<section>e</section>
Foreword
As the problem of soil erosion grows, field staff are increasingly faced with the task of measuring or estimating soil erosion and runoff. The subject is complex and few textbooks or manuals provide much in the way of guidance. As a result, much time, effort and money have been wasted on work that has yielded little useful information. Many experiments, particularly those involving runoff plots and measuring weirs, have been abandoned because they proved to be impractical to operate, faulty in design or too slow in providing the type of information needed.
The main purpose of this Soils Bulletin is to suggest simple methods and techniques which might be used by people working in the field who are not employed to carry out research, but do have a need for information on runoff and erosion. Although it is not directed at professional research workers and academics, it contains strong recommendations about the need for sound experimental design and analysis which are relevant to all experimentation.
Simple field measurements are often undervalued and suspected of lacking scientific validity. Properly designed and carefully executed they can provide sound data. Their strength lies in the possibilities of taking large numbers of measurements cheaply and with only semi-skilled assistance and of obtaining results that are far more meaningful and visually impressive to the farmer and extension worker than more sophisticated experiments on a distant experimental station.
In preparing this Bulletin, references have been restricted to accessible material for readers wishing to obtain more information; the lists of further reading are signposts to information which lies beyond the scope of this Bulletin.
<section>2</section>
List of figures
1. With"before and after" experiments the effect of treatment cannot be separatedfrom the effect of change in rainfall
2. Ccalibration of paired plots before treatment
3. An unexplained anomaly in the relationships between splash and cover
4. Mass ratio calibration of Laws and Parsons
5. Laws and Parsons data on drop size and intensity
6. Later studies of drop diameter at high intensities
7. Erosion pins to measure change in surface level
8. A simple profile meter for measuring changes in surface level
9. Profile meter with a photographic record
10. Setting out a network of erosion pins to measure gully erosion
11. Calculation of cross-sections in a gully
12. Schematic diagram of simple methodology to determine the effect of certain treatments on soil erosion
13. An unsuccessful attempt to measure runoff from terraced land using a small plot
14. Layout of experimental plots to avoid bias caused by soil variation
15. A simple version of the Gerlach trough
16. Hydrographs from three watersheds in Sri Lanka
17. Layout of experimental plots in Zimbabwe
18. Use of screens to trap floating debris
19. Calculating the flow in pipes from the height of a vertical jet
20. Variation of velocity in a stream
21. Two types of current meter
22. Estimating the flow in a stream from measurement with a current meter
23. An example of the rating curve for a stream or river
24. Channels with the same cross-sectional area have a different hydraulic radius
25. Nomograph for solving Manning's formula
26. Freeflow and submerged flow over a sharp-crested weir
27. Unsuppressed flow with end contractions and suppressed flow with the weir in a channel
28. Measuring streamflow with sharp-crested weirs
29. Sharp-crested weirs must have a sharp upstream edge
30. A Cipolletti weir
31. A compound weir
32. A Parshall flume
33. Dimensions of a Parshall flume
34. Proportions of the H flume
35. Effect of submergence on the calibration of an H flume
36. The Washington State College flume
37. Velocity, sediment concentration and sediment discharge in streams
38. A suggested pattern for sediment sampling with sampling points at half the depth of flow
39. A depth-integrating sampler
40. A point-integrated sampler
41. Device for simultaneous sampling at the stream surface and at depth
42. An array of samplers for progressive sampling during a rising stage
43. Sediment sampling mast
44. Cableway manual pump sampling
45. Bedload trap
46. Bedload sampler
47. Bedload sampler with pressure differential at entry
48. Total load slot sampler
49. Trap efficiency of reservoirs
50. Relationship between median volume drop diameter and intensity
51. Terminal velocity of raindrops
52. Relationship between kinetic energy and intensity
53. A simple garden spray simulator
54. A reciprocating garden sprayer
55. The working principle of some rainfall simulators
56. A manually-operated simulator from Kenya
57. Relationship between intensity of rainfall and duration
58. Average runoff in arid or semi-arid climates can be found by plotting cumulative totals of measured rainfall against measured runoff
59. Relationship between runoff and rainfall for various values of S
60. Relationship between rainfall and runoff using runoff curves
61. Alternative estimates of soil erosion in Africa
62. Combined slope/length factor in the USLE
63. Structure of SLEMSA
64. Relationship between cover and soil loss
<section>3</section>
List of plates
1. Pedestal erosion
2. Volume of soil lost from a rill or gully can be compared with the volume of the deposited soil
3. Plastic-lined catchpits
4. Simple demonstration plots in Zimbabwe
5. A rotating nozzle simulator
6. A large Australian simulator which can be picked up by crane in one piece and moved to another plot
7. Rotating boom simulator
8. Microplots in Malawi
9. Microplot at IITA, Nigeria
10. Microplots in Hungary
11. Removable plot boundaries in Zimbabwe
12. A plot to measure the effect of grazing in South Africa
13. Concentric tanks make the emptying of small runoff events simpler
14. A multi-slot divisor in Korea
15. A V-notch divisor in Zimbabwe
16. A divisor of drilled holes in Zimbabwe
17. A multi-pipe divisor in Indonesia
18. A multi-pipe divisor in Nigeria
19. A simple flow-splitter in Thailand
20. Splitting flow in sequence in Thailand
21. A system with three tanks and two divisors in Zimbabwe
22. The Coshocton sampling wheel in Taiwan
23. Measuring streamflow with a current meter in Botswana
24. A broad-crested V weir at IITA in Nigeria with downstream apron
25. The approach to the weir and gantry for current meter measurements and sediment sampling
26. A non-standard weir in Java on a stream with a heavy bedload
27. A Parshall flume with free outfall and one level recorder
28. A Parshall flume with partly submerged outflow and two water level recorders
29. Field construction of a Parshall flume using a reusable metal framework
30. An H flume in Zimbabwe
31. A WSC flume for measuring small flows
32. Modern commercial pumping sampler (Rock and Taylor)
33. Components of the pumping sampler developed by Hydraulics Research Wallingford
34 Wallingford pumping at an HL flume in the Philippines
35. A simple sampler for measuring total load in small channels on cultivated land
36. A field scale simulator from Israel
37. A laboratory dropper simulator
38. Trailer-mounted drop simulator from Venezuela
39. Preparing plots for the simulator
40. A rotating disc rainfall simulator
41. Rotating nozzle simulator developed at Silsoe College
42. The Silsoe College rainfall simulator in China
43. The failure of a terrace system in Tanzania
<section>4</section>
List of tables
1. Soil loss results showing the large number of variations that can occur from replications
2. Calculation of streamflow from current meter readings
3. Values of Manning's roughness coefficient
4. Flow rates over a 90 V-notch weir
5. Flow rates over a rectangular weir with end contractions
6. Construction dimensions for some Parshal flumes
7. Discharge through Parshall flume
8. Free-flow discharge trough 1.5 ft H flume in l/s
9. Flow rates in Washington flumes
10. Maddock's classification for estimation of the bedload
11. Gathering time for small catchments
12. Rainfall probability conversion factors for various return periods
13. Values of runoff coefficient C
14. Values of Cook's watershed characteristics
15. Estimating runoff by Cook's method
16. Values of S for water yield formula
17. Estimation of runoff curve numbers
18. Hydrologic soil groupings
<section>5</section>
Acknowledgements
Assistance is gratefully acknowledged from many individuals and institutions who have helped by sending ideas, comments, literature and photographs for this Bulletin, particularly:
Yvan Biot, University of East Anglia, England; K.J. Bligh, Dept. of Agriculture, Western Australia; P. Bolton, Hydraulics Research, Wallingford, England; N. Carigy, CSIRO Soils Laboratory, Canberra, Australia; A.L. Cogle, ICRISAT, India; A. Dickinson, Hydraulics Research, Wallingford, England; H.A. Elwell, AGRITEX, Harare, Zimbabwe; A. Grant, Silsoe College, Bedford; H. Gunston, Institute of Hydrology, Wallingford, England; R. Hairsine, CSIRO Soils Laboratory, Canberra, Australia; Karl Herweg, Soil Conservation Research Project, Ethiopia; P.I.A. Kinnell, CSIRO Soils Laboratory, Canberra, Australia; D. Lang, Soil Conservation Service of New South Wales, Australia; R.J. Loughran, University of Newcastle, New South Wales, Australia; D. McFarlane, Dept. of Agriculture, Western Australia; L.D. Meyer, National Sedimentation Laboratory, Oxford, Mississippi,; Alex Mitchell, Canterbury, Australia; D.M. Offermans, FAO Watershed Management Project, Nepal; Sir Charles Pereira, Teston,
Kent; A. Profitt, Dept. of Agriculture, Western Australia; Jane Rickson, Silsoe College, England; E. Roose, ORSTOM, Montpellier, France; C.J. Rosewell, Soil Conservation Service of New South Wales, Australia; Adisak Sajjapongse, IBSRAM, Bangkok, Thailand; E. Seminario, FAO, Morocco; T.F. Shaxson, Greenhayes, Dorset, England; Michael Stocking, University of East Anglia; P.A. Taylor, Rock and Taylor Ltd., Warley, England; K.G. Tejwani, Land Use Consultants, New Delhi, India; C. Valentin, ORSTOM, Paris, France.
Many technical staff in FAO have also been most helpful, particularly D.W. Sanders, Senior Officer (Soil Conservation), Soil Resources, Management and Conservation Services, who proposed the bulletin and helped define its scope and objectives, and the officers in that service for technical advice.
On the production side, many photographs have been kindly loaned, and the source of each is acknowledged in the captions. Photos without a listed source are from the author's collection. Most of the diagrams were drawn by D. Mazzei. The author is most grateful to Linde Ovington Lee for ably taking the inumerable drafts and changes through her word-processor, and to administrative and secretarial staff of AGL for editorial help and advice, and for putting it all together.
<section>6</section>
Chapter 1 Experimental design
OBJECTIVES
As explained in the foreword, this Bulletin is not directed to pure research and the pursuit of knowledge, but to finding practical answers to practical questions. So the starting point of any programme must be to define precisely and accurately what it is that one wants to know, and how the knowledge will be used. A very experienced soil scientist, Sir Charles Pereira, suggests:
"One needs to distinguish clearly between two types of experimental measurements.
 a genuine estimate of the mean of a highly variable quantity, such as rainfall, which is to be used in a quantitative balance, and
 an illustration of the range and order of magnitude of a variable for which no useful estimate of the mean can be made from the number of measurements which are logistically practical, such as soil loss per hectare per year, since this compounds the variabilities of soil type, drainage, vegetation cover, mechanical disturbance, slope, aspect, and exposure to flows from upslope.
There is much danger of the unscientific use of the second type, expressed as tonnes/km^2, as if it had the logical and statistical basis of the first type."
It is a sensible precaution to check whether the information which is sought is already available. The project worker in the field is unlikely to have either time or facilities to do a literature search, but the technical backup staff at headquarters may be able to make use of the efficient data storage and retrieval systems which are now available. One problem is that the simple practical field experiments which it is proposed to embark on are usually either not adequately written up, or are in hard-to-find project documents.
In tropical conditions the damage caused by rarely occurring extreme events can be very important - more so than in less aggressive climates. This is particularly so for soil loss from cropland and the expansion of gullies. Thus a balance has to be made between installing a flume which is able to measure a 20-year extreme flood which is unlikely to occur during the experiment, or installing a flume which can measure floods up to a 5-year frequency and take a chance on it being submerged by larger floods.
PRACTICALITIES
A small amount of reliable information is more useful than a large amount of information which cannot be used because it is unreliable. Therefore field assessments should be kept as simple as possible and directed to limited attainable objectives. There is a great temptation to try for too much by including too many variables or too many levels of each variable. When planning a programme of experiments bear in mind the limited resources which will be available, considering the initial and running costs, and the staff required to operate the experiments.
Avoid the idea that any information is better than none. This is sometimes used to justify 'quick and dirty' trials, or as an excuse for not doing them properly. However, it is completely unscientific. Using inaccurate or unreliable data is much more likely to cause problems than to improve matters.
How long will the experiments continue? Because of the variability of runoff from year to year, the duration should be as long as possible but there are practical constraints. How long is the project going to run and what happens at the end? What is the chance that it might continue after the first phase? Can the project continue if the staff who set up the experiments are transferred or replaced? The practical solution is to attempt only what can be completed within the assured time and known resources. It may sometimes be possible to plan an additional component which can be put into operation if the project is extended, but this is only sensible if it is an optional extra, not if its absence will reduce the value of the basic plan.
It may be possible to extrapolate short-term results if longer records of rainfall are available. For example, if annual soil loss was measured for two years but one year had below average rainfall and the other above average rainfall. Long-term rainfall records may give some indication of how often these losses may be expected to occur, but only if there is a direct relationship between what was measured (annual soil loss) and the long-term record (total annual rainfall) There will be an association, of course, because the more it rains, the more erosion will take place, but the linkage is so crude that it has little value because it ignores important factors like how much of the rain fell on bare soil and how much on mature crops. A sound principle in all science is to avoid extrapolating beyond the range of measured results.
In experimental work, it is important to relate cause and effect. If some change or difference is measured, one needs to know what caused it, and usually it does not help to know that it must have been one or more of a number of possible causes. In research station trials, this problem is avoided by changing the factors one at a time, called isolating the variables, so that if a change is measured it is clear what caused it. This is not always practical or necessary in field trials. It may help to know that one package of farm practices gives a better result than another package, but it is better to know which of the components of the package are most important in causing the improvement.
The problem of on-farm research is that it nearly always suffers from the problem that the variables cannot be separated and controlled. An example is the studies made in Kenya which were set up to check whether the conservation package programme could be shown to increase the yield of maize on fields where the programme had been applied. Data were collected from farmers' fields and the results did suggest that there was an increase. But the package consisted of building earth terraces, using improved seed, using more fertilizer, and generally improved cultivation practices, and the effect of each of these factors cannot be separately evaluated, so the information had very limited application. It could be that the improved seed would have given the increase without the cost of additional fertilizer, or that the increased use of fertilizer could have given the improved yield if applied to the traditional maize varieties, and if the effect of the terracing was to improve the
soil moisture availability this might be achieved by simpler methods.
AVOID 'BEFORE AND AFTER' EXPERIMENTS
A method which is sometimes used to assess the effect of some change or treatment is to take a series of measurements before the treatment and compare these with a similar series after the treatment. This is simple but fundamentally unsound because there is no way of telling whether the difference is directly caused by the treatment or arises from some other cause of change between the two sets of measurements. Figure 1 shows an example of this. An experiment is set up to estimate the effect of changing the intensity of grazing on runoff for a small catchment. Measurements of total weekly runoff are plotted against weekly rainfall, and at the end of the season about 20 or 30 points seem to indicate a fairly close relationship. In the following season the treatment is applied, say, by doubling the number of animals grazing, and at the end of the season the plotted points suggest that the relationship is significantly different. The problem lies in the fact that one cannot be
sure that the difference is caused by the treatment and is not reflecting the fact that rainfall during the second season was different. If the rainfall was much heavier, this alone could account for higher rates of runoff. There are no statistical contrivances which can overcome this difficulty. An uncontrollable and unmeasurable variable has been allowed to come in and muddy the waters and there is no way of removing its effect.
The technique to be used to avoid this problem is that of paired plots. Two plots are chosen as similar as possible, for no plots are ever identical, and the two plots are calibrated, i.e., the difference between the two is measured by plotting values of some suitable parameter of one plot against the other as in Figure 2. After a time, the relationship between the two plots becomes apparent and this time depends upon the frequency of the observations. Plotting daily values would establish the relationship sooner than plotting weekly or monthly data. If the two plots are truly identical the plot will be a straight line at 45_ through the origin. The treatment is then applied to one plot and the series of measurements repeated. Now if there is any variation in the rainfall or any other aspect of climate it will affect both plots equally, and so a new relationship can only be due to the treatment because that is the only variable.
The conclusion is to avoid before and after trials of processes which can be affected by climate, particularly rainfall.
STATISTICS
The details of experimental design and the statistical analysis of results are beyond the scope of this Bulletin, but it may be worth a quick look at some important issues. If one is looking for cause and effect relationships, the key to experimental design is to isolate and measure the effect of the variables. The problem is that in all biological processes there are huge numbers of variables which can affect the process, each with a wide range of values, and separating them all is difficult.
t0848e01.jpg (43049 bytes)
Sampling
The method of sampling and the size of the sample are important. For a sample to be representative of the whole population, it must be large enough to reflect the variation within the whole population. To assess the yield of a field of maize the yield of one plant could be measured and multiplied by the number of plants in the field. But plants differ greatly, so a more accurate estimate can be obtained by measuring say 20 plants, and the really believable result is measuring what comes off the whole field.
Differences
Usually the objective is to estimate differences rather than absolute values. For example, trials show that one variety yields 1.5 t/ha and another variety 1.6 t/ha. It may be possible to calculate whether the difference is statistically significant at various levels of probability, but that is irrelevant since no farmer is going to change on the basis of such a small difference in yield when there are other factors to consider such as taste, keeping quality, disease resistance, and so on.
Beware of expressing differences as percentages, which can be misleading or irrelevant. For example, the summary of a research report says that the annual soil loss from the plot with treatment A was 80% less than from the plot with treatment B. This sounds impressive until one reads that the figures were 100 kg/ha and 20 kg/ha, so the real conclusion should be that soil loss was negligible in both cases.
Avoid also announcing a winner without giving the scores. A comparison was made between five different parameters for estimating the erosivity of rainfall, and the abstract says No 4 was 'the best estimator'. The full report discloses that the correlation coefficient was above 0.9 for all five, with the 'winner' at 0.955. A more sensible conclusion would have been that all five were extremely effective, and the one to recommend should be whichever is simplest and easiest to use.
Replications
Going back to the variety trial yield figures of 1.5 t/ha one should know how accurate that is. Did it mean that it is fairly sure to be between 1.0 and 2.0 i.e. 1.5  0.5, or between 1.4 and 1.6 i.e. 1.5  0.1? This can only be answered from replications; with a single observation there is no way of knowing.
Many years ago when the application of statistics to agricultural research was in its infancy and a huge research programme in Africa was being set up, the Director said "We are only looking for results that farmers will understand and apply. I am not interested in figures that need statistics to explain them." As a result, all the early experiments had many treatments and no replications - a foolish error which was much regretted later.
There is always going to be some natural variation in what is being measured, and also some error in the measurement. Replications are used, that is theoretically absolutely identical situations, to give an assessment which is acceptably reliable and accurate. The size of the experiment always has limitations such as cost, labour, area, so there has to be a compromise between the number of treatments and the number of replications. If one can afford 12 plots in a field experiment, they could be allocated as follows:
Treatments
Replications of each Treatment
Clearly the two extremes are impractical, but how to choose between the other four alternatives? For an important long-term experiment it might be worthwhile carrying out a pilot trial. One would take measurements from 10 or 12 replications and study the variation, and it is possible to calculate what is the smallest number of replications which will give an acceptable accuracy. Since this is inappropriate for simple field experiments, one must resort to some simple rules. If the soil loss from two replicates is 2 kg and 8 kg, then a mean of 5 kg is rather crude. If three replications give 2 kg, 8 kg and 7 kg, one might have a little more confidence in a mean of 6.5 kg - but there is still doubt about the 2 kg result. Is that a faulty measurement or is it the only good one with mistakes in the other two?
In general the greater the difference between measurements, the greater is the number of replications required, but the catch is that when the experiment is started, it is not known what the difference is likely to be, so some other arbitrary criteria are required.
 Always do a calibration run on the replicated plots before applying the treatments.
 Too many replications may limit the number of treatments which can be applied, but the results are reliable and therefore useful. This is better than too few replications giving a result which cannot be relied upon.
 The greater the range of what is being measured, the more replications are required. Runoff plots are notorious for wild results because things go wrong (discussed in more detail in Chapter 3), so a large number of replications dilutes the effect of a mechanical fault like a tap accidentally left open.
 Results of the same experiment in successive years are not replications because of annual variability.
As an arbitrary judgement based on experience it is suggested that for plot work there should always be a minimum of three replications and four or five are better. Studies of variance and sampling techniques are listed in the section Further reading.
ANOMALOUS RESULTS AND EXTRAPOLATION
Here is another cautionary tale, which illustrates two points - the danger of discarding anomalous results, and the danger of extrapolating, that is predicting what might happen beyond the range of the measurements.
Suppose the measurements from four replications are 1.6, 1.8, 1.7 and 4.5. Should it be assumed that the 4.5 is an error and discarded, giving a tidy mean of 1.7? No! There is a 25% chance that that is the only correct figure, and that there are faults in the other three. With only three replications an apparently anomalous result has a 33% chance of being right, and with only two replications and two different results each has a 50% chance of being right or wrong. Another reason for having as many replications as possible is that with a large number of replications one freak figure will only have a small effect on the mean.
There are few anomalies in science. When a reading looks suspicious, either there is a reason for it which you have not yet latched on to - so think hard - or it is a false reading due to an unknown experimental error - so do it again until you locate the error.
Here are two examples of anomalies, one of which was resolved and one not.
A graduate student studied the relationship between density of cover and soil splash, and the results plotted as a smooth curve with a strange blip as shown in Figure 3. The effect was real, because it occurred when the experiment was independently repeated, but there was no apparent reason for it. It had to be an unknown fault in the technique, and after much effort it was tracked down. Plastic meshes were used to give different levels of cover, and the density was measured on photographs of each mesh. But the mesh at one point was thicker than at the others so there was more splashing about within the mesh, and less energy available to cause splash. It was not realized that light passing through a mesh is not the same as raindrops passing through.
The second anomaly in experimental results was the opposite situation - apparently spurious results were written off as experimental error although later research showed them to be genuine. Measuring the size of raindrops used to be done by catching drops in pans of flour and weighing the pellet formed in the flour by each drop. A previous laboratory calibration gives the relationship between weight of pellet and weight of water drop, and this is expressed as mass ratio. When this method was used by Laws and Parsons in 1943, the results obtained were as shown in Figure 4. Laws and Parsons assumed that a flour pellet could not weigh less than the drop which formed it, so ignored point A, although it is now known that in fact this can and does happen. The other points fell close to a straight line except the largest drop so they also ignored point B. It is now known that too was a genuine result, and that a smooth curve through all the results is better than the straight line
relationship they assumed.
t0848e02.jpg (59459 bytes)
The error in the calibration of Laws and Parsons did not alter the fact that this was a brilliant and original piece of research. Unfortunately, good original ideas are sometimes so successful that their use is stretched farther than is justifiable. Most of Laws and Parsons samples were at intensities less than 50 mm/h with a very small number up to 100 mm/h, and gave a curve of the type shown in Figure 5 which can be represented by an equation of the form:
D = aI^b
where D is drop diameter, I is intensity, and a and b are constants.
But this equation suggests that the median drop size will continue to increase as intensity increases, and while this is true within the range of Laws and Parsons measurements, later research at higher intensities has shown that is not the case in the high intensities which occur in tropical rainstorms. In fact there is a straightforward physical explanation of this. There is a limit to the size of falling raindrops because above this limit they become unstable and break up into smaller drops, and in fact it is now known that the median drop diameter rises to a maximum and then decreases as in Figure 6. When calculations of rainfall energy were required for calculating the erosivity factor of the Universal Soil Loss Equation, the Laws and Parsons drop size/intensity relationship was extrapolated up to intensities of 250 mm, with the result that the kinetic energy of tropical rainfall was greatly exaggerated. It was not until 1987 that the USDA Agricultural Handbook was
revised and upper limits of rainfall energy were introduced, but in the intervening period many studies of tropical rainfall were confused or unsound as a result of this basic error.
The moral is clear - be very cautious about accepting or rejecting suspicious results, and equally cautious about extrapolating beyond the range of the measured data. A useful book on the handling of experimental data is Pentz and Shott (1988).
CONCLUSION
The message must be: always keep the experimental design as simple as possible, and take advice from a biometrician before starting experiments. What happens all too often is that the experimenter goes to the statistician with a box full of data files and asks for help in analysing the results. He or she is then disappointed to be told that the design was all wrong and the results are of little value. The most likely faults are, in the case of catchment studies, rushing into the treatments before adequate calibration, or in the case of small plot work, the lack of adequate replication or allowing uncontrolled variables to creep in.
t0848e03.jpg (44139 bytes)
<section>7</section>
Chapter 2 Reconnaissance methods
ADVANTAGES
'Reconnaissance methods' are ways to get a first approximation of the amount of erosion in a given situation - this approximation may be all that is needed, or it could be followed by more precise studies if required.
The main advantage of reconnaissance methods is that, because they are cheap and simple, many measurements can be made and so the results can be reliable and representative - which means they are believable and usable - more so than a single precise measurement at a site which may not be representative.
Other advantages are that reconnaissance methods can usually be operated with semi-skilled staff; they may need little maintenance, for example erosion pins (discussed in the section Point measurements), and the time interval between measurements may be flexible, e.g. the pins can be measured after a month or after a season or year. Simple techniques may also be useful as demonstrations, when the object is not to measure the amount of runoff or soil loss, but to show farmers, or extension workers, or the general public, that a lot of erosion is taking place and something should be done about it. An example was the FAO project in Java from 1972 to 1976 where farmers who initially thought that erosion was negligible were entirely convinced by the visible lowering of the soil surface as demonstrated by erosion pins, and the amount of soil caught in simple catchpits as discussed in the section on Volumetric measurements (FAO 1976a).
Interference
A common problem in all off-station field trials is interference with the equipment by the local population. This can be plain curiosity of wanting to see what is inside a strange box; mischief-making like dropping pebbles down measuring tubes, or emptying rain gauges; theft of anything likely to be useful or saleable; or even mindless vandalism with no logical cause, although this seems to be less common in unsophisticated rural societies.
The solution in all these cases is not to let it happen and then react, but to anticipate it and avoid it. This means gaining the confidence and cooperation of the local community. They should already know about the project from having been involved in its planning - if they were not, the project is starting off on the wrong foot. But there is a large gap in understanding trials of a new variety, and understanding why measuring structures are being built in a streambed. So, a public relations programme is required to explain what is happening, how it will help and hence secure the support of the whole population.
A large hydrological study in Sri Lanka serves as an example of getting it right, but should not be taken as a model because there will always be special circumstances. In this case the population were largely literate so a simple one-page leaflet in the vernacular was widely distributed. Extension staff first visited and chatted to groups of village elders and then held meetings with all the village groups or associations in the catchment, including women extension officers to talk to the women's groups. Religion is important in Sri Lanka so all the temples and monasteries were also visited and wherever possible rain-gauges or stream-gauges were installed on temple grounds and the monks asked to keep the records. Schooling is also important, so the primary schools were all visited and groups of children taken out, with their teachers, into the field to be shown how rain-gauges and flow recorders worked, and runoff plots, and water-table tubes. The message throughout this
campaign was simply "this is for your benefit - please help us to make it work."
One feature which worked in spite of the initial doubts of the local extension officers was setting up a "watchers club" among the school children. A main road and several tracks ran through the area and many of the gauging stations were at road bridges. Since it was not far from the capital there was quite a lot of non-local traffic. So each school was asked to 'watch over' any instrumented sites in their area. Members of the watchers club were given a simple button badge to wear as a token of the authority and support of the community for the project. Unfortunately it is hard to tell which of these activities had the most effect, but the result was well worth the effort for dozens of instrumented sites were operated for many years with negligible interference.
ACCURACY
There are two approaches to estimating soil movement. One can estimate how much has been lost from a site, or estimate how much has accumulated at another site. The accuracy of these two approaches is usually very different. If the soil eroded from a field plot is collected in tanks and weighed, then even a coarse measurement of the weight gives a precise estimation of the soil loss. For example if the soil loss from a plot of 100 m is measured to the nearest 0.1 kg, this corresponds to an estimate of soil loss to the nearest 10 kg/ha. By comparison, a direct measurement of the level of the soil surface is a very crude estimate. If the lowering of the soil surface were measured to the nearest millimetre, this corresponds with an estimate of the soil loss to the nearest 15 000 kg/ha, i.e. the precision is about 1500 times less.
However one should differentiate between precision and accuracy. Precision is the degree of refinement in measurement - so weighing soil caught in a catchpit to the nearest 0.1 kg is more precise than weighing to the nearest 1 kg - but it does not make the estimate more accurate - that is determined by the design of the experiment and the possible sources of error. Accuracy is not enhanced by quoting results with more precision than is justified. As an example, the depth of the soil loss can be measured to the nearest 1 mm and because it is a simple technique many measurements can be made. The calculated average figure would be more reliable, more believable, and probably more accurate from 100 measurements than from 10, but it is not any more precise. It is a common error to measure to one decimal place and then quote the average to two decimal places.
Heresay evidence
It can be tempting to collect information from local inhabitants, who are usually very willing to recount 'I remember' stories of where the gully used to be, or the floods of bygone years. But these should be treated with caution for there is no way of assessing their reliability or accuracy. Errors can creep in from several sources: inaccuracies of memory; distortion during translation; the tendency of people being interviewed to guess the answer which the interviewer expects or hopes for, then bend the evidence in that direction; the tendency to wishful thinking and "the past was better". Listening to the local village elders should be part of the job for all rural field workers, and can provide useful information, but it would be unwise to rely on it unless it can be verified.
MEASURING CHANGE OF SURFACE LEVEL
The direct measurement of changes in soil level is appropriate in the case of localized erosion where rates are high and the position of the erosion can be predicted, such as steepland which has been deforested, or cattle tracks on rangeland. It is usually not suitable for soil losses from arable land because the surface level is affected by cultivation and settlement, although short-term changes have been studied in potato furrows in Australia (McFarlane, Delroy and van Vreeswyk 1991). Changes can be measured in one dimension for surface level at a point, or in two dimensions to give a profile or cross-section, or in three dimensions for volumetric measurements of rills or gullies.
Point measurements
Individual measurements of change in level at a single point will vary widely, but if it is an inexpensive and simple method, and a large number of points can be sampled, then a usable estimate can result.
Erosion pins
This widely-used method consists of driving a pin into the soil so that the top of the pin gives a datum from which changes in the soil surface level can be measured. Alternatively called pegs, spikes, stakes or rods, the pins can be of wood, iron or any material which will not rot or decay and is readily and cheaply available. Off-cut lengths of round iron bars for reinforced concrete can usually be picked up at little or no cost from construction sites. In some developing countries, iron or steel pins or nails might be stolen, in which case bamboo or reed canes cut locally might be more suitable (Figure 7).
The pin should be a length which can be pushed or driven into the soil to give a firm stable datum: 300 mm is typical, less for a shallow soil, more for a loose soil. A small diameter of about 5 mm is preferable, as thicker stakes could interfere with the surface flow and cause scour. A rectangular or square grid layout will give a random distribution of points with a spacing appropriate to the area being studied.
An illustration of the point method comes from a study in Japan, where pegs were installed to a 2 m square grid on three 100 m plots with a 30 slope recently cleared of forest. Measurements of the peg heights were made every month for ten years and showed that the annual rate of erosion from each plot was almost consistent at about 13 mm/year (Takei, Kobaski and Fukushima 1981).
t0848e04.jpg (124495 bytes)
In another example the pin method unexpectedly gave a quantitative measure of the effect of a single heavy storm in western Colorado. As part of a long-term hydrology study in a 5 ha basin, pins were installed at 1.5 m intervals on six selected profile lines. All runoff and sediment from the basin is captured in a reservoir at the basin outlet, so that estimates of loss as measured by the pins could be compared with measurements of sediment from surveys of the reservoir. A heavy storm, with an estimated return period of 25 years, occurred shortly after the installation of the pins and the first reservoir survey, enabling an assessment of the isolated effect of the storm. The mean soil loss calculated from the pin results was a depth of 2.7 mm, compared with the estimate of the sediment held in the reservoir which would correspond to a loss of depth of 2.3 mm (Hadley and Lusby 1967), a good measure of agreement.
Some researchers slip a metal washer over the pin to give a better base from which to measure to the top of the pin. If there are likely to be cycles of erosion and deposition such as in a gully floor, the washer method may give useful additional information by falling to the lowest erosion level and being covered by any later deposition which can also be measured. On the other hand, the presence of the washer may cause turbulence and scour, or it could reduce splash erosion and leave the washer sitting on a pedestal of soil. All these variations and possible causes of false readings have been reported in the literature on the use of the pin method which is reviewed by Haigh (1977).
Paint collars
An indication of large changes in level, for example in a stream bed or gully floor, can be obtained by painting a collar just above soil level round rocks, boulders, tree roots, fence posts, or anything firm and stable. Erosion reveals an unpainted band below the paint line, indicating the depth of soil removed. When painting the collar it is advisable to mask the soil with old newspaper as paint accidently sprayed or brushed onto the soil might make it less erodible.
Bottle tops
Another simple way to record the original level is to press bottle tops into the soil surface. The depth of subsequent erosion is shown by the height of the pedestals where the soil is protected by the bottle top. This leads to the use of naturally occurring indicators of changes in soil surface level.
Pedestals
When an easily eroded soil is protected from splash erosion by a stone or tree root, isolated pedestals capped by the resistant material are left standing up from the surrounding ground (Plate 1). The erosion of the surrounding soil is shown to be mainly by splash rather than by surface flow if there is little or no undercutting at the base of the pedestal. Like the bottle top method, it is possible to deduce approximately what depth of soil has been eroded by measuring the height of the pedestals.
t0848e05.jpg (33100 bytes)
Tree mounds and tree roots
In arid or semi-arid climates it is not unusual to find that the surface under trees is raised in a gently sloping dome. In a comprehensive project in Tanzania from 1968-1972 Rapp and colleagues suggested that the mounds are the result of the trees protecting the soil from splash erosion while the surrounding soil is eroded. By measuring the height of the mounds and the age of the trees from tree-ring counts, they estimated a soil lowering of about 10 mm/year (Rapp et al. 1972). However, based on later research in Botswana, Biot (1990) calculated that the rate of denudation as calculated by this method is ten to fifteen times greater than estimates by other methods. He offers the alternative suggestion that the tree mounds can be explained by a difference in bulk density between soils in the mounds and the surrounding flat soils. He concluded that the mound results from a raising of the local surface rather than erosion of the surrounding surface.
Exposed tree roots may offer a valid indication of change when the reason is obvious, such as erosion in a streambed below a paint collar, but exposed tree roots offered as evidence of sheetwash, or of wind erosion in dry climates, should be treated with caution for Biot's hypothesis may also apply. Very long-term rates of erosion (over several centuries) were estimated from tree root exposure in Colorado (Carrara and Carroll 1979).
Clumps of grass elevated above the surrounding soil surface should also be treated with caution for the change may be the result of the grass trapping soil particles splashed from the surrounding soil. This was conclusively shown in Zimbabwe where erosion was measured from runoff plots under various tobacco/grass rotations. After a few years the tufts of weeping lovegrass (Eragrostis curvula) were found to be several centimetres higher than the soil surface between, although the measured soil loss from the plot was negligible. Some simple tests with splash boards showed that there was no net soil loss from the plot, but consideration translocation of soil within the plot. Clearly it is necessary to be certain that changes in soil surface level are the result of erosion down rather than elevation upwards.
Profile meters
To measure small changes in surface level along a cross section such as an area with a number of parallel cattle tracks, a profile meter may be suitable. (The case of larger changes as in rills and gullies is discussed in the next section on volumetric measurements.) The requirement for a profile meter is to be able to set up a datum from which changes in level can be measured along a straight line and which can be re-established at the same points later to measure changes in level. Usually this takes the form of a horizontal bar with rods which can be lowered down to the soil surface, and is the same principle as used to measure surface roughness in studies of tillage and tilth. Such a device to measure surface levels accurately on grazing land was developed by Hudson (1964). Metal pegs were set unobtrusively at ground level in concrete blocks at intervals of 2 m. A light aluminium girder could be fitted onto any two adjacent pegs and this gave a firm datum from which the
level to the soil surface could be accurately measured at positions marked on the girder. Between readings the girder was removed so that there was no interference with cattle movements. Measurements were taken to the nearest millimetre, which allowed annual changes to be clearly recognized. A similar device was used in the Philippines by Ramirez (1988) and is shown in Figure 8. Another approach was used by McCool, Dossett and Yecha (1981). In this case the pins are lowered to the soil surface at the same time and the profile is recorded by camera for later evaluation (Figure 9).
Several other more sophisticated profile meters have been developed and details are given in the section Further reading.
VOLUMETRIC MEASUREMENTS
Estimates of soil loss based on three-dimensional measurements of volume can be used in different ways. For erosion from rills or roads, the length of the eroding section and changes in cross-sectional area are measured. For gully erosion, usually information is needed not only on the volume lost, but on how much the gully is increasing, so changes in length as the gully cuts back also have to be measured. The other volumetric approach is to measure or estimate the volume deposited as an outwash fan, or in a catchpit or reservoir.
Rills and roads
Measuring the cross-section of all the rills in a sample area or along a sample transect is quick and easy, so the method is suitable for measuring change over short time periods, such as the change caused by a single heavy storm. The cross-section may be re-estimated from measurements of average width and depth if the shape is fairly uniform, or by summing the area of segments if the cross-section of the rill is irregular. (The arithmetic of cross-sections is discussed in the section Measuring streamflow.) The accuracy of estimates of total soil loss based only on measurements of rill erosion will depend on how much inter-rill erosion by splash and sheetwash is also occurring. Where inter-rill erosion is low, the underestimation from rill erosion alone may be from 10-30% (Zacher 1982).
t0848e06.jpg (91185 bytes)
A simple method for an immediate estimate of soil loss with minimum calculation dates back to 1937, when it was pioneered by A.N. Alutin of the United States Soil Conservation Service. A fixed-length transect is set out across the slope, and the cross-section area of each rill along the line is calculated from average width and average depth and summed. In the original units the transect was 13.7 feet, and the total cross-section of rills in square inches is numerically equal to the total soil loss in tons/acre (Hill and Kaiser 1965). The metric equivalent is a unit transect of 15 m, when the rill area in cm is numerically equal to ten times the soil loss in tonnes/ha. Usually the results from a number of transects would be averaged. This assumes a soil bulk density of 1.5, and that the transects measured are typical of the area being studied.
Estimates of erosion from rill measurements have been compared with estimates of the volume deposited in outwash fans in England by Evans and Boardman (1994), who found that agreement was better when the measurements were made by experienced field workers. They suggest that estimates by measuring rills can be expected to be between twice and one half of the true value. The opportunity for a detailed assessment of the method occurred in 1985 when water from a burst water main cut a large gully through sandy soil drilled to a winter cereal. Nearly all the eroded soil was redeposited in the field (Plate 2) and estimated to be 304 m^3. The soil eroded from the gully was measured as 320 m^3, the discrepancy probably the result of fine particles being carried away in the runoff.
A further simplification of estimating soil loss from rills was tried out by Watson and Evans (1991) who compared direct measurements of rills in the field with estimates made from a study of colour slides taken in the field. They concluded that "It is possible for an experienced observer to make reasonably accurate decisions about volumes of soil eroded by looking at photographs of fields taken on the ground". On eight of the eleven fields measured in the study, the ratio between estimates from field measurements and estimates from the photographs was between 0.81 and 1.11, with extreme values of 0.67 and 2.12. The discrepancies were thought to arise mainly from the difficulty of estimating the length of rills on the photographs because of foreshortening. They conclude that there is room for improvement in the technique, but that it does offer a quick and simple method of estimating field soil loss where rill erosion is the dominant process.
Clearly figures in tonnes/ha from these methods must not be treated as if they were reliable accurate measurements, but they may be useful in providing a quick simple comparison of the effect of alternative cropping or cultivation practices.
Gullies and streambanks
When the progress of gully erosion is being studied, measurements are needed both of the horizontal spread of the gully and vertical changes within the gully.
t0848e07.jpg (69071 bytes)
To measure the surface area, and changes from cutting back or bank collapse, a rectangular grid of erosion pins is set out at an appropriate grid interval of perhaps 2 or 5 m as in Figure 10. From measurements along the grid lines from the nearest pin to the gully edge, the surface area can be plotted on squared paper. The grid lines also serve as the transects for cross-sections across the gully. A string is stretched at ground level along a grid line with markers at fixed intervals of, say, 1 m. At each marker the depth is measured from the gully floor using a survey staff or a ranging rod, and the section can be plotted. The volume of soil lost from the gully is calculated as in Figure 11, and subsequent measurements will quantify the changes.
The bed of a gully may at any one point have cycles of cutting down at some times and deposition at others, for example when a large bank collapse puts a large quantity of soil into the flow. The use of erosion pins with washers may provide information on such changes of level, as described in the section Measuring change of surface level.
Another method of assessing the cutting back of streambeds or gully sides is to drive in horizontal small-diameter metal rods. An increase in the length of rod exposed shows how much the bank has retreated, and the measurement can be simplified by spray painting collars round the exposed rods. However this technique should not be used if placing the rods will affect the soil's resistance to erosion. In gravel soils, driving the rods can loosen, and increase their erodibility, or in alluvial soils with low tensile strength, the rods can act as a tension reinforcement and reduce slumping, toppling, or cantilever failure (Thorne 1981).
Changes in a gully may be interpreted from the use of sequences of photographs. The position of the camera and the direction of the photograph must be carefully recorded. It is surprising how seldom 'before and after' photographs of gullies are lined up accurately. For studies of the long-term development of gullies, aerial photography can be a useful tool. An interesting example from Zimbabwe allowed the correlation of the changes in a gully with the changes in land use and vegetation in its catchment over a period of forty years (Keech 1992).
Catchpits
Surveys of sediment in reservoirs can be used to make quantitative estimates of erosion as discussed in chapter 5, but simple catchpits may be used to demonstrate comparisons (Plate 3). It is not possible to get a reliable estimate of the total soil movement unless the receiving reservoir is large enough to contain the whole flow and sediment load, but smaller pits which only catch an unknown proportion of the sediment can still be used to obtain comparative information. This was done successfully in the FAO project in Java previously referred to in connection with erosion pins (FAO 1976a) where small catchpits were dug on two small parallel catchments, one of which was terraced and the other not. Previously skeptical farmers were convinced of the effectiveness of terracing when they saw that there was much less soil in the catchpit below the terraced plot than the untreated plot.
Another example is the Japanese study previously referred to (Takei, Kobaski and Fukushima 1981). Two small plots were set up side by side with a simple catchpit below, with one plot left bare and the other reforested. Again a clear difference between the amount of sediment accumulated demonstrated the effect of reforestation, although the actual amounts of soil caught in the pits could not lead to quantitative estimates of the amounts of erosion.
t0848e08.jpg (61165 bytes)
In Colombia, on-farm demonstration trials initiated by the International Centre for Tropical Agriculture (CIAT) used plastic-lined channels to compare the soil movement under different cassava-based cropping systems (Howeler 1987) (Figure 12). More recently a farmer-operated trial in Thailand with catchpits lined with polythene sheets demonstrated a huge difference is soil loss from a plot under hill rice with no conservation measures, and a plot with grass strips and strip cropping (Sombatpanit et al. 1992) (Plate 3).
A simple method for measuring relative soil movement at different points in the catchment uses 'mesh bags'. A 30 cm by 30 cm square of 5 mm mesh nylon fabric is fastened on 3 sides over the same size of 2 mm mesh. The bags are pinned to the soil surface with the open edge uphill in a line across the contour to measure horizontal variation, or up-and-down slope to measure variation down the catena. Some of the soil moved by surface flow is trapped in the mesh bag and may be dried and weighed at intervals. The method is an inexpensive and simple way of studying relative soil movement at different points in the field (Hsieh 1992).
As an alternative to excavating catchpits, gully checkdams can be used to give an approximation of the effect of different treatments in their catchments.
Landslips and landslides
Geomorphological processes tend to require careful and long-term study rather than reconnaissance estimates and so are out of the remit of this Bulletin. Readers wishing to consider this topic are directed to the section Further reading relating to this chapter.
t0848e09.jpg (73383 bytes)
<section>8</section>
Chapter 3 Field plots
OVERVIEW
Runoff plots are expensive and usually ineffective, and worldwide the vast majority of plots have produced little or no usable or worthwhile information. That may sound a harsh judgement but is the considered opinion of those who have spent a working lifetime either operating plots or studying other peoples plots, both making mistakes and observing those of others. To quote again from Sir Charles Pereira, "The most absurd pretensions, that half a kilo of soil from two or three square metres can give estimates of loss rates from hill slopes, have been boosted by 'experts'. A vast amount of totally meaningless data has been acquired on the specious excuse that it is 'better than nothing'".
The remarkable thing is that the weaknesses of plot research have been known for more than 50 years, but the lessons have not been learned, and the same mistakes are still being made. When plot work started in the USA in the 1920s, statistical design and analysis was just beginning to be applied to agricultural research. Since then it has been developed and refined for all other aspects of agricultural field research, but somehow just has not caught on in the use of runoff plots. This may be due to the lack of advice on the subject in the literature, which is one of the reasons for this Soils Bulletin. Reports of runoff plots are constantly published in the technical literature, especially recently as they became fashionable, and there are several manuals on how to build and operate plots, but few offer even the most basic advice on how the experiment should be designed, and the results analysed.
But advice is there in the literature. Brandt explained the basic principles of statistical analysis in 1941, and this was reinforced by Hayward who, in 1968, showed that most plot work was seriously flawed, but the standard is not improving as one might expect. A study of the proceedings of the seven meetings of the International Soil Conservation Organization between 1978 and 1992 shows that reports which show poor design and poor analysis greatly exceed studies with good design and analysis.
Can the reason for this be found? Perhaps the copy-cat effect is partly to blame. Academics and research workers see plot work as a high profile activity, and the scramble for publications or meeting a thesis deadline can lead to premature reporting. Some experiments arise from the over-enthusiasm for trying to get local data to rejig the Universal Soil Loss Equation, even in conditions where the USLE is not suitable (as discussed in Chapter 7). Perhaps another factor is that many people trying to operate runoff plots do not have experience of applying statistical design and analysis to land use problems. Administrators may be looking for numbers to justify conservation programmes, or to persuade farmers to change their farming systems.
The general advice to anyone considering setting up runoff plots has to be "don't, unless:
 there is a specific question which can be answered reliably by plot work, and
 there are sufficient resources to design, build and operate the plots efficiently and effectively and to analyse the results".
Where runoff plots are being used, it is important to remember the basic feature of experimentation that a small amount of reliable information is always better than any amount of unreliable and therefore unusable information.
t0848e10.jpg (73776 bytes)
A catalogue of disasters
An account of the pitfalls which can beset the operation of plots would fill a book. One of the most common is missing important events. "The data published in tables with an added footnote 'The storage tank overflowed for x percent of rains' are useless because it is the heavy rains that cause the most damage. Runoff and soil-loss equipment must, therefore, be properly designed, installed, and operated." (Lal 1988a).
Some other problems, the sources of which are not quoted so as not to embarrass the authors, are:
 "During 1989, by mistake the plots were treated differently from the year before, and several mistakes in measurements and calculations plus loss of data occurred. However, it has to some extent been possible to collect reliable data."
 "An unforeseen problem was encountered... while the magnitude of the over-estimation is not known, it is believed... to be 100% at higher discharge rates."
 "Due to attacks of crickets and monkeys the assessment of maize yield was limited to measuring the height of growth."
 "Unfortunately the primary data from 1988 have been lost."
 "The automatic logging equipment broke down for 3 days in July 1989, and for one day in August 1990. Rainfall and associated runoff data were lost."
 "The suspended load data set for some events was incomplete because samples were lost due to insects, spiders, or debris blocking the flow-splitting device, or due to leakage or accident."
Other reported problems include:
 metal collecting tanks floating out of saturated ground,
 crops destroyed by baboons,
 runoff entering the top of plots,
 taps in collecting tanks left open,
 measuring flumes or divisors blocked by floating debris,
 termite nests which produce large holes into which the runoff disappears without trace.
WHEN TO USE RUNOFF PLOTS
One of the best uses for runoff plots is demonstration, where the purpose is to demonstrate known facts. Examples are to demonstrate to farmers that serious erosion is taking place, or to show that erosion is much less from a plot which has a good vegetative cover than from a bare plot. In this case the actual amounts of erosion are not important, so there is no need for replications, nor for complicated collection systems which attempt to catch all of the soil loss. The plots shown in Plate 4 had only simple brick tanks into which the runoff and soil loss flowed, and they overflowed in heavy storms so that only a proportion of the soil lost was caught in the tanks, but they were very effective for demonstrating to large numbers of farmers the essential principle of reducing erosion by better cover.
Another valid use is in comparative studies, for example to test, or demonstrate, or get an approximate indication of the effect on runoff or erosion of a simple comparison such as with or without a surface mulch, or the amount of runoff at the top and at the bottom of a slope.
A third possible use is to obtain data which are to be used to construct or to validate a model or equation to predict runoff or soil loss. But the difficulties in collecting data of sufficient accuracy and reliability are so great and so numerous that only large experimental programmes conducted at great expense over a long period of time can really meet this objective. The classic example is the Universal Soil Loss Equation, which in fact is not at all universal, being only applicable to the eastern half of the USA. It has to be remembered that the USLE was based on a data base of approximately 10 000 plot years, and it is unrealistic to imagine that local variations for different regimes of soil or climate can be constructed from the results of a handful of plots for a year or two.
t0848e11.jpg (29183 bytes)
The problems associated with runoff plots are many and varied.
 Runoff plots are expensive, both in the initial construction and in their maintenance and operating costs.
 They use up a great deal of staff time at several different levels. There is much unskilled manual work in farming the plots and applying the treatments and emptying the tanks, but all of this has to be carefully supervised or things will go wrong. Attempts to train junior staff or local farmers to take measurements or carry out precise operations are usually unsuccessful even after what appears to be an adequate training programme.
 Easy access to the site is important, but very often the conditions to be investigated can only be found in remote areas. Complete reliability is only achieved when professional staff can get to the site quickly at all times of day and night and in all weathers. The most interesting storms are likely to occur in the middle of the night at a holiday weekend and it requires a high level of dedication to get up in the middle of the night and go floundering about on a hillside in torrential rain in the dark. Also it is in the infrequent storm that something will go wrong with the equipment and the results will be lost if there is not someone on site to correct the problem.
 Back-up facilities are needed as well as the immediately operational staff. Laboratory facilities will usually be required for handling the samples, and repairs to electrical or mechanical equipment.
 Runoff plots have all the problems and difficulties of agronomic trials but in addition the much more difficult problems of collecting, catching and recording the soil and water. There is a huge scope for faults and errors.
There are also constraints on what can be investigated on small runoff plots. Cultivation and other farm operations using tractors or oxen are difficult, and so are treatments which involve livestock, but increasing the size of the plot to allow realistic farm operations means dealing with large volumes of runoff and soil loss. Treatments which cannot be investigated on small plots are conservation measures which involve substantial earthmoving such as bench terraces or channel terraces. The hydrologic effects of channel terraces cannot be reproduced on small plots because the mechanics of runoff will be completely different. Similarly the effect of bench terracing is totally artificial on a small plot because lateral movement of surface water is inhibited by the plot boundaries. A partial solution to this problem has sometimes been attempted using a side collector channel as shown in Figure 13 but this is still an artificial situation.
The field-scale loss of soil from land with bench terraces depends on the probability of the structure failing, and that is not something which can be studied on small plots. Measuring the effect of barriers set out on the contour also faces the problem of the unknown probability of failure. Examples are agroforestry practices such as hedgerows and alley cropping, trash lines and contour furrows. An assessment of the effect of these on runoff and erosion can only be made on field-scale plots.
STATISTICAL DESIGN
Some of the better technical journals are attempting to raise the standard of field experimentation by rejecting articles for publication which do not have a suitable statistical analysis and a reasonable timespan. Only the main points are briefly dealt with in this Bulletin; for more information see the section Further reading.
There are two basic requirements, replication and randomization.
Replication
There must be sufficient replications, that is exactly similar repetitions, to allow a measure of the variance within treatments. This is the experimental error caused by unknown and uncontrollable variations in the soil, or the crop, or the treatment, or the equipment, which cause differences in what theoretically should be identical measurements. For agronomy trials of crop varieties, or fertilizer trials, it may be adequate to have only two replications because one expects that the variation will not be large, but with runoff plots there are the same agronomic possible sources of error and in addition many more which can arise from the installation or operation of the plot equipment. As a result three replications should be considered as an absolute minimum, with more if possible. Theoretically, if time allows, it is possible to carry out exploratory trials which will suggest how many replications are likely to be required. For example, one might start with a set of
twelve plots and put them all under the same treatment and measure the variance between the twelve replications. This will allow an estimate of the number of replications required to give an acceptable level of precision. There is no absolute mathematical answer to the number of replications because it is a question of what level of accuracy is expected from the experiment.
t0848e12.jpg (56617 bytes)
Crop rotations are an added complication and best avoided if possible. The effect of a course in the rotation could be different in wet or dry years, so each course should strictly be considered a separate treatment and applied, with replications, in each year of the rotation. This leads to a complicated design with many plots.
Without replication there is no way of comparing the variance between treatments with the variance within treatments - that is there is no way of telling whether different treatments are really causing a measurably different effect. Where replications are used, the usual practice is simply to use the arithmetic mean of the measurements, which is not by itself satisfactory. It is very rare for reports to include any information on the variance of the measurements. Table 1 shows data from one of the few published reports which give the separate results from replications (Hatch 1981), and illustrates the wide variation which can occur.
Bias
Randomization is necessary to eliminate bias, that is the differences which can arise from variations in, for example, soil characteristics. A set of runoff plots is usually set out along a contour because this avoids variations up and down the slope, but there are other possible sources of bias. If the sequence of six plots along a contour is three replications of treatment A and then three replications of treatment B, as in the upper line of Figure 14, then a fertility gradient along a line of plots would result in bias since it would affect all three replications of one treatment differently from the three replications of the other treatment.
To avoid this source of bias, in a simple field experiment, say three replications of two treatments, i.e. six plots in total, the best method is to select three blocks of two plots each and then to allocate the two treatments randomly to the two plots of each block. This can be done by using any truly random mechanism such as tossing a dice, dealing cards, or using tables of random numbers, as in the lower line of Figure 14.
Theoretically, large plots will reduce the effect of soil variations because the sample is larger, but collection and measurement of runoff and soil loss from large plots are more complex as discussed in the next section. Another thought is that long thin plots side by side have a longer common boundary than square plots side by side, and so might limit the risk of soil variation, but this introduces other factors such as the minimum desirable width for cropping purposes, and the effect of length of slope.
In addition to lack of homogeneity of the soil, another possible source of bias is effects introduced by the equipment. Some of these effects will apply equally to all plots and so will not be removed by randomization, and examples are the interference with overland flow by the plot boundaries, or the capture of rain into uncovered collecting troughs or tanks. But other effects will vary from plot to plot, such as leakages in or out across plot boundaries, or leakage under the collecting trough. Some of these sources of error can be designed out, such as fitting covers to the collecting system, but chance errors, particularly leakage, can and will occur, so that is another reason for random allocation for treatment within blocks.
t0848e13.jpg (66683 bytes)
Standard designs
Several networks of experimental studies set up to study soil loss have recommended a standard design to ease the comparison and compilation of results. For many years field experiments in the USA have used certain common features of size, shape and treatment, such as the bare fallow plot, but this was far from being a national standard and it was no easy task to combine the huge database for the construction of the USLE.
 The French Overseas Agricultural Research Programme (ORSTOM) encourages the use of a common design in the French-speaking countries of north and west Africa using plots similar to those of the USDA (Roose 1988).
 For a network of runoff plots in Asia, a common style is encouraged by the International Board of Soil Research and Management (IBSRAM 1992).
 A network study of the effect of erosion on productivity is presently sponsored by FAO and since this includes a treatment of artificial desurfacing of the soil, a design for the operation of the treatments is recommended in addition to recommendations for the construction of the plots (FAO 1991).
These moves to standardization are constructive, but they all experience some problems as a result of variations introduced by the local operators of the plots. As an example, one network recommends nine treatments randomly distributed on three blocks which should be as similar as possible to serve as replicates, but one operator chose to put the blocks on three different slopes thinking that this would provide additional information. To some extent it could do this with some complicated analysis, but it undermines the ability to estimate the variance within each treatment.
TYPES OF RUNOFF PLOTS
Natural or simulated rainfall
The cheapest and simplest method is to install the plot and then wait for rain, but the unpredictability of rain can make this frustrating. The alternative is to use artificially manufactured rain through the use of rainfall simulators as discussed in Chapter 6. The main advantages of using a simulator are that it can speed up getting results, and the amount and type of rainfall can be controlled, but repetition of simulator runs on the same plot, while improving matters, is not a substitute for replication because it does not eliminate bias from soil variation. If the plot is non-typical, the bias is fed into all the simulator runs and this can only be avoided by setting up the plot separately for each test. Some methods have been developed to avoid the tedium of moving the simulator. On a small scale, Plate 5 shows a simulator which can conduct six replicated tests on the small octagonal plots. A larger scale solution in Australia was to build a large simulator of
lightweight materials so that the whole structure could be lifted by crane and moved to a new position (Plate 6). On small plots the rotating simulator shown in Plate 7 is set up between two plots which can be rained on at the same time.
The disadvantage of simulators is that simulators for large plots are expensive to build and have a high labour requirement to operate. Simpler and cheaper simulators are usually restricted to small plots of a few square metres and these do not reproduce real conditions of surface flow.
The measurement of runoff is much easier than the measurement of soil loss, and easier to scale-up to larger quantities. It is therefore relatively easy to measure the runoff from large plots which are necessary in order to reproduce full-scale farming conditions, but collecting, storing and sampling the large quantities of soil involved is a difficult operation. Devices have been designed which are able to give a continuous monitoring of the rate of soil movement in a flume, but they involve sophisticated instrumentation and are beyond the scope of this Bulletin.
Bounded or unbounded plots
Most plots have boundaries which define the area from which the runoff and soil are being collected, but there are some cases where it is appropriate to use unbounded plots using what are usually referred to as Gerlach Troughs after their inventor. They consist of a small ollecting gutter which is let into the soil surface and connected to a small collecting container on the downstream side. There are various degrees of sophistication in the construction of the gutters and containers but expensive or complicated construction is not justified because what is required is a large number of replications to overcome the variation which arises from the fact that, without any boundaries to direct or limit runoff into the collecting gutter, the amount collected depends on the chance occurrence of minor depressions or rills. Figure 15 illustrates an ingenious application which requires only a plastic dustpan and a bottle.
t0848e14.jpg (108147 bytes)
t0848e15.jpg (23537 bytes)
Size of plots
The size of plots must be related to the purpose of the trial.
 Microplots of one or two square metres may be appropriate if the objective is a simple comparison of two treatments where the effect of the treatments is unlikely to be influenced by scale. An example is illustrated in Plate 8 where the objective was to demonstrate and obtain an approximate figure for the difference in surface runoff when a grass mulch was applied to newly planted tea bushes. The runoff was led into old oil drums which were emptied after each storm. The accuracy was not high but the method was so cheap and simple that ten replications could be used, and gave a useful starting point for investigations on a larger scale. The experiment was continued for ten years to assess how the difference changed with the progressive growth of the tea bushes. Other examples of the use of microplots for simple tests are illustrated in Plate 9 looking at the effect of alternative maize populations at IITA in Nigeria, and Plate 10 showing small container plots to measure the
effect of slope on splash. The plots were lifted above ground level so that only splash out of the plots was measured, and while this took out the effect of splash inwards onto the plots, it still allowed a valid comparison of the effect of slope alone.
 Small-scale plots usually of about 100 m are most commonly used for trials of cropping practices, cover effects, rotations, and any other practice which can be applied to small plots in the same way as it would be on a field scale, and where the effect can be expected to be unaffected by plot size. The original size and shape for this type of plots adopted in the USA was extremely arbitrary - six feet wide seemed to be a suitable width, and an area of one hundredth of an acre sounded like a convenient size for calculations, and so gave a length of 72.6 feet. There is some justification for following a well-established practice so that direct comparisons may be made, but there is no justification for suggesting that these precise measurements should be followed in metric units. In fact plots only six feet wide are liable to have a significant border effect and a more sensible size in metric units would be five metres wide and twenty metres long.
t0848e16.jpg (144685 bytes)
t0848e17.jpg (72733 bytes)
It is important to appreciate that this type of plot is not appropriate for any assessment of the effect of earth-moving practices such as channel terraces, bench terraces, or any structures which depend for their effect on interruption to the surface flow. In such cases the amounts of runoff and soil loss are dominated by the occurrence of weaknesses or failures in the system, i.e., breaks or overtopping in channels or the collapse of banks or walls, and these are not properly reproduced on small plots. The partial solution sometimes attempted by building a collector drain down the side of the plot as shown in Figure 13 is seldom satisfactory, and all practices which involve barriers or structures on the contour should only be investigated using larger plots.
 Field plots of about 1 ha are also appropriate for assessing any treatment which cannot be applied realistically to small plots. It is possible to apply cultivation and similar farm operations through the use of removable plot boundaries, as shown in Plate 11 but this requires large areas between the plots for turning oxen or tractors, and also extreme care in the replacement of the plot boundaries after each operation. A major source of error in runoff plots is leakages across plot boundaries so it is unwise to increase this risk by frequent alterations to the boundaries. Plots of the order of 1 ha are necessary to assess any form of terracing, and also to assess the effect of grazing or livestock management. Plate 12 illustrates an attempt to measure the effect of intensity of grazing on rangeland using small plots with a low concrete boundary. Even such a minor obstruction was sufficient to influence the grazing pattern because the cattle did not like walking over it
and the photograph shows that the plot retains more vegetation that the surrounding area.
t0848e18.jpg (136152 bytes)
Watershed/catchment studies
There is a variation in terminology. British usage is 'catchment' for the area which catches runoff, and 'watershed' for the boundary of the catchment, i.e. the divide which sheds water on either side. American usage is 'watershed' instead of 'catchment'. In this Bulletin the two terms are used interchangeably.
All small-plot studies have two in-built deficiencies. First, at the point of collection there is free-fall discharge over the lip of the collecting trough, a condition which does not occur naturally in field runoff. The second is that small plots measure only movement from the plot, and few studies take account of the real-life situation where deposition takes place farther down the slope. Both these factors lead to an over-estimation of soil loss from plots. A valid estimate of runoff and soil loss from a watershed can only be obtained from measurements at the outlet from the watershed. The ratio of soil lost from the whole watershed to the higher rates of soil movement within the watershed is called the delivery ratio. For agronomists concerned about loss of productivity, the gross movement downslope as measured by field plots may be the most appropriate measure, because sediment trapped lower down the watershed has been permanently lost from the cropped area. But it is
misleading to suggest that soil loss measured on small plots can be multiplied up and expressed as tonnes/km as if this were uniform loss from the whole watershed.
The other point about plot size is that the effect of some major changes in land use, such as those resulting from human settlement, or a programme of terracing or treeplanting, can only be evaluated by measuring what happens to the whole watershed. The instrumentation needed to handle large flows and large soil loss is more complex than needed for field plots and is discussed briefly in Chapter 4. Chapter 1 discussed why watershed studies must be carried out on calibrated paired plots and not by comparing before and after treatment on a single plot.
A technique sometimes used to check on the difference between results from plots of different size is called 'nested plots', where small plots are sited within larger plots. An example is a hydrological study carried out in Sri Lanka, where the purpose was to collect reliable and accurate data on the rainfall and runoff regime under existing farming practices, which included irrigated rice, rain-fed tea, and multiple-crop spice gardens. The design was a single watershed of 5000 ha with measured outflow, comprising 15 separately monitored sub-watersheds from 7 ha to 284 ha. Within the sub-watersheds were replicated plots of 1 ha on each of the main farming systems, and replicated plots of one fiftieth ha to study variations such as different densities of tea planting. The hydrographs of runoff from different sub-watersheds could be compared as in Figure 16 (Hudson 1981a).
Another example comes from China, where plots of various sizes from 60 m to 1000 m were installed within monitored sub-watersheds within a 2 ha watershed (Mou Jinze 1981). The conclusion was that plots which extended over the entire slope length from the top of the ridge to the bottom of gully slopes were necessary to measure erosion and runoff on a watershed scale.
t0848e19.jpg (54850 bytes)
CONSTRUCTION
Plot size
Size is dictated both by the treatment, as discussed in the section Size of plots, and the system for collecting soil loss and/or runoff. Microplots may have collecting tanks which store the whole of the runoff and soil, but if it is important to measure extreme events, the size of the tank required becomes excessive for plots of more than a few square metres. As an illustration, a 2 m x 2 m plot, subject to a storm rainfall of 100 mm, with a runoff of 80%, needs a tank storing 320 litres to be practical. But single tanks for plots of 5 m x 20 m would be unmanagably large at 8000 litres, so it is usual to employ some sampling device as discussed in the next section. For plots of 1 ha or more, to sample continuously and store sediment-laden runoff requires complicated instrumentation, and a common approach is to measure continuously only the rate of runoff through a flume, perhaps with intermittent sampling of the sediment, as discussed in Chapter 4.
Two factors must be considered when designing the size and capacity of the collector system. It must be able to handle the maximum probable rate of flow and also to store the maximum probable quantity of runoff. It is well established that infrequent extreme events can contribute a large proportion of the annual runoff and soil loss. In tropical conditions this can amount to three quarters of the annual soil loss occurring during a single storm, so the collecting sampling system must be designed to handle extreme events.
The maximum probable rate of runoff can be computed from the maximum probable runoff ratio from an already saturated soil and the probable maximum intensity over a short period of perhaps five minutes. As an example, a plot of 100 m receiving a burst of rain at an intensity of 250 mm/h and 100% runoff would generate a rate of flow of about 7 litres per second. To allow for the partial blocking by accumulated sediment or floating debris, a pipe of 100 mm diameter would be appropriate.
The total storage capacity required for the plot of 100 m, allowing for 80% runoff of 200 mm of rain, would require total storage of 16 m^3 and some type of divisor system would probably be appropriate, as discussed in the section Tanks and divisors.
There will be only a few storms where the maximum storage is needed, and many small storms which produce small amounts of runoff. If small containers are placed within the larger tanks, they catch small runoffs and can be more easily emptied and recorded. During big runoff events the small cans overflow but the main tank catches the runoff. Plate 13 shows an example from Kenya (Liniger 1990).
Free discharge from the collector into the storage tanks is required. One possible solution is shown in Figure 17, where 150 mm diameter pipes were used to take the water downhill to a point where the tanks could be close together and above ground for ease of sampling and emptying. The more usual system is to have the collecting tanks below the ground surface, and if they are to be emptied by gravity, a drainage system must be provided. Even if the tanks are to be emptied by pumping, a drainage system may be desirable because monolithic metal tanks have been known to float up when the ground became saturated and the water table rose, and brick built or concrete tanks could suffer from inward leakage in similar conditions.
t0848e20.jpg (77489 bytes)
Plot shape
There is no standard for the ratio of length to width. Short plots are generally considered undesirable because they may interfere with rill development, but the relationship between erosion and length of slope is debatable, in spite of the form assumed in the USLE of EL^0.6. The width should be suitable for the farming systems to be applied, as discussed earlier. For cropped plots, a buffer strip at the sides and top may be used to reduce border effects, and also to allow access without walking on the plots.
Plot boundaries
Many materials have been used as plot boundaries, including earth banks, brick or concrete walls, timber planks, and strips of metal, asbestos-cement, or plastic. They are usually permanently installed for the life of the plots, but sometimes removable boundaries have been used to permit tractor or ox cultivation across the plot, as illustrated in Plate 11.
Other points about boundaries are:
 Leakage in or out of the plot across the boundaries is a common source of error. There should be a drain above the plot to divert surface water flowing down from higher ground.
 Plots should not have common boundaries otherwise one leakage affects the result of two plots. There should be a buffer strip between plots.
 Boundaries must be carefully installed, inserted deep enough to prevent leakage underneath, tall enough to prevent overtopping (particularly at the top boundary), and lengths of timber or metal must either overlap or be butted tightly together to prevent leaks. The boundaries shown in Plate 11 were strips of asbestos-cement 2 m x 16 cm x 1 cm, inserted 8 cm into the soil, held upright by steel pegs driven vertically on either side, and the joints were butted together and covered with a sheet metal spring clip;
 A small filet of earth heaped against the outside of boundaries stops surface water ponding or flowing against the boundary, but the soil must be drawn against the boundary wall without leaving a channel which could start a rill.
 Similarly, when building earth banks, a channel should not be left where the soil has been taken from. The soil should be taken only from outside the plot.
Collectors
For small plots, the runoff may spill directly into a tank running the width of the plot, but for larger plots some form of collector trough or channel is required leading to the tanks. Several possible sources of error can occur at this point.
If the edge of the collecting trough is higher than the soil surface, the sediment collected will be reduced as soil is trapped by the sill. If the edge of the collector is lower than the soil surface, there will be excessive erosion at this point and the possibility of initiating small rills. Care is therefore required to ensure that the edge of the collector is at original ground level, and many different methods and devices have been used to ensure this. Sometimes the soil is excavated just uphill from the collector and then replaced and compacted to the right level after the collector has been installed. Another method is to construct a smooth flat approach to the collector trough by installing a strip of sheet metal or plaster or concrete.
t0848e21.jpg (77395 bytes)
If large amounts of soil are eroded, the collecting trough may prevent the natural development of a new profile down the slope - that is the sill of the trough will be higher than the level which the soil would be if the trough were not there. To avoid this possible error, some plots have been constructed with a sill which can be progressively lowered as erosion takes place, for example by making the sill of a weak lime plaster which can be scraped down as required (Hudson 1957).
Another possible error is leakage underneath the collecting trough and if this cannot be controlled by compaction of the soil below the collector, some form of cutoff wall should be installed, perhaps by inserting an impermeable membrane or, if the collecting trough is of brick or concrete, by taking the foundations down deep enough to prevent seepage underneath.
Tanks and Divisors
In the case of small plots, all the runoff is led into a single collecting tank where it is stored until it can be measured, sampled and recorded. For larger plots, or when large amounts of runoff are expected, it is impractical to store the whole of the runoff, and some device is used to divide it accurately so that a known fraction can be separated off and stored.
There will always be considerable amounts of floating organic material in the runoff, and this must be caught on screens if any type of divisor or sampler is used. Sometimes a wire mesh screen is placed over the collecting trough as shown in Figure 18, or alternatively one or more screens may be placed in the collecting tanks as in Plate 16. A device widely used in the USA for many years is the GEIB Divisor, which consists of a number of equal rectangular slots. The water passing through the central slot is collected and stored, while that through the other slots runs to waste (Plate 14). This requires a high degree of accuracy in its manufacture and so a number of simpler alternatives have been developed. These include a series of V-notches (Plate 15), or vertical rows of holes drilled in a steel plate (Plate 16), or a series of pipes built into the wall of the tank as in Plates 17 and 18. Any of these can be constructed to take a sample of between one fifth and one
twentieth of the total flow.
Another approach is to split the flow successively by dividing the flow in half and then dividing again by half as many times as required. Two splitters which divide in half give a sample of a quarter, three give a one eighth sample and four give a one sixteenth. This means more pipework and channels but the divisors themselves can be very simple if they only have to split the flow in two, and an example is shown in Plates 19 and 20.
It is always desirable that any divisor should be checked to see that the sample is exactly the proportion that it is supposed to be. There are several possible sources of error, such as the different sampling points not being at exactly the same level, blockages or partial blockages of some of the outlets, or that the sampling mechanism interferes with the flow through the divisor. As an example, in the slot divisor shown in Plate 14, at high rates of flow the metal chute taking the sample from the third slot inhibits free flow through that slot, so it is taking a smaller sample than intended. Also the velocity of approach to each slot, or notch, or pipe, must be the same. If the divisor is built into a narrow channel the flow through the end slots can be reduced by friction against the channel walls.
t0848e22.jpg (101486 bytes)
t0848e23.jpg (112838 bytes)
t0848e24.jpg (121683 bytes)
All divisors or splitters are likely to interfere to some extent with the flow conditions so there is a possibility of sediment being deposited within the system. This is not necessarily a problem if the calculation of solids is based on the sum of the sediment retained plus an accurate fraction of what is discharged to waste. Thus in a three tank system shown in Plate 21 with two successive seven-slot divisors, the total runoff, or the total soil loss, is that which is retained in the collecting trough and first tank, plus seven times the sediment in the second tank, plus forty-nine times the sediment in the third tank.
There are several types of divisor which involve moving parts. These are only suitable where there will be constant supervision and maintenance, because there is a high risk of such divisors becoming jammed or choked by debris or subject to mechanical failure. One of the best known is the Coschocton Wheel sampler shown in Plate 22. This is installed under the discharge from a flume, such as an H flume, and the force of the water turns a rotating slot sampler mounted on a vertical axis. A possible disadvantage is that the size of the sample is not constant at all rates of flow, and a possible further refinement is to add a motor to give a constant speed of rotation. Another mechanism is the tilting bucket as used in some automatic rain-gauges. This allows the taking of a sample each time the buckets tilt, and also it is fairly simple to add a counter to record the frequency of the tiltings.
Any recording device which depends upon moving parts or electrical supply is suitable only for use on experimental stations where there will be constant supervision, particularly during the extreme event, which is when mechanical and electrical devices go wrong, and usually occurs in the middle of the night.
OPERATION
Frequency of recordings
First the objective of the experiment must be defined. Will annual records be sufficient for the purpose or do they need to be based on a shorter time interval to monitor changes, or are separate data required for individual storms? There is no point in accumulating daily records if they are going to be lumped together into weekly or monthly totals. When labour is short or expensive, it may be cheaper and more accurate to use larger storage tanks or more divisors to reduce the number of readings.
After defining the kind of data required, a balanced choice is required between how much to use suitably trained staff to take measurements and keep records, and when to use automatic instrumentation.
Good access to the experimental sites is extremely important. If detailed accurate results are required, somebody has to be on site during rainstorms to make sure everything is going to plan. It is unreasonably optimistic to expect good data when these depend on somebody getting out of bed in the middle of the night to go clambering up a steep slippery path through the jungle in torrential rain - but at least one large research programme could be quoted where the operation of runoff plots requires this. Not surprisingly, it has not produced any meaningful results.
t0848e25.jpg (134269 bytes)
Estimating soil loss
There are alternative ways of handling the soil and water in the tanks, where the problem is how to take a representative sample of a mixture of water and soil particles of different sizes. The simplest method is to stir the mixture vigorously and scoop out a sample which is filtered, dried and weighed. This method is almost certain to underestimate the soil loss because large particles of soil settle quickly and are hard to keep in suspension while the sample is being taken. An improvement is to add a flocculant, which causes the suspended matter to settle, so the clear supernatant liquid can be drawn off. This leaves a thick sludge which, when stored, allows a more representative sample to be taken (Jackson 1964). Very effective flocculating chemicals are now commercially available.
Another method avoids the time-consuming drying and weighing in the laboratory by weighing a fixed volume of the sludge and comparing this with the weight of an equal volume of water. After making an allowance for the water displaced by the soil, the weight of dry soil in the sludge can be calculated (Barnett and Holladay 1965). This method avoids the need for laboratory work, and also means that samples of various sizes can be weighed. For example in Zimbabwe containers of 1, 5 and 50 litres were used (Elwell 1976). If divisors are used, it is necessary to calculate the weight of soil in each of the tanks separately because the concentration of sediment will be much greater in the first tank where the heavy particles settle out, and least in the final tank.
If the purpose of the experiments can be served by comparing approximate values of soil loss from different treatments, the runoff from the plot can be passed through a filtering fabric which traps some of the soil particles. Pilot trials are needed to establish the best combination of the required size of the filter and its mesh size.
Even simpler, if it is likely that the relationship between runoff and soil loss will be similar for the treatments being compared, it may suffice to measure runoff only, which is much easier than measuring soil loss.
Recorders and automation
It was suggested earlier that instruments with moving parts are best avoided if possible, but they do have the advantage that when there is a malfunction one can see exactly what is happening, and perhaps put it right or make a correction. This may not be the case with automatic recorders. Two examples illustrate extreme cases of these two approaches.
For a major hydrological study in the Philippines, the river gauging stations were remote and difficult to get to in the rains, so they were equipped with automatic recorders which stored a month's record of rainfall and river level in a potted plug-in solid-state memory which was to be changed each month. It worked satisfactorily during tests, but when, after the first month of the rainy season, the cassettes were brought back and plugged into the computers, most of them were a complete blank. Apparently the 'tropicalization protection' was not able to cope with the changes of temperature, pressure and humidity in the recorder housing, so damp got in and wrecked the storage. The problem was expensively rectified, but the main loss was having to wait another year to get data of how river flow built up at the beginning of the rainy season.
The other example, also a hydrological network, was in Sri Lanka, with very different conditions. The watershed had a good road network, and all the fifteen recorders were visited daily to check the operation of clockwork pen-and-chart, water-level recorders. The labour market at that time was saturated with skilled clerical workers, so analysing and interpreting the huge number of paper chart hydrographs was done quickly and cheaply with nothing more sophisticated than hand-held calculators.
It should be pointed out that there have been great improvements in instrumentation in recent years. In most circumstances nowadays, electrical or mechanical recorders for water level would be replaced by pressure transducers feeding solid-stated memory packs. So the choice of recording equipment should depend on the special circumstances of each project or experiment.
Measuring rate of runoff is fairly straightforward. There is a wide range of standard flumes for all rates of flow - standard flumes meaning those which, when built and installed according to specified conditions, do not need to be individually calibrated as the flow rate can be read directly from tables or charts if the depth of flow is known. Standard flumes and weirs are discussed in Chapter 4, in the section on Velocity/area method. The most commonly used flume for small plots is the H flume, which was designed for this purpose by the USDA.
Quantity of runoff may be calculated from hydrographs. When the rate of flow is plotted against time, the area under the curve is the quantity of flow.
Measuring rate of soil movement in runoff is much more difficult, and is discussed in Chapter 5. Sophisticated devices have been developed but are not suitable for field experiments. They usually depend on the attenuation of a beam of light or gamma radiation by the solids passing between a source and a sensor on either side of a channel.
Record keeping and analysis
The principle which should be applied to all records of experiments is that which is the standard practice of professional surveyors. A surveyor goes into the field with a theodolite or level and records all observations in a notebook. The requirement is that the records in the notebook have to be such that they can be completely understood by other surveyors or draughtsmen at any time. They must not depend upon the person who made the record remembering additional facts, they must not be affected by the passage of time, and they must be neat, clean and readable.
The main source of error in records of field experiment is when rather scrappy records are taken in the field and are later copied out tidily in the office. The trouble is that because the field record is untidy and perhaps wet or muddy it is easy for it to be misread or misinterpreted. The answer is to use specially designed record forms or notebooks in a format which is suitable for producing neat and tidy records in the field. Where possible, subsequent calculations should be done on the same form. When it is necessary to transfer data to summary sheets or into another form, the work should be checked and double checked. There should be frequent inspection of the field notebooks and all the subsequent calculations.
<section>9</section>
Chapter 4 Streamflow
This chapter reviews methods for measuring rates of runoff in channels, small streams and rivers. Estimating the total quantity of runoff by empirical methods or from models is discussed in Chapter 7.
VOLUMETRIC METHODS
The simplest way to estimate small flows is by direct measurement of the time to fill a container of known volume. The flow is diverted into a channel or pipe which discharges into a suitable container, and the time to fill is measured by stopwatch. For flows up to about 4 l/s, a bucket of 10 l capacity is suitable and will fill in 2 seconds. For larger flows, an oil drum of 200 l can handle flows up to about 50 l/s. The time to fill must be measured accurately, especially when it is only a few seconds. The variation between several measurements taken in succession will give an indication of the accuracy of results.
If the water flow can be diverted into a pipe so that it is discharged under pressure, the rate of flow can be estimated from measurements of the jet. If the pipe can be arranged to discharge vertically upwards, the height to which the jet rises above the end of the pipe can be measured and the rate of flow calculated from the appropriate formula as shown in Figure 19. Estimates of discharge can also be made from measurements of the trajectory from horizontal or sloping pipes, and from partly filled pipes, but these are less reliable (Scott and Houston 1959).
VELOCITY/AREA METHOD
This depends on measuring the average velocity of flow and the cross-sectional area of the channel and calculating the flow from:
Q(m^3/s) = A(m^2) x V(m/s)
The metric unit m^3/s is referred to as the cumec. Because m^3/s is a large unit, smaller flows are measured in litres per second (l/s).
A simple way to estimate the velocity is to measure the time taken for a floating object to travel a measured distance downstream. The velocity is not the same at all places in the stream, being slower at the sides and bottom, and faster on the surface, as shown in Figure 20. Taking 0.8 of the surface velocity as measured by the float gives an approximate value for the average velocity. Alternatively, the velocity can be measured below the surface by attaching a submerged weight to a float. The float and weight move down the stream together at the velocity of the stream at the depth where the weight is suspended. At about half the stream depth, the velocity is approximately the same as the average velocity for the whole stream. Float methods are only suitable for straight streams or canals where the flow is fairly even and regular.
t0848e26.jpg (68953 bytes)
Another method is to pour into the stream a quantity of strongly coloured dye, and to measure the time for this to flow a measured distance downstream. The dye should be added quickly with a sharp cutoff, so that it travels downstream in a cloud. The time is measured for the first and last of the dye to reach the downstream measuring point and an average of the two times is used to calculate the average velocity.
In turbulent streams the cloud of dye is dispersed quickly and cannot be observed and measured, but other tracers can be used, either chemical or radio-isotopes, in what is called the dilution method. A solution of the tracer of known strength is added to the stream at a constant measured rate and samples are taken at points downstream. The concentration of the sample taken downstream can be compared with the concentration of the added tracer and the dilution is a function of the rate of flow which can be calculated.
More accurate determination of velocity can be obtained by using a current meter. The two main types are illustrated in Figure 21. The conical cup type revolves about a vertical axis, and the propeller type about a horizontal axis. In each case the speed of revolution is proportional to the velocity, and the number of revolutions in a given time is counted, either on a digital counter or as clicks heard in earphones worn by an operator. In shallow streams small current meters will be mounted on rods and held by wading operators (Plate 23). When measurements of floodflows are to be measured on big rivers, the readings are taken either from a bridge, or an overhead cableway is installed well above maximum flood level, and the current meter is lowered on cables into the river with weights to hold it against the riverflow.
A current meter measures the velocity at a single point, and several measurements are required to calculate the total flow. The procedure is to measure and plot on graph paper the cross-section of the stream and to imagine that it is divided into strips of equal width as shown in Figure 22. The average velocity for each strip is estimated from the mean of the velocity measured at 0.2 and 0.8 of the depth in that strip. This velocity, times the area of the strip, gives the flow for the strip and the total flow is the sum of the strips. Table 2 shows how the calculations will be done for data shown in Figure 22. In practice, more strips would be used than the number shown in Figure 22 and Table 2. For shallow water a single reading is taken at 0.6 of the depth instead of averaging the readings at 0.2 and 0.8 of the depth.
Sometimes the information required on streamflow is the maximum flood flow, and a rough estimate can be made using the velocity/area method. The maximum depth of flow in a stream can sometimes be deduced from the height of leaves and trash caught in vegetation on the bankside, or from the highest signs of scour or sediment deposits on the bank. Alternatively some device can be installed which is designed to leave a record of the maximum level. To prevent false readings from turbulence in the stream, some kind of stilling well is used - usually a pipe with holes on the downstream side. The maximum depth of water can be recorded on a rod painted with a water soluble paint, or from traces left at the highest level from something floated on the water surface in the tube. Materials used have included ground cork, chalk dust and ground charcoal. Knowing the maximum depth of flow, the corresponding cross-section area of the channel can be measured, and the velocity estimated by one
of the methods described, bearing in mind that the velocity at high flood will usually be faster than the normal flow.
t0848e27.jpg (92932 bytes)
t0848e28.jpg (70472 bytes)
RATING A GAUGING STATION
If a measurement of the flow is made by the current-meter method on different occasions when the river is flowing at different depths, these measurements can be used to draw a graph of amount of flow against depth of flow as shown in Figure 23. The depth of flow of a stream or river is called stage, and when a curve has been obtained for discharge against stage, the gauging station is described as being rated. Subsequent estimates of flow can be obtained by measuring the stage at a permanent gauging post, and reading off the flow from the rating curve. If the cross-section of the stream changes through erosion or deposition, a new rating curve has to be drawn up. To plot the rating curve, it is necessary to take measurements at many different stages of flow, including infrequently occurring flood flows. Clearly this can take a long time, particularly if access to the site is difficult, so it is preferable to use some type of weir or flume which does not need to be
individually calibrated, and these are discussed in later sections.
t0848e29.jpg (32765 bytes)
EMPIRICAL FORMULAS FOR ESTIMATING VELOCITY
The velocity of water flowing in a stream or open channel is affected by a number of factors.
 Gradient or slope. All other factors being equal, velocity of flow increases when the gradient is steeper.
 Roughness. The contact between the water and the streambank causes a frictional resistance which depends on the smoothness or roughness of the channel. In natural streams the amount of vegetation affects the roughness, and also any unevenness which causes turbulence.
 Shape. Channels can have the same cross-sectional area, gradient and roughness, but still have different velocities of flow according to their shape. The reason is that water close to the sides and bottom of a stream channel is slowed by the friction effect, so a channel shape which provides least area of contact with the water will have least frictional resistance and so a greater velocity. The parameter used to measure this effect of shape is called the hydraulic radius of the channel. It is defined as the cross-sectional area divided by the wetted perimeter, which is the length of the bed and sides of the channel which are in contact with the water. Hydraulic radius thus has units of length, and it may be represented by either M or R. It is also sometimes called hydraulic mean radius or hydraulic mean depth. Figure 24 shows how channels can have the same cross-sectional area but a different hydraulic radius. If all other factors are constant, then the lower the value of
R, the lower will be the velocity.
All these variables which affect velocity of flow have been brought together in a very useful empirical equation called the Manning formula, which is:
t0848e-5.gif (1019 bytes)
where:
V is the average velocity of flow in metres per second
R is the hydraulic radius in metres (the letter M is also used to denote hydraulic radius, standing for Mean Hydraulic Depth)
S is the average gradient of the channel in metres per metre (the letter i is also used to denote gradient)
n is a coefficient, known as Manning's n, or Manning's roughness coefficient. Some values for channel flow are listed in Table 3.
Strictly speaking, the gradient of the water surface should be used in the Manning formula and this may not be the same as the gradient of the streambed when the stream is rising or falling. However, it is not easy to measure the level of the surface accurately and so an average of the channel gradient is usually calculated from the difference in elevation between several sets of points each 100 metres apart. Nomographs are available to assist solving the Manning formula, and an example is shown in Figure 25.
Another simple empirical formula for estimating velocity of flow is Elliot's open-ditch formula which is:
t0848e-6.gif (979 bytes)
where:
V is the average velocity of flow in metres per second
m is the hydraulic radius in metres
h is the channel gradient in metres per kilometre.
This formula assumes a value of Manning's n of 0.02 and so is only suitable for free-flowing natural streams with low roughness.
t0848e30.jpg (114722 bytes)
GAUGING WEIRS
Gauging the flow in natural streams can never be precise because the channel is usually irregular and so is the relationship between stage and flow rate. Natural stream channels are also subject to change by erosion or deposition. More reliable estimates can be obtained when the flow is passed through a section where these problems have been reduced. This could be simply smoothing the bottom and sides of the channel, or perhaps lining it with masonry or concrete, or installing a purpose-built structure. There is a wide variety of such devices, mostly suitable for a particular application. A selection of those simple to install and operate are described here with reference to appropriate manuals for more expensive or complicated structures.
In general, structures across the stream which change the upstream level are called weirs, and channel-type structures are called flumes, but this distinction is not always followed. A more important distinction is between standard and non-standard devices. A standard weir or flume is one where if it is built and installed to a standard published specification, the flow can be directly obtained from the depth of flow by the use of charts or discharge tables, that is the flume is pre-calibrated. A non-standard weir or flume is one which needs to be individually calibrated after installation by using the velocity/area method as when rating a stream. There is such a wide range of standard devices available, that non-standard structures are best avoided except for one-off estimates of flood flows using the velocity/area method at a bridge, or ford, or culvert.
Most weirs are designed for free discharge over the critical section so that the rate of flow is proportional to the depth of flow over the weir, but some weirs can operate in the condition called submerged or drowned, where the level downstream interferes with the flow over the weir. Some types of weir can be corrected for partial submergence but this is an undesirable complication requiring additional measurements and more calculations so should be avoided where possible (Figure 26). Another variation best avoided is the suppressed weir, which is a weir set in channel of the same width as the critical section (Figure 27).
Sharp-crested weirs
The two most common types are the V-notch and the rectangular notch as shown in Figure 28. There must be a stilling pool or approach channel on the upstream side to smooth out any turbulence and ensure that the water approaches the notch slowly and smoothly. For accurate measurements the specification is that the width of the approach channel should be 8 times the width of the notch, and it must extend upstream for 15 times the depth of flow over the notch. The notch must have a sharp edge at the upstream side so that the flow is clear of the downside edge as shown in Figure 29. This is called the end contractions, which are required for the standard calibration to be applicable.
To read the depth of flow through the notch a measuring scale is set in the stilling pool in a position where it can be easily read. The zero of the scale is set level with the lowest point of the notch. The scale should be set well back from the notch so that it is not affected by the drawdown curve as the water approaches the notch.
t0848e31.jpg (96353 bytes)
V-notch weirs are portable and simple to install in either temporary or permanent positions. The V shape means that they are more sensitive at low flows, but the width increases to accommodate larger flows. The angle of the notch is most commonly 90, but calibration charts are available for other angles, 60, 30 and 15, if more sensitivity is required. Discharge values through small 90 V-notch weirs are given in Table 4.
For larger flows the rectangular weir is more suitable because the width can be chosen so that it can pass the expected flow at a suitable depth. Table 5 gives the discharge per metre of crest length and so can be applied to rectangular weirs of any size.
t0848e32.jpg (16742 bytes)
Other sharp-crested weirs
In some weirs the characteristics of the V-notch and the rectangular notch are combined. The Cipoletti weir has a horizontal crest like a rectangular notch and sloping sides like a V-notch, but for simple installations there is no advantage over the rectangular notch (Figure 30).
The compound weir is sometimes used when a sensitive measurement is required of low flows through the V-notch, and measurements are also required of large flood-flows through the rectangular notch. The more complicated design and calibration mean that this type is usually confined to serious hydrological studies (Figure 31).
Broad-crested weirs
On streams or rivers with gentle gradients it may be difficult to install sharp-crested weirs which require a free overfall on the downstream side. The alternative is weirs which can operate in the partly submerged condition. An example is the USDA-ARS triangular weir shown in Plates 24 and 25. This is nearly a standard weir in the sense that rating tables are available (USDA 1979), but the rating is influenced by the velocity of approach and the calibration should be checked by current meter measurements. Another example, which might be called either a flume or weir, is shown in Plate 26 and also requires rating by current meter.
MEASURING FLUMES
Several flumes have been developed in the USA for use in particular situations, and are widely used in spite of the awkwardness of the units of measurement. The design, construction and laboratory calibrations were all done in fps units, and until some laboratory undertakes the huge task of starting again in metric or SI units, the practical approach is to construct the flumes according to the original specifications in feet, and use the metric conversions of flow rates which have been computed by a consortium of hydraulic laboratories in The Netherlands (Bos 1976).
TABLE 4
Flow rates over a 90 V-notch weir (from USDI 1975)
Head (mm)
Flow (l/s)
TABLE 5
Flow rates over a rectangular weir with end contractions (from USDI 1975)
Head (mm) Flow (l/s per metre of crest length)
t0848e33.jpg (14423 bytes)
t0848e34.jpg (89644 bytes)
t0848e35.jpg (39907 bytes)
t0848e36.jpg (47397 bytes)
The reason for this approach is the complicated design of the different sizes of flumes, which were standardized after years of trial and error testing, and then calibrated. The different sizes of flume are not hydraulic scale models of each other, so it cannot be assumed that a dimension in the 4-foot flume will be twice the corresponding dimensions in a 2-foot flume. Some dimensions or proportions are constant for part of the range, but others vary for each size. As a result, each of the 22 variations in the range of Parshall flumes, and each of the H-flumes, must be regarded as a different device. They will have some features in common but each has its own manufacturing specification and its own calibration tables.
In spite of this complication, the flumes are widely used because of the advantages: they are purpose-built to meet a particular requirement; they are 'standard' measuring devices, that is when manufactured and installed according to the specification, they do not need calibration, and the rating can be taken directly from published tables. Like weirs, it is usually preferable for flumes to operate with free discharge downstream, but some types can operate satisfactorily in the partly submerged condition, i.e. when downstream conditions cause the water to back up in the flume and create some restriction of the flow. If the effect is predictable and quantifiable this is not a serious problem, but it does mean that the depth of flow must be measured at two points in the flume, as shown in Figure 32 and a correction factor applied to the rating tables.
The Parshall flume
Named after the American irrigation engineer who developed it, this is technically described as a venturi, or standing-wave, or critical-depth flume. The main advantages are that there is only a small loss of head through the flume, it readily passes sediment or debris, it does not need special approach conditions or a stilling pond, and it does not need correction for up to 70% submergence. It is therefore particularly suitable for measuring flow in irrigation canals, or natural streams with a gentle gradient.
The basic principle is illustrated in Figure 32. The flume consists of a converging section with a level floor, a throat section with a downward sloping floor, and a diverging section with an upward sloping floor. This results in flow at critical velocity through the throat, and a standing wave in the diverging section.
In the 'free-flow' condition the water level at the outlet is not high enough to affect the flow through the throat and so the rate of flow is proportional to the level as measured at a specified point in the converging section (Plate 27 and Figure 32). The ratio of the downstream water level (Hb in Figure 32) to the upstream level Ha is called the degree of submergence, and an advantage of the Parshall flume is that no correction is required up to 70% submergence. If a greater degree of submergence is likely, then both Ha and Hb must be recorded, as in Plate 28.
The dimensions of flumes with throat width of 1 to 8 feet are shown in Table 6 and Figure 33. The flow rates of a 1-foot flume are shown in Table 7. The manuals listed in the section Further reading give dimensions and rating tables for larger and smaller flumes and correction factors for submergence over 70%.
t0848e37.jpg (155922 bytes)
TABLE 6
Construction dimensions for some Parshall flumes (from USDA-SCS 1965)
Throat width W (feet) A (feet, inches) B C D
Dimensions as shown in Figure 33.
Dimension A = 2/3 (w/2 + 4)
For this range of throat width the following dimensions are constant.
E = 3-0, F = 2-0, g = 3-0, K = 3 inches, N = 9 inches, X = 2 inches, Y = 3 inches.
t0848e38.jpg (51539 bytes)
Table 7
Flow rates in a Parshall flume of throat width 304.8 mm (12 inches)
Head (mm) (Ha in Figure 32) Flow (l/s)
t0848e39.jpg (78450 bytes)
A wide variety of materials has been used for making Parshall flumes. They can be prefabricated from sheet metal or timber, or they can be constructed in the field from brick and plaster using a prefabricated metal skeleton to ensure that the exact measurements are achieved (Plate 29). If a number of flumes are required, they can be cast in concrete using reusable shuttering. Spot measurements of the depth of flow may be read from a gauge post set in the wall of the flume or, if continuous records are required, a float-operated recorder can be installed in a stilling well at the specified position.
H flumes
A group of special-purpose flumes, called H flumes were designed by the US Soil Conservation Service for measuring flows accurately and continuously from runoff plots or small experimental catchments. The design requirements were that the flume should measure low flows accurately but still have a good capacity for high flows, and not need a stilling pond. It is also required to be able to pass runoff containing a heavy sediment load. The practical solution to the American units is, as for the Parshall flumes, to construct in the original specifications in feet, and use the metric conversions of flow rate in Bos (1976).
There are three types of H flume. The smallest (HS) can record flows up to 22 l/s, the regular type (H) can take flows up to 2.36 m^3/s, and the large type (HL) flows up to 3.32 m^3/s. Each type can be built in a range of sizes which is defined by the maximum depth of flow (D), and the manufacturing dimensions are given as proportions of D, but the proportions, i.e. the shape of the flume, are different for each of the three types HS, H, and HL.
The HS can be built in four sizes, from 0.4 to 1.0 feet, the H type in eight sizes from 0.5 to 4.5 feet, and the HL in two sizes, 3.5 and 4.0 feet. There are thus fourteen possible manufacturing specifications and fourteen different calibration tables. As examples, the dimensions for the H type are shown in Figure 34, and the calibration for the H-type of size 1.5 ft (0.457 m) in Table 8.
H flumes can operate partly submerged and the correction is shown in Figure 35. The submergence downstream causes the water to back up in the flume and flow at an increased depth. The correction curve shows how much the measured depth in the flume should be reduced to give the equivalent depth for free flow with which to enter the calibration tables.
H flumes are usually prefabricated from sheet metal and may be used either for temporary installation using sandbags to form an approach channel, or for more permanent installation, using concrete or masonry as illustrated in Plate 30. Like the Parshall flume, spot measurements of depth of flow can be made from a gauge plate at a specified point on the wall of the flume, or a continuous record from a float-operated recorder. With all flumes there is a drawdown curve, that is the surface level falls as the water accelerates to the discharge point, and it is therefore essential that the measurement of depth of flow must be made at precisely the specified distance upstream from the control section.
H flumes have two other advantages. The water flows through the notch fast so there is no deposition of sediment in the flume. Also the outlet design with a backward sloping V does not get jammed by floating trash. If some vegetation does get caught in the V, the water backs up behind until the obstruction is floated over the top of the notch.
t0848e40.jpg (40569 bytes)
TABLE 8
Free-flow discharge through 1.5 ft H flume in l/s (from Bos 1976)
h[a] (mm) 0 2 4 6 8
t0848e41.jpg (26811 bytes)
t0848e42.jpg (56031 bytes)
t0848e43.jpg (73635 bytes)
TABLE 9
Flow rates in Washington flumes
Depth of flow (mm) 30 40 50 60 70 80 90
Flow (l/s) 0.10 0.20 0.33 0.50 0.75 1.07 1.43
Flow in litres per second for depth of flow measured on scale in millimetres.
Washington State College (WSC) flume
This is another critical-depth flume of a design rather similar to the Parshall which is particularly useful as a portable flume for spot measurements of small flows in unlined streams or channels (Chamberlain 1952). It can be prefabricated in fibre-glass (Plate 31) or thin sheet metal and installed in a few minutes. Dimensions are shown in Figure 36 and the rating in Table 9.
There are many larger versions and variations on the principle of the Washington flume. They are usually built in situ rather than prefabricated, and are particularly useful for swift-flowing mountain streams (Goodell 1950) or for semi-tropical conditions where high-load flash floods can be expected (Gwinn 1964). An intermediate size of Washington-type flume, designed for use in New Mexico, can measure flows up to 6 m^3/s with heavy bedload (Aldon and Brown 1965). These are not standard flumes and have to be rated using the velocity/area method discussed in the section on Velocity/area method.
t0848e44.jpg (45357 bytes)
Using existing structures
Existing structures can sometimes be used as control sections to give an estimate of peak flows through road culverts or bridge openings. For rectangular culverts, an approximate value can be calculated from the general formula for flow through a rectangular weir.
Q= c W H ^3/2
where:
Q is the flow in cubic metres per second
W is the width of opening in metres
H is the depth of flow in metres
c is a coefficient of discharge which depends on the geometry of the culvert. A typical value is 0.6; more precise figures can be taken from tables such as in USDA-ARS (1979)
Larger flows may be estimated at rectangular bridge openings using this method, or from current meter reading of velocity and the velocity/area method. For fast flows it may be necessary to attach a heavy weight to the current meter, or to mount it on a rod. If high-water marks can be seen at the bridge opening and also at a distance upstream where the flow is not affected by the bridge opening, the maximum flow can be calculated using a procedure established by the US Geological Service (Kindsvater, Carter and Tracey 1953).
WATER-LEVEL RECORDERS
Sometimes a single measure of maximum depth of flow is sufficient to estimate maximum flood flow, and methods were described in the section on Velocity/area methods. If a hydrograph is required, i.e. a plot of rate of flow against time, then a continuous record of changes in water level is needed. For decades the standard method was a float whose rise and fall in a stilling well was recorded by a pen on a clockwork-driven chart. These recorders were flexible in that gearing could be used to cover large or small ranges of level, and the time-speed of the charts could also be varied by the gearing of the clockwork. The disadvantage was the susceptibility to accidental errors and malfunction. To name just a few, the pipe to the stilling well gets blocked or silted up, insects nest in the recorder housing, humidity or aridity makes the pen overflow or dry up, the chart may stretch or contract, the clock stops, the observer cannot get to the site to change the chart, and many
other problems. Daily inspection is not always possible when sites are remote or have difficult access. In addition to the difficulties of getting good data, the analysis and computation of the charts are laborious.
Fortunately modern technology has greatly improved both the collection and the processing of data. Non-float level detectors can be based on electrical resistance/ capacitance, pressure on a sealed bulb or affecting the discharge of air bubbles and acoustic transducers. Most commonly used today is the pressure transducer in which the deflection of a membrane is sensed electrically. These can be connected to solid-state programmers, timers, and memory storage to provide any required type and frequency of recording, and the stored data can be plugged into a computer for rapid analysis.
<title>Field measurement of soil erosion and runoff</title>
Chapter 5 Sediment transport
Estimating soil loss from measurements of sediment movement in streams and rivers faces several problems. Taking the measurements is time consuming and expensive; the accuracy of the measurements is likely to be poor; and even if there are good data on the movement in a stream it is not known where the soil came from and when. Some of the technical problems are discussed in Dickinson and Bolton (1992). However, it may be useful to be able to make comparisons of the movement in different streams, or at different times of year, or from watersheds under different land uses. It was explained in Chapter 1 why reliable quantitative data require calibrated paired watersheds, and why 'before and after' treatments should be avoided.
Sediment movement in streams and rivers takes two forms. Suspended sediment is the finer particles which are held in suspension by the eddy currents in the flowing stream, and which only settle out when the stream velocity decreases, such as when the streambed becomes flatter, or the stream discharges into a pond or lake. Larger solid particles are rolled along the streambed and called the bedload. There is an intermediate type of movement where particles move downstream in a series of bounces or jumps, sometimes touching the bed and sometimes carried along in suspension until they fall back to the bed. This is called movement in saltation, and is a very important part of the process of transport by wind, but in liquid flow the height of the bounces is so low that they are not readily distinguished from rolling bedload.
The relative quantities moved in suspension and as bedload vary greatly. At one extreme, where the sediment is coming from a fine-grained soil such as a wind-deposited loess, or an alluvial clay, the sediment may be almost entirely in suspension. On the other hand, a fast-flowing clear mountain stream may have negligible amounts of suspended matter and almost all the movement by rolling gravel, pebbles and stones on the streambed. Very high concentrations of sediment, as occur in some rivers such as the Yellow River in China and the Mississippi in the USA, may cause significant changes in the rheological properties of the water. The viscosity is higher and the particle settling velocity much lower, so that the threshold between suspended sediment and bedload becomes blurred.
The estimation of suspended load by sampling is relatively simple, but taking a representative sample of bedload is difficult. Both types of sampling are briefly reviewed, also estimation of the total sediment movement, and estimates based on measuring the amount of deposition in ponds or lakes.
t0848e45.jpg (68578 bytes)
There are several sources of error associated with trying to correlate the amount of sediment measured in streams with the extent of erosion within the watershed.
Firstly, there may be significant amounts of erosion taking place which do not contribute to sediment in the stream because the eroded material is deposited before it reaches the stream. The proportion of sediment which does reach the stream compared with the gross sediment movement within the watershed is called the delivery ratio. It could be as low as 1% if there are depressions or heavily vegetated areas where most of soil would be deposited. In a countrywide study of 105 agricultural production areas in the USA Wade and Heady (1978) found delivery ratios varying between 0.1% and 37.8% of the gross erosion.
A second possible source of error is the time factor. In a larger watershed sediment may be eroded and deposited, then eroded again and redeposited, and this process could be repeated a number of times before the sediment reaches the stream. A sample of sediment could include material which had been originally eroded several years previously.
The third difficulty is that the sediment in the stream includes material which has come from several different sources with widely different delivery ratios. Sediment caused by the collapse of gully sides or river banks passes immediately into the streamflow, whereas soil lost from a small cultivated area within a dominantly forested watershed might have high local rates of erosion but contribute little to the total sediment load.
Estimates of the total sediment discharge in streams may be made by combining estimates of the sediment concentration with velocity of flow. The section Velocity/area methods in Chapter 4 explained how velocity varies at different places in the stream,and how an average velocity may be calculated from a series of measurements (Figure 22). The sediment concentration also varies, being usually greater near the bottom, and so the amount of total sediment discharge is the product of these two variables, as in Figure 37.
ESTIMATING SUSPENDED LOAD
Grab samples
The simplest way of taking a sample of suspended sediment is to dip a bucket or other container into the stream, preferably at a point where it will be well mixed, such as downstream from a weir or rock bar. The sediment contained in a measured volume of water is filtered, dried and weighed. This gives a measure of the concentration of sediment and when combined with the rate of flow gives the rate of sediment discharge.
A study of alternative sampling techniques in South Africa showed that dip sampling in bottles generally gives concentrations about 25% lower than results obtained from more sophisticated techniques (Rooseboom and Annandale 1981). For single samples taken by scooping a sample, a depth of 300 mm below the surface is recommended as better than sampling at the surface. If the single sample can be taken at any chosen depth, half the depth of flow is recommended as giving the best estimate of average sediment concentration. Where the sampling programme consists of samples on vertical sections at several points across the stream, the recommended pattern is to use six equally spaced sections as shown in Figure 38.
t0848e46.jpg (54051 bytes)
Depth-integrating samplers
One can allow for variations in sediment concentration at different points in the stream by using an integrating sampler, that is one which gives a single sample combined from small sub-samples taken from different points. A typical sampler is illustrated in Figure 39 and consists of a glass bottle inserted in a fish-shaped frame mounted on a rod when gauging small streams or suspended on a cable for larger streams. For the bottle to fill smoothly and evenly when below the surface it is necessary to have one nozzle or orifice for entry of water, and a second pipe through which the displaced air is ejected. The entry nozzle is usually designed with a slightly expanding cross-section behind the point of entry in order to reduce the risk of back pressure which could interfere with the flow into the bottle. In operation, the sampler is moved from the surface down to the bed and back up to the surface while sampling continuously. A few trial runs will establish how long is
required for the bottle to fill during this double journey. It is undesirable for any type of bottle sampler to continue to accept more inflow after the bottle is full as this can lead to an accumulation of sediment in the bottle. In some depth-integrating samplers the bottle is lifted out of the flow when or just before it is filled; other types of sampler may have some device to stop further sampling once the bottle is full.
Point-integrating samplers
The point-integrating sampler remains at a fixed point in the stream and samples continuously during the time it takes for the bottle to fill. Opening and closing the valves of the sampler are controlled from the surface electrically or by cables. Samples should be taken at a number of depths at each of several vertical sections, as described in the section Velocity/area methods in Chapter 4, for the gauging of streams by the current meter method, so these two operations are often carried out at the same time.
Another method of obtaining samples at various depths of flow is to use automatic samplers which will take a sample at a predetermined depth of flow. A typical example is shown in Figure 40 using a milk bottle and two lengths of bent tubing. Factory-made versions usually use copper tubing accurately bent to shape, but a simple field version can be made using plastic tubing which is tied to a rigid framework to hold it in place. The bottle starts to fill when the depth of flow reaches point A and starts syphon flow into the bottle, and ceases when the depth of flow rises to point B which is the outlet of the air exhaust pipe. The range of sampling is controlled by adjusting the distance between points A and B. In its simplest form the intake and exhaust pipes are bent into a simple U shape, but this means that flow into the sampler is at right angles to the streamflow, and this may interfere with the sediment concentration, so a more sophisticated version has the two pipes
with a second bend to point upstream into the flow, as in Figure 42.
An ingenious home-made automatic sampler was used Kenya and is illustrated in Figure 41. The operation is described as follows.
"The surface samples are collected through a small-bore brass tube which projects upstream to avoid the turbulence caused by the assembly. The tube delivers the water into a standard one-pint milk bottle inside which there is a flexible rubber ball (standard squash ball) that floats up and seals off the bottle internally when full.
"The sub-surface sample is also taken in a standard milk bottle that it initially sealed by a rubber ball attached to a rod projecting from an inverted milk bottle as shown in the diagram. The length of the rod is such that the upper bottle begins to float, thus unsealing the sampling bottle, just as the water level has reached the orifice of the tube in the companion pipe. The surface and sub-surface samples are therefore taken at more or less the same time in the flood. The sub-surface sampling bottle is sealed internally when full with a floating squash ball as before. A further set of pipes is designed to sample the flood at a higher stage, as shown in the diagram." (Pereira and Hosegood 1962).
t0848e47.jpg (23915 bytes)
t0848e48.jpg (44695 bytes)
If it is required to take a series of samples as the river rises, then an automatic sampler can be set up as shown in Figures 42 and 43. The concentration of suspended sediment is usually higher when the river is rising than when it is falling.
Pumping samplers
Samples can be manually pumped from a stream as shown in Figure 44. However, for nearly twenty years automatic samplers have been available which can pump a small sample into a series of bottles, either at predetermined times and intervals, or as triggered by predetermined flow conditions, usually depth (USDA-ARS 1976). In the early years these devices were usually rather large and cumbersome and subject to malfunctions of the many electrical or mechanical components. However, solid-state electronics have led to a new generation of automatic samplers which are smaller, more reliable and less expensive. Two examples are illustrated in Plates 32 and 33. Modern programmers and timers linked to a float switch or a pressure transducer in the stream allow an almost infinite variety of sampling programmes. Suction lifts of up to six metres are possible, so the sampler can be sited above flood level. Plate 34 shows the Wallingford sampler with an HL flume in the Philippines.
Continuous sampling
The pattern of rising and falling rates of flow, and the variations of sediment concentration at different flow rates, can to some extent be anticipated from observations, but even sophisticated automatic samplers cannot predict what is going to happen next. An automatic pumping sampler may perform exactly as programmed and take a series of samples as required on a rising and falling flood, but then there is another extreme rainstorm in the catchment which produces an even bigger flood which cannot be sampled because the bottles are all full. The only way this possibility can be avoided is to have a system of continuous measurement of sediment concentration, and two methods are possible.
An optical turbidimeter passes a beam of light through sediment-laden water from a source on one side of a channel to a sensor at the other side. The sensor may either measure the extent to which light is absorbed by the sediment particles, and this is called the attenuation principle, or measure the extent to which the light is scattered by the suspended particles, called the scatter principle. Like pumping samplers, they can be programmed to react to combinations of depth of flow and time, but since the data are recorded in a Read-Only-Memory (ROM) device, any amount of data can be stored. Successful examples of turbidimeters have been developed in South Africa (Grobler and Weaver 1981) and in Indonesia (Brabben 1981).
t0848e49.jpg (23999 bytes)
t0848e50.jpg (45270 bytes)
t0848e51.jpg (94680 bytes)
t0848e52.jpg (69337 bytes)
t0848e53.jpg (71145 bytes)
t0848e54.jpg (57175 bytes)
t0848e55.jpg (110428 bytes)
A similar principle is used in nuclear gauges which measure either the absorption or the scattering of gamma radiation instead of light. The successful use of such instruments in many countries is reported by Walling (1988) who suggests, "However, the instruments are more sophisticated than optical turbidity meters and have been restricted mostly to specialised experimental measurements rather than routine monitoring".
ESTIMATING BEDLOAD
Direct measurements
The simplest way to estimate bedload is to dig a hole in the streambed as in Figure 45 and remove and weigh the material that drops into it. The basin upstream of a weir or flume can similarly act as a sediment trap, but it may not be known whether all the bedload has been trapped. Where heavy loads occur this process can be very time consuming and laborious.
Samplers
Estimates of bedload may be obtained from samples caught in a device which is lowered to the streambed for a measured time then brought up for weighing the catch. Many such devices have been used, and the variety demonstrates the difficulty of taking an accurate and representative sample. The problems with bedload samplers are:
 The sampler disturbs the flow and changes the hydraulic conditions at the entry into the sampler.
 The sampler has to be resting on the streambed and tends to dig in as scour occurs round it.
 To remain stable on the bed it has to be heavy, and this restricts the use to lowering from bridges or purpose-built gantries.
 A sampler needs to rest on a reasonably smooth bed and not perch on large stones or boulders.
The simplest form is a wire basket with a stabilizing tail fin as illustrated in Figure 46. The catch of such devices is low because they interfere with the flow and some material is deflected round the sampler, increasingly as the basket fills up. This is described by saying that back pressure reduces the flow into the sampler, and this description conveys the right image without going into the mechanics of fluid flow. Some samplers have a diverging section behind the orifice, which allows entry to the sampler at the surrounding stream velocity. These are called pressure-difference samplers and an example is illustrated in Figure 47).
TABLE 10
Maddock's classification for estimation of the bedload (Maddock 1975)
Suspended sediment concentration
parts per million
River bed material Suspended elements texture Bedload discharge expressed as % of suspended sediment discharge
less than 1000 sand similar to the river bed 25-150
less than 1000 gravel, rocks, hard clay low sand content 5-12
1000 - 7500 sand similar to the river bed 10-35
1000 - 7500 gravel, rocks, hard clay 25% sand or less 5-12
more than 7500 sand similar to the river bed 5-15
more than 7500 gravel, rocks, hard clay 25% sand or less 2-8
Radio-active tracers
A number of studies report the use of radio-active tracers to monitor the bedload movement. The technique is to insert into the stream a radio-active tracer in a form similar to the bedload, that is it should have the same shape, size and weight as the natural sediment. The movement downstream can then be monitored using portable detectors. Alternatively, the tracer can be applied to the surface of naturally-occurring sediment, or it can be incorporated into artificial materials which can be made radio-active by irradiation (Tazioli 1981).
t0848e56.jpg (40827 bytes)
Empirical estimations
The difficulty of obtaining reliable measurements of bedload has led to some attempts to calculate it from more easily measured parameters but these are not widely used. A very simple method based on knowing the suspended sediment concentration and the texture of both suspended material and bed material is given in Table 10. A sophisticated approach was developed by Einstein (1950) and has been later modified and improved. There are many other theoretical formulas, and much debate on their accuracy and reliability.
ESTIMATING TOTAL LOAD
A method of avoiding separate estimates of suspended load and bedload is to mix up all the moving sediment and then take a single sample of the mixture. A turbulence flume is a purpose-built structure with obstructions in the streambed to create as much turbulence as possible before the flow passes over a weir where samples can be taken. The same effect may be found at a rock bar or perhaps where the stream flows through a restricted opening such as a bridge or culvert. Large bedload material will settle to the bottom again so the sample has to be taken quickly by scooping a bucket full of the mixture.
Larger streams or rivers may be sampled at a turbulence flume using a slot sampler as illustrated in Figure 48 (Barnes and Johnson 1956). An application of this method is described by Brown, Hansen and Champagne (1970). The sampling slot is narrow with sharp edges, and the water and sediment drop through into a hollow pipe or channel leading to a container. The slot must not be too small or it may be blocked by trash and also unable to catch larger particles, but a slot width of 5 mm set in a weir of 5 m width will take a 1000th sample of the flow. If this is still too large to handle comfortably, further subdivisions may be used, either another slot splitter or a sampling wheel as described in Chapter 3. Some of the difficulties associated with this method are:
 the splitter may affect the flow at entry into the slot;
 the slot may be blocked by floating trash;
 the concentration of sediment may not be equal across the width of the weir;
 coarse bedload may not be evenly mixed or not caught.
At a very much smaller scale, a device in Australia takes a sample of the total load in very small channels such as rills or furrows on cultivated land using a plastic jug as shown in Plate 35. A low suction is applied to the container to avoid entry problems.
ESTIMATES FROM DEPOSITION IN RESERVOIRS
Measuring the total amount of sediment deposited in ponds or reservoirs avoids the issue of the sediment delivery ratio, but unless the reservoir is large enough to contain the whole of the runoff, some of the sediment will be carried out over the spillway of the reservoir. The proportion of sediment caught is called trap efficiency and depends on:
 the size of the trap compared with the amount of inflow, that is the proportion of the flow which is caught in the reservoir, and
 the speed of flow through the reservoir which, combined with the particle size of suspended material, determines how much time there is for sediment to settle out in the reservoir. Trap efficiency may be estimated from Figure 49 (Brune 1953).
t0848e57.jpg (42618 bytes)
t0848e58.gif
Accurate surveys of the reservoir or pond basin are required at intervals so that the accumulation can be calculated. In a reservoir which dries up completely this is a relatively simple surveying exercise. When the reservoir is partly flooded, the survey must be carried out from boats, and the level of the sediment may be determined either by a probe or an echo-sounder. It is also necessary to take samples and determine the density of the sediment in order to calculate the weight from the measurement by volume.
The ideal situation is to carry out a survey after the reservoir is completed and before it starts to fill, but existing reservoirs can be used by comparing successive surveys over a period of time. In all cases it is most important to establish a permanent base line so that the same transects are used in successive surveys. A good example of this technique is the work of Rapp in Tanzania (1977).
Computer programs are now available for calculating the storage volume from the relationship of surface area to depth of water (called the stage/area curve), and the total weight of sediment can be calculated from the sediment volume and density.
<title>Field measurement of soil erosion and runoff</title>
<section>1</section>
Chapter 6 Rainfall simulators
OBJECTIVES AND APPLICATIONS
This discussion of rainfall simulators will address only field applications, although it can be argued that it is in laboratory research that simulators are most useful.
Advantages and disadvantages
The main advantages are:
 The ability to take many measurements quickly without having to wait for natural rain.
 Tbe able to work with constant controlled rain, thereby eliminating the erratic and unpredictable variability of natural rain.
 It is usually quicker and simpler to set up a simulator over existing cropping treatments than to establish the treatments on runoff plots.
The disadvantages are all related to scale:
 It is cheap and simple to use a small simulator which rains onto a test plot of only a few square metres, but simulators to cover field plots of say 100 m are large, expensive and cumbersome.
 Measurements of runoff and erosion from simulator tests on small plots cannot be extrapolated to field conditions. They are best restricted to comparisons, such as which of three cropping treatments suffers least erosion under the specific conditions of the simulator test, or the comparison of relative values of erodibility of different soil types.
 Simulators are likely to be affected by wind, but having to erect windshields undermines the advantage of simplicity.
Opportunities
Any consideration of using rainfall simulators must start by defining exactly what information is required. Simulators can be a useful tool for some purposes but quite unsuitable for others, and the objectives will affect most factors when choosing the most appropriate type of simulator. For example, in studies of infiltration and runoff it is not necessary for the simulated rainfall to have precisely the same characteristics as natural rain. In other studies it may be important that the erosion processes are not distorted by the simulated rain being different from natural rain. The required size of the test plots may dictate the best type of simulator: for example small plots may be suitable for studies of relative erodibility, but larger plots would be required for measuring rill erosion.
Some examples of experiments for which simulators are appropriate are:
 the relative protection afforded by different plant densities;
 the relative protection afforded at different times during the growing season;
 studies of relative erodibility;
 studies of soil infiltration characteristics;
 erosion and runoff from up and down slope row crops.
Some examples of studies for which simulators are not suitable are:
 crops grown on a contour, because the plot borders interfere with the normal water flow;
 any comparison of treatments which have only minor differences because under field conditions, experiments with rainfall simulators will suffer from considerable uncontrollable experimental variation;
 studies of physical processes which require accurate variation of rainfall characteristics such as changes in kinetic energy or intensity.
Construction
There are few commercial suppliers of rainfall simulators so it usual for research workers to build their own. However, there is a large amount of literature reporting the building and testing of rainfall simulators so it is usually practical to copy a previous design rather than to start from the beginning. In particular, a huge variety of commercially-available spraying nozzles have been tested. Also anyone contemplating building and using a simulator would be well advised to seek advice from other researchers.
Meyer (1988) offers two useful pieces of advice:
"Research with rainfall simulators involves many problems and pitfalls, and most researchers are glad to help others avoid problems they have encountered."
"Researchers should avoid becoming so involved in developing and improving simulators that little time is left for their use. The goal of rainfall simulator research should be the collection of accurate, useful data, not a perfect rainfall simulator."
The comments in Chapter 3 on the statistical design of field plot experiments are equally applicable to experiments with rainfall simulators. It is essential to have replications and to calculate the variance between plots in order to compare that with the variance between treatments. Also there must be randomization of the location of plots to avoid bias resulting from soil variation.
TYPES OF SIMULATOR
There is a huge amount of literature on the design, construction and operation of rainfall simulators, and some reviews are listed in Further Reading. Large simulators using test plots of 100 m or more are valuable for the study of cropping treatments under something aproaching field conditions, and examples from the USA, Australia, and Israel are illustrated in Plates 6, 7 and 36. These machines are expensive and need teams of trained operators, so are outside the scope of this Bulletin, which will look at some simple and inexpensive simulators.
Desirable characteristics of simulated rain
It is desirable that all the physical characteristics of natural rain should be reproduced as accurately as possible, but some latitude may be acceptable in the interests of simplicity and cost. The main characteristics are:
 Drop size. Raindrops vary from the minute droplets in mist up to a maximum of 6 or 7 mm diameter. This is a physical upper limit to drop size and above this any drops which form from the coallescence of more than one drop are unstable and will break up into smaller drops. The median drop diameter by volume lies between 2 and 3 mm and varies with intensity, as shown in Figure 50.
 The distribution of drops of different sizes varies. Cyclonic rain in temperate climates is mainly composed of small and average size drops, but high-intensity tropical thunderstorms have a greater proportion of large drops.
 Fall velocity. Falling raindrops reach a maximum (or terminal) velocity when the force of gravitational acceleration is equalled by the resistence of the drop falling through the air. The terminal velocity is a function of drop size and increases up to about 9 m/s for the largest drops, as shown in Figure 51.
 Kinetic energy is the energy of a moving body, and the kinetic energy of rainfall is the sum of the kinetic energy of the individual drops. Kinetic energy is a function of the size and fall velocity and is often used as a desirable parameter for a simulator because it is known that kinetic energy is closely related to the ability of rainfall to cause erosion. The kinetic energy of rainfall varies with intensity as shown in Figure 52, with an upper limit at about 75 mm/h. This upper limit is a consequence of the upper limit of the size of raindrops in that the highest intensities have more drops but not of an ever-increasing size, so the energy per volume of rain does not increase above intensities of 75 mm/h. The energy per second does, of course, increase with intensity at all levels of intensity. The intensity of rainfall is not related to mean annual rainfall - arid or semi-arid rainfall can reach intensities as high as in the humid tropics, although less frequently.
 Rainfall intensity or rate of rainfall can vary rapidly in natural rainfall, but it is usually not practical or necessary to build into rainfall simulators the ability to change intensity during a test. It is usual to choose and design for a single value of intensity, for example 25 mm/h to simulate temperate rainfall, or 75 mm/h for tropical or semi-arid rainfall.
 Uniformity of distribution of rainfall over the test plots is desirable.
t0848e60.jpg (82695 bytes)
t0848e59.jpg (23044 bytes)
t0848e61.jpg (20440 bytes)
t0848e62.jpg (56484 bytes)
t0848e63.jpg (53090 bytes)
Making artificial rainfall
Non-pressure droppers
Many simple simulators have used the principle of drops forming and dropping from the tip of tubes connected to a water supply. The size of drop is related to the size of the tubing. Metal, glass or plastic tubing has been used or hypodermic needles which are manufactured to a high degree of accuracy. An array of tubes of different sizes may be used to produce rain of different size drops (Plate 37).
The advantages of this method are that the size of the drops and their fall velocity are constant, the distribution of rainfall across the test plot is uniform and can be achieved with low water pressures.
The disadvantages are that unless the device is raised up very high, the drops strike the test plot at a velocity much lower than the terminal velocity of falling rain, and therefore the values of kinetic energy are also low. A large drop of 5 mm diameter needs a height of fall of about 12 metres to reach terminal velocity and this is difficult to achieve in field conditions. To some extent this can be compensated by using larger drops than in natural rainfall. Another disadvantage is that the size of the test plot is limited by the practicalities of constructing a very large drop forming tank. A simulator using this approach and mounted on a small trailer has been successfully used for many years in Venezuela (Plates 38 and 39).
t0848e64.jpg (152859 bytes)
t0848e65.jpg (76626 bytes)
Pressure sprays
The simplest possible form of spray, but which may be perfectly suitable for some simple applications, is a spray from a watering can, or the rose connected to a pressurized hosepipe as in Figure 53. Most commercial roses are drilled with all the holes of the same size, but it is easy to achieve a mixed drop distribution by drilling holes of different sizes. A basic problem with sprinklers of this type is that, like non-pressure drop formers, they only achieve a low impact velocity unless falling from a considerable height. With pressure sprays the impact velocity can be increased by pointing the spray downwards so that it leaves the nozzle with a velocity dependent on the pressure and then accelerates as it falls.
Another very simple simulator using a reciprocating garden spray is shown in Figure 54. The oscillation is controlled by a simple water turbine whose rotary action is converted into simple harmonic motion. This means that the distribution is not uniform as there is a dwell at each extreme, so a test plot using this principle should be located in the central part of the spray pattern.
Many types of spraying nozzle are commercially available, some designed for other purposes and some designed especially for rainfall simulators. A major difficulty is that if the spray is to include drops of the largest size which occur in natural rain, then the nozzle opening has to be large - about 3 mm diameter. But even with low water pressures the intensity produced from nozzles of this size is higher than natural rain (Elwell and Makwanya 1980). It is therefore necessary to have some kind of interruption of the spray to reduce the intensity to that of natural rain. In Meyer's 'Rainulator' two methods were used (Figure 55). The spray nozzles were mounted on an overhead carriage which traversed backwards and forwards across the plot, and also the flow of water to the nozzles was switched on and off by solenoid valves. This simulator and its derivatives are very efficient, but because they were designed for operation on large plots they are complicated and expensive. Most
subsequent developments have therefore been concerned with designing simpler or smaller machines. One such variation was designed by Dunne, Dietrich and Brunengo (1980) for field use in Kenya, shown in Figure 56. A trolley carrying the spray nozzle is pulled backwards and forwards along an overhead track by two operators pulling on ropes.
Another approach is a machine based on a commercial rotating-boom irrigation machine shown in Figure 55 and Plate 7. Each boom carries the water supply to a number of nozzles on each boom which rotate slowly, powered by a water turbine. The machine is set up between two test plots so that rain can be applied simulataneously to both plots. Plot lengths up to 15 m can be rained on by one machine, or for longer plots two machines can be used (Swanson 1965; Hinkle 1990).
Another very popular device which has been copied and developed in many countries is the rotating disc originally designed by Morin, Goldberg and Seginer (1967) and illustrated in Figure 55 and Plate 40. A fixed nozzle sprays continuously, but the soil is intermittently shielded from the spray. The nozzle is directed vertically downwards, and just below it is a metal disc which rotates in the horizontal plane. A radial slot is cut in the disc, and each time this passes under the nozzle a short burst of rain passes through to the plot below. The proportion of the spray which passes is determined by the angle of the slot. This design allows the use of large nozzles which give the right drop size distribution and kinetic energy but which, when spraying continuously, produce excessive intensities.
t0848e66.jpg (80972 bytes)
t0848e67.jpg (45552 bytes)
t0848e68.jpg (53810 bytes)
t0848e69.jpg (49992 bytes)
For simple, home-made, do-it-yourself experiments with simulators one of the best approaches is to use the reaction of the jet to rotate an upside down irrigation sprinkler. An early device of this type shown in Figure 55 and Plate 5. This was designed to be light and portable so that it could be taken to remote areas with poor road access. After the machine is set up it can be positioned in turn over each of the six hexagonal plots which are arranged in circular pattern around the supporting mast. Six replications of each test can thus be made without moving the machine. A later model suitable for larger plots was developed at Silsoe College (Plate 41). A major advantage is that this type of machine can be assembled from off-the-shelf components, as was done in China (Plate 42).
Water pressure for spraying nozzles
Potential sources for the required pressure are gravity or by pumping. In hilly country it may be possible to generate sufficient pressure by piping water down from a higher reservoir, or from a storage tank on top of a tall building. The pressure generated is approximately 10 kN/m for each metre of head.
Higher pressures are usually achieved by pumping. Peristaltic pumps which squeeze a flexible tube are very simple, but only appropriate for small flows. Centrifugal pumps are more appropriate for most simulators, and are readily available in all sizes directly coupled to electric motors or IC engines. Submersible electric pumps can be used for direct abstraction from streams, and hydraulic rams can be used to pump water from a steeply-falling stream to storage at a higher level.
t0848e70.jpg (38326 bytes)
Usually the researcher is looking for the lowest operating water pressure which will give the required drop size distribution and uniformity. An alternative, to date confined to laboratory use, is to inject air into the water supply, which gives higher discharge pressure for better uniformity without increasing rainfall intensity (Shelton, von Bernuth and Rejbhandari 1985; Hinkle 1990). Although mainly a laboratory technique, it should be possible to adapt to field use using compressed air cylinders.
PRACTICAL CONSIDERATIONS
The main factors are power sources, water supplies and access. Most simulators need a power source for motors and pumps, the only exceptions being those using gravity. Small reliable diesel- or petrol-powered generators are available but they are not cheap, and one more thing to be carried to the site. Some small simulators can run on electricity from batteries, but lead-acid car-type batteries are heavy and awkward to carry, and dry batteries, while suitable for electronic equipment, are expensive as a power source for motors or pumps.
Small simulators of the nozzle dropper type may need only small supplies of water because they can be targeted onto the test plot with little wastage outside the plot. Spraying systems need larger supplies, partly because they usually run at higher intensities, and also because the sprays usually cover a larger area than the test plot. It is important to calculate the amount of water which will be required, and how it is going to be delivered to the site. The spinning disc type and oscillating types can be fitted with a device to catch and recirculate the rain not going into the plot, but this has to be done without affecting the rain onto the plot. Large drops from leakages are a common problem.
Access is important. A site close to an all-weather road is so much easier to operate; indeed really large machines like the rainulator have to be able to take large trucks and trailers right to the site. But the sites to be investigated may not be easily accessible, so many simulators are designed to be carried by or operate from a four-wheel-drive vehicle.
Another practical consideration is reliability. Things never work as well in the field as when tested at the workshop. Components get dropped or bent in transit; pipes get clogged; pumps jam; motors burn out. The key is to make a field simulator as simple as possible, robust, easy to repair and with as few moving parts as possible.
OPERATION
Runoff plots used with rainfall simulators are the same as miniature runoff plots discussed in Chapter 3, and the same considerations apply to the plot boundaries, the collecting trough, piping the runoff and sediment to containers, and recording the volume of the runoff and weight of soil.
Much labour is required for setting up the large machines such as the rainulator. Several simulators are designed to reduce this. The Australian simulator in Plate 6 is made of lightweight materials, and can be picked up in one piece by a mobile crane and swung onto a new plot in minutes. The rotating boom in Plate 7 covers two plots from one position, and the rotating nozzle type in Plate 5 allows six replicated plots for each setting up.
Tests have shown that the results from simulator trials are considerably affected by the initial soil moisture of the test plot, and to reduce this undesirable variable it is usual to specify some standardized pre-wetting treatment. One method is saturating the soil 24 hours before the tests, so that the soil is approximately at field capacity. An alternative is to apply 25 mm of rain at 100 mm/h four hours before each test.
The amount of simulated rainfall during the test must be measured. One approach is to cover the whole plot with a collecting sheet and measure the rain caught in a fixed period. This is done before and after the test to make sure there is no change during the test. Alternatively, measurements can be made during the test either by small rain-gauges installed on the test plot, or by collecting channels across the plot, as in Plate 7.
<section>2</section>
Chapter 7 Estimating from models
Sometimes the simplest way to estimate the effect of a physical process is to use an established equation, or formula, or charts and diagrams. The current trend is to call all such aids and solutions models, and they tend to become increasingly complicated and consequently dependent on computers to handle the mathematical processes.
As always, the objective must be clearly defined. Is information on the amount of erosion required because of concern about the loss of productivity or because a reservoir is silting up? Is the required end-product a number which will be used to design something or to give a better understanding of some part of the erosion process? Some discussions of the theory and practice of modelling are listed in the section on Further reading; this discussion will be limited to methods which can answer questions likely to arise in field projects.
The different kinds of models need a short explanation.
An empirical solution or model is one based on observation or experiment, and not derived from theory. It fits observed facts and allows the prediction of what will happen in certain circumstances, because what has happened before in those circumstances is known. The reliability of such methods depends on the database of experience: one might say "this will certainly happen" (because it always does), or "will probably happen" (because it usually does), or "it may happen" (because it sometimes does). An empirical solution may be a simple approximate relationship or a complex multiple regression equation.
Comparing the estimate obtained from one empirical method with that obtained from another empirical method without new experimental data is totally futile and unscientific, for example comparing the erosion index, EI[30], with other empirical estimates of erosivity. The foundation and starting point of all empirical studies must be physical measurements.
A factor model is an empirical model where each of the variables is represented by a quantified factor, and then the factors are combined, for example by adding them up or by multiplying them. Examples are Cook's method for estimating runoff discussed in the section Maximum runoff rates, and the Universal Soil Loss Equation for estimating soil loss, discussed in the section Expirical models for estimating soil loss.
TABLE 11
Gathering time for small catchments (from Schwab et al. 1981)
Average gradient in catchment (%) 0.05 0.1 0.5 1.0 2.0 5.0 10.0
Maximum length of flow (m) 
Gathering time (min)
The term "black-box" model describes a model where the user feeds in defined items of information and takes out the answer without needing to know or understand what happens inside the black box. Such models are also called mystery models. These models can only be operated in the designed direction, that is all the inputs go into one side of the equation, and the answer is the output on the other side of the equation. A regrettably common misuse of one very important black box model, the Universal Soil Loss Equation, is to try to drive it in reverse and solve the equation for one of the inputs.
Empirical models are created from a database of experience obtained under certain conditions, so the model can be expected to work in those conditions. But it will not necessarily work under different conditions. No model can ever be truly universal - even process-based models need site-specific correction parameters. Ideally, each country or region should design its own prediction models to match its own conditions and to suit its database. Some examples are the Soil Loss Estimation Model for Southern Africa (SLEMSA), designed in Zimbabwe, and the European Soil Erosion Model (EUROSEM).
Procedures derived in the USA are built on a huge database from research, and there is a great temptation to apply them in less developed countries which cannot afford the time and expense to accumulate enough data to create local variations. A certain amount of extrapolation can be useful, for instance some components of the USLE may be borrowed, but this should be done with caution. The possibilities and the pitfalls of transferring USA technology on erosion prediction has been carefully studied (Foster, Moldenhauer and Wischmeier 1982).
A process-based model (also called an analytical component model) is able to mathematically explain each of the separate physical processes and then combine the separate effects. Because there are so many variables and so many mathematical computations, such models can only be operated through computers.
Stochastic models are useful particularly in hydrological studies and are based on the probabilities of the occurrence of events in a long time series. Both the last two types of model are outside the scope of the present discussion.
Finally, the accuracy and reliability of estimates from models can only be as good as the inputs. As the computer programmers put it, "garbage in, garbage out".
ESTIMATING RUNOFF
Maximum runoff rates
An estimate of the probable maximum rate of runoff may be required for the design of channels, drains or culverts, or to estimate maximum flood levels. Two simple empirical methods are described.
The Rational Formula
The rational formula is:
where:
Q is the rate of runoff in cubic metres per second,
I is the intensity in millimetres per hour,
A is the catchment area in hectares,
C is a dimensionless runoff coefficient.
The formula was derived originally in English units and owes part of its popularity to the fact that, when using the most convenient English units, C becomes dimensionless because of a fortunate numerical coincidence:
For rain falling at 1 in/hour on 1 acre, 43560 (acre to ft)x 1/12 (inch/hour to ft/hour) x 1/3600 (hours to seconds) = 1.008 ft^3/s, which for all practical purposes can be taken as unity, so in English units the formula is:
where:
Q is the rate of runoff in cubic feet per second,
I is the intensity in inches per hour,
A is the area in acres,
C is the same dimensionless factor as in the metric formula.
To solve the equation each of the three factors on the right-hand side needs to be known. The area A is measured by surveying, or from maps or aerial photographs.
t0848e71.jpg (21232 bytes)
To get the value of intensity I it is first necessary to estimate the gathering time of the catchment, that is, the longest time taken by surface runoff to get from any point in the catchment to the outlet. Table 11 gives values of gathering time for catchments of various size and slopes. Next information on the highest intensity of rain which is likely to last for the given gathering time is needed. Local rainfall records should be used to estimate this if possible. When local records are not available an estimate can be made from Figure 57 which is derived from rainfall records in Australia and Africa. Short duration storms of less than five minutes can have extremely high intensities and this method should not be used for gathering times of five minutes or less. This figure shows the heaviest rainfall likely to occur on average once in 10 years. To get corresponding figures for shorter or longer periods the conversion factors of Table 12 can be used.
TABLE 12
Rainfall probability conversion factors for various return periods
[2 years]
[5 years]
[10 years]
[25 years]
[50 years]
The coefficient C is a measure of the proportion of the rain which becomes runoff. On a corrugated-iron roof almost all of the rain would run off, so C would be almost 1.0, while a well-drained sandy soil, where nine-tenths of the rain soaks in, would have a C value of 0.1. Table 13 gives some values of C. Where the catchment has several different kinds of topography, or land use, a weighted average is found by combining the different values in proportion to the area of each.
Cook's method
TABLE 13
Values of runoff coefficient C (from Schwab et al. 1981)
[Topography and vegetation] [Soil texture]
[Open sandy loam] [Clay and silt loam] [Tight clay]
[Woodland]
[Flat 0-5% slope]
[Rolling 5-10% slope]
[Hilly 10-30% slope]
[Pasture]
[Flat]
[Hilly]
[Cultivated]
[Flat]
[Hilly]
[Urban areas]
[Flat]
[30% of area impervious]
[50% of area impervious]
[70% of area impervious]
This method was originally developed by an engineer of the US Soil Conservation Service, and requires an assessment of some of the main factors which affect runoff - the vegetative cover, the soil type and drainage, and the land slope. In Cook's original method there was a fourth factor of the extent of surface storage within the watershed, but trials have shown that the method can be simplified by ignoring this factor, without significant loss of its effectiveness.
For each of the three factors the catchment condition is compared with the conditions listed in Table 14. The description is found in the table which best fits the catchment, and the corresponding number is noted. Intermediate values can be used; for example, if half the catchment has heavy grass cover and the rest is not quite so dense, a value of 12 or 13 could be used. The arithmetic total of the number from each of the three columns is called the catchment characteristic (CC).
The area of the catchment is then measured, and using the area A and the catchment characteristic (CC), the maximum runoff can be read from Table 15. This gives the runoff for a 10-year probability, and the conversion factors given in Table 12 can be applied to get the corresponding figures for other time periods.
Another factor can be applied to take account of the shape of the catchment. Table 13 gives the runoff for a catchment which is roughly square or round. If the catchment is another shape the following conversion factors should be applied:
Square or round catchment Long and narrow catchment Broad and short catchment
TABLE 14
Values of Cook's watershed characteristics
[Cover] [Soil type and drainage] [Slope]
[Heavy grass] [10] [Deep, well-drained soils] [10] [Very flat to gentle] [5]
[Scrub or medium grass] [15] [Deep, moderately pervious soil] [20] [Moderate] [10]
[Bare or eroded] [25] [Shallow soils with impeded drainage] [30] [Hilly or steep] [20]
[Medium heavy clays or rocky surfaces] [40] [Mountainous] [25]
[Impervious surfacs and waterlogged soils] [50] 
Select the most appropriate factor from each of these three lists and add them together.
Example: Heavy grass (10) on shallow soils with impeded drainage (30) and moderate slope (10):
CC = 10 + 30 + 10 = 50.
TABLE 15
Estimating runoff by Cook's method
CC from Table 14, A in hectares, runoff in m^3/s
[CC]
[A]
Runoff quantity, or yield
In addition to knowing the probable rates of runoff, the total quantity which is likely to come from a watershed may be required. The total annual runoff is called the water yield, although one may be more interested in shorter periods, such as the monthly flow, or the amount from individudal storms. The usefulness of water for irrigation or domestic supplies not only depends upon the total amount, but also upon when it is available, and how reliable the supply will be. The average flow might be misleading if the likely variation on either side of the average, and the probable minimum flow are not known. The design of an irrigation scheme using a constant reliable flow would be very different from a scheme which requires storage to even out an unreliable and varying flow. Estimates of water availability therefore depend on having rainfall and streamflow records, and the longer and more reliable the records, the more accurate is the estimate based on them.
The methods of estimating water yield are quite different in arid climates and in humid climates. In humid climates the water table is fairly close to the surface most of the time, and higher than the bed of streams and rivers. There is therefore a steady seepage of groundwater into the streams, in addition to the direct runoff from storms. It is not possible to tell how much of the water in the stream has come from seepage flow and how much from storm flow, and so the total flow cannot be correlated with rainfall records; the only way to predict water yield is from past records of flow. In countries with sufficient data on streamflow, maps can be drawn showing isopleths, or lines of equal runoff. Naturally these resemble the rainfall maps, but the proportion of runoff is greater when the total rainfall is more, so the difference between low and high rainfall is magnified in runoff maps.
In arid regions there is no reservoir of groundwater, and so no seepage flow. The yield of runoff therefore consists entirely of storm runoff and this can be estimated from rainfall records.
The amount of runoff is the rainfall minus the losses, that is:
Q (runoff) = P (rainfall) - L (losses)
In semi-arid climates this method can be used to estimate annual runoff from annual rainfall by subtracting the estimated annual evapotranspiration. This is a function of land use and latitude, and can vary from 300 mm to 800 mm per year. If the cumulative runoff from a catchment is plotted against cumulative rainfall, the average losses can be determined from the slope of the graph as in Figure 58. Such a plot can be made using daily or weekly data or from individual storms.
In arid climates the loss is the infiltration and evaporation, and an estimate of yield can be obtained by applying the formula to each storm, assuming the same loss from each storm, with values from 10 mm to 20 mm per storm.
A more accurate method is to recognize that the losses are going to vary according to the amount of rainfall in the storm, and according to the amount of moisture which can be absorbed by the soil. This is the basis of the formula of the US Soil Conservation Service, which is:
where:
Q is the runoff in mm
I is the storm rainfall in mm
S is the amount of rainfall in mm which can soak into the soil during the storm.
t0848e72.jpg (23907 bytes)
t0848e73.jpg (36113 bytes)
TABLE 16
Values of S (mm) for water yield formula. Intermediate values may be used (from USDA-SCS 1964)
[Soil type] [Number of days since last storm which caused runoff]
[More than 5] [2-5] [Less than 2]
[Good permeability, for example, deep sands] [150] [75] [50]
[Medium permeability, for example, sandy clay loams and clay loams] [100] [50] [25]
[Low permeability, for example, clays] [50] [25] [25]
One possibility is to assume a constant value of S for a given catchment. More accurate estimates can be made by assuming that if storms occur in quick succession the soil will not have time to dry out in between. Table 16 shows some values of S which make allowance for this and for the different storage capacity of different soils. Figure 59 shows the above equation plotted for various values of S.
An alternative method of estimating the effect of conditions in the watershed, using some different variables, is known as the Soil Conservation Service Method of Runoff Curves. Four variables are considered and in each case a selection has to be made from a list of alternatives. Ten categories of land use or cover are offered, as shown in the first column of Table 17, with a choice of two or three appropriate soil conservation practices such as contouring (i.e. planting on the contour) and terracing (i.e. use of graded channel terraces). The hydrological condition of the catchment is graded good, fair or poor, and subjective assessments are called for in this category. For arable land, the hydrologic condition reflects whether the rotation will encourage infiltration and promote a good tilth. For grassland, it is assessed on the density of the vegetative cover, and more than 75% cover is 'good', while less than 50% is 'poor'. For forest lands, the criteria are the depth of
litter and humus, and the compactness of the humus. Finally the soil is designated as one of four hydrologic soil groups described in Table 18.
A disadvantage of this method is that it relies on subjective (i.e. non-measurable) assessments as well as factual criteria. The variables are combined as in Table 17 to give the curve number which can range from 25 to 100. A weighted average can be calculated when conditions vary within the watershed. The procedure would be to first decide the area according to soil group, then according to land use, then obtain the curve number for each treatment and condition.
Figure 60 shows the runoff for curve numbers and rainfall amounts, and is clearly very similar in form to Figure 59, which is not surprising because the runoff curve number and S value are merely alternative estimators of the conditions in the watershed which will affect yield.
TABLE 17
Estimation of runoff curve numbers (from USDA-SCS 1964)
[Land use or cover]
[Treatment or practice] [Hydrologic condition] [Hydrologic soil group]
[A] [B] [C] [D]
[Fallow] [Straight row] [-] [77] [86] [91] [94]
[Row crops] [Straight row]
[Straight row]
[Contoured]
[Contoured]
[Terraced]
[Terraced]
[Poor]
[Good]
[Poor]
[Good]
[Poor]
[Good]
[Small grain] [Straight row]
[Straight row]
[Contoured]
[Contoured]
[Terraced]
[Terraced]
[Poor]
[Good]
[Poor]
[Good]
[Poor]
[Good]
[Close seeded legumes or rotation meadow] [Straight row]
[Straight row]
[Contoured]
[Controued]
[Terraced]
[Teraced]
[Poor]
[Good]
[Poor]
[Good]
[Poor]
[Good]
[Pasture or range] [Contoured]
[Contoured]
[Contoured]
[Poor]
[Fair]
[Good]
[Poor]
[Fair]
[Good]
[Meadow (permanent)] [Good] [30] [58] [71] [78]
[Woods (farm wood-lots)] [Poor]
[Fair]
[Good]
[Farmsteads] [-] [59] [74] [82] [86]
[Roads] [-] [74] [84] [90] [92]
TABLE 18
Hydrologic soil groups (from USDA-SCS 1964)
[Hydrologic soil group] [Runoff potential] [Infiltration when wet] [Typical soils]
[A] [Low] [High] [Excessively drained sands and gravels]
[B] [Moderate] [Moderate] [Medium textures]
[C] [Medium] [Slow] [Fine texture or soils with a layer impeding downward drainage]
[D] [High] [Very slow] [Swelling clays, claypan soils or shallow soils over impervious layers]
The runoff curve method may be applied to estimate runoff from an individual storm, or weekly, monthly, or annual rainfall. It is also possible to use it to derive estimates of maximum rates of runoff, and an example of this is reported in FAO (1976b) but the authors stress that this is an example of where extrapolation is only permissible to an area of similar climatic conditions where exact comparisons have been made, and should otherwise be treated with extreme caution.
t0848e74.jpg (72360 bytes)
ESTIMATING SOIL LOSS
Estimating soil loss is considerably more difficult than estimating runoff because there are so many variables, both occurring naturally such as soil and rainfall, and chosen management practices. As a result, models, whether empirical or process-based, are necessarily complex if they are to include the effect of all the variables.
For some purposes, meaningful and useful estimates can be obtained from models, and the best example is the estimation of long-term average annual soil loss using by the Universal Soil Loss Equation (USLE). On the other hand, estimates of regional or national erosion are of very little significance or value, and the classic example of this is the three different estimates of suspended sediment yields within Africa compared by Stocking (1987) and shown in Figure 61.
Constructing a model based on physical processes is possible for small components of the erosion process; for example splash erosion involves only the energy of the rainfall, the extent to which the soil is covered and exposed by vegetation, and the soil type. Similarly, sediment transport requires only an understanding of the effects of particle size and velocity of flow. But a model of erosion in a field situation would require equations for both of these, and also equations to predict deposition and delivery ratio, none of which are presently available.
t0848e75.jpg (55544 bytes)
If the boundary conditions are limited, for example to soil loss from arable land of moderate slopes, it may be possible to set up an empirical black box model, and this has in fact been done successfully with the USLE. But there are other difficulties. The effect of extreme rainfall events may dominate the total amount of soil loss, particularly in the tropics and subtropics. In that case, the prediction of soil loss is heavily dependent upon rainfall probability studies.
Another factor which can interfere with prediction equations is the effect of mechanical soil conservation systems overtopping, for example ridge and furrow systems, or failing from inadequate design or construction, as illustrated in Plate 43. Another aspect of erosion dominated by one-off events is mass movement from slips and landslides. The only way to deal with these three situations appears to be a combination of physical process modelling and stochastic modelling based on probability, both of which are outside the scope of this present discussion, except that it might perhaps be pointed out that the origin of 'stochastic' is the Greek for 'to guess'.
A basic difficulty with modelling soil loss is that the different forms of erosion have different causes and are influenced by different factors, so a model to predict erosion from arable land uses one group of parameters, but a model for gully erosion would use a very different set. In this discussion, estimating gully erosion is ignored because although the factors which cause gullies can be qualitatively identified, they cannot be quantified. Also estimates of watershed erosion are not included because deposition and delivery ratio cannot be quantified. However, the successful models for estimating soil loss from arable land, and some of the factors used in those models, are considered briefly.
Empirical models for estimating soil loss
The Universal Soil Loss Equation (USLE)
The USLE has been a valuable and successful tool for nearly forty years. Its appeal has led to attempts to use it for purposes it was not designed for, and this has resulted in it sometimes being unjustly criticized. At one time this led the principal author of the system to explain how it should be and should not be used (Wischmeier 1976). The purpose is very simple and specific. It provides an estimate of the long-term average annual soil loss from segments of arable land under various cropping conditions. The application of this estimate is to enable farmers and soil conservation advisers to select combinations of land use, cropping practice, and soil conservation practices, which will keep the soil loss down to an acceptable level - in today's terms it would be said to ensure that the farming system is sustainable. Because it was designed for field use it had to be "easy to solve and include only factors whose value at a particular site can be determined from available
data. Some potential details and refinements were sacrificed in the interests of utility" (Wischmeier 1976).
t0848e76.jpg (116217 bytes)
Some of the things the USLE is not intended to do (and should therefore not be criticized for not doing) are:
 Predicting sediment yield from a watershed, because it does not include deposition and delivery ratios
 Predicting soil loss from a single storm, because the factors are all long-term averages which smooth out the large variations
 Predicting soil loss outside the range of its own database without determining appropriate different values for the factors (for example the slope factor has only been experimentally determined up to 16%, and extrapolation beyond this should be tested by experimental studies)
 Separating the factors as if they were each independent. As Wischmeier (1976, p. 372) says "The relation of a particular parameter to soil loss is often appreciably influenced by the levels at which other parameters are present. To the extent that these interaction effects could be evaluated from existing data, they are reflected in the equation through the established procedures for computing local factor values. Factor R reflects the interaction of storm size and rain intensities". Wischmeier gives some other examples where interaction is partly accounted for, but the basic assumption is that each factor is an independent variable.
 Being used as a precise research tool to study the processes of erosion.
 Treating it as a mathematical equation which can be solved for one of the input factors, for example by measuring soil loss, estimating all the factors but K and then solving for K.
The equation is presented in the form
A = R x K x L x S x C x P
where:
A is the average annual soil loss in tonnes per hectare
R is a measure of the erosive forces of rainfall and runoff
K is the soil erodibility factor - a number which reflects the susceptibility of a soil type to erosion, i.e., it is the reciprocal of soil resistence to erosion
L is the length factor, a ratio which compares the soil loss with that from a field of specified length of 22.6 metres
S is the slope factor, a ratio which compares the soil loss with that from a field of specified slope of 9%
C is a crop management factor - a ratio which compares the soil loss with that from a field under a standard treatment of cultivated bare fallow.
P is the conservation practice factor - a ratio which compares the soil loss with that from a field with no conservation practice, i.e. ploughing up and down the slope.
The units require some explanation, particularly as they were originally derived in Imperial units, and the conversion into metric or SI units is the source of much error and confusion, compounded by the fact that the official USDA SCS reference on the subject (USDA 1978) contained errors which had to be corrected in a supplement of 1981.
The factors L, S, C and P are each dimensionless ratios which allow comparison of the site being estimated with the standard conditions of the database.
R, the erosivity factor, is computed by the erosion index (EI30) method which is the summation for each rainstorm of the kinetic energy (expressed in MJ/ha when using metric units in the USA or in J/m in Europe), multiplied by the greatest amount of rain in any 30 minute period expressed in cm/h in USA or in mm/h in Europe.
K, the erodibility factor, is the average soil loss in tonnes per hectare for each unit of the metric R as calculated by the EI[30] method. In effect, the units of K are arbitrarily chosen so that when multiplied by R in its unconventional units the product is in tonnes per hectare.
Although R and C are average annual factors, there is provision within the system for interaction between them. For example, a period in spring when the soil is newly ploughed and without any plant cover will be dangerous if the spring rains are highly erosive, but not a problem if the spring rains are gentle. Similarly, the effect on erosion of the state of the ground after harvest in the autumn will depend on whether or not the autumn rains are severe. To allow for this possibility, the growing season may be divided into periods and C and R values calculated for each period. The annual combined effect is the sum of the product for each period. Mathematically the effect is the same:
C x R = c[1]r[1] + c[2]r[2] + c[3]r[3]......
t0848e77.jpg (72526 bytes)
In the USA the wealth of data allows this calculation to be carried out with precision, and detailed charts and tables are provided in Agricultural Handbook 537 (USDA 1978). However, the crop rotations, cropping practices and rainfall distribution pattern are all specific to the USA, and in most other countries it will be more appropriate to use annual values of C and R.
The principle of separately quantifying the rainfall and soil erodibility factors in a format of multiplying them together is equally valid anywhere. There is, of course, no theoretical requirement for this format and one could construct a model in which the effects were combined by addition instead of multiplication, but this format is simple and it works. Similarly the concept of dimensionless ratios to compare a particular situation with a standard set of conditions is also transferable. It would be quite possible to leave out any of the present ratio factors or to insert others, but this would require a major research programme and the more practical approach is to try to establish local values of the existing factors.
It would be quite impractical to expect other countries to attempt to acquire a database comparable with that of the USA which used something like 10 000 plot years of experimental records to develop the USLE. It is therefore worth considering which of the principles and which of the USA-derived factors can be used in other countries.
The erosivity factor R is empirical, but the concept of basing it on rainfall energy and intensity has been confirmed in many countries. When attempts were first made to apply the USLE in the tropics, alarmingly high predictions of soil loss were discovered because the database of rainfall energy values obtained in the USA did not cover the high intensities of tropical rainfall, and extrapolation induced major errors. As a result, many attempts were made to find alternative empirical estimators of erosivity. However, later studies of high intensity rainfall in countries around the world established more realistic values for the energy of high intensity rainfall and these have now been incorporated into the USLE. In its present form calculation of erosivity values by the EI method are likely to be reasonable for most rainfall regimes.
The soil erodibility factor K is least likely to be transferable as several studies have shown that the USLE nomograph is not applicable to many tropical and sub-tropical soils (Vanelslande et al. 1984). The four factors fed into the nomograph are the percentage of silt plus very fine sand, the organic matter content, the soil structure, and the permeability. It is probable that the source of the discrepancy is that the silt and very fine sand content and the organic matter content are lower in tropical soils than in the medium-textured soils of mid-west USA. The only reliable way to establish local values for K is to use runoff plots under the standard conditions of bare fallow. It is commonly assumed that once the K value has been established for a soil this can be regarded as permanent. This is a useful simplification when the USLE is being used for its proper purpose, but in fact the value can change as a result of soil management; for example, the soil structure can
change as a result of cultivation, and the organic matter content may be reduced by cropping or increased by manuring. There is also some evidence of seasonal variations in K values, particularly in climates with pronounced wet and dry seasons.
In the USLE the factors of slope length L and slope steepness S are combined together as shown in Figure 62, but this is only for convenience and the two factors derive from two separate and different relationships. The USA database for steepness factor S extends to 18? but it is quite likely that the physics of fluid flow and sediment transport will not be the same on very steep slopes, and this is a possible area for local investigation. The length factor L is less likely to vary, and the need to validate this relationship is of fairly low priority. The cover-management factor C certainly needs to be researched. The crop rotations and variations of the USA mid-West have been minutely researched and documented, and it is clear that the primary purpose of the C factor is to reflect how much protection is given to the soil by the vegetative cover. This principle will be the same under any cropping practice, but the tillage and cultivation practices may be quite different from
those of the mid-West so local investigation of C is desirable.
The conservation practice P is rather crude in the USLE compared with the precision with which the other factors are calculated. One of the reasons is that the effect of major surface manipulation, such as graded channel terraces, cannot be satisfactorily evaluated with small plots as discussed in Chapter 3. Foster, Moldenhauer and Wischmeier (1982) suggest that most of the mechanical practices such as contouring, strip cropping, terraces, and contour furrows, which are used to support protection provided by crop rotation, canopy cover and residue mulches, are probably transferable. There are no values established in the USA for trash lines, grass strips, or agro-forestry practices, but these are the subject of research in several countries. Also there are no known values of P for bench terracing, but it can be argued that the mechanics of erosion on bench terraced land are so different that in its present form the USLE is not appropriate to this situation.
t0848e78.jpg (32490 bytes)
Since the introduction of USLE in 1958, there has been much research and many improvements, leading to the revised version of Agricultural Handbook 537 in 1978. Development has continued since then and a new version for operation on personal computers is at the stage of in-service field testing under the title Revised Universal Soil Loss Equation (RUSLE) (USDA 1991). A process-based model, Water Erosion Prediction Project (WEPP) is at a similar stage of development, and is expected to replace RUSLE at some time in the future. However, there will always be a place for USLE in its original function - to provide information to guide land use planning - because of its simplicity and ease of operation.
Other empirical models
No other country has a database from experimental plots comparable with that of the USA which has the results from more than 10 000 plot years. Australia and Zimbabwe each have a significant base from long-running national research programmes with something of the order of 1000 plot years (for example 50 plots for 20 years). Many other countries have some runoff plots, and regional networks are stimulating many more, as described in Chapter 3. However, not all these experiments were designed to produce data for prediction equations and, as discussed in Chapter 3, the quality of the data often leaves much to be desired.
The question therefore, is how to make use of limited data in a system that allows progressive improvement as more data are acquired. A good example is the Soil Loss Estimation Model for Southern Africa (SLEMSA) (Elwell 1981; Elwell and Stocking 1982). The framework of the model in Figure 63 shows that it closely follows that of the USLE. The basic USLE equation in real units is A = RK, with modifying ratios C, L, S and P. The basic SLEMSA equation in real units is Z = K (a combination of rainfall E and erodibility F), with modifying ratios C derived from cover, and X from L and S. Both models estimate long-term average annual soil loss, and in both the combination of cover and rainfall energy can be done for each of smaller periods of time within the growing season.
The differences between the two models are that in SLEMSA:
 the P factor of USLE is left out because it is felt that the effect of local conservation practices can be allowed for in factors L or S within the topography system, or erodibility F in the soil system;
 the other factors are quantified by methods which are simpler to calculate or require less data;
R (in USLE) is replaced by E in SLEMSA, and is a measure of the total annual kinetic energy of the rainfall, which is easier to calculate from rainfall records than EI.
C in USLE is replaced by a different C in SLEMSA and is determined from i, the density of crop cover which is measured in the field at 10-day intervals over the 180-day growing season. C is expressed as a ratio of the soil lost from a cropped plot to that lost from a bare fallow. SLEMSA can be used to estimate the soil loss from rangeland using a slightly different sub-model to relate C to i.
K in USLE is replaced by F in SLEMSA which is a soil erodibility index and is based on soil type.
LS in USLE is replaced by X in SLEMSA calculated in a very similar manner but with slightly different equations.
A model to estimate change
In some cases it may be useful to be able to quantify relative changes in erosion, without trying to estimate absolute values of soil loss. A model is being developed in Indonesia, called INDEROSI, for this purpose (Gnagey 1991).
Erosion parameters
Empirical models all depend on a base of information collected on a few basic parameters, so a brief review of some of the methods of obtaining these data is appropriate.
Rainfall parameters
The measurement of amount of rainfall is adequately described in all the meteorological manuals, and practical advice for field operation is in Pereira (1989). Rainfall intensity can be measured by specially designed instruments which continuously record the rate of rainfall, but the usual source of information is to compute it from charts from rainfall recorders as described in Hudson (1981b). Similarly, rainfall energy can be measured directly, through the medium of transducers or piezo-electric materials, or by acoustic devices which use a diaphragm to convert the energy into a sound signal which can be measured. The relationship between kinetic energy of rainfall and intensity has been studied in many countries around the world. The variations are shown in Figure 52, but there is doubt about how much these are real differences and how much due to different methods and techniques used in the measurements. It is clear that the general relationship is an increase of kinetic
energy with intensity up to 75 mm/h, with little or no increase at higher intensities. A simple general equation is:
where:
E is the kinetic energy in J/m/mm of rain
I intensity in mm/h
t0848e79.jpg (22983 bytes)
The capacity to cause rain splash is strongly correlated with kinetic energy. The direct measurement of absolute quantitative values is complicated, but relative values which will allow the comparison of the erosive power of different rainstorms or of different rainfall regimes can be measured effectively and simply in the field using a technique developed almost 50 years ago (Ellison 1944). The method is to expose to rainfall small metal containers filled with sand which are weighed in the oven-dry condition before and after exposure to the rain, as described in Lal (1988b).
Soil parameters
Many methods have been derived for estimating the erodibility of soil from properties which can be measured in the laboratory, such as particle size and aggregate stability. Fourteen quantitative indexes are listed by Lal (1988b). For use in the Universal Soil Loss Equation, an empirical equation was derived using six components: percent silt plus very fine sand, percent organic matter, percent sand, soil structure and permeability, and this has been presented in the form of an easy-to-use nomograph (Wischmeier, Johnson and Cross 1971). The database for this was 13 bench-mark soils in the USA, mostly of medium texture, and of medium to poor structure. It has also been tested and found suitable for heavy-textured soils within the USA, but serious doubts have been expressed about its suitability for tropical soils in Hawaii, Tanzania and Nigeria by Vanelslande et al. (1984). Like erosivity, direct measurements in the field in absolute terms are difficult, but relative values
for the comparison of different soil types can be carried out with a simple rainfall simulator.
Cover
Erosion is greatly influenced by the extent to which the soil is protected from the energy of the rainfall or surface runoff by the vegetative cover. Many studies have shown that the relationship is non-linear, with a substantial reduction of erosion being caused by relatively small density of cover. The general relationship is shown in Figure 64. In SLEMSA, this relationship is used to create the index of the effectiveness of crop management. For the direct measurement of cover in the field, many methods have been suggested such as aerial photography, high altitude ground photography, stereoscopic photography and various methods to measure the light able to penetrate a crop canopy. The most successful method is that developed in Zimbabwe which has allowed the accumulation of a large database of measurements taken by extension workers. The instrument is a quadrat siting frame, similar to instruments used in botanic surveys, and uses an inclined mirror which by reflection
allows the operator to look upwards through the canopy and assess the density. The method is explained by Stocking (1988).
<section>3</section>
References
Aldon E.F. and Brown F.J. 1965. A prefabricated flume for gaging ephemeral streams. US Forest Service Research Note RM55. Fort Collins, Colorado.
Barnes K.K. and Johnson H.P. 1956. A runoff sampler for large watersheds. Agricultural Engineering 37(12):813-815, 824.
Barnett A.P. and Holladay J.H. 1965. To weigh dry soil in sludge-fast. Agricultural Engineering 46(8):451-452.
Biot Y. 1990. The use of tree mounds as benchmarks of previous land surface in a semi-arid tree savanna, Botswana. In: Vegetation and Erosion. Thornes J.B. (ed). John Wiley, New York. pp. 437-450.
Bos M.G. (ed). 1976. Discharge measurement structures. Publication 20, International Institute for Land Reclamation and Improvement, Wageningen.
Brabben T. 1981. Use of turbidity monitors to assess sediment yield in East Java, Indonesia. In: Erosion and Sediment Transport Measurement. IAHS Pub. 133. pp. 105-113.
Brandt A.E. 1941. The design of plot experiments for measurement of runoff and erosion. Agricultural Engineering 22:429-432.
Brown H.E., Hansen E.A. and Champagne N.E. 1970. A system for measuring total sediment yield from small watersheds. Water Resources Research 6(3):818-826.
Brune G.M. 1953. Trap efficiency of reservoirs. Trans. American Geophysical Union 22:649-655.
Carrara P.E and Carroll T.R. 1979. The determination of erosion rates from exposed tree roots in the Piceance Basin, Colorado. Earth Surface Processes 4:307-317.
Carter C.E., Greer J.D., Braud H.J. and Floyd J.M. 1974. Raindrop characteristics in South Central United States. Trans. ASAE 17(6):1033-1037.
Chamberlain A.R. 1952. Measuring water in small channels with WSC flume. Stations Circular 200, State College of Washington.
Dickinson A. and Bolton P. 1992. A programme of monitoring sediment transport in North Central Luzon, Philippines. In: Erosion and Sediment Transport Monitoring Programmes in River Basins. IAHS Publication 210. pp. 483-492.
Dunne T, Dietrich W.E. and Brunengo M.J. 1980. Simple portable equipment for erosion under artificial rainfall. J. Agric. Eng. Res. 25:161-8.
Einstein H.A. 1950. The bed-load function for sediment transportation in open channel flows. USDA Tech. Bull. 1026. Washington DC.
Ellison W.D. 1944. Studies of raindrop erosion. Agricultural Engineering 25:131-136; 181-182.
Elwell H.A. 1976. A rapid method for estimating the dry mass of soil from erosion research plots. Research Bulletin 20, Dept. of Conservation and Extension, Ministry of Agriculture, Harare, Zimbabwe.
Elwell H.A. 1981. A soil loss estimation technique for southern Africa. In: Soil Conservation: Problems and Prospects. R.P.C. Morgan (ed), John Wiley, Chichester, UK. pp. 281-292.
Elwell H.A. and Makwanya H. 1980. Design and calibration of a rainfall simulator nozzle assembly for laboratory and field studies. Res. Bulletin 25, Dept. of Agricultural Technical and Extension Services, Zimbabwe.
Elwell H.A. and Stocking M.S. 1982. Developing a simple yet practical method of soil-loss estimation. Tropical Agriculture (Trinidad) 59(1):43-47.
Evans R and Boardman J. 1994. Assessment of water erosion in farmers fields. In: Proceedings of 1st International European Society for Soil Conservation Congress. J. Rickson (ed.). Silsoe, UK, April 1992. Catena-Verlag, Crentingen, Germany.
FAO. 1976a. Upper Solo watershed management and upland development project, Indonesia Project INS/72/006, Termination Field Document No 6, Soil Conservation, by B.C. John and W. van der Goot. Rome.
FAO. 1976b. Hydrology for soil and water conservation in coastal regions of north Africa. In: Hydrological Techniques for Upstream Conservation, USDA-SCS North Africa project. In: Conservation Guide 2. S.H. Kunkle and J.L. Thames (eds). Rome.
FAO. 1991. Network on erosion-induced loss in soil productivity. Report of a workshop at Bogor, Indonesia, March 1991. Land and Water Development Division, FAO, Rome.
Foster G.R., Moldenhauer W.C. and Wischmeier W.H. 1982. Transferability of US technology for prediction and control of erosion in the tropics. In: Soil Erosion and Conservation in the Tropics, Special Publication 43. Amer. Soc. of Agronomy. pp. 135-149.
Gnagey R.A. 1991. Calculating Erosion Reduction with Inderosi. Paper presented at the International Workshop on Conservation Policies for Sustainable Hillslope Farming. 11-15 March 1991, Solo, Indonesia.
Goodell B.C. 1950. A trapezoidal flume for gaging mountain streams. Station Paper No. 2, Rocky Mountain Forest and Range Experiment Station, Fort Collins, Colorado.
Grobler D.C. and Weaver A. van B. 1981. Continuous measurement of suspended sediment in rivers by means of a double beam turbidity meter. In: Erosion and Sediment Transport Measurement. Proceedings of the Florence Symposium, IAHS Publ. no. 133. pp.97-103.
Gwinn W.R. 1964. Walnut Gulch experimental measuring flume. Trans. ASAE 7(3):197-199.
Hadley R.F and Lusby G.C. 1967. Runoff and hillslope erosion resulting from a high-intensity thunderstorm near Mack, Western Colorado. Water Resources Research 3(1):139-143.
Haigh M.J. 1977. The use of erosion pins in the study of slope evolution. In: Shorter Technical Methods (II), Technical Bulletin No 18, British Geomorphological Research Group, Geo Books, Norwich, UK.
Hatch T. 1981. Preliminary results of soil erosion and conservation trials under pepper (Piper nigrum) in Sarawak, Malaysia. In: Soil Conservation: Problems and Prospects. R.P.C. Morgan (ed.). John Wiley, Chichester, UK.
Hayward J.A. 1968. The measurement of soil loss from fractional acre plots. Lincoln Papers in Water Resources 5, New Zealand Agricultural Engineering Institute, Lincoln College, Canterbury, New Zealand.
Hill W.H and Kaiser V.G. 1965. Method of measuring soil erosion losses: rill and sheet erosion. USDA-SCS, Soil Survey Technical Notes. pp. 13-14.
Hinkle S.E. 1990. The Akron USDA-ARS portable boom-mounted rainfall simulator. Trans. ASAE 33(3):818-820.
Howeler R.H. 1987. Soil conservation practices in cassava-based cropping systems. In: Proceedings of International Conference on Steepland Agriculture in the Tropics. MARDI, Serdang, Malaysia.
Hsieh Yuch-Ping. 1992. A mesh-bag method for field measurement of soil erosion. J. Soil and Water Conservation 47(6):495-499.
Hudson N.W. 1957. The design of field experiments on soil erosion. J. Agricultural Engineering Research 2(1):56-65.
Hudson N.W. 1964. Field measurement of accelerated soil erosion in localised areas. Rhodesia Agricultural Journal 31(3):46-48.
Hudson N.W. 1981a. A research project on hydrology and soil erosion in mountain watersheds in Sri Lanka. In: Tropical Agricultural Hydrology. R. Lal and E.W. Russell (eds.). John Wiley, New York. pp. 311-324.
Hudson N.W. 1981b. Soil Conservation. Chapter 3, The Physics of Rainfall, 2nd. ed. Batsford, London, and Cornell University Press, Ithaca, NY.
Hydraulics Research. 1984. A guide to some equipment and measuring techniques in soil erosion research. M.B. Amphlett. OD63 Hydraulics Research, Wallingford.
Hydraulics Research. 1990. Sediment discharge measurements, Magat Catchment, Philippines. OD122. Hydraulics Research, Wallingford.
IBSRAM. 1992. Newsletter No. 23, Bangkok.
Jackson D.C. 1964. Sludge sampling techniques for soil erosion research. Research Bulletin 12, Department of Conservation and Extension, Salisbury, Zimbabwe.
Keech M.A. 1992. The photogrammatical evaluation of areal and volumetric change in a gully in Zimbabwe. In: Erosion, Conservation, and Small-scale Farming. H. Hurni and K. Tato (eds.). Geographica Bernensia, Bern, Switzerland.
Kindsvater C.E., Carter R.W. and Tracey H.J. 1953. Computation of peak discharge at contractions. Circular 284, US Geological Survey.
Lal R. 1988a. Soil erosion research on steep lands. In: Conservation Farming on Steep Lands. W.C. Moldenhauer and N.W. Hudson (eds.). p. 47. Soil and Water Conservation Society, Ankeny, Iowa.
Lal R. 1988b. Erodibility and erosivity. Chapter 7. In: Soil Erosion Research Methods. R. Lal (ed.). Soil and Water Conservation Society, Ankeny, Iowa.
Laws J.O. 1941. Measurements of fall velocity of water drops and raindrops. Trans. American Geophysical Union 22:709.
Laws J.O and Parsons D.A. 1943. The relation of raindrop size to intensity In: Trans. American Geophysical Union 24:452-450.
Liniger H. 1990. Water conservation for rainfed farming in the semi-arid foothills west and north west of Mount Kenya: consequences for soil productivity. In: African Mountains and Highlands: Problems and Perspectives. Chapter 16. B. Messerli and H. Hurni (eds.). African Mountains Association. Geographica Bernensia, Bern, Switzerland.
Maddock T. 1975. Table 3.2 in Sediment Engineering, V.A. Vanoni (ed.). ASCE, New York.
McCool D.K., Dossett M.G. and Yecha S.J. 1981. A portable rill meter for field measurement of soil loss. In: Erosion and Sediment Transport Measurement, Proceedings of the Florence Symposium, IAHS Publ. no. 133. pp. 479-484.
McFarlane D., Delroy N. and van Vreeswyk S. 1991. Water erosion of potato land in Western Australia. Aust. J. Soil and Water Cons. 4(1):33-40.
Meyer L.D. 1988. Rainfall simulators for soil conservation research. Chapter 4. In: Soil Erosion Research Methods. R. Lal (ed.). Soil and Water Conservation Society, Ankeny, Iowa.
Morin J., Goldberg D. and Seginer I. 1967. A rainfall simulator with a rotating disc. Trans. ASAE 10(1):74-77, 79.
Mou Jinze. 1981. The establishment of experimental plots for studying runoff and soil loss in the rolling loess region of China. In: Erosion and Sediment Transport Measurement, Proceedings of the Florence Symposium, IAHS Publ. No. 133. pp. 467-477.
Pentz M. and Shott M. 1988. Handling Experimental Data. Open University Press, Milton Keynes, UK.
Pereira, Sir Charles H. 1989. The scientific basis for management of tropical watersheds. Chapter 3. In: Policy and Practice in the Measurement of Tropical Watersheds. Westview Press, Boulder, Colorado and Bilhaven Press, London.
Pereira H.C. and Hosegood P.H. 1962. Suspended sediment and bed-load sampling in the Mbeya Range Catchments. East African Agricultural and Forestry Journal Vol. XXVII, Special Issue, pp. 123-124.
Ramirez D.M. 1988. Indigenous soil conservation strategies in Philippine upland farms. Working Paper No. 1. Environment and Policy Institute, East-West Center, Honolulu.
Rapp A. 1977. Methods of soil erosion monitoring for improved watershed management in Tanzania. In: Guidelines for Watershed Management. Conservation Guide No. 1. FAO, Rome. pp. 85-97.
Rapp A., Murray-Rust D.H., Christiansson C. and Berry L. 1972. Soil erosion and sedimentation in four catchments near Dodoma, Tanzania. Geografiska Annaler, Series A, 54A(3):255-318.
Roose E. 1988. Protocole standard pour les parelles de mesure de l'erosion en nappe et rigole. ORSTOM, Montpellier, France.
Rooseboom A. and Annandale G.W. 1981. Techniques applied in determining sediment loads in South African rivers. In: Erosion and Sediment Transport Measurement, Proceedings of the Florence Symposium, IAHS Publ. no. 133. pp. 219-224.
Schwab G.O., Frevert R.K., Edminster T.W. and Barnes K.K. 1981. Soil and Water Conservation Engineering. 3rd ed. John Wiley, New York.
Scott V.H. and Houston C.E. 1959. Measuring Irrigation Water. California Agric. Expt. Station, Circular 473.
Shelton C.H., von Bernuth R.D. and Rajbhandari S.P. 1985. A continuous application rainfall simulator. Trans. ASAE 28(4):1115-1119.
Sombatpanit Samran et al. 1992. The use of plastic sheet in soil erosion and conservation studies. In: Erosion, Conservation, and Small-scale Farming. H. Hurni and K. Tato (eds.). Geographica Bernensia, Bern, Switzerland.
Stocking M.A. 1980. Environmental education through the use of erosional features. Proc. Geographical Association of Rhodesia No. 13. Harare, Zimbabwe.
Stocking M.A. 1987. Measuring land degradation. In: Land Degradation and Society. Chapter 3. P. Blaikie and H. Brookfield H. (eds). Methuen, London.
Stocking M.A. 1988. Assessing vegetative cover and management effects. Chapter 8. In: Soil Erosion Research Methods. R. Lal (ed.). Soil and Water Conservation Society, Ankeny, Iowa.
Swanson N.P. 1965. Rotating-boom rainfall simulator. Trans. ASAE 8(1):71-72.
Takei A., Kobaski S. and Fukushima Y. 1981. Erosion and sediment transport measurement in a weathered granite mountain area. In: Erosion and Sediment Transport Measurement, Proceedings of the Florence Symposium, IAHS Publ. no. 133. pp. 493-502.
Tazioli G.S. 1981. Nuclear techniques for measuring sediment transport in natural streams: examples from instrumental basins. In: Erosion and Sediment Transport Measurement, Proceedings of the Florence Symposium, IAHS Publ. no. 133. pp. 63-81.
Thorne C.R. 1981. Field measurement of rates of bank erosion and bank material strength. In: Erosion and Sediment Transport Measurement, Proceedings of the Florence Symposium, IAHS Publ. no. 133. pp. 503-512.
USDA. 1978. Predicting rainfall erosion losses: A guide to conservation planning. Agricultural Handbook 537, and Supplement of 1981. US Department of Agriculture, Washington DC.
USDA. 1991. Predicting Soil Erosion by Water - A Guide to Conservation Planning with the Revised Universal Soil Loss Equation (RUSLE). Draft Handbook for limited circulation, US Department of Agriculture, Washington DC.
USDA-ARS. 1963. Runoff plot design and installation for soil erosion studies. C.K. Mutchler. ARS-41-49. US Department of Agriculture, Washington DC.
USDA-ARS. 1976. The modified Chickasha sediment sampler. ARS-S-107. US Department of Agriculture, Washington DC.
USDA-ARS. 1979. Field manual for research in agricultural hydrology. In: Agricultural Handbook 224. US Department of Agriculture, Washington DC.
USDA-SCS. 1964. Hydrology. Section 4, Part I, Watershed planning. In: National Engineering Handbook. US Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, Washington DC.
USDA-SCS. 1965. Measurement of irrigation water. Section 15 Irrigation, Chapter 9. In: National Engineering Handbook. US Department of the Interior, Soil Conservation Service, Washington DC.
USDI. 1975. Water Measurement Manual. US Department of the Interior, Bureau of Reclamation, Denver, Colorado.
Vanelslande A., Rosseau P., Lal R., Gabriels D. and Ghuman B.S. 1984. Testing the applicability of a soil erodibility nomogram for some tropical soils. In: Challenges in African Hydrology and Water Resources. D.E. Walling, S.S.D. Foster and P. Wurzel (eds.). IAHS Publ. no. 144. pp. 463-473.
Wade J.C. and Heady E.O. 1978. Measurement of sediment control impacts on agriculture. Water Resources Research 14:1-8.
Walling D.E. 1988. Measuring sediment yield from river basins. Chapter 3. In: Soil Erosion Research Methods. R. Lal (ed.). Soil and Water Conservation Society, Ankeny, Iowa.
Watson A. and Evans R. 1991. A comparison of estimates of soil erosion made in the field and from photographs. Soil and Tillage Research 19:17-27.
Wischmeier W.C. 1976. Use and misuse of the Universal Soil Loss Equation. J. Soil and Water Cons. 31(1):5-9. Also published as Appendix A in Soil Erosion: Prediction and Control. Soil and Water Conservation Society, Ankeny, Iowa.
Wischmeier W.C. Johnson C.B. and Cross B.V. 1971. A soil erodibility nomograph for farmland and construction sites. J. Soil and Water Cons. 26(5):189-192.
Zachar D. 1982. Soil Erosion. Developments in Soil Sciences 10. Elsevier, Amsterdam.
<section>4</section>
Further reading
CHAPTER 1 Experimental Design
Pereira H.C. and Vernon A.J. 1960. Practical aspects of field experimentation in Africa. East African Agricultural and Forestry Journal XXVI, (I): 35-41.
Stocking. M.A. 1978. Measuring land degradation. In: Land Degradation and Society. P. Blaikie. and H. Brookfield (eds.). Methuen, London. pp. 49-56.
Experimental design and statistical analysis
Clarke G.M. 1980. Statistics and Experiment Design. Edward Arnold, London.
Little T.M. and Hills F.J. 1978. Agricultural Experimentation, Design and Analysis. John Wiley, New York.
CHAPTER 2 Reconnaissance Methods
Anderson E.W. 1974. Indicators of soil movement on range watersheds. J. Range Management 27(3):244-247.
Gleason C.H. 1957. Reconnaissance methods of measuring erosion. J. Soil and Water Conservation 12(3):105-107.
Profile meters
Henry J.E., Sciarini M.J. and Van Doren D.M. 1980. A device for measuring soil surface profiles. Trans. ASAE 23(6):1457-1459.
Ronkens M.J.M., Singarayer S. and Gantzer C.J. 1982. An automated noncontact surface profile meter. Amer. Soc. Agr. Eng. Paper 82-2620.
Geomorphology studies
Technical Bulletins of British Geomorphological Research Group, Numbers 16 (1975), 17 (1975), 18 (1977), 19 (1977), 24 (1979). Geo Books, Norwich, UK.
Landslides
Landslides in Japan. 1972. National Conference of Landslide Control, The Japan Society of Landslide, Tokyo.
Sheng T.C. 1966. Landslide classification and studies of Taiwan. Forestry Series No 10, Joint Commission on Rural Reconstruction, Taipei.
Tien-Po Chang. 1971. Landslide investigation techniques. MSc thesis, Colorado State Univ. Fort Collins.
CHAPTER 3 Field Plots
Runoff plots
Djorovic M. 1977. Use of runoff plots to evaluate soil loss. In: Conservation Guide No.1, FAO, Rome. pp. 143-146.
Hayward J.A. 1969. The use of fractional acre plots to predict soil loss from a mountain catchment. Lincoln Papers in Water Resources No. 7, Lincoln College, Canterbury, New Zealand.
Sheng T.C. 1990. Runoff plots and erosion phenomena on tropical steeplands. In: Research Needs and Applications to Reduce Erosion and Sedimentation in Tropical Steeplands. IAHS Publication 192. pp. 154-161.
CHAPTER 4 Streamflow
Field Manual for Research in Agricultural Hydrology. 1979. In: Agricultural Handbook 224. United States Department of Agriculture, Washington DC.
Water Measurement Manual (Second edition) 1975. US Dept of the Interior, Bureau of Reclamation, Denver, Colorado.
Manual on stream gauging. Vol. 1 Fieldwork, Vol. 2 Computation of discharge. 1980. Operational Hydrology Report 13. WMO, Geneva.
Parshall R.L. 1950. Measuring water in irrigation channels with Parshall flumes and small weirs. Circular 843, United States Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, Washington DC.
Symposium on river-flow measurement. 1969. Institution of Water Engineers. Proceedings of a Symposium at Loughborough University, Sept. 1969.
Gunston H. 1994. An Introduction to Field Hydrology in Tropical Countries. Institute of Hydrology, Wallingford.
USDA-SCS. 1965. Measurement of irrigation water. Section 15 Irrigation, Chapter 9. National Engineering Handbook. US Department of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service, Washington DC.
CHAPTER 5 Sediment Transport
Bolton P. 1983. Sediment discharge and measurement and calculation. Tech. Note OD/TN2. Hydraulics Research, Wallingford.
Brogan J., Walling D.E. and Day T.J. 1992. Erosion and Sediment Transport Monitoring Programmes in River Basins. Proceedings of Oslo Symposium. IAHS Publication 210.
Erosion and Sediment Transport Measurement. 1981. Proceedings of the Florence Symposium, June 1981, IAHS Publ. no. 133.
Hadley R.F. and Walling D.E. (eds.). 1984. Erosion and Sediment Yield: Some Methods of Measurement and Modelling. Geo Books, Norwich, UK.
Rausch D.L. and Heinemann H.G. 1984. Measurement of reservoir sedimentation. In: Erosion and Sediment Yield: Some Methods of Measurement and Modelling. Hadley R.F. and Walling D.E. (eds). Geo Books, Norwich, UK.
Walling D.E., Davies T.R. and Hashott B. (eds.). 1992. Erosion, debris flows, and environment, in mountain regions. Proceedings of Chengdu Symposium. IAHS Publication 209.
A study of methods used in measurement and analysis of sediment loads in streams. Report No 14. Determination of Fluvial Sediment Discharge, 1963. Inter-Agency Committee on Water Resources. US Govt. Printing Office, Washington DC.
White S.M. 1987. Estimation of sediment yield. OD/P 101. Overseas Development Unit, Hydraulics Research, Wallingford.
CHAPTER 6 Rainfall Simulators
Hudson N.W. 1964. A review of artificial rainfall simulators. Research Bulletin 7, Department of Conservation and Extension, Harare, Zimbabwe.
Proceedings of the Rainfall Simulator Workshop, Tucson, Arizona, March 1979. ARM-W-10. USDA-SEA, Sidney, Montana.
CHAPTER 7 Estimating from models
Schwab G.O., Frevert R.K., Edminster T.W. and Barnes K.K. 1981. Soil and Water Conservation Engineering. 3rd ed. John Wiley, New York.
USDA-SCS. 1964. Hydrology. Section 4, Part I, Watershed Planning. National Engineering Handbook. US Department of Agriculture, Washington DC.
