<title>Tree and land tenure rapid appraisal tools</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
The Forests, Trees and People Programme, coordinated within FAO by the Community Forestry Unit, focuses on strengthening local communities' efforts to improve the management of their forest and tree resources. Land and tree tenure is a central issue in this area. The failure to clearly understand existing rights to land and trees has been a common cause of failure of community forestry projects. As a result, individual incentives are often misjudged, and the benefits of projects are distributed quite differently from the intention of project designers or participants. In designing a forestry initiative, an understanding of the existing system of tree and land tenure is essential to viable project design.
In 1989, FAO published Community Forestry Note 5: Rapid Appraisal of Tree and Land Tenure by John Bruce of the Land Tenure Center of the University of Wisconsin at Madison. This document presented a new approach to exploring tenure issues in forestry, and it forms the basis for the present Field Manual. The manual was developed by Karen Freudenberger also at the Land Tenure Center and translates the concepts of the earlier volume into the practical methodology of rapid appraisal. Among others, this means dividing resources into three broad categories holdings, commons and reserves - and then understanding how villages and households approach tree and forest resource management in each category. Reversing the traditional questioning order is a key approach which has been put into practice by Dr Freudenberger, deferring questions like "Who owns the land?" and "Can the land be sold?" in favour of more indirect questions like "If a newly married couple needs to build a house,
where do they get the poles?"
Dr Freudenberger has long been active in developing rapid appraisal techniques in the field. While a large part of her experience has been in the Sahel region in Africa, the issues she has confronted are often universal. For example, conflict identification, a particularly sensitive issue, is a very important area in project design, but detecting conflicts within a community is usually a long-term and difficult task. This is an area where her experience has led to the development of rapid appraisal techniques which permit quick discovery and understanding of key community problems.
Like other Forests, Trees and People Programme activities, the methods described in the manual lay a strong emphasis on community participation. As the author maintains, Rapid Appraisal is highly dependent on the rapport which is established between the researchers and the local community. Whether the method used is closer to Rapid Rural Appraisal or to Participatory Rural Appraisal, the active involvement of the community in the research process is important to the quality of tee results which can be obtained.
This field manual is being produced and circulated with the intention that it will be revised and enriched based on experience gained in different regions of the world in the application of its techniques. Readers and users are therefore encouraged to send their comments and suggestions to The Community Forestry Unit, Forestry Department, Food and Agriculture Organization. Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
Marilyn W. Hoskins
Senior Community Forestry Officer
Forestry Policy and Planning Division
Forestry Department
<section>2</section>
Introduction
Development projects are often concerned with the management of natural resources. This is because the natural resource base comprises the principal wealth of many rural communities. The more fertile their land and the more productive their trees, the more possibilities these communities have to ensure their livelihoods and improve their well-being.
For projects to be effective in strengthening local communities' efforts to improve management of their resources, project designers need to have good quality information about the area in which they plan to work. They need to understand how resources are already being managed and the often complex tenure systems that govern the ownership and use of land and trees. For this information to be useful, whether designing a project or improving its implementation, it needs to be available without long delays. And for this information to lead to projects that really benefit rural people, it must be not only useable and useful, but used. That is, agencies must be prepared to adapt their programmes and activities in response to what they have learned about local realities.
Rapid Appraisal refers to a family of methodologies designed to encourage the participation of local communities in the collection and use of information to improve their livelihoods. The methods, which have been used in all parts of the world, put a premium on the usefulness of research as well as the rapidity with which results are obtained. They have substantially contributed to improving our knowledge of local conditions and to furthering a partnership between local communities and outsiders for a better management of natural resources.
<section>3</section>
About the field manual
This manual offers guidelines for using Rapid Appraisal methods ^1 to gather information on tenure and natural resource management. It will not give a full introduction to RA methodology since there are already many documents available on that subject. However, it will remind the reader of some of the most important features of the methodology ^2. Neither will it go into much detail explaining tenure and how it relates to development projects. There is already an FAO concept paper (Bruce 1989) that discusses these issues and it may usefully be read as a companion volume to this one. In addition, Appendix 2 suggests further reading on tenure and natural resource issues. It will therefore be assumed that (1) the reader is already familiar with RA and (2) the project for which the manual is being used needs certain information about tenure and natural resource management. The manual will suggest how RA techniques might be used to get the necessary information.
One important reminder is necessary. What follows is not a recipe! It should not be followed as such. Rather, the manual offers suggestions for activities that may prove useful in a tenure study. These must be mixed with the ideas and especially the good judgement of the user before they will produce results of any value. In any given situation, some of the suggestions may not be relevant or may not work. Even those which do seem useful will have to be adapted to the particular kind of study being undertaken and the specific working conditions. RA not only encourages but obliges the practitioner to be creative and resourceful.
The guide addresses, in order, the principal steps in doing an RA study of tenure issues. Chapter 1 gives a brief introduction to tenure and Rapid Appraisal. Preparations needed to do a tenure study are discussed in Chapter 2. Chapter 3 suggests practical techniques that have proved useful in gathering information in the field. Chapter 4 presents methods that may be helpful in organizing and analysing the information collected as well as writing the report. The final chapter discusses issues that may come up in using the information that has been gathered and notes some of the more common problems that may arise.
^1 The term RA is being used to refer to the group of methodologies that includes Rapid Rural Appraisal (RRA), Participatory Rural Appraisal (PRA) and other similar techniques. Much of the information presented here is applicable to both RRA and PRA (see page 9 for a discussion of the difference) and where this is the case we use "Rapid Appraisal" to cover them both. Where there are significant differences in application between RRA and PRA, these are noted in the text.
^2 For those who are not already familiar with RA, some sources of information have been listed in Appendix 1.
<section>4</section>
Chapter 1: Tenure, natural resource management and rapid appraisal
Why study tenure?
What is rapid appraisal?
Why study tenure?
As projects or local communities work toward better management of natural resources, tenure becomes a critical issue. "Tenure" is "the set of rights which a person or some private entity holds in land or trees" (Bruce 1989). It includes questions of both ownership and access. Tenure relations in rural communities are often more complex than those to which westerners or urban, formally educated development workers are accustomed. Local tenure systems may incorporate aspects of official legislation. But they may also incorporate traditional or customary tenure systems.
These systems are often highly complex. Instead of one person having all the rights to a given plot of land and the resources on it, the 'bundle of rights" is divided up. It may be divided according to the resource: the land is owned by one person, the trees by another, the water by a third. It may he divided according to the way the resource is exploited: one person may be considered the owner of a tree and have exclusive rights to chop it clown or collect the firewood, but many other people may have rights to collect fruits or leaves. Or, the rights to the resource may change over time: one person may hold land for cultivation purposes during the rainy season while it becomes pasture with much less restrictive rules of access during the dry season. One characteristic of local tenure systems is that they are often adaptive, evolving over time in response to changing ecological and/or social economic conditions.
How Tenure Issues Affect Project Activities
1. TENURE AFFECTS WHO HAS ACCESS TO RESOURCES
o A project promoting women's gardens may find that women have difficulty obtaining good land.
o A project to improve land with local irrigation systems may find that only the noble classes have secure rights to land, while the former slaves have land rights only through their masters.
2. TENURE AFFECTS WHETHER PEOPLE ARE WILLING TO PARTICIPATE IN PROJECT ACTIVITIES
o Projects may find people reluctant to plant trees on their fields if all trees belong to the state and even the individual who plants a tree is not permitted to cut it.
o In many communities, especially where there is a strong inequality in land distribution, there is a great deal of land borrowing. Often there are rules against planting trees on borrowed fields.
o Projects to improve common areas may have difficulty attracting people to participate if it is not clear who will benefit from the improvements.
3. TENURE AFFECTS THE DISTRIBUTION OF PROJECT BENEFITS
o In some communities, even if a woman plants and waters a fruit tree to maturity, the benefits of the fruit go to the male head of household.
o A herder who used a pasture area during the dry season may lose his rights if irrigated gardening or orchards are introduced and the land is farmed during both the wet and dry seasons.
o A project may add value to a resource by constructing a small dam or other infrastructures. When this happens, powerful people may come and lay claim to the improved lands and the people who had been using the area may be disenfranchised.
Projects working on natural resource issues that fail to understand how tenure rules work in a community are likely to encounter major problems. Tenure issues affect project activities at every stage. Early on, tenure determines who has access to the resources needed to participate in the project. Once the project has begun, peoples' willingness to participate fully in pro posed activities often depends on the kinds of rights they have to resources which determine, in turn, their incentives to invest in or protect them. Tenure rules often determine who benefits from the project as time goes on.
There is a danger of viewing tenure systems as static and failing to recognize and respect the adaptability of local systems. Outsiders have had a tendency to promote more rigid, legalistic tenure systems that, while they may appear appropriate at a given time, are unable to respond to changes in social and ecological conditions.
The earlier information is gathered in the project cycle, the better. Ideally, it should be collected while the project is still being planned in order to avoid making mistakes from the start. However, in many cases the need to gather information arises in ongoing projects. It is never too late to gather information that can help in understanding difficulties that are being encountered and to explore ways to solve these problems.
What is rapid appraisal?
The methodology discussed in this manual is called Rapid Appraisal (RA). RA is a family of methods designed to get practical information on development issues in local communities quickly. Certain characteristics are common to all the methods in the RA family. For example, triangulation (see textbox below) is used in all types of RA both to reduce bias that can distort the results of research and also to increase the richness of information obtained in the study. All RA methods also use a wide variety of tools and techniques to gather information, rather than relying exclusively on pre-established questionnaires. These techniques include, among others, mapping exercises, diagrams, ranking activities, and semi-structured interviews with both groups and individuals.
One of the key differences among the various methods in the RA family is the question of who does the research. In what is often called RRA (Rapid Rural Appraisal), the research process is mostly managed by outsiders. Typically, a multidisciplinary research team determines the objectives for the study, conducts the research in the field, has the principal responsibility for analysing the results, and often decides what happens to the information in the end. This contrasts with PRA ^3 (Participatory Rural Appraisal) in which the local community manages the research process. The outsiders' role is limited, initially, to providing training in the methods and, later, to facilitating (as needed) their use In this case, the villagers them selves work on the objection of the study, they arc the principal collectors and analysers of information and they decide how the information will be used in the end After an initial orientation to the techniques they may or may not. choose to
include outsiders in this process.
^3 For a more complete explanation of the differences between RRA and PRA and the historical evolution of the methods, see Chambers (1992). For a practical guide on carrying out PRA, see Odour-Noah et al. (1992).
Triangulation
When doing any study, the researcher must be aware of bias. If a study is biased, it means that the results do not reflect the reality because one situation, or perspective was favored. A study that fails to include the perspective of women may be gender biased. A study that only considers the problems of villages near a road may be spatially biased. A study that fails to probe issues deeply may be subject to a bias of "politeness" if people tell only what they think the interviewer wants to hear.
Triangulation is one of the principles of RA that tries to ensure that the results of a study are as accurate and unbiased as possible. Triangulation means looking at any problem from as many perspectives as possible, but at least three. When doing a study, triangulation works at three levels.
1 ) Triangulation of the perspectives on the team by having at least three people with different points of view (women/men, social scientists/technical specialists, insiders/ outsiders, youth/elders, etc.).
2) Triangulation of the perspectives of informants by ensuring that a wide range of people are interviewed and all information is verified by at least three different sources (women/men, old/young, diverse ethnic groups, etc.).
3) Triangulation of information gathering methods by addressing the same issue using several different tools (historical interviews, spatial maps, seasonal calendars, etc).
In simplistic terms, RRA can be seen .as being led by outsiders while PRA belongs to the local community In practice however these are not two distinct ways of proceeding Rather there is .a continuum between the two Effective RRA teams even when composed of outside researches put a lot of effort into building a rapport (see the following textbox) with local communities so that the study is in fact a collaborative process in which local participation is solicited at all stages of the research process. The tools of RA help to encourage this kind of local participation in both the collection and analysis of information
There is a wide middle ground between RRA and PRA in which outsiders may initiate the process but then ask the Iocal community to select several representatives to join their team as active members. Over time, a local community that becomes familiar with the techniques may take more control of the process. Many studies that call themselves PRA, in fact continue to have substantial participation of outsiders. Whether the local community succeeds in taking charge of the process when there is significant outsider participation depends a lot on the attitudes and behavior of the outsiders.
There are beginning to be examples of PRAs in which local communities take over the process completely. In one example in south India, a local non-governmental organization (NGO) worked with a community to introduce PRA techniques to study village problems and to devise plans to confront those problems. Some time later, the village sent a message to the NGO to tell them that they planned to do a PRA the following week. "But," they added, "there is no need for you to come, we were just letting you know...."
The Primacy of Rapport
Most experienced RA users would probably agree that the most important ingredient for getting good information using these techniques is the attitude of the researchers and the relationship they are able to develop with the local population. Robert Chambers, who is one of the "fathers" of RA has this to say about what he calls the "primacy of rapport" (Chambers 1991):
The key to facilitating ... participation is rapport. At first sight, it is a mystery why it has taken until 1990 to "discover" the richness of the knowledge, creativity, and analytic capacity in villagers. But when the widespread beliefs, attitudes and behavior of outsiders are considered, there is little mystery. Outsiders have been conditioned to believe that villagers are ignorant or have interviewed them asking rapid questions, interrupting, and not listening beyond immediate replies. "Our" lecturing and interviewing are much of the problem. The ignorance of rural people is then an artifact of our ignorance of how to enable them to express, share and extend their knowledge. The attitudes and behavior needed for rapport have been missing.
These include:
o participation by the outsider [in village activities]
o respect for the villager
o interest in what villagers have to say and show
o patience, wandering around, not rushing. and not interrupting
o humility
o materials and methods which empower villagers to express and analyse their knowledge
Where a study falls on the RRA-PRA continuum depends on a lot of factors. Most of the people who will read this manual are "outsiders" who do not fully belong to the local community. Hence, it is unlikely that the research process, at least at the beginning, will be wholly "owned" by the villagers themselves. "Outsiders" should stop to think about whether they foresee their team being the principal investigators (in which case they are working in more of the RRA mode) or whether they imagine their role to involve training the local community to be the principal investigators (in which case they are thinking more about PRA).
There are many different reasons for gathering information on resource management and tenure. Two common reasons are (1) so that villages can create plans to make better use of the resources at their disposal and (2) to inform and influence national policy/legislation concerning tenure and resource regulation. In the former case, the argument is particularly strong for PRA in which villagers are encouraged to take the lead - as much as possible and as early as possible - in managing the process of collecting and analysing information. This is much more likely to lead to sustainable solutions than a process that is dominated by outsiders. Gathering information for policy reform may lend itself more naturally to RRA, however, since information will be collected from numerous sites. Indeed, one reason for doing such studies may be to expose and educate outside decision makers to local realities.
An RA can be divided into three stages as shown in Figure 1. The first phase is a preparatory phase. Activities during this period include setting the objectives for the study, choosing the site and the team, collecting and reviewing background information, and making the necessary logistical arrangements for the field study. The second phase of the RA is the field study itself. During this time, the team lives in the village where the study is taking place and divides its time between information collection and interaction for preliminary analysis. For the third phase of the RA the team sits down to carefully analyse the information collected and figure out how it can be used. In the case of a PRA - and especially one that is intended to come up with a community action plan - the full analysis takes place in the village, with the active involvement of the local community. In the case of an RRA, some initial analysis will take place with the local community and the
information gathered is verified and shared with that community. But typically, in an RRA at least some part of the final analysis takes place after the team leaves the village At this point for example information collected from several different sites might he compared and analysed.
Figure 1: Organization of a rapid appraisal
The next three chapters will address in turn these phases of doing an HA study: preparation, information collection and analysis.
<section>5</section>
Chapter 2: Preparing a study of tenure issues
Setting objectives for the study
Choosing the site for the study
Selecting the team to do the study
Reviewing secondary materials
Making logistical arrangements
There are several important preparations that must be done before the field work begins in any RA. The preparation time for the study may take anywhere from a few days to several weeks, depending on the complexity of the study and how much the researcher already knows about the area.
Among the first questions to ask are "why is this study being done and what is expected from it?" This will help decide what kind of RA to do. While there are no rigid categories, RAs are often grouped in four classes.
o An exploratory RA is done when there is not much information about an area and a general overview of the situation is needed. This kind of RA often helps to identify issues that are important and warrant more detailed study.
o A topical RA looks at a particular subject and tries to get more in-depth information. It is more focused than an exploratory RA and often results in specific recommendations for actions needed to solve a problem.
o An RA for monitoring and evaluation is carried out when actions have already been undertaken. The study is done to see whether they have been effective and to suggest improvements in the programme or activity.
o The final class of RA leads to a process of participatory planning. The product from this kind of not just information or recommendation, but a detailed plan of action that is devised with the population at the site where the study takes place.
Information about tenure and natural resource management may be gathered in any of these studies, so it is important to consider carefully what the actual information needs are. Are they limited to a rather superficial look at tenure issues as part of a broader study on how people ensure their livelihoods? In this case, the RA will be broad and exploratory. Is there a need to gather lots of information on tenure questions, looking at broader issues only superficially to get a context for the study? In this case, the RA will be topical. The kinds of questions asked and the amount of time spent on different issues will be quite different depending on the type of information required. It is important that the members of the team and the organization for which the study is being carried out all agree on what needs to be learned before field work is begun. This will help to minimize disputes in the field and criticisms when results are presented upon return to the office.
Setting objectives for the study
Once a decision has been taken regarding the kind of study required, the specific objectives of the work must be considered. The objectives define what information is desired and will be used to guide activities in the field. If objectives are clearly defined, they help orient the research and make it more likely that useful results will be obtained in the end. It may help to think of research as a kind of puzzle. Each time a piece of information is collected, another piece of the puzzle is obtained. The objectives are like the frame or the border of the puzzle. It is necessary to collect information that will fit inside the borders which have been established by the objectives.
There are two dangers in setting objectives that can be illustrated by the puzzle example. The first danger is setting objectives that are too broad for the time available to do the study. In this case the frame is a large one. Even if a lot of information is collected, it is likely to be scattered, with one piece here and another there. At the end of the study, there will be so many blank areas remaining that it will be hard to make any sense of the picture and to see the significance of the information collected. At the other extreme is the danger of setting objectives that are too narrow. In this case the frame is very small and it is easy to get enough information to fill in the whole frame. The picture may be too small to make much sense, though, and the most interesting information may fall outside the frame around the study. (Example: the study covers everything there is to know about tree tenure, but the more locally relevant and conflictual subject is how pastures
are managed.)
Setting good objectives is often one of the most difficult parts of an RA. In an RRA, the whole team should participate and sometimes other members of the organization doing the study should be invited to assist in order to ensure that everyone is in agreement. Plenty of time must be allowed for discussion because this is where the team members' different perspectives need to be represented. For a PRA, the local community should be actively involved in setting the objectives for the field study. In this case, objective setting may be the first step in the field work.
In setting objectives, a common ground must be found so that the team will work comfortably together in the field. It is dangerous to set objectives that are either too broad or too narrow; a middle course should be found that meets information needs and is compatible with the time available for the study. Typically, it is useful to define a theme for the study and three or four principal objectives. Several sub-objectives can be noted to help guide the study but very specific questions should be avoided, since they more appropriately belong on the daily checklist of issues to be examined in detail (see Chapter 3).
Choosing the site for the study
There is no set pattern for carrying out an RA. Every field study is a little bit different because the questions to be answered and the conditions encountered vary. A "basic" RA as well as two of the many possible variations are discussed below.
The first example might be called the "basic" RA. This is the case where the team does a single field study in a single village. Typically, the team has three to six members and the field study might last from four days to a week. While this is the simplest kind of RA, it is probably not the most effective since there is no follow-up. These kinds of participatory techniques lend themselves to building longer-term relations with the local communities in question.
Sample Objectives for a Tenure Study
RESEARCH THEME: An exploratory/topical RA on tenure and natural resource management in the village of X.
OBJECTIVE 1:
Identify the territory (ies) of the village of X and, by micro-ecological zone/tenure niche, the principal natural resources found there.
OBJECTIVE 2:
Identify the users of natural resources and their utilization with particular attention to the following social categories:
o Gender
o Age groups
o Socio-economic status, e.g. caste and class
o Residents and outsiders
o Livelihood /herder, cultivator)
OBJECTIVE 3:
Identify the institutions and rules governing the management of natural resources
o Local rules and regulations
o State rules and regulations
o Community institutions
o External institutions
OBJECTIVE 4:
Identify the key tenure and natural resource management issues in the territory of X.
o Cause of conflict or situation
o Results
o Consequences and future perspectives
One variation is to do a series of RAs in one village over time. Research might be carried out with the village on three or more different occasions. This might be done to get information at different times of year, or at different points in the project cycle. The same village might host exploratory, topical and monitoring RAs, for example. The objectives for each RA would be different, depending on what kind of information was needed at the time of each study.
A PRA that tries to draw up a resource plan might be done either during one discrete time period (perhaps taking two weeks or more) or might be done sequentially over several weeks or months. If outsiders are involved, they may make several sojourns in the village. The first sojourn could serve to participate in planning the study and setting objectives for the work, a second to participate in the community's activities to collect information and a third to come up with a plan in light of the problems and potentialities identified. Then, over a period of several years, follow-up studies might take place to evaluate actions that have been undertaken and to plan new activities.
In a second variation, the objectives of the study stay the same but RAs are carried out on different sites. Perhaps several villages in different areas of the country or different micro-ecological zones might be selected in order to get a sense of the diversity or similarity of conditions. If outsiders are conducting the research, the same team might conduct all the studies or the team might split into sub-groups to explore the situation in different areas.
The decision of how many sites to include in the RA will depend on (a) the purpose of the study, (b) the size and nature (relatively more heterogeneous or more homogeneous) of the territory to be covered, and (c) the means available. If the purpose of the RA is to gather information to inform a project or policy decisions, information will probably need to be gathered from several sites. The more variation in the area being studied, the more sites will probably need to be selected in order to understand the range of situations. However, if the purpose of the study is to gather information that can be used locally to create an action plan, then each study is independent of any others and the number of villages is not a concern.
The next step in site selection is to think about the criteria to be used in choosing the sites. Here it is important to decide whether what is required is a site or sites that can be considered representative, or, on the other hand, a site or sites with some special characteristics. For example, if the purpose of the study is to inform the activities of a project that is working in a certain area, it may be useful to sample one or several villages that are fairly representative in terms of resource management. In this case villages that are very different from the average would be avoided (for example because they are particularly large or are comprised of an uncommon ethnic group).
If there are some important differences in the area, it might be necessary to make a stratified sample. This means that the major factors that might cause villages to manage their resources differently are identified in advance. For example, such factors might include ethnic group or proximity to markets. Thus, one village is chosen to represent the situation of one ethnic group and one that of another ethnic group. Or one to represent villages with good marketing opportunities and another to represent villages without. As much as possible, the villages selected must be representative of their class.
In other cases, it may be important to do the study in a village that is special in some way. For example, certain villages may have devised particular mechanisms for managing their communal lands and it would be useful to know more about them. In this case, a village is selected for study because it is different.
It will depend on the situation whether it makes sense to choose villages that are representative or those that are particular in some way. What is important in either case is that (1) careful thought go into deciding why a certain choice is made and (2) the criteria for selection are made explicit. Once the criteria have been established, help can be solicited from people who know the area well (development workers who have spent a long time in the zone, extension agents, government officials, etc.) to help in selecting the village(s0 that will meet the criteria decided upon.
Selecting the team to do the study
RRA teams that bring outsiders into a village are usually composed of three to six people. Where villagers join the team as active members, a somewhat larger team may be necessary to permit greater participation. For the purpose of "triangulating" and reducing the bias that comes from a single perspective, it is preferable to have no fewer than three people. The principal reason for limiting the number of people on the team is that large teams can at times be difficult to manage.
In selecting the team, it is important to ensure a diversity of perspectives and experience. There should be both men and women on the team. At a minimum, it is useful to have at least one social scientist as well as people with technical expertise relevant to the subject being studied. For tenure studies, useful social science fields include economics, sociology, anthropology and geography. Among the technical fields that are particularly useful are agronomy, forestry and animal husbandry and pastoralism. In cases where villagers join the team, it is equally important to include a variety of perspectives. The importance of having diverse representation should be discussed when the methodology is initially introduced to the village so that their selection of people to join the team reflects the diversity of the community as much as possible.
Since the team will have to work intensively together, it is important that the members are personally compatible and that all are committed to the same objectives. It is also important that outsiders be willing to work in a participatory fashion and in a genuinely collaborative effort with the local population. It is vital to screen out people whose arrogance or inability to value local participation and perspectives would make their presence counterproductive. If possible, it is advantageous to get someone with experience in RA to serve as team leader.
Reviewing secondary materials
An important step in the preparation for the field study is to gather and review relevant secondary materials. This will help the team to fix its objectives and also to focus its questions. Secondary material relevant to a tenure study can come from many sources. If team members are unfamiliar with the area, it will be necessary to spend some time looking at whatever general information is available on the social structure and livelihood or farming systems found in the area where the research will take place. This kind of information can be found in studies that have been done for other projects, from academic research and from government reports. It is useful to get copies of any national laws or local edicts that relate to resource management. If there have been local court cases concerning tenure and resource conflicts, these may also prove interesting. Maps of the area as well as any aerial photographs should be obtained where available.
One cannot assume, of course, that all secondary information is necessarily good information. It should always be read with a critical eye. As the team reviews the literature, it is useful to keep a list of areas where all the reports seem to agree about resource management practices. Other areas where there seem to be differences of opinion should also be identified. On a third sheet, questions that arise while going through the reports can be noted. Are there important areas that have little information written about them? Noting all of these will help prepare the questions to ask and identify the issues to probe more deeply when in the field.
Making logistical arrangements
The last area to be discussed in preparing a field study is logistics. This topic will not be considered in great depth here, though it is of considerable importance to the success of the study. If a preliminary site selection is done by outsiders, an initial visit to the village is needed to explain the purpose and methodology of the research and to find out whether the village is interested in participating. If the village agrees to host the study, discussion can then begin concerning such logistical arrangements as the lodging and feeding of the team. As a rule of thumb, outsiders should try to integrate as fully as possible into the life of the village but without imposing an undue burden on their hosts. This might mean asking someone to prepare local foods for the team but contributing foodstuffs sufficient to amply cover the needs of the team and people who may join it for its meals. Experience suggests that teams should stay overnight in the village where the study
takes place whenever possible. This both helps to create an ambiance conducive to participatory research and facilitates an effective use of time in the field. In some places, local authorities expect to be informed of the programme when outsiders conduct studies or activities in the area under their authority.
<section>6</section>
Chapter 3: Gathering information in the field
Gathering information about the physical aspects of the territory
Gathering information about the use of resources
Gathering information about the management of resources
This chapter discusses techniques for getting information on tenure and natural resource management issues. It is divided into sections and each section is organized around a sample objective for a tenure study given in the textbox found on page 16, Chapter 2. Objective 1 was concerned with identifying the physical aspects of the territory so the first section talks about techniques that are particularly useful for gathering that information. The next two sections deal in turn with techniques that are useful for finding out how natural resources are used in the community (objective 2) and about the rules governing access to those resources (objective 3). Objective 4, which is a synthesis of the research process and deals with identifying tenure and management issues, is covered in Chapter 4 on the analysis of information.
For each technique there is a brief explanation of how it is used in the field. This is followed by a list of suggested questions that can he asked while using the tool. These questions are for illustrative purposes only and intend to give an idea of how each tool can illuminate tenure and resource management issues. They are not complete lists and neither do they mean to suggest that all the proposed questions should be looked at when a given tool is used. In most cases, the discussion of each tool ends with an example of how the technique was actually used in a recent RA. While the examples come mostly from work that has been done over the past several years in west Africa, these tools have been used in RAs all over the world. Experiences with the tools of RA suggest that they are very widely applicable.
While the chapter is organized into separate sections that follow the objectives defined above, it is important to note that in reality there is a lot of overlap in the information obtained using different research tools. That is, a map may be especially useful for gathering information about the physical environment, but it can also be used to discuss issues of resource use. For example, if an informant draws a pasture area on the map, one can follow up by asking who uses that pasture. A calendar may tell principally about resource use, but there are plenty of questions about management that can be asked as the calendar drawing progresses. For example, if an informant relates that women collect baobab fruits at a certain time of year, this is an opportunity to find out whether one has to have permission to gather these fruits. It is by asking questions about the same subjects using different tools and techniques that the researcher begins to triangulate or cross-check the
information which has been gathered.
The order in which these tools are used is of no particular importance, though it will often make sense to roughly follow the order given in this chapter. This tends to follow a progression from simpler, more descriptive information of the physical and social environment to more complex and potentially more controversial information about management, tenure and conflict. Much of the order will depend on such factors as when people are available in the village and when the weather is appropriate for various activities. One might try to avoid walking a 10 kilometer transect in the middle of a blistering Sahelian afternoon.
The emphasis in this chapter is on using RA tools to gather information. However, it must be remembered that only about 60-70% of the time in the field is actually spent collecting information. The team should spend some part of every day in what is known as "team interaction." During this time the team looks over the information it has collected and begins to make note of important issues that are surfacing. From this, a "checklist" is prepared covering the issues that need to be addressed in the next round of activities. Each day, some subjects will be crossed off the checklist if enough information has been gathered on those topics and some other new subjects will he added. Once the team has decided what issues need to be addressed, it chooses the tools that will be most useful in getting the information and decides with whom it would like to carry out each activity.
The team interaction is also an opportunity to review methodological issues. The team needs to think about whether it is adequately triangulating information. Are the responses the same from different people using different tools and techniques or is there a need to verify some of the information? It is also important to review whether there are any biases creeping into the study. If so, deliberate actions can be taken to reduce the offending bias. If it appears that the team has been talking only to men, for example, this is the time to recognize the bias and to orient the next day's activities toward women. If the study has been relying principally on interviews, using some of the other techniques should be considered to illuminate different perspectives on the issues.
Gathering information about the physical aspects of the territory
Participatory map
Transect
For the somewhat exploratory tenure study proposed in Chapter 2, objective 1 is to identify the territory and the principal resources that are found there. Increasingly, projects are trying to orient their activities around the space that the village or villages define as their own (rather than using an outsider's definition of the relevant management unit). The village "territory" can be described as a land area which is habitually used by members of an agrarian community for their livelihoods, with boundaries that are recognized by members of the spatial unit and by those residing outside the territory (Painter 1991).
While this sounds relatively straightforward, there are numerous factors that can make the identification of territories very complex. In some places several villages may co-manage a single territory. In other cases, noble villages may feel that they control both their territory and the village of their captives or former captives. Sedentary cultivators may have a very different conception of territory from pastoralists. Nomadic or semi-nomadic peoples may recognize a territory that moves with them and have certain rules that they apply to resource management within the territory that they define. Even territorial boundaries as recognized by sedentary villages may not be static. Recognized limits may change according to the season. Or there may be one territorial limit that applies to control or access of land while another limit is applied to trees and yet another to pastures. An understanding of how villagers define their territory and the rules that apply to this space is
critical for those attempting to address tenure and resource management issues.
The first objective also suggests the importance of identifying the various micro-ecological zones in the village territory. This is important because different micro-ecological zones often have different uses and may be characterized by different tenure arrangements. It is also important to have a sense of the kinds of resources that exist in the territory. As this information is gathered, it is useful to begin thinking about how the territory may be divided among several broad tenure "niches." Which part of the territory appears to be holdings (individual or household farming operations), which are commons (managed by a group), and which, if any, seem to be reserves (protected by the government)? ^4
^4 See Bruce (1989)
While the first objective is principally concerned with the physical characterization of the territory, as soon as questions of tenure begin to be addressed the issue arises of how the community manages the resources at its disposal. Tenure rules are among the principal mechanisms that communities use, first to define their territorial space and then to manage the resources within that territory. Objective 1 sets the stage for gathering more detailed information on such subjects as use patterns of resources found in the territory (objective 2) and the rules governing access to those resources (objective 3).
Two techniques are presented below: the participatory map (with several variations) and the transect.
Participatory map
In conventional mapping, the trained outsider draws a map of the village or territory. In participatory mapping, the informants are handed a stick ^5 and asked to do the drawing. Outsiders who have not tried the participatory method are often surprised to find that illiterate people are quite capable of drawing illuminating maps. The primary concern is not with cartographic precision in drawing participatory maps. Instead it is with getting useful information that reveals local perceptions of boundaries, resource availability and distribution, etc.
^5 For more on the importance of handing over the stick and letting local people guide the research process see the writings of Robert Chambers.
Mapping is usually quite simple. It is best done with a group (except for "holding" maps, discussed below, which may be done with an individual or several family members). A large open space should be found and the ground cleared. It is often useful to start with a map of the village (rather than the territory) since this is usually relatively non-controversial. It is easiest to start by placing a rock or leaf to represent a central and important landmark (such as the mosque, church or school). Informants are then asked to draw other things on the map that are important landmarks in the village. It can be suggested that they use stones, shells, leaves, etc. to mark significant places. They should not be interrupted unless they stop drawing, in which case questions can be asked such as whether there is anything else of importance that should be added. As the map is being drawn on the ground, it can be copied into the researcher's notebook for future reference. It is up to the
researcher to decide how much detail is needed on this first village map. If it is to be used primarily as an ice-breaking exercise and a way to find one's way around the village, it may not be necessary to go into much detail. In such a case, most of the questions would be saved for the map of the territory.
In some cases it is possible to draw the map of the territory at the same time as the map of the village. When the central village has been sketched, the informants are simply asked to give an idea of the limit of the village's territory. If there is not enough room or time to do it on the same map, the exercise can be repeated later. This time the inhabited part of the village can be represented by a rock in the middle, and the rest of the territory can be sketched around it.
A third kind of map can be made of a single family's "holding." This type of map would show the different parcels farmed by the family, as well as, perhaps, the areas they use for pastures.
Useful historical information can also be obtained using the map as the basis for discussion. If there appear to be interesting changes to explore over time, additional maps can be drawn to show how, for example, the territory looked one or two generations ago. Alternatively, rather than actually doing another map, boundaries can be altered on the original map to show how they have changed over time.
Some Questions to Ask while Doing Maps
TERRITORIAL MAP:
o Does the village being studied have its own territory or does it share a territory with other villages?
o How clearly delimited are the boundaries? Are there any areas that are less clearly demarcated? Any possible conflicts should be noted.)
o What is the history of the delimitation?
o Are there any areas that are shared with other villages? What villages have adjacent territories? What is the relationship with those villages?
o Do outsiders use the territory? For what purposes?
o Within the territory, what are the different important land use areas: fields, fallows, forests, pastures, etc.? (It may be possible to begin to explore which of those are "commons" and which are individually held.)
o How has the village's "space" changed over time?
HOLDING OR FARM SKETCH MAP:
o Who is the "holder" of the land?
o Who actually uses it? What is the relationship between the two?
o What activities take place on the different parcels? Does this change by season or year fallows, etc.)?
o Are the parcels characterized by different tenure relations?
o Does the informant borrow or lend land? What rules characterize these arrangements?
o What resources on the holding are used exclusively by members of his/her family and which ones are more widely exploited?
o How are men's and women's rights to the holding different?
o How easy is it to increase the size of the holding?
The map on the following page was done in a village in northern Senegal. The subject of the conflict with a neighboring village over the land to the north came up while drawing the map and was later pursued in numerous other discussions. The team found that Ndam Mor Fademba itself does not have a territory, but instead manages its land with five other Ndam villages. Thus the team began to explore the division of fields fallow. This was the first clue to a complex and evolving system of community management of fallow lands.
Transect
If a map is a bird's eye view of an area, a transect cuts across the same territory in order to get an idea of the diverse micro-ecological zones found in a territory. Depending on the size of the area to be covered and the nature of the terrain, a transect can be done on foot, animal, cart, or motor vehicle. Slower forms of transportation are preferable because they allow for greater observation. Using the map, or the advice of informants, a route is chosen that will travel across a variety of micro-ecological zones. If the territory has clear differences in elevation, it might be useful to cut a transect that traverses a range of elevations from the highest to the lowest parts of the territory.
Figure 2: Map of village territory
SOURCE: "Fields, Fallow, and Flexibility Natural Resource Management in Ndam Mor Fademba, Senegal"
If the territory is relatively flat, a path should be traced which will go through the widest variety of micro-ecological zones, including any forested areas, lowlands, upland fields, grasslands, etc. The researcher then proceeds with the informant or informants (on foot, by cart, etc.) to traverse the area. It is useful to try to go to the high point of the territory if there is one, or the spot from which there is the best view of a large area. It is often possible to see boundary markers, different land uses, etc. from such a height.
As the transect proceeds, questions relevant to the area being crossed should be asked, phenomena of interest observed, etc. One of the advantages of doing a transect is that often people are more willing to address sensitive issues (such as land ownership patterns or conflicts) when they are away from the village. If a question is related to the things being observed, it can seem less intrusive than if the same question is asked in a more formal interview situation. While everything is being noted as the transect proceeds, only later will the information be transcribed onto the kind of transect shown in Figure 3 (page 32). Some information in the transect may not be obtained in the first walk. As information is gathered from other activities, the diagram can be completed.
Some Questions to Ask while Doing a Transect
o When does the group cross into different micro-ecological zones/one clue is to note when the soil type changes)?
o Are there different land uses in different micro-ecological zones?
o As the different micro-ecological zones are crossed, questions should be asked to get a sense of what kind of tenure arrangements exist. Is the land owned? borrowed? the subject of conflict? Is it farmed by men? women? outsiders?
o Are there some areas that are more in demand than others? How is this land allocated?
o What is the significance of any fences or boundaries that are observed? Are there more in some areas than another? Why? (Fences are often indicators that there is a competition for land or competing uses such as grazing and cultivation.)
o Uses of various trees should be investigated. Who is allowed to use the trees and for what purpose? Are the rules the same for all tree species? Do they vary depending on where the tree is located?
o Do people plant trees? protect trees?
o What are the water sources in the territory? How are they controlled or managed?
o Is any of the land that is being passed through borrowed? if so, it is useful to begin to find out about borrowing practices in the community.
o Where do animals pasture? drink? Are there conflicts associated with either of these activities?
o Do animals come from outside the village to use the territory?
o How does land use vary at different times of the year?
o Is the group crossing through any communally owned areas? if so, it is an opportunity to begin to find out how they are managed.
While the classic transect is a direct traverse from one edge of the territory to the other, experience shows that certain adaptations can be practical. For example, if the team has six members it can be divided into three groups of two people each. Each group has one or two informants (ideally with a mix of men and women) and chooses a subject of particular interest. One group may focus on land use and cultivation, a second on land use and animals, and the third on tree and water resources. While the groups may follow similar paths for their transect, they may also deviate to look at things of particular interest to their subject. Afterwards, the three groups share information from their walks.
The transect shown on the following page was done of the territory between two study villages in the Fouta Djallon of Guinea. These villages have historic relations as nobles/captives. Some of the information was collected during a first morning when the RA team divided into three groups. Each group set off with an informant to gather information on either trees and water, land use, or animals and pastures. After the walk, the teams shared the information and then started organizing it on a big sheet of flipchart paper. One of the informants helped the team as it wrote down the transect by answering some more questions. When, as the study progressed, more relevant information was obtained (particularly concerning tenure relations), this was added to the transect.
Gathering information about the use of resources
Calendar
Matrix
Quantification technique
Objective 2 of the tenure study in Chapter 2 is to identify how natural resources are used in the community. When information is gathered about resource use, the concern is with what kinds of resources are used (or not used), how and for what purpose they are used and who the users are. This information is important for understanding where there are constraints in resource use and for identifying resources that could be more fully or efficiently exploited. It begins to address equity issues: who has greater access to resources and who has limited use or is excluded altogether?
Figure 3: Transect
Source: Resource Management Practices and Tenure Constraints and Opportunities in the Kondou Watershed, Fouta Djallon, Guinea
In looking at these issues, it is important to be particularly sensitive to characteristics such as gender, ethnic group, social or economic standing and other factors that affect peoples' access to resources in the community in question. When use patterns are being studied, it is particularly important to pay attention to the more "marginal" or invisible users of resources. These are people who, because of their poverty or marginal social status, tend to be under-represented in discussions. Their use patterns may not be reported by others. Often, however, these same people are highly vulnerable and depend disproportionately on natural resource-based livelihood strategies. For example, they may engage heavily in the collection of wild tree products that require less cash investment than many other income generating activities.
Gathering information on the relative standing of community members. Before much sense can be made of this kind of information, it is necessary to have a basic understanding of the social structure of households and communities in the study area. If team members are not already familiar with the social structure before the start of the RA, it will probably be necessary to include this in the study of secondary materials before beginning the field study. Some information can be obtained from informal discussions during meals with the village host family. Other questions may require more systematic interviews. What is the farming unit? eating unit? Are families polygamous or monogamous? Are living arrangements by nuclear family or extended family? How are these defined? Are there castes in the community or other important social distinctions?
Wealth ranking. One extremely useful set of techniques for understanding wealth and other social characteristics of a community is called wealth ranking. This is a group of techniques that enables the researcher to gather information on the relative standing of members of the community (it avoids any questions about absolute levels of wealth). Wealth ranking is a broad subject and will not be addressed in detail here. There are many variations on the technique that have been used in various parts of the world, and it would be useful to consult the literature on the subject to identify the one that is most appropriate to the study being undertaken. ^6
^6 Experiences with a range of wealth ranking techniques can be found in RRA Notes, no. 15. IIED, London.
Briefly, one of the most commonly used wealth ranking techniques is social mapping. A social map is constructed using the physical map drawn by the village. The compounds are identified on the map and then the group drawing the map is asked to indicate the relative social status of families using different markers (such as beans, seeds or pebbles). Markers might be placed for such indicators as overall wealth (up to five beans or seeds to represent a wealthy family, one or two beans to represent those who are much less well off), status as a land borrower or land lender, whether the family has people working outside the village, etc.
Another frequently used wealth ranking technique is card ranking. First, the names of families in the village are placed on cards. A preliminary discussion takes place on the informant's perception of the meaning of "wealth." She or he is then asked to place the cards in piles so that each pile includes families with approximately equal wealth. This leads to a more complete discussion of wealth and its ramifications. Social mapping is generally done in public, while card ranking is more commonly done with an individual, in private. Which technique is more appropriate will depend on cultural factors and the setting in which people feel more comfortable discussing these issues.
In doing wealth ranking, discussions can easily move on to questions of whether people of different socio-economic strata have equal access to resources, use them at similar levels and for the same purposes, etc. Also, once the poorer people of the community have been identified, they can be expressly interviewed to ensure that their perspectives are included.
Three techniques are presented below that may be used to explore questions about how resources are used in a community: the calendar, the matrix and the quantification technique.
Calendar
Calendars are tools that help to explore changes taking place over the period of a year. They can be useful in counteracting time biases because they are used to find out what happens in different seasons. Otherwise there is a tendency to discuss only what is happening at the moment the study is being done. Calendars can be used to study many things such as how much work people have at different times of year, or how their revenues change in different periods. These may be important for a project which needs to know when people have resources (time or money) to invest in project activities.
In many local tenure systems the rules governing access to resources change seasonally. For example, people may be permitted to collect products from trees in individual holdings during the dry season without asking permission. But they may be entirely excluded or have to ask the permission of the holder to harvest the same product during the cropping season. Some lands may be considered as individual holdings when they are under crops, and as village common property (for example, with open access for grazing) during the rest of the year. Calendars can help to focus discussions around these issues of seasonality.
It often helps to begin by discussing what people do when. When do they plant and harvest crops? When do they harvest different kinds of tree products? When do they keep their animals tied or fenced and when do the animals roam freely? Once these use patterns are established, questions can be asked about the rules and management practices that change by seasons.
The example given in Figure 4 is a simple calendar of when people collect different products from trees. On the same diagram, one might indicate the crops cultivated. This would give an idea of how cultivation and collection activities complement one another in the local economy. Calendars can be drawn on a large paper laid out on the ground or can be traced in the sand or on a dirt floor. This activity is best done with a group so that people can help one another to remember things as the activity progresses. First, a scale is drawn along the bottom with the months or seasons. How to define the time scale will depend on the periods that are known and used by local informants. In some cases people have local names for the months, in others they use religious calendars. Some people are more familiar with seasons than months. The scale to one that makes the most sense to the informants.
A logical moment should be chosen to begin the sequence (the rainy season or the first month of the calendar year, for example). People can be asked to think of all the products they collect from trees during the period in question. These are then marked on the calendar. When using markers and paper, different colors may be used to show whether the product is collected by men, women, or children. Other symbols can be drawn to indicate other useful information such as whether the product is sold, used at home, or some of each. When all the products collected in one time period have been noted, the next time period is examined and the various products for that period filled in.
The calendar on the following page was drawn in a village in the peanut basin of Senegal. The RA was quite surprised to find that even in this area, which has been subject to severe desertification, the population still places considerable emphasis on tree product collection. The team later asked the villagers to use quantification techniques (see page 41) to rank the importance in the household economy of the products they collected. In this case, the number of markers shows the relative importance of each crop for home consumption and for women's revenue.
Some Questions to Ask while Drawing a Calendar
o Do any of the products noted have a particular importance for either household consumption or for sale?
o Are there conflicts associated with the collection of any of the products noted?
o Are there times of year when the competition for resources is particularly high? Why is that?
o Which of the products are in high demand and which less so?
o Have any of the products changed in importance or availability over time (since the time when elderly people in the village were children)?
o Which of the products noted require permission before they can be collected?
o Which are from trees on individual holdings and which are on common lands?
o do any the rules concerning access to use of the resources change depending on the time of year?
Figure 4 Tree products collection calendar
NOTE: dots represent markers such as beans or pebbles. The number of markers reflects the degree of importance i.e. more markers = greater importance.
SOURCE: Le foncier et la gestion des ressources naturelles: une tude de cas employant la mthode MARP
Matrix
The matrix is a powerful technique that can be adapted to many different kinds of information needs. Two types of matrices that are especially useful for gathering information on resource management are classification matrices and historical matrices.
The Classification (or ranking) matrix is used to get information about the importance or the frequency of a certain event. For example, one might try to find out who uses the various resources found in the community by drawing a resource-use matrix. A simple matrix of this type might only compare the difference in resource use between men and women. In this case, the various resources would be listed along the vertical axis. Then two columns would be drawn, one for men and one for women. The informant is asked to start at the top of the matrix and compare men's and women's use of the first item (say valley bottom land). Markers (beans, seeds or pebbles) should be used to indicate which group uses the resource most intensively. The maximum number of markers in a box might be limited to 10. If, say, men use valley bottom land very heavily, the informant would place 10 markers in the valley/men box. If women also use that land, but considerably less than men, the informant
might place only four markers in the valley/women box. Then the second resource (say hill slope lands) is discussed, asking the same question. This continues until all the boxes have been filled in.
This kind of matrix can be enlarged to make a series of comparisons. The different groups to be compared are placed on the horizontal axis. As suggested above, a comparison can be made between men and women. When those two columns have been completed, a second comparison of rich people and poor people can be carried out. The whole list of resources should be gone through comparing whether the resource is used more by the rich or the poor. When this is finished, a third category can be done, such as people living in the village versus people from neighboring villages and people who are complete strangers. Matrices can be drawn on paper or on the ground. It is usually best done in a group since the discussion, as people try to agree on how many markers to place, is often highly illuminating.
The matrix on the following page was done in a village in Guinea. The RA team was divided in two groups and half did the matrix with men and the other half did the same matrix with women. The dots represent markers that were placed by informants to show whether, for example, men or women used a given resource more. It was very important to be clear on the words used to explain the translation. It was necessary to specify whether the question referred to who exploits the resource or who gets the benefits. For example, a poor person may be the one who actually chops the wood, but he may give or sell it to his master.
Figure 5: Classification matrix
NOTE: dots represent markers such as seeds. The number of markers reflects the degree of use, i.e. more seeds = more intense use.
SOURCE: Resource Management Practices and Tenure Constraints and Opportunities in the Koundou Watershed, Fouta Djallon, Guinea.
The Historical matrix looks at how various factors have changed over time. Such a historical perspective is extremely important in studying resource use issues. Projects often err as a result of treating resource management as a static phenomenon. Many fail to see how local strategies evolve with time in response to changing conditions. They therefore fail to build the same kind of flexibility into their actions and may (without recognizing the consequences) undertake actions that impinge on the local population's capacity to adapt.
Historical matrices can help to break away from static analyses of resource management and use. As shown in Figure 6. different time periods appear in chronological order on the horizontal axis beginning with the earliest time period. A discussion with the informants will help to identify events which may have caused significant changes in resource endowments or use. Different resources are put on the vertical axis. This matrix is best completed vertically so that people do not have to keep jumping back and forth in time. They should be asked to think first about the earliest time period in their matrix (the first column). At that time, would they say that there was a lot of land in fallow? If so, they will put many markers in the box. The informants are then asked about the amount of cultivated land, the number of cattle, the number or density of trees, etc. When the first column has been completed, the next is begun. The informants are asked, "during the period of
mechanization (or whatever the second period is in the matrix) was there more or less land in fallow than during the first period?" Continuing down the column, the informants are asked to place markers to show how resources have changed.
Figure 6: Historical matrix
NOTE: dots represent markers such as beans or pebbles The markers reflect availability of resources, i e more dots = greater availability
SOURCE: Fields, Fallow, and Flexibility Natural Resource Management in Ndam Mor Fademba, Senegal
The matrix shown here was done by villagers in northern Senegal. The dots represent markers that were placed by informants to show how the availability of various resources changed over time. Thus, for example, much land was in fallow before the period of mechanization. During the 1960s, however, the amount of fallow land decreased and the amount of land under cultivation increased commensurately. After completing the first three columns, the three older men who were doing the matrix were asked to speculate on how they thought resource use would evolve in the future.
Quantification technique
In doing matrices, markers such as beans are used to indicate the ranking of different variables. It is often useful to use markers as ranking tools in simpler comparisons as well. If the researcher carries along a bag of pebbles or beans, it is easy to ask informants to make quantitative estimates whenever it would be useful for the study. For example, it may be interesting to know whether the borrowing of land is a common practice. One way to find out is to place a pile of markers in front of the informant who is then told that the markers represent the total number of farmers in the village. The informant is asked to divide the markers into two piles to show how many people are borrowers of lands and how many do not borrow. Question can then be asked about people out, side the village who borrow land in the village Awl people in tile village who borrow land outside are the borrowers men or women? (The informant can be asked to divide tilt' borrower category into a pile
for men and a pile for women). On another question markers might be used to find out what proportion of the population owns cattle or sheep and goats.
Some Subjects to Discuss while Doing Matrices
Matrices can be used to explore almost any subject. They are especially useful for provoking discussions. What is important is to think very carefully about what variables to put on each axis to make CLASSIFICATION sure that they are relevant, consistent and easily understood. Also, it is important to consider whether it makes more sense to rank horizontally or vertically. In some cases it will affect the kind of information obtained, while in others, one way is more logical than the other in facilitating a comparison. The following offer some examples of the variety of ways matrices may be used to gather information on resource use.
CLASSIFICATION MATRICES:
o Use of tree products: tree species on the vertical axis and the products (leaves, fruit, bark, roots, etc.) on the horizontal axis.
o Preference for tree species: tree species on the vertical axis and choice criteria {fuel. human consumption, animal consumption, medicines, income generating products, etc.) on the horizontal axis.
o Sources of revenues and how expended: different sources of revenue on vertical axis (sell animals, sell tree products [list individually], sell crops, etc) and different uses of funds on horizontal axis (buy food, pay school fees, buy clothes, pay health costs, etc.)
HISTORICAL MATRICES:
o Evolution of livelihood strategies: various livelihood strategies (cultivation, animal raising, fishing, work in town, etc.) on vertical axis and time periods horizontally.
o Evolution of survival strategies in time of crisis: various survival techniques listed by the population (eat wild fruits, sell animals, emigrate, etc.) on the vertical axis and crisis periods on the horizontal axis.
Some Questions to Ask while Using Bean Quantification
o What proportion of the population uses various resources?
o What proportion owns land or animals? borrows?
o What are the relative sizes of the biggest and smallest herds? the biggest and smallest land holdings?
o How has the person s income changed over the past five years?
o How does income from one activity compare to total income?
The information obtained will be very approximate, but it will often be sufficient for the needs of a project. Using these techniques is much faster than conducting a more detailed survey. In addition, collecting approximate information using marker quantification may be less threatening than collecting more detailed information with a formal survey. Informants would thus be less likely to provide purposefully misleading answers. The results obtained from these qualitative methods may in some cases he more accurate than precise (but wrong) quantitative results.
Gathering information about the management of resources
Veen diagram
Conflict matrix
Semi-structured interview
Objective 3 in the tenure study is to identify who makes decisions about resource use, what rules apply and who plays a role in negotiating any disputes that may arise. In looking at questions about who makes decisions concerning resource use, it is important to remember that there are many different levels of decision making. Many important decisions concerning resource use are made entirely informally and by individuals. Others arc made at the family level where one or more people may have a particular influence on other members of the family. Decisions may also be made formally, either by committees or by powerful individuals with clearly designated roles in the community.
While there is a tendency to focus on formal mechanism for decision-making, it is important not to omit the role of individuals and families. The role of women, in particular, is often noted at this level even when they arc largely absent from more formal decision-making structures. For example there may be rules in a community about which trees can he cut for fire Women who actually cut the wood may (or may not) follow the-se rules. In addition, they may have practices, such as certain ways of pruning the trees to encourage regeneration, that are not codified but are very important to resource management.
Rules concerning resource management are also made at different levels. Part of the work of the RA is to understand how many different kinds of rules have an effect on the community in question. Are there government rules that apply in theory? Do these rules have an influence in practice? Are there also local rules that come into play? How do these two sets of rules interact? Then, there is the question of what actually happens, which may be very different from both local rules and formal legislation. The latin phrases de jure and de facto are sometimes used to describe situations where the reality differs from what is supposed to exist according to the formal rules. De jure is, simply, fin law," or what is supposed to take place if everything went by the rules. De facto is in fact," or what really does happen.
Because RA often takes the village as its unit of observation, there is a danger of seeing the community as a self-contained entity and failing to sec the ways in which it is influenced by the larger world around it. It is highly unlikely that a community's management of resources could avoid being affected in some way by rules and authorities outside. In some cases, the effect may be that people adapt their behavior to conform to the rules. In other cases communities may resist rules from the outside and seek to implement their own strategies. In both instances, the outside world has its effect and these kinds of linkages should be identified in the study. This may require a certain amount of research outside the village, which might include consulting written sources to find out what official rules exist, or interviewing government authorities.
Different tenure regimes are often found in different micro-ecolcygical zones with different resource use patterns. This is why it is so important to gather information identifying resources and their use as discussed in the preceding sections. The tenure regime for the area that is privately managed by an individual household is sometimes called the "holding." This contrasts with the "commons," which refers to property which is managed by the community. A third kind of tenure rule may apply to "state reserves" whose use is regulated by the state. In each case, different rules will apply concerning who has rights to use resources and who has rights to exclude others from using them. ^7
^7 These issues are taken up in much greater detail in Bruce (1989)
Conflicts over resource use are often very revealing of the kind of issues communities face in managing their resources. They also illuminate the mechanisms that exist to deal with problems when they arise. Studying such conflictual situations can provide examples of how rules in the community really work instead of how they function in some idealized representation. However, these topics may be very sensitive and they must be broached with particular care.
The purpose, then, of this part of the research is to understand what management practices (both informal and formal) and rules of access and exclusion apply to each of the resources or tenure niches which have been identified in the territory.
All of the techniques described until now can he used to get information on these tenure questions. In fact, it is often easier to get at these questions in the course of a variety of different activities rather than trying to do a whole interview focused on tenure rules. A few questions might be asked about tenure on fields and pastures as these areas are traversed during a transect walk. Some other questions might be asked about tree tenure during the preparation of a calendar of tree product collection activities. Other questions will certainly arise during mapping exercises and matrix drawing.
Three techniques are presented here that are useful for understanding resource management questions: the Venn diagram, the conflict matrix (which is a variation on the matrices presented above) and the semi-structured interview.
<section>7</section>
Veen diagram
The Venn diagram is a kind of social map of the community (see Figure 7). It can be used to show which individuals and groups have an influence on decision making, as well as the relations between village institutions and outside forces, such as government services or development agencies. The diagram can be traced on the ground or on a large sheet of paper. If colored paper is available, it can be helpful to cut different sizes and shapes of paper to represent the different kinds of institutions (men's or women's committees for example) and individuals. The larger the piece, the more influential the actor. The cards identifying village individuals and groups should be placed inside a big circle which represents the village. If the cards touch, that means that there is some interaction or overlap of membership between the two groups. The cards representing exterior organizations are placed outside the village circle. Arrows can be drawn to show how outside organizations
interact with village institutions.
While it will be useful to complete the entire diagram to get an idea of the range of local decision-making bodies, discussion will most usefully focus on those that are active in natural resource affairs.
Some Questions to Ask while Using a Venn Diagram
o Which people or groups have power to make rules concerning resource management?
o Which act to enforce the rules?
o What happens when there is a conflict (give example)?
o What is women s role in decision-making? in decisions on resource management?
o Is the village autonomous in its decision-making on natural resource management or does it work in conjunction with other communities?
o What kinds of help or sanctions come from outside the village concerning resource management?
o Are any of the institutions noted gaining or losing power as time passes? Why?
Figure 7: Venn diagram
SOURCE: Resource management Practices and Tenure Constrainst and Opportunities in the Koundou Watershed, Founta Djallon, Guinea.
Figure 7 shows a Veen diagram that was draw in a former captive village in Guinea. It was particularly interesting to note that the decision of the village Council of Elders (the body which makes most decisions concerning resource use in the territory) must be confirmed by the Councils of the former noble villages, it was found that there were no such constrains on of the Council of Elders of that village. This was one of several critical indicators of the continuation of this historic (and officially outlawed) relationship between the two village. It was then possible to explore in greater depth the impact this has on resource management issues.
Conflict matrix
The technique of doing matrices was discussed above. One of the many possible variations is a conflict matrix can evoke sensitive issues and raise suspicions concerning the motives of the research, it is best to wait until the team has developed a good rapport with the village before attempting the exercise. In this matrix, the various resources are listed on the vertical axis and the potential disputants along the horizontal axis (see Figure 8). It is important that informants be told that the research is not concerned with particular cases of conflicts, but rather with the kinds of disputes that occur and their relative frequency.
Some Questions to Ask while doing a Conflict Matrix
o What are the principal causes of disputes over natural resources in the village?
o Why is one type of resource disputed more than another (if this is the case)?
o Are there mechanisms for resolving these disputes?
o Has the nature or frequency of disputes changed over time?
o What can be learned about access and rules of exclusion from the kinds of disputes people are describing?
Informants are asked to place markers to indicate whether disputes took place among villagers, between villagers and neighboring villages, between villagers and strangers, or between villagers and officials of the state (such as government agents). It might be useful to add a column at the beginning for disputes that take place within. the family. Few markers show that there are very few disputes, whereas many markers mean that there are lots of problems. Once the matrix is completed one can go back to ask whether the problem was resolved by the disputants themselves or by an intermediary of their choice, whether it required intervention by village officials, or whether it was treated at a higher level.
Figure 8 shows a matrix which was done during a study in Senegal. It was done on the next to last day of the study with a group of men who had come to know the research team well. They were reminded that all communities have problems and members of the team gave examples from their own communities to open the discussion. The matrix helped them to see the importance of problems between people starting gardens and conflicts that had arisen, goat owners (who were disproportionately women) had gotten rid of all of their animals. This issue had only been superficially alluded to in other conversations. Once its importance, was made apparent in the matrix, the issue was pursued in greater detail in various interviews.
Figure 8: Conflict matrix
NOTE: dots represent markers such as seeds These markers reflect frequency of disputes i e few markers = few disputes.
SOURCE: unpublished
Semi-structured interview
The semi-structured interview (SSI) is a tool that can be used at any time in an RA. In most cases, an SSI should accompany the use of every other tool, since it will be useful to probe certain questions and follow up topics of interest. Formal interviews generally use pre-established questionnaires. In contrast, the SSI starts off with a "checklist" of issues that the interviewer wishes to address. Some people prefer to have quite detailed checklists so that they do not forget what they want to ask, while other people feel comfortable noting only the very broad outlines and then devising their questions as they go along. In either case, the interview should be as relaxed and friendly as possible. The interviewer(s) should try to guide the discussion to cover the topics on the checklist, while leaving room to pursue any relevant subjects that are brought up by the informant. SSIs can be done with individuals or with groups.
Example of How a Checklist Issue Turns into an Interview
CHECKLIST ISSUE: Women's role in decision-making
QUESTIONS WHICH MIGHT ACTUALLY BE ASKED IN AN INTERVIEW:
o Who are the women in the village who have particular influence when decisions are made in the village?
o How did these women become influential?
o What role do they play when decisions are made?
o Have there been any examples indicating when women have had a particular impact on how trees (or land, or pastures, etc.) are managed in the village?
o At the level of the household, what role do women play in decisions about land use (or other resource issues)? (Questions can be asked about her own fields, if she has them, as well as the family fields.)
o Who makes decisions about where women plant? about what will be planted and how?
o Who manages the harvest of women's fields?
Please note that each of these questions might have its own series of follow-up questions depending on the response of the informant.
Whenever possible in the first days of the RA, it is good to use a range of participatory techniques such as a maps, calendars, or matrices to involve the population as fully as possible. This is also a way to "triangulate" the use of techniques and to ensure that each subject its broached in different ways. With reference to the puzzle metaphor from Chapter 2, these techniques will reveal some of the big pieces that are needed to put the picture together. As the work progresses, it will begin to be apparent where the holes are and where there is the need to get more precise information. This is where an SSI that is focused on a particular topic can be very useful. Often, these interviews will be done with carefully selected people who have a particular knowledge of the subject being addressed, rather than with informants chosen at random. Such interviews are known as key informant interviews.
While doing a map and a matrix, the informants may have made veiled allusions to a conflict over resources that took place some years back. It may not be comfortable to address the topic in a group, but perhaps talking to one of the individuals who mentioned it would be a good way to get more information. Or perhaps there is a need for more detailed information about women's roles in decision-making in the village. Asking around reveals that one woman is particularly respected. It may be useful to do an SSI with this woman. Among the key informants who may prove particularly useful in investigating resource use are the following: (a) an old person for the history of the village, (b) a specialist in herding or collection of tree products such as medicines, (c) people who have particular decision-making roles or are known for their negotiating skills, (d) a very poor person, and (e) people who use resources differently from the rest of the community (the one person with a
garden or orchard).
<section>8</section>
Chapter 4: Analysing the information: making sense of the tenure situation
Analysing the information
Writing the report
Analysing the information
Tenure transect
Resource management decision grid
Collecting information in an RA takes patience and persistence. But the real challenge often comes in analysing the information. Analysis is a multi-step process. It requires organizing the information so that it is coherent and makes sense. It requires sifting the information to separate that which is important from that which is less so. And it requires thinking hard in order to figure out why some of the information is so important and what it means for project activities, policy recommendations, etc.
In RA, analysis is an ongoing process. This contrasts with conventional survey methods in which the collection and analysis of information are two distinct phases in the research process. In RA, analysis begins to take place in the field. Many of the techniques of RA are helpful in promoting an analytic dialogue with the community where the work is being done. As villagers do a historical matrix, for example, they are likely to begin thinking about the causes of changes and the interaction among various elements that appear on the matrix. In addition, on a daily basis, the team uses its interaction session to review the information it has gathered and to reflect on what is important and where the gaps or inconsistencies lie. While this level of analysis is important and permits rapid learning as knowledge builds upon itself, it is necessarily cursory due to the shortness of time and the pressure to continue collecting information during the short time available in the field.
In the case of an RRA where the information collected is to be used (at least in part) outside of the village, there is a second period of analysis when the team is preparing the feedback session for the village. This feedback session is essential since it permits information to be verified with the village but it also offers a mechanism for systematically sharing the information that has been collected with the village at large. Even if some villagers have participated as team members, it is important to do a feedback with the whole community, or at a minimum with a group of people which represents a wide variety of interests in the community.
To make the feedback useful to both the team and the village the team should pause about three quarters of the way through the study and take at least half a day to review the information that has been collected. This helps to begin to assemble the information in a coherent way, identify the most important remaining gaps, and think about how to present the results of the study back to the villagers for their review. At this point it is useful to begin organizing the collected information by objective. It helps to take several large sheets of paper and write each objective on the top of a sheet. The whole team should brainstorm together on the most important findings under each objective. Another sheet is used to note down any contradictions or holes in the data that are noticed during the discussion. These can later be verified or completed with the informants. This phase of analysis is still rather superficial because all the information has not yet been collected and time
is still too short to do the job completely. Nevertheless, it permits the team to focus its last days activities and to make a coherent presentation to the villagers. It also helps avoid the frustration of coming back to the office and only then finding big gaps in the work which has been done.
In an RRA, the complete analysis of the information will probably take place after the team leaves the village. If villagers have been involved as members of the team, it may be worthwhile to stay in the village and work with them on the analysis. If villagers were not part of the team, it may be useful to find a spot where the team can work comfortably to analyse the information. In any case, it is best to avoid going back to the office where team members will be confronted with innumerable urgencies. It is important that the whole team works together on the analysis because this is where much of the "triangulation" of team perspectives takes place.
In the case of a PRA, the analysis and planning phases of the study are likely to run together. The analysis and discussion of the information gathered in a PRA will be a community-wide process that takes place over several days at the end of the information collection phase. The feedback will then be a time when different members of the community will have the chance to share the information they have been most closely involved in gathering with others who may have had a more peripheral role. This sharing of information launches the process of analysing the information, identifying problems and galvanizing efforts to find solutions.
There are several ways to organize the process of thinking about the information gathered so that it starts to make more sense. The first step is to complete the process started in the preliminary analysis: organizing the information by objective. Then it will be possible to go into greater detail. This can either be done as a team or in smaller sub-groups, with each group working on one objective and then presenting it to the others for their review. The idea of this exercise is to come up with a fairly complete outline of what has been learned, pulling information together from all the different activities in the field.
Tenure transect
Two activities may be useful in organizing the information which has been gathered specifically on tenure and decision-making. The first is to make a "tenure transect" (Figure 9, page 56). Unlike the transect described in Chapter 3 which was used to collect information, the tenure transect" is simply a way to start organizing and thinking about the things learned during the field study. Along the bottom of the transect, all the tenure niches identified in the village territory are written in. These can now be much more specific than just "holding" or "commons" if more specific information has been obtained on areas such as "inner fields," "outer fields," "orchards," "home garden," etc. In the space above each micro-ecological zone, list all the important information obtained regarding how that zone is managed, or what tenure rules seem to apply.
The next step is to think about how people view tenure in each zone. Are individual's rights very clearly defined or are they quite lax? Can one easily get access to resources in that zone or are the rules very restrictive? Are boundaries clearly marked and highly contested or are they more fluid? In some areas, it will have been found that the rules concerning access to and use of resources are carefully defined and enforced; rights are clearly established and highly protected. This can be identified as an area where tenure rules are "highly articulated." In other areas, it may be that the rules seem much more flexible; rights may exist but be latent. This would be an area in which tenure rules are much less highly articulated.
For the "tenure transect" a rough bar graph is drawn to represent the assessment of whether tenure rules are highly articulated or less articulated for each zone. This graph is purely to help think about and organize information; it should be adapted in whatever way will be most useful to analysing the particular area being studied. Its purpose is to provoke the team into thinking about information that may explain the relationships that appear on the bar graph. What appears to cause rules to be more precise, or rights more contested in some areas than in others? What does this imply for resource management and any new activities that might be introduced into the area?
Figure 9: Tenure transect
SOURCE: Inspired by work reported in the paper "Institutions and Natural Resource Management in The Gambia: A Case Study of the Foni Jarrol District"
Resource management decision grid
A second activity may help to sort out the information which has been gathered on decision-making and rules systems. A grid (Figure 10, page 58) can be used to map out what decisions/rules are made by whom concerning natural resource management. Across the top of the grid, headings are made for the different resources in the community. Then, down the side, rows indicate the various levels of decision-making. These start at the level of the individual and move down to the family, the village, the government or whatever levels are relevant to the area studied. In each square, the kinds of decisions or rules that are made at each level are filled in for each resource. For example, if women decide which tree species they will cut and take certain measures to ensure that trees regenerate after they have been pruned for wood, these are noted in the box for individual decisions concerning the management of trees. The village as a whole may regulate which species can be cut. The
government may impose further controls through the forest code. These rules and practices should be noted at the appropriate level of the grid.
This grid will help to see where the loci of decision-making are for various resources and to sort out what kinds of decisions are made informally perhaps by individuals, and which ones are regulated more formally by rules made within or outside the community. While the grid itself may not show` the difference, it should provoke thought about de jure and de facto management practices that exist in the area. Are there contradictions between the rules that are made at different levels? If so, which does the community follow? If a project is trying to influence resource use, this grid will help to think through where it might try to have an impact: by persuading individuals to change their practices? by working through the head of the family who has the most influence over a given activity? by persuading the chief of the village or village council to promulgate a certain regulation? by encouraging the government to enact national legislation?
Figure 10: Resource management decision grid
SOURCE: Inspired by analytic diagram in "Fields, Fallow, and Flexibility: Natural Resource Management in Nadam Mor Fademba, Senegal
With the pieces of the puzzle clearly laid out, it is now time to fit them into a coherent picture and, most importantly, to step back and look at the picture to see what it really means. "The Community, tenure and natural resource analytic schema" below offers one suggestion for how a picture of the information collected might be assembled. It may also help the team to distinguish between the descriptive parts of its work and the analytic questions that will illuminate what is really important. In the schema, the rectangular boxes are the descriptive elements that will be needed to do the analysis. The arrows between the rectangles represent the analysis that is needed in order for the team to think about policy or development interventions that are most relevant to the situation being studied.
The schema proposes three large descriptive categories and poses key questions needed to analyse the relationship between them. The descriptive box at the far left looks at the community that has been studied and its characteristics. This includes such issues ^8 as the nature of the livelihood and production systems: are the people principally farmers? herders? Do they engage in many diverse economic activities or are they focused on only a few? What are the constraints to production? It also looks at the social structure of the community. Is it relatively egalitarian or hierarchical? What are the rights and roles of women and men in the community? Since no community exists in isolation, this box also helps to think about the political, geographical and economic context in which the village operates. Is it remote from markets or well integrated? Is it more or less politically influential? These are just a few examples of the kinds of issues to think about in the first
rectangle; their importance will be explored in a moment.
^8 The issues suggested here are illustrative only and are not intended to be exhaustive.
Figure 11: The community, tenure and natural resource analytic schema
The descriptive box in the center focuses on the tenure system and rules of resource management. It is the place to describe both the local rules systems and the formal or state rules that exist. As these are described, it will be important to think about how they interact, which system takes precedence under which conditions, etc.
What makes this exercise interesting is not just describing the community and the rules systems. The key is to explore the analytic arrows between the two. It can be hypothesized that rules systems for resource management are developed in response to a community's need to assure its livelihood and the nature and organization of its social structure. Thus the forward arrow is useful to think about the community in order to answer the question: 'how do the characteristics of the community determine the nature of its tenure and resource management system?" For example, a community that engages exclusively in sedentary, rain-fed agriculture and is characterized by a relatively egalitarian social structure is likely to have a rules system that is very different from a community that lives principally from animal raising and whose social structure is dominated by a few very wealthy families. The key is to figure out in any given situation which characteristics of the community are
most critical to understanding the rules system it uses and to put particular emphasis on understanding these factors.
The reverse arrow indicates that this is not a one-way relationship. Communities not only make rules, but they are influenced both by their own rules and by rules from the outside. For example, these rules may have an impact on the kinds of livelihood strategies that people can pursue, depending on their access to resources. Rules may reinforce or undermine social patterns. It is useful to try to identify any particularly interesting ways in which the community is affected by the rules it has created or by resource management rules imposed from the outside.
There is a third descriptive box on the far right. This box serves to organize the observations made about the natural resource base. What resources are in ample supply, which ones are in shortage? What resources are used? unused? Which are degrading or improving? Here again, while one needs to be able to describe what is happening, the more interesting step is to explore, analytically, the arrow between the "Rules" box and the "Resource" box. Specifically, with the forward arrow, an attempt should he made to understand what incentives or disincentives the rules create for using the resource base in a way that is sustainable, equitable and efficient.
In some communities, for example, there may be rules that give every body equal access to the resources (highly equitable) but have no provisions for protecting the resources from rampant exploitation (hence questionable sustainability). In other places, there may be strict rules about replanting trees or exploiting them only in ways that are sustainable, hut many people arc excluded from use altogether, raising questions of equitability. Perhaps there are rules excluding almost everybody almost all the time (as in some gazetted forests). These may provide for the sustainability of the resources, but do they make efficient use of them?
As might he expected, the reverse arrow between the 'Resource box and the "Rules" box again poses an important analytic issue. It is clear that rules affect resources, but the nature of resources also has influence on the rules that are made and how they are implemented. When resources arc scarce, different rules often apply from when they are more abundant. Or rules may be enforced differently, depending on the value accorded the resource in question.
While schemata are necessarily simplistic, this one may at least help the RA team begin to explore the connections between information gathered about the community, its tenure system and effects on the natural environment. It will help the team to focus on the information that is most critical to understanding underlying relationships which lead communities to make the rules they do and the effects of rules on sustainable resource use and community well-being. However, for the schema to be useful, it is critical that it not be seen as a static model, but rather as a dynamic process that is constantly evolving and adapting over time. The arrow from the "Resource" box back to the "Community" box is a reminder of this. If the resource base degrades or improves, this will have an impact on the community, its production and livelihood systems, etc. This in turn will often lead to changes in management rules which, in turn, will have an impact on the resource base Each of these
issues must be explored with an eye to its evolution over time if the information obtained in the end is to be meaningful.
As the analysis is carried out, it is important to remember that action research tries not only to document a situation and to describe a certain reality, but also to relate the findings to the problems people encounter in their lives and the search for solutions. As the analysis is done, it is essential to stop regularly to ask, "what is the importance of what has been learned?" "What implications do these findings have for the well-being of the people in this community?" "How can this information be used to make things better?" If the study is for a project: "What is now known that can make this project serve the local population better?" If no one on the team naturally plays the role of insisting that the team work on these questions, it may he useful to designate one person officially to provoke such discussions as the analysis continues.
Writing the report
There are as many variations on RA reports as there are studies that have been done. As in the collection of information, there is not a recipe for writing a good RA report. Nevertheless, this manual can at least point out some characteristics of a good report and offer some guidelines that may facilitate the writing.
Whereas the analysis should include all the team members, the report can be done by a smaller group. It can be designated to one person, divided up among a few people, or divided among all the members of the team. This will depend on whether people enjoy writing and want to participate, who has time, and logistical considerations. If several people participate in the writing, one person should be designated as principal author, or editor. This person is responsible for making sure that all the sections fit together and that nothing has been left out or duplicated in the parts various people have written. Everyone on the team should have an opportunity to review the completed draft report and should offer corrections or additions as needed. This is another aspect of triangulation and the authors should not take such corrections as criticism of their work.
An RA report should attempt to capture the richness of information that was collected in the study. But, it should not be just a massive compilation of every piece of information obtained in the field. This is why a period of careful analysis is necessary before starting to write. One step of the analysis is the "sifting" in which the information that is really relevant to this particular study is separated from that which is of little consequence As the report is written, another sifting is done, putting more emphasis and detail in parts which can be considered to be really important.
There are many ways to organize an RA report. The outline suggested in the following text box is just one suggestion. This may he adapted or the order changed depending on the results of the study. But what is important is that the report follows a logical flow of information and is organized according to themes. What it should not be is a summary of field activities or a simple compilation of the diagrams done in the field.
In the first section (Introduction/Context) a brief explanation is given of why the study was done and for whom. If the study is part of a project a brief explanation is given regarding what the project is trying to do and where this study comes in the cycle of project activities. This is followed by the methodology section which is a very important part of the report. If readers are to believe the information presented, they have to know how it was obtained. It is helpful to first explain briefly what RA is. Then information is supplied on who was on the team (including their disciplines or special perspectives) and the role of any members of the community who joined the team. The rationale is given for choosing the site for the study. Was it chosen to be representative or as a special case? In the next paragraph, an overview should be given of the activities conducted in the field. (In an appendix to the report, it is useful to put a detailed schedule of what activities
were done.) All of this information is important so that the reader can judge whether care was taken to triangulate the team members tools and informants. In the last paragraph of the methodology section, a list is given of any difficulties encountered in the field. If there were some biases which the team was not able to overcome (meeting women, for example), then this should be stated frankly. Readers will he more likely to take what is being said seriously if they see that an effort was made to control the quality of the work and the authors arc aware of its limitations.
Sample Outline of an RA Report
Chapter 1. INTRODUCTION, CONTEXT, METHODOLOGY
Introduction/Context
Why the study was done
Methodology
Objectives of the study
The team
The choice of site (s)
Activities carried out
Limits of the studies and problems encountered
Chapter 2. INTRODUCTION TO THE VILLAGE/OBJECTIVE 1
Introduction to the village
Location
History
Social structure
Economy
Objective 1
Chapter 3. OBJECTIVE 2
Chapter 4. OBJECTIVE 3
Chapter 5. OBJECTIVE 4
Chapter 6. CONCLUSIONS, RECOMMENDATIONS
In the next chapters of the report each objective is taken in turn. If the outline is already organized by objective, it will be quite easy to write these chapters. As an introduction to the first objective. an overview is given of the village or area where the work was done. It is helpful to provide brief information on such subjects as: the location of the village, its ethnic composition any information available on its history, the local economy and livelihood strategies.
An effort should be made to convey the information in the report in as clear and interesting a fashion as possible. It is like telling a story about the village where the study was done. If difficulties are encountered in writing a section clearly, sometimes it helps to discuss it orally with a colleague or friend. Once the story has been told clearly to someone else, it is often easier to write down. The diagrams and tools used in the research should be used as supporting evidence for the argument being made. Where they arc relevant, they should be inserted into the report as illustrations of what its being discussed. Whenever a diagram is put into the report something should he written that connects the diagram to what is being explained. The whole diagram need not be explained in great detail. Instead the one or two things that are the most important should be pointed out to the readers.
The last chapter should try to draw the conclusions of the study together and make practical suggestions for what should be done with the information. If the final objective is a kind of summary or synthesis objective. then it may be decided to combine the last objective and the conclusions into one chapter.
If an analytic schema such as the one in Figure 11 has been used to tie together all the different parts of the study, this integrated analysis will probably best be saved for the concluding chapter. This is the sauce that com- all the ingredients laid out in earlier sections. In writing a coherent report, it is important to be sure that all the ingredients needed for the sauce have been put forth and adequately explained in the descriptive chapters. Conversely, it is important to avoid spending a lot of time presenting and discussing ingredients that will not be used in the sauce. If this is done well, the concluding chapter can focus on analytic issues and the recommendations that follow from the analysis, rather than getting bogged down in description.
<section>9</section>
Chapter 5: Using the information from the tenure study
Participation and expectations
The situation suggests the need to adapt project activities
Participatory planning and the loss of control
Villagers engaged in creative but illegal activities
The paralysis of dealing with complexity
In a good RA, information is gathered to be used in a way that will improve the wellbeing of the local community. This is most likely to happen if the community itself participates maximally in the collection and analysis of information. The more that it is involved in the whole process and has access to the information that is generated, the more likely that it will find ways to use the information for the benefit of the members of the community.
This is why the feedback stage of the RA is so important. Ideally, this feedback is more than a simple verification of the facts with the informants. More usefully, it is an opportunity to launch a planning process with the village, using the information that has already been gathered as a point of departure. What are the key problems that have been identified? What resources are available locally to confront these problems? What problems are beyond the scope of local solutions and require some form of outside intervention? What is the time frame for working on the problems? Who will be involved and with what responsibilities?
One of the reasons that RA has become such a popular methodology is that, when used well, it provides useful information quickly. Development agencies and others can begin to get at least preliminary answers needed to plan and implement their activities in a matter of weeks, rather than waiting years as was sometimes necessary to get the results of conventional surveys. And yet, looking at the record, it is clear that even though better and faster information is now available, in many cases it is not being used to its full potential. There are undoubtedly an infinite number of explanations for the gap between information collection and use. The discussion here will he limited to a few of the most commonly encountered problems, since some of them can be avoided with a certain amount of advance planning.
Participation and expectations
The participation of the local population in the research process is one of the greatest advantages of RA methods. Yet the more people participate, the higher their expectations concerning the outcome. This can he a very good thing if village expectations and donor possibilities coincide, since the process itself will build a momentum for change. However, it can cause problems when the villagers' expectations cannot be met by the activities of the donor who is conducting the study.
For example, an RA may be done on tenure and natural resource management such as the one that has been described in this manual. While the villagers may be interested in these issues and participate with great enthusiasm, their priority concern may turn out to be a school for local children. They may, for many reasons, feel that this is a more important issue than any of the natural resource concerns that the project expects to address.
In such a case, the project may find itself in the difficult position of facilitating a process in which the villagers express and prioritize their concerns. At the end, however, the project ignores the principal issues raised by the village and addresses those that appear first on its agenda. From the villagers perspective, the most important results of the study are being neglected
If an outside agency is unable to meet local expectations, as in this case of the school, this issue should be addressed frankly with the population and other solutions should be sought. This might involve collaborating with another agency that can respond to local concerns or passing on the request to the appropriate government agency.
The situation suggests the need to adapt project activities
It will often happen that the results of a village RA suggest that the project should retune its activities. Perhaps the study reveals a critical need to focus on pasture improvement, while activities of the project are oriented around trees. It may be found that the village has important reciprocal arrangements with other villages for using resources, while the project planned to promote policies excluding strangers from forest commons as part of a strategy for regenerating the resource.
Unfortunately the record in such cases is not very good: the most common outcome is that agencies simply ignore the information from the RA and proceed according to their own pre-established plan. Such projects are doomed to failure in the long run but, regrettably, that is often not a pressing consideration in the short and medium term. Projects that take the trouble to use methods like RA should be prepared to listen to what they learn in the field and to the extent possible to readjust their programme accordingly. Often, this puts the project staff who actually participate in the RA in the difficult position of trying to persuade others in the agency to change the programme to make it more responsive to local situations. Depending on the attitudes of co-workers and the flexibility of the agency, this may be a contentious issue or it may lead to an exciting process of adaptation through increased communications with the beneficiary population.
Participatory planning and the loss of control
The best kind of RA leads to a process of participatory planning in which the local population takes the lead in identifying the causes and the solutions for their problems. Outsiders may have a role in providing technical analysis and complementing the resources of the community with investments of knowledge or financial inputs that are not available locally, but they are not in charge of the process. The advantage of deferring to local leadership is, of course that the process is far more likely to be sustainable and to outlive the life of the project.
In many cases, donors have been reluctant to relinquish control over project activities so that the planning process can be locally based. If the donor agency has promised their funders three woodlots and twenty fields equipped with stone bunds by the end of three rainy seasons, they may be unwilling to let an open ended planning process proceed. There might in fact be nothing tangible to show by the end of three years, or it might be a compost pile instead of the bunds.
Projects which want to become more participatory but are constrained by donor expectations will have to engage in a process of education of their funders. It may be necessary to start with a small pilot in which RA and participatory planning activities so that they understand the importance of the process that is being undertaken. The next time they may agree to fund a more open-ended activity.
Villagers engaged in creative but illegal activities
It is not uncommon for RA studies to come upon highly creative and effective local resource management strategies that are against national laws. For example, villagers may borrow or even sell land in contravention of national land laws. They may carefully prune trees as they see fit when, according to forest rules, any cutting requires a permit. This creates a problem for the project that might like to write about these strategies, and perhaps even encourage their wider adoption. The options in this case depend very much on the responsiveness of the government in question. Certainly, information from an RA should not be used in any way that might result in serious sanctions on the village that provided the information. If the government is somewhat responsive to local concerns, however, the information may provide an opportunity to open a dialogue on the merits of the law, possible alternatives, and their impact on rural communities. Here again, RA can be used to inform and
educate people who may have little knowledge of local realities.
The paralysis of dealing with complexity
After researching an area carefully, projects often gain a rather sobering appreciation of the complexity of the tenure situation in which they are planning to intervene. Good RA research almost invariably exposes issues of power and powerlessness as it tries to understand who makes the rules - and in whose interests the rules are made. While it may be informative on these issues, it does not, and cannot be expected to, provide easy answers on how to deal with these fundamental and persistently perplexing questions.
In deciding how to orient their natural resource activities, projects may be stymied by information suggesting that local tenure arrangements are in contravention of national policies. This puts them in the difficult position of having to decide which framework to use in implementing their activities, a tortuous choice given most projects' multiple constituencies. In most cases they work, at a minimum, with the local community, with local elites, and with government officials at different levels, each of whom will have its own expectations and interests. In addition, project activities are frequently subject to close scrutinization by outsiders who are eager to tap into the benefits of any intervention.
Once again, uncovering the information does not necessarily lead to unambiguous solutions. While local tenure arrangements may have clear advantages in terms of their appropriateness to the community's problems, they may not have broad enough authority to protect those resource users if they are challenged by outsiders. The government may or may not tolerate projects promoting local tenure systems. In some places government structures cast a blind eye on local tenure arrangements (or may even support the decentralization of such decisions), while in others there is active hostility and the authorities seek to force local rules to conform to national norms.
It is impossible to offer generalizable recommendations concerning these complex issues. Little more can be given than a word of warning. Projects that undertake research on these issues should be aware that the process of gathering information does not necessarily mean that clear answers will present themselves. In fact, the information collected may prove quite troubling when its full implications are thought through. An inability to deal with the complexity that characterizes local realities is a common cause of paralysis.
For the most part, good quality information can be used in a productive way, though it may require researchers and projects to review their prior assumptions and rethink their approaches. Good RA will highlight differences between insider and outsider approaches. It will expose issues of power and powerlessness. This may result in some rather perplexing dilemmas, but it is better to confront the issues frankly and search for solutions than to proceed as if the differences didn't exist.
Confronting the issues raised by participatory research is not likely to be an easy process, given the short-term imperatives of donors and governments. For participatory research to work, outsiders will have to become more humble in acknowledging that they do not have all the answers to complex development problems. They will have to become more willing to relinquish a certain amount of authority in the planning process and to leave a space so that local people can take greater leadership. And they will need to be more open to unpredictable outcomes that result from such a process. Information neglect occurs because it is much easier to ignore differences than to address the institutional issues needed to confront and reconcile them. In the end, getting good information is only the first hurdle. The information must also be used to increase our effectiveness in working with rural people. Otherwise, the emphasis on participation that is so central to RA will do little more
than add yet another burden on the poor. This is the ultimate challenge to all of those who use and promote these techniques.
<section>a</section>
Appendices
Appendix 1- Sources of Information on Rapid Appraisal
Appendix 2 - Sources of information on tenure and natural resource management
Appendix 1- Sources of Information on Rapid Appraisal
As Rapid Appraisal techniques become more widely practiced, the number of sources of information have quickly multiplied. The addresses suggested below are by no means the only good sources of information, but they may help to get started, and help to find information that is particularly relevant to the area in which the work is being done. All of the institutions cited below use or have used participatory methods for the study of natural resource questions. Many of the them have published manuals on the use of these methods as well as case studies of their work.
Program for International Development
Clark University
950 Main Street
Worcester, Mass. 01610
United States of America
Egerton University
Office of Research and Extension
PO Box 536
Njoro
Kenya
ILELA
PO Box 64
3830 AB Leusden
The Netherlands
Institut de Science et L'Environnement
Universit Cheikh Anta Diop
Dakar-Fann
Senegal
International Institute of Environment and Development^ 9
3, Endsleigh St.
London WC1H ODD
United Kingdom
^9 IIED, London publishes and distributes RRA Notes, an informal journal of contributions by RRA practitioners.
IRED/PRAAP
C.P. 13
Dakar
Senegal
Faculty of Agriculture
Khon Kaen University
Khon Kaen 40002
Thailand
MYRADA
2 Service Road
Domlur Layout
Bangalore 560 071
India
National Environment Secretariat
Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources
PO Box 67839
Nairobi
Kenya
SPEECH
14, Jeyaraja Illam Opp. Kasirajan Hospital
Tirupalai, Madurai 625 014
India
Winrock International
P.O. Box 1312
Kathmandu
Nepal
World Resources Institute
1709 New York Avenue, NW
Washington, D.C. 20006
United States of America
For a more complete listing of sources of information on PRA, please consult the discussion paper by Robert Chambers, Rural Appraisal: Rapid, Relaxed and Participatory. It is available from IDS Publications, Institute for Development Studies, University of Sussex, Brighton BN1 SIRE, United Kingdom.
Appendix 2 - Sources of information on tenure and natural resource management
In addition to many of the organizations listed in Appendix 1, the following are sources of publications and information on land and tree tenure issues.
o Forests, Trees and People Programme
Community Forestry Unit
Forestry and Planning Division
FAO
Viale delle Terme de Caracalla
00100 Rome, Italy
o The Forests, Trees and People Newsletter
IRCD
Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences (SUAS)
Box 7005
S-750 07 Uppsala, Sweden
o The Land Tenure Center
1357 University Avenue
Madison, Wisconsin 53715
United States of America
o Bruce, John W. 1989. Rapid Appraisal of Tree and Land Tenure.
FAO, Rome.
The following are suggested as first references for people getting to know the subject.
Bruce, John W. 1988. A Perspective on Indigenous Land Tenure Systems and Land Concentration. In Downs, R.E. and Reyna, S.P. (eds.). 1988. Land and Society in Contemporary Africa. University Press of New England, Hanover, New Hampshire.
Fortmann, L. and Riddell, J. 1985. Trees and Tenure: An Annotated Bibliography for Foresters and Others. Land Tenure Center, Madison, Wisconsin and International Council for Research in Agroforestry, Nairobi.
Fortmann, L., and Bruce , John W., (eds.) 1988. Whose Tress? Proprietary Dimensions of Forestry. Westview Press, Boulder, Colorado.
Niamir, Maryam. 1991. Traditional African Range Management Techniques: Implications for Rangeland Management. ODI Pastoral Development Network Paper 31d.
Painter, T. 1991. Approaches to Improving the Use of Natural Resources for Agriculture in Sahelian West Africa. CARE International, New York.
Raintree, J. (ed.). 1987. Land, Trees and Tenure. Land Tenure Center, Madison, Wisconsin and International Council for Research in Agroforesty, Nairobi.
Shepherd, Gill. 1991. The Communal Management of Forests in the Semi-Arid and Sub-Humid Regions of Africa: Past Practice and Prospects for the Future. Development Policy Review 9: 151-176.
<section>b</section>
References
Barraclough, Solon and Ghimire, K. 1990. The Social Dynamics of Deforestation in Developing Countries: Principal Issues and Research Priorities. United Nations Research Institute for Social Development, Geneva.
Bromley, Daniel. 1992. Making the Commons Work. Institute for Contemporary Studies, San Francisco.
Bruce, John W. 1991. La foresterie communautaire: Evaluation rapide des droits fonciers et proprit de l'arbre et de la terre. FAO, Rome.
Bruce, John W. 1989. Community Forestry Note 5. Rapid Appraisal of Tree and Land Tenure. FAO, Rome.
Chambers, R. 1992. Rural Appraisal: Rapid, Relaxed and Participatory. Institute for Development Studies Discussion Paper 311, University of Sussex, Sussex.
Chambers, R. 1990. Rapid and Participatory Rural Appraisal: Past, Present and Future. Paper for a Seminar at the University of Chieng Mai, Thailand.
Collins, Jane. 1992. Smallholder Settlement of Tropical South America: The Social Causes of Ecological Destruction. Human Organization 45: 1-10.
Collins, J. 1992. Marxism Confronts the Environment: Labor, Ecology and Environmental Change. In Ortiz, S. and Lee, S. (eds.) 1992. Understanding Economic Process. University Press of America, New York.
Conac, G. 1980. Dynamiques et finalitis des droits Africains. Economica, Paris.
Crousse, B., Le Bris, E., and Le Roy, E. 1986. Espaces disputs en Afrique noire. Pratiques foncires locales. Karthala, Paris.
Davison, Jean (ed.). 1988. Agriculture, Women, and Land. The African Experience. Westview Press, Boulder, Colorado.
Downs, R.E. and Reyna, S.P. 1988. Land and Society in Contemporary Africa. University Press of New England, Hanover, New Hampshire.
Faure, E. and Le Roy, E. 1990. Experts et dveloppeurs face aux enjeux de la question foncire en Afrique francophone. Les Cahiers de la Recherche Dveloppement 25: 5-18.
Fischer, J., Freudenberger, K.S. Diallo, M.S., Bah, A.B., Seck, I.S., Balde, M., Diallo, B., Doumboiya, S. 1993. Resource Management Practices and Tenure Constraints and Opportunities in the Koundou Watershed, Fouta Djallon Guinea. Land Tenure Center, University of Wisconsin, Madison.
Forster, Nancy R. 1992. Protecting Fragile Lands: New Resources to Tackle Old Problems. World Development 20: 571-585.
Fortmann, Louise and Rocheleau. 1985. Women and Agroforestry: Four Myths and Three Case Studies. Agroforestry Systems 2 253-272
Freudenberger, K.S. and Freudenberger, M.S. 1993. Fields, Fallow, and Flexibility: Natural Resource Management in Ndam Mor Fademba, Senegal. IIED, London.
Freudenberger, M.S., (ed.). 1993. Institutions and Natural Resource Management in The Gambia: A Case Study of the Foni Jarrol District. Land Tenure Center, University of Wisconsin, Madison.
Freudenberger, M.S. 1992. Land Tenure, Local Institutions and Natural Resources in Senegal. Land Tenure Center, University of Wisconsin, Madison.
Ghai, Dharam. 1992.00 Conservation, Livelihood and Democracy: Social Dynamics of Environmental Changes in Africa. United Nations Research Institute for Social Development, Geneva.
Ghimire, Krishna. 1991. Parks and People: Livelihood Issues in National Parks Management in Thailand and Madagascar. United Nations Research Institute for Social Development, Geneva.
Grandin, B. 1988. Wealth Ranking in Smallholder Communities: A Field Manual. Intermediate Technology Publications, London.
Gueye, Bara and Freudenberger, K.S. 1991. Introduction a la Mthode Acclre de Recherche Participative (MARP). IIED, London.
Guijt, I. (ed.). 1992. Special Issue on Applications of Wealth Ranking, RRA Notes 15. IIED, London.
Hecht, Susana. 1981. Deforestation in the Amazon Basin: Magnitude, Dynamics and Soil Resource Effects. Studies in Third World Societies 13: 61-100.
Hecht, S. and Cockburn, A. 1989. The Fate of the Forest: Developers, Defenders and Destroyers of the Amazon. Verso, New York.
Lane, C., and Swift, J. East African Pastoralism: Common Land, Common Problems. Report on the Pastoral Land Tenure Workshop. IIED, London.
Le Bris, E., Le Roy, E., and Leimdorfer, F. 1982. Enjoux fonciers en Afrique noire. Editions Karthala/ORSTOM, Paris.
Le Bris, Emile, Le Roy, E., and Mathieu, P. 1991. L 'appropriation de la terre en Afrique noire: Manuel d'analyse, de decision et de gestion foncires. Karthala, Paris.
Le Roy, Etienne. 1987. Introduction. La rforme du droit de la terre dans certains pays d'Afrique francophone. Etude Legislative, 44: 1-29. FAO, Rome.
Le Roy, Etienne. 1982. Caractres des droits fonciers coutumiers. L'Encyclopdie Juridique de l'Afrique. Tome V: 39-47. Nouvelles Editions Africaines, Dakar.
Le Roy, Etienne. 1982. Les modes d'acquisition et les preuves des droits fonciers coutumiers. L'Encyclopedie Juridique de l'Afrique. Tome V Dakar: 39-47. Nouvelles Editions Africaines, Dakar.
MacDonald, Ted. 1992. Working with Indigenous People in Latin America: Towards Social Equity in the Conservation of Fragile Lands and Protected Areas. Paper prepared for USAID, Bureau of Research and Development. Cultural Survival, Cambridge, Mass.
Mascarenhas, J., Parmesh, S. Joseph, S. Jayakaran, R., Devavaram, J., Ramachandran, V. Fernandez, A., Chambers, R. and Pretty, J., (ads.). 1991. Participatory Rural Appraisal, Proceedings of the February 1991 Bangalore PRA Trainers Workshop, RRA Notes 13. IIED, London and Myrada, Bangalore.
McCracken, J., Pretty, J., and Conway, G. 1988. An Introduction to Rapid Rural Appraisal for Agricultural Development. IIED, London.
National Environment Secretariat, Egerton University, Clark University, Center for International Development and Environment. 1990. Participatory Rural Appraisal Handbook. World Resources Institute, Washington, D.C.
Niamir, Maryam. 1991. Traditional African Range Management Techniques: Implications for Rangeland Management ODI Pastoral Development Network Paper 31d.
Odour-Noah, E., Asamba, I., Ford, R., Wichhart, L., and Lelo, F. 1992. Implementing PRA: A Handbook to Facilitate Participatory Rural Appraisal. Program for International Development, Clark University, Worcester, Mass.
Painter, T. 1991. Approaches to Improving the Use of Natural Resources for Agriculture in Sahelian West Africa. CARE International, New York.
Painter, Thomas M. 1991. Approches pour une meilleure utilization des ressources naturelles et agricoles en Afrique de l'ouest Sahelienne: Analyse sociologique de l'approche Amnagement/Gestion des Terroirs Villageois et de ses implications pour les organizations non-gouvernementales. CARE, New York.
Poole, P. 1989. Developing a Partnership of Indigenous People, Conservationists and Land Use Planners in Latin America. World Bank, Washington, D.C.
Pretty, J.N. and Scoones, I.C. (eds.). 1989. Rapid Rural Appraisal for Economics: Exploring Incentives to Tree Management in Sudan. IIED, London.
RRA Notes. 1988 onwards. Published and distributed by IIED, London.
Scoones, I. and McCracken, J. (eds.). 1989. Participatory Rapid Rural Appraisal in Wollo Ethiopia: Peasant Association Planning for Natural Resource Management. International Institute for Environment and Development, London.
Shepherd, Gill. 1991. The Communal Management of Forests in the Semi-Arid and Sub-Humid Regions of Africa: Past Practice and Prospects for the Future. Development Policy Review 9: 151-176.
Theis, J., and Grady, H. 1991. Participatory Rapid Appraisal for Community Development: a Training Manual Based on Experiences in the Middle East and North Africa. Save the Children and IIED, London.
Thiesenhusen, Willam C. 1991. Implications of the Rural Land Tenure System for the Environmental Debate: Three Scenarios. The Journal of Developing Areas 26: 1-24.
Utting, Peter. 1991. The Social Origins and Impact of Deforestation in Central America. United Nations Research Institute for Social Development, Geneva.
Verdier, R. and Rochegude, A. 1986. Systms fonciers  la ville et au village: Afrique noire francophone. Editions l'Harmattan, Paris.
<section>c</section>
Publications
COMMUNITY FORESTRY NOTES
1 Household food security and forestry: an analysis of socio-economic issues, 1989 E/F/S/Ar)
2 Community forestry: participatory assessment, monitoring and evaluation, 1989 (E/F/S)
3 Community forestry: rapid appraisal, 1989 (E/F/S)
4 Community forestry: herders' decision-making in natural resources management in arid and semi-arid Africa, 1990 (E/F)
5 Community forestry: rapid appraisal of tree and land tenure, 1990 (E/F/S**)
6 The major significance of 'minor' forest products: the local use and value of forests in the West African humid forest zone, 1990 (E)
7 Community forestry: ten years in review, 1991 (E/F/S)
8 Shifting cultivators: local technical knowledge and natural resource management in the humid tropics, 1991 (E/F/S)
9 Socioeconomic attributes of trees and tree planting practices, 1991 (E/F**/S**)
10 A framework for analyzing institutional incentives in community forestry, 1992 (E/F)
11 Common forest resource management: annotated bibliography of Asia, Africa, and Latin America, 1993 (E/F**)
12 Introducing community forestry: annotated listing of topics and readings, 1994 (E)
13 What about the wild animals? Wild animal species in community forestry in the tropics, 1995 (E)
COMMUNITY FORESTRY FIELD MANUALS
1 Guidelines for planning, monitoring and evaluating cookstove programs, 1990 (E/F/S)
2 The community's toolbox: the idea, methods and tools for participatory assessment, monitoring and evaluation in community forestry, 1990 (E/F/S/Viet)
3 Guidelines for integrating nutrition concerns into forestry projects, 1991 (E/F/S)
4 Tree and land tenure: rapid appraisal tools, 1994 (E/F)
5 Selecting tree species on the basis of community needs, 1995 (E/F**)
6 Marketing information systems for non-timber forest products, 1996 (E)
7 Crafting institutional arrangements for community forestry, 1997 (E)
COMMUNITY FORESTRY CASE STUDIES
1 Case studies of farm forestry and wasteland development in Gujarat, In 1988 (E)
2 Forestland for the people. A forest village project in Northeast Thail. 1988 (E)
3 Women's role in dynamic forest-based small-scale enterprises. Case studies on uppage and lacquerware from India, 1991 (E)
4 Case studies in forest-based small scale enterprises in Asia. Rattan, ma making and handicrafts, 1991 (E)
5 Social and economic incentives for smallholder tree growing. A case study from Murang's District, Kenya, 1993 (E/Viet)
6 Shifting cultivators of Indonesia: marauders or managers of the forest? ] production and forest use among the Uma'Jalan of East Kalimantan, Indonesia, 1993 (E)
8 The impact of social and environmental change on forest management case study from West Kalimantan, Indonesia, 1993 (E/Viet)
9 Tree and land tenure in the Eastern Terai, Nepal. A case study from the aha and Saptari Districts, Nepal, 1993 (E)
10 Tree and land tenure: using rapid appraisal to study natural resource management. A case study from Anvirano, Madagascar, 1995 (E)
11 Shifting cultivation in Bhutan: A gradual approach to modifying land use l terns. A case study from Pema Gatshel District, Bhutan, 1995 (E)
12 Farmer experimentation and innovation. A case study of knowledge generation processes in agroforestry systems in Rwanda, 1996 (E)
COMMUNITY FORESTRY WORKING PAPERS
1 The role of alternative conflict management in community forestry, 1994
2 Participatory approaches to planning for community forestry, 1995 (E)
COMMUNITY FORESTRY GUIDELINES
1 Women in community forestry: a field guide for project design and implementation, 1989 (E/F/S)
2 Integrating gender considerations into FAO forestry projects, 1994 (E/F**/S)
COMMUNITY FORESTRY AUDIO VISUALS AND SLIDE BOOKLETS
o Forestry and food security, 1993 (E/F/S)
o What is a tree?, 1994 (E/F)
o Gender analysis and forestry development planning - why? & how?, 1996 (E)
o Fruits of our work: women in community forestry, Tanzania (slide booklet), 1991 (E)
o Women and community forestry in Sudan (slide booklet), 1991 (E)
o What is a tree? (Slide booklet), 1995 (E)
o Gender analysis for forestry development planning - why? & how? (slide booklet), 1997 (E)
COMMUNITY FORESTRY CARTOON BOOKLETS
1 Food for the Future, 1990 (E/F/S/Hindi/Malaysian/Portuguese/Sinhala/Viet/Lao)
2 Our trees and forests, 1992 (E/F/S)
3 I am so hungry I could eat a tree, 1992 (E/F/S)
4 Fabulous forest factories, 1993 (E/F/S)
COMMUNITY FORESTRY CONFLICT MANAGEMENT SERIES
o Proceedings: electronic conference on "addressing natural resource conflicts through community forestry, January-May 1996," 1997 (E)
OTHER COMMUNITY FORESTRY PUBLICATIONS
o Restoring the balance: women and forest resources, 1991 (E/F/S)
o Forests, trees and food, 1992 (E/S)
o The gender analysis and forestry training package, 1995 (E)
o Forestry and food security brochure, 1996 (E/F/S)
o Forestry and food security poster, 1996 (E/F/S)
o Community forestry posters, 1997 (E)
o People and forests: community forestry at FAO, 1997 (E/F/S)
o Forests, trees and people programme (brochure), 1998 (E)
E - English
Ar - Arabic
F - French
S - Spanish
Viet - Vietnamese
** in preparation
OUR PUBLICATIONS AND VIDEOS ARE AVAILABLE FROM YOUR REGIONAL FOCAL POINT:
Anglophone Africa:
FTPP/FAN
Forest Action Network
P.O. Box 21428
Nairobi, Kenya
Fax: (254-2) 718398
E-mail: fan@arcc.or.ke
Asia:
FTPP/RECOFTC
Regional Community Forestry Training Center
Kasetsart University
P.O. Box 1111
Bangkok 10903, Thailand
Fax: (66-2) 561-4880
E-mail: ftcsss@nontri.ku.ac.th
Europe:
The Editor, FTPP Newsletter
SLU, Department of Rural Development Studies
Box 7005
75007 Uppsala, Sweden
Fax: (46-18) 673420
E-mail: daphne.tuvesson@irdc.slu.se
Francophone Africa:
Facilitateur Regional pour L'Afrique Francophone
IPD-AC
Institut Panafricain pour le Dveloppement
B.P. 4078
Douala, Cameroon
Fax: (237) 403068
E-mail: ftppass@camnet.cm
Latin America and Caribbean (Spanish):
Revista Bosques, Arboles y Comunidades Rurales
c/o CIED
Av. Santa Cruz 500, Jesus Maria
Apartado 11-0152
Lima 11, Peru
Fax: (51-1) 330-5862
E-mail: ftpp@sifocom.org.pe
North America and Caribbean (English):
FTPP/NACARCE
North American & Caribbean Regional Center
5400 Grosvenor Lane
Bethesda, Maryland 20814
USA
Fax: (301) 897-3690
E-mail: istfiusf@igc.apc.org
Other regions:
The Senior Community Forestry Officer
Forestry Policy and Planning Division
Forestry Department
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
Rome 00100, Italy
Fax: (39-6) 5705-5514
E-mail: ftpp@fao.org
