<title>COMMUNICATION - a key to human development</title>
<section>1</section>
contents next
COMMUNICATION
a key to human development
- Communication in practice
- A new agenda
FOREWORD
"People's participation is becoming the central issue of our time," says UNDP in its Human Development Report 1993, to which we add, "and participation requires communication".
Development programmes can only realise their full potential if knowledge and technology are shared effectively, and if populations are motivated and committed to achieve success. Unless people themselves are the driving force of their own development, no amount of investment or provision of technology and inputs will bring about any lasting improvements in their living standards.
Communication is central to this task in many ways. For example, it enables planners, when identifying and formulating development programmes, to consult with people in order to take into account their needs, attitudes and traditional knowledge. Only with communication will the project beneficiaries become the principal actors to make development programmes successful.
Helping people at all levels to communicate empowers them to recognise important issues and find common grounds for action, and builds a sense of identity and participation in order to implement their decisions.
On top of that, development involves change, new ways of doing things. Will people have the confidence to make a project work? Will they acquire the new knowledge and skills they need? How can barriers of illiteracy be overcome? Communication media and techniques can be powerful tools to advise people about new ideas and methods, to encourage adoption of those ideas and methods, and to improve training overall.
Communication approaches are also invaluable for improved coordination and teamwork to manage development programmes, and to gain institutional support.
We live in a communication age, and the full impact of communication on development is just starting to be seen. Based on the experience of FAO and other agencies, communication for development has reached the stage where it can have a noticeable and rewarding effect on many development programmes.
This booklet not only promotes the concept of development communication but, more important, it also describes how achieving its full potential to support development requires executive decisions by national planners and policy-makers.
Jacques Diouf, Director-General, January 1994, Rome
THE ROLE OF COMMUNICATION
A decisive role can be played by communication in promoting human development in today's new climate of social change. As the world moves towards greater democracy, decentralization and the market economy, conditions are becoming more favourable for people to start steering their own course of change. But it is vital to stimulate their awareness, participation and capabilities. Communication skills and technology are central to this task, but at present are often underutilized. Policies are needed that encourage effective planning and implementation of communication programmes.
The new development context
Major changes and new emphases have appeared on the development scene. Societies are opening to debate and markets to individual initiative; privatisation and entrepreneurship are being encouraged; new technologies are becoming widely available; management of government services is gradually being relocated closer to the users, if not handed over directly to users themselves, in order to cut costs and seek partners more committed to effective implementation. Indeed, a host of structural adjustments are profoundly affecting most aspects of production and human interaction. These structural adjustments make demands, and have direct economic and social effects on people.
Governments of developing countries can no longer fulfil all social and regulatory services by themselves, especially in rural areas. Many economies are overwhelmed by the cost of servicing their foreign debt, and governments are under stringent requirement from international financial institutions to reduce spending. In their quest for greater cost-effectiveness in all their operations, governments must have the active support of, and a greater contribution from, the people. Governments are thus obliged to seek new and perhaps unfamiliar partners, ranging from local leaders to people in a variety of non-governmental organisations. These people are accordingly obliged to shoulder new and perhaps unfamiliar responsibilities.
Furthermore, as we near the end of the century, a number of specific issues have come clearly into focus as being central to socio-economic progress, equity, social stability, to the future of humanity- and perhaps even to its survival.
The environment
and its relation to sustainable agricultural development and food production present an enormous challenge. A prime consideration is the proper use and conservation of natural resources. These resources are often degraded at the hands of impoverished rural people who have no immediate alternative for meeting their needs for land on which to grow food, and for fuelwood. Their abuse of forest areas, with the negative consequences of soil erosion and dwindling water resources, will only be halted through new schemes of employment and income generation and through applying conservation techniques. Such solutions, however, will have to be made acceptable to local people, many of whom will need considerable encouragement and training in new skills. The provisions of Agenda 21, which emerged from the UN Conference on the Environment and Development held in Rio de Janeiro (1992), will only become a reality through large-scale changes in attitudes and behaviour in societies
worldwide.
Population growth
is exerting pressure on natural resources, on food production and on the ability of governments to provide basic services and employment opportunities. Population growth depends on choices made by individuals. Helping people to make more informed choices by raising their awareness of the implications of family size and unwanted pregnancy, and of methods of contraception, requires much more than simply sending out messages. Instead it requires learning, from people and their leaders, how to make such issues socially acceptable and worthy of urgent action. Insight into people's underlying attitudes are needed before they can be helped to change their views.
Rural poverty
continues to increase in many countries, accelerating urban migration and creating intolerable economic and social problems. The solution, of course, lies in the development of rural areas. Most rural communities are characterised by reliance on traditional knowledge and production systems, based strictly on what has worked for survival in the past. This has led to a view that rural communities are resistant to change, even though their traditional wisdom has been hard-won and its reasoning is sound. Planners need to take this into account, as the first step of any planning exercise. For this, and for all rural development activities, communication between local communities and national planners and policy-makers is of vital importance but, unfortunately, in rural areas it is at its weakest.
Malnutrition
is both a cause and a consequence of underdevelopment. Recent decades have seen consistent reductions in the daily per caput supply of calories in many countries. The International Conference on Nutrition held in December 1992 drew attention to the fact that more than 780 million people in the world suffer from chronic malnutrition and that, each year, some 13 million children below the age of five die from infectious diseases that can be directly or indirectly attributed to hunger or malnutrition. Nutritional well-being is not just a question of food availability and economics among families, however. It also depends on sufficient knowledge and acceptance of appropriate diets. At the planner's level, incorporating nutritional concerns into development initiatives for agriculture, food security, forestry, land use, exports and so forth requires an increased awareness of nutritional priorities since these are not spontaneously identified in such disciplines.
Women in development
is another priority issue. In many countries, women shoulder most of the work in rural areas. Given the opportunity, women have shown themselves again and again to be highly responsive and responsible when helped to mobilise themselves, build upon available resources and produce sustainable results. Women need to learn additional technical and organisational skills and more women are needed at the centre of decision-making. Specific challenges where communication is vital include helping women's groups to increase their self-determination and to broaden the dialogue between the sexes regarding rights, privileges and responsibilities.
The common denominators - people and communication
The first common theme running through the development issues just outlined is the human factor: the outcome will be based less on scientific and material inputs than on the people involved. For, even if our understanding of the development process is changing, there can be no doubt that its future shape, its pace, sustainability and ultimate direction - for better or worse - will be determined by people, and the level of their awareness, participation and skills. Investment in scientific and material inputs will bear no fruit without a parallel investment in "human capital" - in informing people, opening up avenues by which they may reach consensus for action, and developing the knowledge and skills needed to put material investments to the best use.
Communication is the second common theme in the issues outlined. For if development can be seen as a fabric woven out of the activities of millions of people, communication represents the essential thread that binds them together.
On the one hand, communication as dialogue and debate occurs spontaneously in any time of social change. The increased freedom of expression in recent times has been almost simultaneous with changes in the global political structure.
On the other hand, it is communication as a deliberate intervention to affect social and economic change that holds the most interesting possibilities. A development strategy that uses communication approaches can reveal people's underlying attitudes and traditional wisdom, help people to adapt their views and to acquire new knowledge and skills, and spread new social messages to large audiences.
The planned use of communication techniques, activities and media gives people powerful tools both to experience change and actually to guide it. An intensified exchange of ideas among all sectors of society can lead to the greater involvement of people in a common cause. This is a fundamental requirement for appropriate and sustainable development.
The rural dilemma
The primary focus of FAO's work in communication for development lies in rural areas, where the expertise and logistics required to communicate well with rural communities may seem daunting.
Nearly 1 000 million people in developing countries, more than one-third of the adult population, are illiterate. Rural communities are often remote and difficult to reach; they lack the infrastructures and communication systems - such as newspapers, radios, televisions and telephones, as well as meeting rooms, offices and schools -that help townsfolk keep abreast of developments and function effectively as informed participants.
In rural areas, the challenge is to increase the quantity and accessibility of information, to ensure its exchange in appropriate ways, and to elicit more information from rural people themselves in order to guide development planning.
The communication technology and know-how are available
We live in a communication era, with rapid expansion in the reach of mass media, and improved techniques for the interpersonal exchange of ideas. The advent of the cheap transistor radio, for example, has brought this medium to remote corners of even the least-developed countries, where a lack of electricity can be overcome by solar-powered transmitters and receivers.
Video provides a good example of the technological advances in the communication field. Little more than a decade ago, video was a bulky and expensive medium. The basic kit for shooting in black and white included a camera and recorder weighing about 30 kg, a power supply, and often an electrical generator for fieldwork. Total cost: almost US$10 000. Now video can be filmed in vivid color using a "camcorder". A semi-professional unit, including batteries, weighs less than 3 kg, and costs less than US$3 000. The size and price of video equipment drop further every year helping the use of video playback to expand rapidly everywhere, even to villages in remote rural areas.
Preparation of printed materials with type, graphics and photographs, has also been revolutionised. The use of computers for desktop publishing has sharply reduced costs and production time, providing much greater access and versatility.
Traditional and popular media such as folk theatre, dances, puppet shows and popular poetry, as well as rural press linked to literacy programmes, and audiovisual materials, can be highly effective channels for disseminating development information and for stimulating community action.
Much more is now known about the interpersonal communication skills development field workers need in order to function more effectively as agents of change with rural people. These skills include the use of techniques such as focus group discussions, illustrated discussion tools such as flipcharts that have been pretested to be effective for rural viewers, and other media such as video and audiovisuals that can be used to share ideas and cause reflection, or as part of a training methodology involving presentation, discussion and practice. Interpersonal communication skills can improve activities at all levels, enhancing management, teamwork and the morale of personnel.
A look into the future
With such rapid advances in communication technology and know-how, the age of telecommunication for rural development may already be upon us. Solar-powered microwave links for telephone communication, facsimile machines and even satellite links, are increasingly reaching into rural areas of the world, offering the possibility of breaking their traditional isolation for the first time in history.
In fact today the idea is being mooted that telecommunication learning centres could be established in villages of the developing world, with user-friendly computer terminals that would download interactive learning and management information programmes from a central supply, similar to a water or electricity service, with users paying modest charges for the time of actual use. The programmes could be video images, sound and computer-type data. This technology already exists, and the speed with which it is becoming cheaper and more accessible is so rapid that the use of computers in the villages of developing countries may someday be part of a pragmatic strategy to reduce the rural-urban population shift and promote rural development.
Time for communication for development
Whether we come to see village learning centres equipped with a centrally linked computer terminal, or, instead, a more systematic use of traditional media for human development, the use of communication no longer depends on the availability of technology: it depends on the will and decisions of policymakers to exploit its potential. Already communication has been highly exploited for political and commercial aims. Now is the time for communication to be applied to development.
COMMUNICATION IN PRACTICE
...for better planning and programme formulation
Any development programme that regards people as mere recipients, rather than as the actual creators of change and progress, usually fails. Consulting the people and actively involving them in making the decisions that will affect them virtually ensures the programme's success.
In practical terms, effective planning must make a deliberate effort to determine what people want to do, can do and can continue to do in a sustainable way. To find this out, communication techniques go far beyond the simple question-and-answer survey. Meaningful discussion, generated by people trained in interpersonal communication skills, and audiovisual tools, such as video or radio, can help the community to identify its true problems and priorities and where its capabilities and needs lie. This self-analysis can help a community to generate realistic proposals for new development initiatives and stimulates tremendous interest to have these initiatives succeed.
The views of rural people can also guide prospective work plans, preventing them from moving in the wrong direction. For example, agricultural research can be tied directly to what farmers really want and are capable of using. A systematic communication process brings researchers and practitioners together.
A policy of communicating with people intensively before a development programme is even drafted, and taking into account their views, capabilities and needs as they see them, is the best insurance a planner can have.
"Participatory planning" helps to answer US$149-million question
Planners in Mexico in 1975 contemplating a large-scale integrated rural development project wished to avoid the bitter experience of a prior agro-industrial project in the 1960s which drained 83 000 hectares, built roads, bridges, new villages, schools and medical centres, and yet met with serious resistance from local residents, causing the massive effort to fall far short of its objectives. How could a similar new project, budgeted at US$149 million, be ensured of success?
The new project, the planners determined, should be designed with the proposed beneficiaries themselves, the rural communities, in the hope of securing their active participation.
A communication process was initiated. Local people's attitudes and needs were elicited using video and audio recordings that were then played back to the communities themselves as a basis for discussion. People began to articulate more clearly the realities of their situation, their priorities and what they felt capable of achieving.
A true dialogue between the rural communities and planners resulted in the birth of the first phase of an extraordinary project in 1978-84: PRODERITH (Programme of Integrated Rural Development in the Tropical Wetlands).
This development programme went on to increase the income of 3 500 farming families in a 500 000-hectare zone by 50 percent. It also trained 500 development professionals. Most significantly, it developed a methodology for rural development which was applied in a successive phase to a 1.2 million-hectare area affecting 650 000 people.
Communication played a decisive role at every stage of the project - planning, increasing people's participation, training and evaluation. The World Bank, which helped to finance PRODERITH, considered it to be among the most successful programmes they supported, attributing much of its success to its rural communication system. This system had at absorbed only 1.2 percent of the total cost of the large infrastructure project by the end of its first phase in 1983. PRODERITH achieved an internal rate of return, which measures the economic success of the venture, 7.2 percent higher than originally foreseen.
COMMUNICATION IN PRACTICE
...for people's participation and community mobilisation
The dynamic strategy behind people's participation and community mobilisation is to ~ release the energy of rural people by building I their confidence to make decisions and carry them out ~ as a community in a self-reliant way. and to grove that A. they benefit from such efforts.
Communication activities can help people, even those from different social groups within a community, to share information and exchange ideas in a positive and productive fashion. This dialogue can be enriched by understanding how development issues affect them, discovering what others think in other communities, and seeing what other communities have achieved. These are effective methods to help people to reach a consensus and find common grounds for action, based on their own needs and capabilities.
Dialogue can be initiated and guided by field staff who have good interpersonal communication skills. Discussion tools such as flipcharts, audio-cassettes, slides and even video, can be used to help people visualize and reflect upon their own reality. Rural radio too can be a popular forum where local people do most of the talking about technical and cultural topics. These activities can lead to a serious diagnosis of problems and a search for solutions.
Gaining people's participation always requires much face-to-face work within the community in order to make a bridge of understanding. Communication skills and media help people to visualize and cross that bridge more swiftly.
In praise of sheep
In Benin in early 1992 a government veterinarian visited a village near the town of Parakou with a number of good ideas to help the community improve its livestock production. Sheep and goats, many sickly and thin, wandered everywhere, stripping the land bare. The veterinarian advised local residents to plant fast-growing fodder crops, build enclosures in which to keep the stock and have the animals vaccinated. The people, however, rejected his ideas immediately and absolutely. They had trust neither in the government official himself, nor in his untraditional ideas.
Not one to give up, the veterinarian managed to have the village - and himself - included in a new communication project. Before long, he had been trained to use better interpersonal communication skills and tools, and the village was soon erupting into lively discussions about his proposals almost every night.
Today in this village one sees large and healthy sheep and goats. Almost every home has an enclosure to keep the animals, and fodder gardens to feed them. Owners sell the sheep for triple the price they obtained before. Many use the profits to buy buffaloes to plough their fields for the first time.
However, the main talk is not about new buffaloes, or ploughs, or the labour saved or even whatever happened to the veterinarian (who moved on to another village); instead it is about marketing, genetic improvement, flock size and feed.
To an outsider, credit for all these improvements in living standards might seem due to the Veterinarian or perhaps to the "communication process" itself. Residents would probably disagree-they praise the sheep.
COMMUNICATION IN PRACTICE
... for changing life-styles
Rural populations, and women in particular, find it increasingly difficult to cope with rapidly changing social conditions, which often lead to the development of unsettling life-styles. For instance, in societies where marriage and childbearing no longer go together, the social and economic cost of teenage pregnancies weighs heavily on people's, and the nation's, resources. In others, rural youth, often from fatherless homes, increasingly rebels against parental poverty. Pressed by peers, teenagers often drop out of school, fall for drugs, or end up in the gangs of city slums.
Communication can focus on the long and sensitive process of changing behaviour and life-styles. Quite recent communication research methodologies make it possible to gain insight into the underlying reasons why people adopt a certain life-style.
Once this understanding is acquired, communication approaches can respond in a combination of ways. Mass media can raise awareness and public understanding of the social implications of problems such as adolescent fertility, AIDS or drug abuse. Other communication activities can bring about informed processes of change among the audiences they intend to reach. Interpersonal communication techniques such as peer counselling have the capacity to develop coping mechanisms, self-esteem and images of a better future among teenagers, especially if combined with group discussions and other tools which create a dialogue. Social communication activities based, for example, on street and village theatre, and using truly participatory methodologies, can pioneer attitudinal changes at the community level and stimulate nonthreatening environments in which teenagers wish to learn about life.
Artists for a better life: population communication in Malawi
Since 1986 population communication teams working in the Comoros, Burundi, Rwanda, Kenya, Uganda and the Philippines have tried to tap a variety of artistic skills: the beat of drums, the sound of three-string guitars, the rhythm of skiffle bands, the thrill of women's dance groups, the village clowns, the storytellers, the theatre groups, the puppets. So much tradition, so much inspiration, so many cultural resources close at hand, all firmly woven into the oral web of traditional tales, the home of ancestors, gods, mysteries and witch doctors.
Building on those experiences, a population communication project in Malawi decided to invite grassroots artists, most of them belonging to the very audiences the project was trying to reach, for a week-long workshop: drummers, dancers, musicians, actors, clowns and storytellers thought together, wrought together and laughed together. The result of this dynamic interaction between performers and communication facilitators was the production of a coherent package of songs and dances, stories and plays, village clowneries and drum shows, that use idiom, imagery, rhythm and humour to deal with a variety of population issues and lifestyles.
All productions were then pretested and integrated into a multimedia campaign which also used radio, audio cassettes, visuals, drama and print. But it was the talent, creativity, intuition and instinct of the artists which triggered a process of village participation in the rural areas of southern Malawi. The emotional excitement created by the launching of village campaigns gave way to the spontaneous development of traditional songs, dances and popular plays by other village artists.
The Malawi experience, which is still under way, proved the potential of using traditional resources. But this can only be done through a true participatory process, sharing information and knowledge. This process has timidly, but surely, started in Malawi.
contents next
<section>2</section>
back contents next
COMMUNICATION IN PRACTICE
...for improved training
Colourful, even dramatic, audiovisual tools bring alive new ideas and techniques; they energise programmes of training and human resource development whenever they are used.
Audiovisual materials can be produced locally at a reasonable cost. Then, duplicated in quantity, they can help to train large numbers of people.
Audiovisuals have many additional advantages for users. Trainees - even if they are illiterate - can see and discuss quite complex techniques and procedures before practising them. This audiovisual training method improves mental retention enormously: making it four or five times better than just hearing a lecture, and nine times better than merely reading the information.
In just one sitting a training group using audiovisuals can explore, for example, improved agricultural practices from sowing to reaping, the problem of deforestation and the solution of afforestation, or the symptoms of undernutrition and how people can obtain a better diet. Trainees can travel - through pictures - to places that are otherwise too distant and expensive to visit. Limits of time and space can be overcome, thanks to the skillful use of communication media.
The trainers and field staff themselves also benefit from using audiovisual training packages. The technical information presented is standardised and of high quality, coming directly from technical specialists without any intervening distortion; the presentations are attractive and interesting; and the training packages guide dialogue from beginning to end. Overall audiovisuals allow trainers to be more confident and professional.
The priority need for better training in agriculture and rural development can be illustrated by the tragic example of the use of agrochemicals. The World Health Organization, in its Global Health Situation and Projections (1992), reports: "Worldwide, agrochemicals alone lead to about 4 million poisonings each year, with at least 15 000 deaths. Millions of people are exposed to toxic chemicals via food, drinking-water or air." Improved training in this and other areas could save lives and improve the quality of life enormously.
"What I hear, I forget.
What I see, I remember.
What I do, I know."
Farmer's proverb from Peru
Based on the above proverb, a training methodology using video was created in Peru for farmers. It received such attention that the same method has been taken up by governments around the world - in Brazil, the Caribbean, China, Honduras, the Republic of Korea, Mali and Mexico.
In Peru, from 1975 to 1986, over 1 000 video programmes and training packages were produced and used with over 450 000 farmers. Subjects included agricultural and livestock production, natural resources, health, habitats, mechanisation, forestry and aquaculture. The courses utilized existing farmer knowledge merged with new technology.
The videos were made in a way that permitted maximum comprehension by farmers, many of whom were illiterate. Moreover, the video programmes were part of a package, with guidebook for the farmer and another for the trainer, as well as practice in using the techniques after viewing and discussion.
In an evaluation, 92 percent of the farmers applauded the video approach because it was like "actually being in the field". The video equipment was portable and battery-powered, allowing the training to take place where farmers live and work. Some of the farming communities contributed to the cost, which worked out at US$30 per farmer per course over the life of the project, but was down to US$13 by 1984, when the project was in full swing. The project received external support from UNDP, a bilateral donor and the FAO/TCP programme, but also generated its own income of US$1.5 million.
In Mali, the Peruvian experience was adapted to create the Centre for Audio-visual Production Services (CESPA), assisted by UNDP. The facility not only handles the needs for farmer training video materials in Mali, but is also planning to service clients across West Africa. It provides advice and training so that local development agencies can define their communication strategies. CESPA was granted parastatal status through national legislation, allowing it to generate and retain income. It already recovers some of its costs and aims eventually to be financially self-sustaining.
COMMUNICATION IN PRACTICE
...for rapid spread of information
Often the news, as well as information on new techniques and issues of development should be made known to people throughout a region or an entire country. Used with skill, the mass media can provide a powerful service to spread this information far and wide.
The use of radio, television, other electronic media and newspapers has grown considerably in many developing countries over the last four decades. The cost of using these media to spread information to large numbers of people can be low. For example, studies have shown that radio broadcasts are 2 000 to 3 500 times less expensive per contact hour than extension workers are. Of course, extension workers do much more than pass messages, but the cost-efficiency of the mass media can be indisputable for certain purposes. One example comes from Turkey where free-of-charge "public-service" television time was given ; to air spots and programmes on health and social ~ themes such as teenage pregnancy. This resulted in reaching every person in the entire country at | the extraordinarily low cost of just US$0.02 each.
Universally, whether media organisations are state-owned or in private hands, they and their audiences want interesting material. This is where good communication skills are essential to identify, I write and produce informational materials in a professional way. Building such skills among national staff for these purposes should be a priority.
"... INCALCULABLE DENSITY MILLIONS ADULT LOCUSTS STOP ... NO INSECTICIDE TREATMENT POSSIBLE STOP REASON CATEGORICAL REFUSAL OF HERDERS TO ALLOW SPRAYING STOP ..."
Excerpt from a telex from field staff in Kalait region, Republic of Chad, to the headquarters of the Sahelian Mission and Ministry of Agriculture, N'djamena, 1 August 1987.
When a scourge of locusts invaded the Sahel in 1987 to devour all vegetation in sight and threaten the very survival of humans and animals throughout the area, a refusal to stamp out the menace would have seemed inconceivable to an outsider.
However, such a refusal did occur in the important Kalait region which formed the frontline against desertification of the country and was the site of major agricultural projects. There, local livestock owners were deterrninined not to risk poisoning their herds with insecticide. Also, because of the ongoing conflict with a neighbouring country, they strongly disliked any low-flying aircraft, such as were needed to spray the insecticide, and so effectively blocked emergency action across 3 800 hectares, endangering the entire region.
Before it was too late, the Rural Radio Service of Chad was called upon to change the herders' minds - somehow. Instead of commanding them to cooperate by issuing increasingly dire threats over the radio - a tactic used by the government, which had already failed - the rural radio producers knew how to write a message which would appeal to the sense of dignity and responsibility of their loyal listeners. The broadcast made a simple proposition: to move the herds out of one zone for three days so that it too could be treated with insecticide. Then it would be safe to re-enter that zone: and vacate another so that it too could be treated.
Within 24 hours the herders across the large area had met and agreed. The plane was allowed to fly. The locusts were sprayed and destroyed. Good communication skills had helped to overcome this scourge.
COMMUNICATION IN PRACTICE
...for effective management and coordination
When a new development orientation is being introduced within a ministry, when strengthened teamwork is needed, or when planners and policymakers need to keep abreast of the field situation regarding the social effect of their development programmes, communication approaches are crucial.
Workshops that bring together different levels of officials can be the best way to create common understanding and to obtain acceptance for change and a commitment to work together.
Such workshops, if well run, can be a rewarding exercise in communication skills. Participants from various levels can explore problems and opportunities in their development work and look for solutions, in a brain-storming atmosphere. Informal discussions allow centrally based managers to hear about the field situation in ways that are perhaps more meaningful than official reporting often is. They can also enter into the spirit of teamwork by helping to suggest new approaches and learning to work in a participatory way among staff of all levels. This experience boosts morale and commitment and provides insights into how participatory planning can work in practice.
Media materials, such as rural radio and video programmes, which feature rural people themselves as a prime source of information, can have an additional purpose beyond their use in rural areas. They can provide management with direct raw information and a barometer of people's concerns, which otherwise might not pass so quickly through an administrative reporting process.
Field staff, too, greatly appreciate the higher quality of information which communication techniques can provide as a supplement to the existing system of reports, memoranda and directives. Regular, accessible and credible communications can narrow the gap between headquarters and the field. Used for reporting purposes, video, photographs, sound recordings and printed materials can bring the field situation alive to managers who may not have the means or the time to visit project sites.
Top management sees video and finds a better way
Even successful projects like the Shivapuri Watershed Management and Fuelwood Plantation Project in Nepal can benefit from communication as a management tool. Since 1985 this project has restored parts of a severely degraded watershed - by reafforestation, erosion control, new fuelwood plantations, providing alternative sources of income to local people and helping them to live in better harmony with the environment.
Policy-makers, however, seriously reconsidered how best to carry out the second phase of the project after viewing a video programme made in 1991, and aired on national television. Interviews with local people in and around the project site revealed that they were experiencing a number of unanticipated difficulties. Most striking was the bitter complaint of one woman who, like a number of people originally living in the watershed, had been requested to move her residence outside the newly protected area:
"We were asked to leave our house in order that the project could restore the forest, but so far as we can see the forest is still not made, and neither are we well settled. Some of us who used to be farmers are now forced to work as porters. Neither the forest nor the people seem to have benefited from the project," she said in the video programme.
The UNDP Resident Representative in Nepal responded: "As I looked at the video it really struck me that [planning the project] wasn't done with the people early enough... The people had been involved in the decisions about the 'how-to'. But they weren't involved in decision-making about 'whether-to'. I think we could have done it better and in planning the second phase... I think we have to think a little about how to involve the people more."
As a result of the video programmes, consultations with the people were, for the first time, integrated into the work plan and situations similar to that reported above were not repeated. The project investment of US$2 279 000 was better safeguarded for sustainable results.
COMMUNICATION IN PRACTICE
...for generating the support of decision-makers
Decision-makers in government, technical agencies and donor countries should be well informed about the progress and achievements of new programmes in order to sustain, and even expand them when justified.
Communication tools can be a dynamic means to gain the attention and support of decisionmakers.
For presentations in meetings and displays at conferences, the use of video programmes, photographs, audiovisual programmes and overhead projections helps participants to visualize the otherwise dry statistics and data typed in reports. Video programmes are especially useful because they can be given to decision-makers to view individually at a convenient time, away from the pressures and distractions of office hours.
Interesting programmes aired on national television and radio, and informative articles newspapers are often noticed by decisionmakers. Newsletters too, while primarily intended for people within development programmes, also keep decision-makers informed about achievements and needs.
A video for the Prime Minster
Deforestation is often a complex problem requiring complex solutions. If governments are to make informed decisions in-depth explanations from technical specialists and the serious attention of national policy-makers are needed. Unfortunately many policy-makers simply do not have the time.
In 1991, FAO a two-year study at the request of the Government of Dominica which wanted to know why several commercial logging ventures had failed, and to find out what the true economic potential of the island's tropical rain forest was.
The FAO study found that the amount of forest on the island and its commercial potential had both been overestimated. The study recommended strict limitations on any further use of forest land for agriculture, and measures to preserve the delicate balance required between logging, watershed protection and the preservation of a wildlife habitat.
Would the law-makers have time to appreciate the forest management plan described in a 90-page document, with additional background papers? Gaining their interest was certainly the first priority.
The Prime Minister, seven ministers and other members of the Cabinet were treated to a 14-minute video, "Our vanishing forests" produced by the local Rural Communications Centre under the guidance of the forestry specialists.
The visual impact of how Dominica's forests had been exploited in recent years was shocking to some viewers. After the programme, the Cabinet entered into extensive discussion about the findings and recommendations of the study, a document that many had not yet had the opportunity to read.
Four months later, the national Forestry Sector Plan was put to the vote of the Cabinet. It reflected many of the major FAO recommendations. There was no opposition.
The grassroots - on fire
Communication activities often reaffirm people's traditions, but not always. In 1991-92, in two areas of Chad, communication intentionally sought to stamp out an age-old tradition completely: that of bushfires lit by farmers.
Farmers around the world cite the advantages of setting ablaze agricultural land before planting crops: weeds are cleared, potent nutrients of ash are deposited on to the soil, and rodents, insects and other pests are destroyed. In Chad, from November to June, farmers have fired their land by tradition, confident in the ancient ways.
Tradition is not always best, however. The soil, in many places, is overworked and degraded - literally blowing away. Fires, occasionally out of control, devastate forest reserves and the desert advances.
Determined to halt the desert, the Ministry of Tourism and the Environment decided to campaign against bushfires. A participatory approach was chosen through the advice of the Technical Cooperation Programme of FAO.
Forestry agents and NGO field workers trained in communication skills, were posted to the villages in selected regions in order to conduct discussions. Two key zones consisting of 54 villages in total were covered. Using slides and audio-cassettes supported by radio broadcasts, villagers were encouraged to voice their opinions and propose solutions to the problem. The communities then made decisions based on the outcome of these meetings.
What were the results after one year? Forest fires reduced by 90 percent; 22 villages with active bushfire control committees, and a further nine planning the same; 10 000 hectares of forest protected by firebreaks created by 17 villages; 25 000 trees planted by 44 villages; and new tree nurseries established or planned in 29 villages. Using data collected from the village discussions, the campaign will be extended to other regions.
The morale of forestry officers is greatly improved. Said one officer who received the communication training: "Before, people saw us as the agents of repression. This training taught us that from now on we shall be the agents of development in villages, alongside the population!"
Communication has replaced one kind of fire with another.
Rural radio-letting the listeners speak
A villager's story, recorded in a radio programme about bushfires:
My uncle once told me how a bushfire burnt his field:
"That bushfire was angry-it charged like a herd of elephants, destroying everything! Even came near to our home!"
I said, "Don't be scared. With the right words, a good hunter can stop a herd of charging elephants. We too can stop bushfires with the right words. "
"What words?"
"Let's unite. "
"Let's unite?"
"If the entire village gets organised to fight bushfires, you'll never be afraid of bushfires again!"
Whether produced at the local, regional or national level, such radio programmes are most effective when made with audience participation, in local languages and taking into account cultural traditions. To achieve this, radio production teams should be multidisciplinary and mobile so that they can dialogue with many people and record a wide variety of important subjects for transmission.
In this way, rural radio programming, besides spreading information, can fulfil other important functions: it can stimulate a regular discussion and debate among the people involved in development; provide a forum where rural communities can express their views and their cultural heritage; and it can even be a powerful means of investigation for decision-makers, helping them to appreciate better rural people and their world, in order to approach them in appropriate ways.
back contents next
<section>3</section>
back contents
A NEW AGENDA FOR COMMUNICATION IN DEVELOPMENT
Lessons from past experience
Communication has shown its usefulness in many individual programmes and projects. Experience has made clear, however, that there are certain prerequisites for success.
A systematic approach brings the best results. Communication succeeds when it is part of the core strategy to set development priorities and carry out planning, implementation and evaluation of programmes, and also when it is used to improve training at all levels.
Above all, communication succeeds when it is planned with a comprehensive strategy. There must be research, clear objectives, identification of different audience groups, careful message design and choice of channels, and monitoring and feedback. Multimedia approaches that use different communication channels in a coordinated and mutually reinforcing way give the best results. The last-minute addition of a "communication component" too often consists only of a budget to make project publicity materials or to produce some audiovisual aids, and is not cost-effective.
A critical mass of staff, equipment and activities is needed to make an impact. Since the activities involve what is sometimes termed "social engineering", they must be persistent over time.
Media hardware
may need to be purchased after determining clear objectives, needs and local infrastructure. An adequate maintenance facility is needed locally, and equipment operators must be trained in its use.
The overall budget
for communication, experience shows, is typically about 10 percent of the total development programme budget. For large-scale programmes, however, it may be as low as 1 percent, and for small programmes somewhat higher than 10 percent.
Communication for development is a specialized field, and if local expertise is not available, technical assistance will need to be sought from neighbouring countries, from international agencies and aid programmes.
Multimedia in the "mountain kingdom"
Using a multimedia approach - several media channels and tools together- multiplies the impact of communication campaigns. This was clearly proven in the mountainous Kingdom of Lesotho in southern Africa, in 1988.
An assessment of needs was carried out among the people of the Mohale Hoek district by government extension officers who had been trained in communication techniques. One priority which emerged was to increase farmers' knowledge of recommended seed varieties and methods of sorghum production, and to reduce postharvest losses.
It was decided to launch a communication campaign in a way that would make it possible to evaluate its impact accurately. Surveys about knowledge, radio audiences and attitudes were taken before and after the campaign in three areas: the "full campaign" communities (to receive personal visits, radio programmes and other materials), the "radio only" community (to hear radio programmes only, without personal visits and other materials) and a nearby "control" district where the campaign was not held.
The "full campaign" strategy consisted of several steps. On the first week a nutritionist gave cooking demonstrations using sorghum and explained its nutritional value. Leaflets were distributed and radio programmes were aired once a week on the same theme. Communication teams visited and used audiocassettes and slidetape audiovisual programmes as a basis for discussion with small groups of farmers. Posters and handouts were given during these sessions and when possible, practical demonstrations were held.
The multimedia approach produced nearly double the impact that the radio medium could by itself.
How may communication be part of a national development policy?
A political and executive decision that development must reflect the true needs of people, and involve them every step of the way - this is the starting-point.
Once this decision has been made at the highest level, and once it has been recognised that communication must be used to invigorate and sustain the development process, several policy issues of a more practical nature must be addressed in order to mandate a sphere of action for communication, to locate an institutional framework and ensure its operational requirements are met.
The following ideas are based on FAO's experience over the last two decades in assisting member countries to use communication for development.
A national communication policy
should he drawn up to articulate the role of communication in development. This policy might require, for example, that communication and a participatory planning process should help to establish needs and guidelines prior to formulating any new development proposals, especially those involving rural communities. Alternatively, a somewhat less ambitious policy might simply ensure that communication activities and the media are used systematically to guide and promote the objectives of development programmes which are already established.
Whatever the emphasis, communication for development should be conceived as a cross-cutting sector, similar to the already existing sectors of information, education and planning. It should cover subject matter where people's participation is needed, such as agriculture, livestock, forestry, environment, fisheries, population, women, health arid nutrition. The existing situation in most countries where sectoral ministries conduct their communication and extension work independently is proving wasteful, and the lack of coordination causes confusion.
New legislation
may be needed. For example, establishing a rural radio service that includes community radio stations where local people create and broadcast their own programmes could require new regulations or laws.
Likewise, the responsibilities and relationships of various ministries, institutions and NGOs with regard to communication may need legislation. For example, the ministry of information may need to devote more mass media time to social and educational programmes or to the needs of the rural population. Similarly, licences for privately owned TV and radio channels may need to be conditional on their giving a proportion of their air time for development programmes. In some countries the broadcasting channels, although belonging to the state, now expect ministries to pay for any services they require, and thus new financial relationships may need to be established within the government. To generate new sources of funding for communication and training activities, paid corporate sponsorship might be considered.
An institutional framework
should provide the logistical and organisational structure for communication work. In the past, large development programmes have sometimes had their own communication units consisting of planners, researchers, trainers and media producers, and a multimedia production capacity. In other cases, a central unit belonging to the technical ministry concerned has been used, as has the media infrastructure of the ministry of information.
A development communication policy and programming unit might be located in the decision-making centre of government. Here, it could keep abreast of the most recent national policies and objectives, advise decision-makers about communication issues and set the overall priorities for communication work. Within those overall priorities, the unit's main role could be to guide and support ministries, other development institutions, people's organisations, and other participants in the development process, in the planning, implementation and evaluation of their communication work.
The unit could ensure a coordinated approach among all the partners in the development effort, and avoid having contradictory messages sent to the public. It could continuously analyse results, feedback, problems and opportunities revealed by the communication process, and inform the nation's policy-makers. Staffing of the unit would need to be small in number but high in professional quality, and a policy framework to give the unit the prestige necessary for it to carry out its planning and coordinating functions would be required.
The services for research, planning and media production and use
could be arranged in a number of
Africa's first national policy of development communication: Mali
After a change in Mali's government in 1991, the new authorities were determined to make not only their national institutions but the entire development process more democratic and responsive to the needs of the people.
The days of the "top-down" approach were over, they decided. However, in practical terms, how could they install a functional system that encouraged people's participation, an exchange knowledge and ideas across all levels, and coordination of efforts?
The heart of the manor, they realised, was the need for a national communication policy. This could pave the way to a better understanding between leaders and people, and to ensuring that different ministries and sectors of the public were aware of each other's activities and concerns. Of particular importance to Mali, a country dependent on its agriculture and livestock, such a policy of communication would be vital to ensure the involvement of rural populations in identifying and successfully implementing priority development programmes.
Accordingly, the President of Mali asked FAO and UNDP to assist in the preparation and implementation of a national workshop to define a national communication policy for development.
The workshop took place in Bamako in October 1993. The result was Africa's first national
communication policy for development, charting key guidelines on the role of communication, an appropriate institutional framework, the role of different media and specific training requirements.
The workshop recommended: to set up communication units in sectorial ministries to define the strategies and implement communication programmes; to establish an intersectorial coordinating committee to deal with development communication activities under the "Conseil superieur de la communication", the highest policy body dealing with communication in the country; to introduce a curriculum for development communication at the University of Mali; to establish a research programme; and to upgrade the communication skills of intermediate-level professionals working in development programmes. The workshop emphasized the need to involve all partners in the development process, including government institutions, NGOs, farmers' associations and rural communities. With regard to the media, emphasis was placed on the use of rural radio, video for farmer training, traditional media and the rural press. Finally, the workshop recommended that all development programmes and projects
include a communication component.
The President commented that the people of Mali must assume responsibility for their own development and that a democratic process cannot be achieved without the participation of the rural people, thus underlining the importance- of communication
ways, depending on the circumstances. In many countries, individual ministries already have units for producing programmes for mass media and audiovisual training materials. In some cases, these may wish to continue independently, but with support, advice, training and coordination arranged by the central communication unit. In other cases, existing units may wish to amalgamate and perhaps form a parastatal service; and in others, ministries may decide to contract out their media research and production requirements to NGOs or the private sector, as is already happening in the field of health. Small countries may decide to establish a single communication service to handle all development needs. In some cases, NGOs might be entrusted with the whole task.
There are a number of options, but whichever one is chosen, an important principle is that the communication services should aim to become financially autonomous, at least in part, within a given time-frame. This could be a precondition for their establishment. However, profit considerations should not be allowed to detract from the essentially public and social nature of the services provided.
To generate income, the service or services would need a marketing plan to sell skills and capacities in areas such as field research, situation analysis, formulating communication strategies, producing media materials and training personnel in communication skills. Clients would be government ministries, institutions, aid agencies, NGOs and even commercial firms.
The goal of financial autonomy should directly guide the design of the services and their institutional framework. In many countries, parastatal structure might be the solution. This can allow income to be generated, retained and used directly by the communication service for its operational needs, rather than having income revert to the central treasury, as is usually the case when government departments earn revenue. The parastatal structure would also allow the service to pay higher salaries to trained communication personnel to avoid the risk of losing them to the private sector and to encourage greater creativity and problem-solving capability by the management. The establishment of such a parastatal institution usually needs legislative action.
Development loans and investment
to capitalise communication services, whether at the outset or after their initial establishment, might be a viable proposition to aid agencies and even to commercial lenders. After all, a parastatal entity which generates its own income within a national policy and mandate gives communication the profile of a "bankable" sector.
Training national personnel
in communication for development would be vital in most cases. Good communication staff possess a unique mix of knowledge and skills in social sciences as well as in the production and use of media. This particular educational curriculum still needs to be established in most countries.
Common practice is to take social scientists or people with field experience in rural communities and train them in the use of communication media and the concept of rural development. Less frequently, media specialists are trained to use their skills to meet the needs of rural people. Managers may also need training in how to select outside contractors, such as advertising agencies with a social focus, and how to supervise them properly.
Training of national staff in development communication is often best done in-country, based on the specific needs and with the media facilities and equipment available. However, the need to introduce very specialized media production techniques or provide higher level academic training may sometimes warrant external study.
A mandate within the national communication policy and legislation may be needed for those who carry out
Thirty-four countries and nowhere to go
The strategy of the Pan-African Rinderpest Campaign (PARC) regarding the rinderpest virus, deadly to cattle and other animals is: squeeze it out of existence through vaccination of cattle and other control measures.
However, national livestock services, no matter how enthusiastic, cannot do the job by themselves, faced with 180 million animals, a vast continent, many difficult areas and a hot climate which destroys vaccine, if unprotected, within hours.
They need the active support of the cattle owners to report the disease, to bring all their animals for vaccination and other measures, and eventually to help pay for the campaign, costing US$64 million in the first five years and initially financed by the European Community. PARC plans this cost-recovery exercise as one of several steps to make the livestock services financially self-sustaining - another key objective of the campaign.
When they began in 1986 PARC's planners originally overlooked the need for communication activities. Then in 1988, recognising the enormous need for people's participation, the coordinator of PARC, the Organization of African Unity's Inter-African Bureau for Animal Resources (OAU/IBAR), began to introduce a new subject to the PARC countries: "development communication". Initially viewed with suspicion by many senior veterinarians, todaylnearly every national PARC project has budgeted 5-7 percent for communication, often using contingency or even government funds.
PARC provides national campaigns with a model communication strategy consisting of increased dialogue with cattle-owning communities, a kit of media materials and guidelines for local adaptation, and training of personnel in communication skills. Publicizing PARC to decision-makers also enhances support for the programme.
Community visits are now being made, the bright PARC logo, stickers, postage stamps, posters, leaflets, flipcharts, booklets, banners, radio programmes and television spots are being noticed and understood more and more across the continent and beyond, and national planners are increasingly consulting rural communities on how to undertake common work against rinderpest and other problems.
With PARC's communication effort growing in so many places, it may be word-of-mouth, multiplied by millions, that in the end chases rinderpest out of Africa.
"Projects are more successful if they are participatory in design and implementation. A review of 30 completed World Bank projects from the 1970s found an average rate of return of 18 percent for projects that were judged culturally appropriate but only 9 percent for projects that did not include mechanisms for social and cultural adaptation. A more detailed study of 52 USAID projects similarly found a strong correlation between participation and project success, especially when participation took place through organisations created and managed by the beneficiaries themselves. "
World Development Report 1992, The World Bank
communication activities so that they are recognised by others, and their scope of activities is well defined and directed. A clear mandate to use communication techniques, skills and media specifically to involve people in planning, participation and training for sustainable development, for example, would be useful. This would help to clear up any possible confusion between "communication for development" and public information, journalism or even some sort of political exercise.
Training the network of field staff,
including extension staff, in the ministries might be another requirement, since the use of communication media with rural communities should be complemented by good interpersonal communication. Field staff should also learn how to gather feedback from rural communities in order to inform the managers of development programmes. Such liaison work gives field staff a new role and responsibility, and can deepen their commitment to achieving sustainable results.
Communication-for better agricultural knowledge and information systems
The strong link needed between research, extension and farmers has been notoriously difficult to achieve. In the past, the agricultural technology developed by researchers and disseminated by extension staff has not always been relevant to the farmers' situation. In other cases farmers have considered the technology to be inappropriate to their needs and capacities. The so-called strategy of "transfer of technology" has, therefore, produced meagre results.
Today, developing countries are experiencing various economic pressures and shortfalls, and find the costs of large research and extension services difficult to bear. Better agricultural knowledge and information systems are being sought, systems that will be technically effective, cost-effective and people-effective. For these, too, communication would be an integral component.
A better agricultural knowledge and information system would correctly identify, sort and match the needs and existing technical know-how of all three groups involved: farmers, extensionists and agricultural researchers. As a result, appropriate technology packages could be developed and disseminated, and would probably be rapidly adopted because of the farmers' contribution in developing them. An additional result of such a consultation process would be that researchers could focus their work primarily on those technical problems confronting farmers for which there is no ready solution available.
A "farmer-first" approach
In Thailand, a "participatory extension" pilot project encouraged farmers to help decide what technology should be used to carry out the national wheat programme. Despite the fact that this was a relatively new and unfamiliar crop, it was recognised that farmers had important contributions to make in deciding how it should be adapted to local conditions.
Extension agents introduced farmers to the recommended new practices through slide sets, study tours and on-farm trials, encouraging them to make any changes they felt necessary to suit their conditions. One of the major changes they made was from row seeding to broadcast seeding, primarily because of labour and time constraints. However, the physical environment could also influence their choice: row seeding was preferred where there was sandy soil and a hand plough could be used to open up one furrow and simultaneously cover seed in the adjacent one.
In many villages extension meetings were used to present innovations being made by farmers, thus encouraging others to adopt them more rapidly.
Of course, not all the farmers' adaptations led to improved production, but trial and error are a normal part of the adaptation process. With opportunities for information exchange, the experiences of farmers, both good and bad, could be compared, and the exposure to alternative technologies stimulated farmers to experiment. The lesson for extension is that farmers should actively participate in the selection and evaluation of technologies and be encouraged to communicate the results of their efforts to other farmers.
The basic aim of the system would be to bring the three groups - farmers, extensionists and researchers - into an equal partnership to communicate and to share knowledge. Whatever the configuration of such a new system, both its energy and its linkage would rely greatly on the use of communication skills, materials and methodology.
In order to exchange information effectively among researchers, extension workers and farmers, there must be a dialogue among equals. Farmers' opinions need to carry the same weight as those of the formally educated experts. A "demand-driven" mechanism would be the aim, where farmers have enough status to demand and receive the best quality of agricultural research and extension services they require.
However, farmers often need help to define their own problems, reach consensus among themselves and build up their self-confidence before they can express their ideas to the urbanised specialists. Communication activities should be used to empower farmers in this way.
Such an intervention requires interpersonal communication, and the extension agents are the obvious personnel already in place for this. In most cases, however, extension staff would need to be transformed into
Farmers' networks on display
After 4 hours of drawing and discussion, a group of Filipino farmers map out their agricultural communication linkages, indicating the people that have best linked them with information: the farmer from the neighbouring village who shared improved rice seed in 1989; the extension worker who helped organise their cooperative; the pesticide salesman who pushes chemicals; the merchant in town who supplies urea; the vegetable middleman who brings new cabbage seed; the farmer who visited the University three years ago to seek advice about a new disease... All these people, the "actors", and the linkages are mapped. The diagram on display shows where the actors work (village, municipality, region), what information they bring and to whom.
A farmers' agricultural knowledge and communication system materialises and serves as a discussion tool with others: the youth group and the women's club. The drawing is the result of a participatory rapid appraisal with a handful of farmers. Such diagrams indicate who is feeding information into a village; what kind of knowledge is in demand; who are the experts to whom theses demands may be addressed; how can farmers reach those sources of information.
This process has a future as a local planning tool, providing a bottom-up approach to identifying agricultural communication needs, the possible actors and channels through which information can be shared, and the information demands to which researchers need to pay attention.
development agents who can use communication skills and materials more effectively with farmers. Instead of concentrating mainly on teaching agricultural techniques, these development agents would have to learn how to promote dialogue among farmers, to help them identify their needs and build their sense of being a group taking action.
The same development agents would also have prime responsibility for selecting and interpreting the farmers' information to pass on to agricultural researchers and, vice versa, for disseminating the results of research to the farmers. The reorientation and training of extension staff to provide them with adequate communication skills and materials are, therefore, fundamental tasks.
Finally, a policy decision to create such a "farmer-first" approach must address the most important issue of all. Agricultural researchers may need to be more fully aware of the field situation, the value of indigenous farming knowledge and the reasons underlying requests from the farmers, in order to create appropriate technology. Communication techniques can provide researchers with information direct from the field on human factors, such as farmers' attitudes and working conditions, and, to some degree, on the physical factors too.
The challenge for planners
To take advantage of communication for sustainable development a progressive series of steps needs to be taken. As these steps are taken, a fundamental caution must be kept in mind. Are governments, or local authorities, entering into communication processes with rural people as a genuine expression of a common cause?
Likewise there are implications for international development agencies. Can they seriously go beyond the established mindset of planning a development initiative on the basis of contacts that are mainly limited to government staff and, at best, a fleeting visit to interview a few rural people in the field? Can development agencies be more flexible and accommodate grassroots level action that may not follow predictable paths, pre-set objectives or precise deadlines?
And since meaningful social change takes time, can development programmes be planned accordingly, in terms of duration, budgets and criteria for evaluation?
Applying communication to development emphasises the human element and, especially in a climate of social change, communication can support development in ways that are both known and new. To exploit its full potential is an enormous challenge. "Our common future" depends on meeting that challenge successfully.
FAO SERVICES
Technical assistance for communication
To take advantage of communication for rural development, at the request of member governments, FAO can assist in several ways:
Advice
on policies for communication and its role in assisting development programmes may be useful when considering how to increase people's participation and improve training. "Communication" is still confused with advertising or even propaganda efforts. Policy-makers and planners may wish to know specific functions which communication could perform to help meet stated development goals.
Assessment
of communication needs and priorities at the national level can be made, as a guide for policy, planning and project formulation.
Formulation
of communication, projects or components of projects, to assist the planning and implementation of development programmes, can be carried out. These projects can vary widely in scope. A project may seek to integrate communication into development planning at the higher levels; it may aim to establish or reinforce a communication approach which employs particular communication media and skills such as radio, video, interpersonal communication or traditional media; or it may assist in planning and implementing a programme with specific goals of agricultural production, animal production, afforestation, human health, population and so forth.
Implementation of communication projects, covering both technical and operational backstopping, including recruitment of personnel, control over purchasing and subcontracts, arrangement of fellowships, study-tours and in-project training, project monitoring and evaluation are typical areas of involvement, according to the needs of the project itself.
For further information contact the FAO Country Representative or:
Chief
Development Support Communication Branch
Information Division
FAO
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome
Italy
Facsimile:
Telex: 625852 FAO I
625853 FAO I
610181 FAO I
Lom IV Convention between African-Caribbean-
Pacific States and the European Communities (EEC),
Article 149
United Nations Conference on Environment and
Development, Adoption of Agreements on Environment and
Development (UNCED), Agenda 21,
Rio de Janiero
World Bank Policy Research Bulletin, April/May 1992
About this booklet
This booklet was written by Colin Fraser and Jonathan Villet. It reflects not only the experience and research of the authors, but to a large degree that of the Development Support Communications (DSC) Branch of the Information Division of FAO. In this capacity, Ms Silvia Balit, Chief of the DSC Branch, its staff in Rome and technical experts in the field have been greatly responsible for guiding the final content of this publication. The photos were taken by G.Bizzarri, F. Botts, G. Coldevin, C. Errath, R. Faidutti, F. Mcdougall, P. Nivan, R. Ramirez, M. I. Roque, the Rural Communication Center, Dominica, J. Sultan, I. Velez, J. Villet and, A. Wolstad.
back contents
