<title>Body mass index - A measure of chronic energy deficiency in adults</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
Preface
Whereas body weight and height have long been used to define the nutritional status of children, anthropometric studies of the nutritional status of adults have been accorded low priority. Serious attempts to distinguish between normal and undernourished or energy deficient adults have not been made largely because of the difficulties in establishing satisfactory reference standards which are applicable worldwide. This book calls attention to the need for more objective measures for the assessment of chronically undernourished adults since the prevalence of adult undernutrition is likely to be a better indicator of and reflect more truly the nutritional status of the community than estimates of childhood undernutrition alone.
The need for a method of diagnosing chronic energy deficiency in adults was a major issue which emerged at the first meeting of the International Dietary Energy Consultancy Group (IDECG), held in Guatemala in 1987. Further efforts to examine this problem were recommended and a report representing the first attempt at the international level to devise an operational definition of chronic energy deficiency (CED) in adults was made (James et al., 1988). Soon after the IDECG's Working Party completed its work, FAO began to explore the possibility of using the Body Mass Index (BMI) of adults as an indicator of the food situation and nutritional well-being of a community. Initially, the functional significance and behaviour of various weight/height indices were explored in depth; later, the BMI became the focus of attention. In this text, evidence provided by FAO and others is assessed and the case for using the BMI as an indicator for chronic energy deficiency is presented.
Throughout this publication, BMI data from various countries is presented and summarized. However, the detailed examples were provided from seven basic data sets. The reasons for the selection of these data sets are straightforward: they were complete and robust, they were accessible, and each had a large number of variables from which analyses could be drawn. It should be noted that all were collected for broader purposes than the examination of the BMI.
In Chapter 1, "Defining chronic energy deficiency", the distinction between acute energy deficiency and chronic energy deficiency is made. Particular attention is given to the level of normal fluctuations in body weight and energy expenditure. The advantages of adopting nutritional anthropometric indices such as height and weight as measures in adults are reviewed, followed by a review of the characteristics which constitute a good index. After a careful review of the weight/height ratio taken to various powers, the BMI (weight/height^2) is proposed as the preferable index. The rationale for the use of the BMI as an objective measure of chronic energy deficiency in adults in a community is provided and the suitability of cut-off points related to CED is discussed.
In Chapter 2, "BMI as a reflection of body energy stores", the BMI as an index of both energy supply to the body and the variations in body composition, i.e., body fat and muscle mass that can occur at similar BMI values, are examined. In addition to describing these phenomena, the possible reasons for these variations are discussed.
In Chapter 3, "BMI as an indicator of CED", a background for the use of the BMI as an indicator of CED is given. Starting with the traditional classification of obesity according to the BMI, reasons are presented for adopting the BMI to define CED. The issues surrounding the choice of one cutoff point or several as well as the problem of causality are discussed.
In Chapter 4, "BMI and factors affecting access to food", an examination of the changes in BMI with variations in socio-economic status and seasonal patterns of household food availability is made. The conclusion is that the BMI is a responsive index, sensitive to changes in nutritional status which are influenced by socio-economic status, seasonal changes in food availability and demands on activity.
In Chapter 5, "Functional consequences of low BMI in adults", the implications of CED for physiological work performance are discussed and where data allow, the influence of low BMI on work performance and productivity is explored. In addition to work performance, behavioural changes as a consequence of low BMI are examined.
In Chapter 6, "Health and BMI", consideration is given to low BMI and pregnancy and lactation, women's nutritional vulnerability, and the potentially detrimental effects of low maternal BMI for the newborn child. Data from several studies are presented which demonstrate the association between low maternal BMI and low birth weight. Although limited data are available for studying the health consequences of low BMI, possible implications are drawn from morbidity and mortality data.
In Chapter 7, "BMI distribution in developed and developing countries", an extensive array of data sets are drawn upon to display and compare the distribution of the BMI from various regions. Differences are highlighted and possible reasons for the differences observed are presented.
The BMI is a simple but objective anthropometric indicator of the nutritional status of the adult population and seems to be closely related to their food consumption levels. It is relatively inexpensive, easy to collect and to analyse. Collection of data on weight and height from which BMI is easily derived can readily be incorporated into regional and national surveys that are presently being conducted. It could be used for the purpose of nutritional surveillance or for the purposes of monitoring since this allows for interregional or inter-country comparisons as well as longitudinal comparisons within the same region or country. The BMI is sensitive to socio-economic status and to seasonal fluctuations in food consumption relative to the level of physical activity. The BMI is a reasonably sensitive index of function and physical performance and may be useful if development projects depend on the physical activity of the community. The deleterious consequences of a low BMI
status in an adult are only now being recognised; there is considerable need to evaluate immune function, proneness to illness, morbidity and mortality in low BMI adults. There is also scope for evaluation of intervention strategies in a community using the BMI as the parameter of choice to identify individuals at risk. Further epidemiological research on anthropometric data and individual food consumption measurements are still necessary, especially in different socioeconomic contexts. The percentage of false positives and false negatives needs to be assessed. However, there is reason to believe the BMI is a simple, responsive and useful index of nutritional status of the adult in a community and may indeed be the method of choice to assess the numbers of people who are undernourished world-wide.
<section>2</section>
Chapter 1 Defining chronic energy deficiency
Energy intake and CED
Energy expenditure and CED
CED as diagnosed by anthropometry
Requirements of an ideal nutritional anthropometric index
Types of weight-for-height indices
Chapter 1 Defining chronic energy deficiency
At the time of its convening, an initial task of the IDECG Working Party was to distinguish between acute energy deficiency (AED) and chronic energy deficiency (CED) in adults.
AED was regarded a priori as a state of negative energy balance, i.e. energy intake is less than the energy expenditure so that, despite changes in metabolic efficiency or physical activity patterns, there is a progressive loss of body weight and body energy stores. As this energy imbalance and weight loss continue, health and body function will be impaired over a period of time eventually leading to death. CED in the adult, on the other hand, is not a state of prolonged continuous loss of body weight and energy.
CED is defined as a "steady state" where an individual is in energy balance, i.e. the energy intake equals the energy expenditure, despite the low body weight and low body energy stores. Thus, by never growing to a normal size or having experienced one or more stages of energy deficiency, the individual has arrived at a reduced body weight with possibly limited physical activity, which have allowed the energy demands of a lower basal metabolic rate (BMR) and reduced amounts of activity to balance the lower intake.
AED may occur episodically among people who have a pre-existing condition of CED, for example, during a seasonal shortage of food in a community which is already deprived. The concept of a "steady state" is a theoretical one and the degree to which it is experienced by an individual depends on the time-scale considered. Normal fluctuations in energy balance occur over a 24-hour period, with eating by day and fasting by night.
Unsteady states also occur over a week with marked changes over the weekend in individuals in industrialized societies.
Festivals and religious occasions also involve phases of energy imbalance. Women in a community also show fluctuations in energy balance according to the phase of the menstrual cycle. In some developing countries, there are long term seasonal cycles, with weight being lost during the hungry season before the harvest and regained when the harvest has been completed. Since seasonal changes in energy balance could be functionally important, perhaps a steady state should be considered as involving a body weight and energy store which is maintained over a 2-3 month period.
There are various levels of severity for CED, but in all cases energy input equals energy output. For a person with an adequate amount of food, body weight and body energy stores are within the acceptable range of normality, health is not impaired and physiological function is not compromised. Energy is expended on bodily functions which include the maintenance of an optimum body temperature as well as the cost of storing the different forms of energy such as carbohydrate, fat, and protein after a meal. The energy used is sufficient for economically necessary and productive work and domestic chores as well as social and leisure activities. In such a situation, measuring either the average energy intake or expenditure over a suitable period of time should provide an estimate of the amount of energy required to maintain the stable body weight, level of physical activity and appropriate life-style.
The steady state will change when either energy supply is reduced or demands for energy output increase and this change is not counterbalanced on the other side of the equation. In response to this change, there is a fall in body weight but not essential energy output. Monitoring of individuals has shown that body weight does change as soon as energy imbalance occurs (Ferro-Luzzi, 1990). This means that during the acute energy deficiency phase body weight falls. When the adults do stabilize by matching their output to their energy intake, they will have a lower weight. In order to sustain productive and economically vital activities which may occur at the peak energy output periods such as planting or harvesting, body weight is sacrificed. During the initial period of body weight reduction much of the socially desirable and leisure activities may not be reduced or compromised and if so, only slightly.
Eventually, increased energy imbalance leads to marked changes in body weight as well as the quantity and quality of energy output. Therefore, long-standing energy deficiency is reflected by both changes in body weight and activity patterns. In normal circumstances, these sequences of events are most likely to occur over phases of a seasonal agricultural cycle. If the individual needs to continue working during a phase of seasonal food shortage, their weight will have dropped with little or no evidence of a decrease in physical activity. They may still, however, come into a steady state of chronic energy deficiency because their lower body weight will imply a lower BMR. The cost of moving also declines with the fall in body weight, so that the two savings in energy related to weight will allow a steady state of energy balance to be achieved once more. The costs, however, will be those associated with the lower body weight, i.e. lower energy stores and lower resistance to
infection and environmental insults. If severe enough and over a long enough period of time, leisure and socially desirable activities will also begin to decrease.
Energy intake and CED
As nutritional science was developing, attempts were made to assess the adequacy of food supplies by measuring food intake and determining its adequacy in comparison to the assumed energy requirements. Nutritionists have usually sought to assess the adequacy of food supplies directly once they have calculated the food intake values and individual energy requirements. In practice, this involves measuring habitual food intakes, transforming the data into energy values, and relating them to needs estimated for the age, sex, optimum body weight and desirable activity levels of the adults. These issues have been addressed in the literature and various solutions have been proposed and utilized in several surveys (François, 1970).
As an example, the National Nutrition Monitoring Bureau (NNMB) in India^1 has expressed a household's energy intake in terms of consumption units (CU) also referred to as adult equivalents which standardize the data according to the demographic characteristics of the family. This value is then compared with the recommended allowance of that "standardized" household member (Rao & Shastry, 1986). This recommended allowance (i.e. adequate intake) was set at 2 400 kcal/CU/day, and it was estimated that 30 percent of households had intakes below 2 000 kcal/CU/day while 10 percent had intakes of less than 1 600 kcal/CU/day. If the reference value of 2 400 kcal/CU/day is correct, this implies that there are very large numbers of households with inadequate intakes. The validity of this recommended allowance/CU/day depends on a value judgement and cannot, of course, take into account either the actual body size or the physical activity level of the individuals within a household,
both of which influence the energy needs. Again, this method involves the collection of household food intake data, a time-consuming process which can be inaccurate. The use of household energy intakes and crude averages for the recommended allowances must, therefore, be considered only as a general approximation of the nutritional situation within a community. The costs involved in collecting such information on a large scale are also considerable.
[ 1. The National Institute of Nutrition (NIN), India analysed data from several series of surveys carried out by the National Nutrition Monitoring Bureau. These surveys are carried out each year on a representative sample of the rural areas from ten of the most populated states. A variety of information is collected including anthropometry of all household members, family food consumption and various socio-economic variables. For this BMI study, the NIN prepared two data sets, one the aggregated data from 1974-79 rounds and the other from 1988-90 which represented a total sample size of 48,252 and 21,361, respectively. ]
Further difficulties arise if one wants to assess individuals for CED by monitoring their individual intake rather than assessing CED at a household or national level. First, it is difficult to estimate energy intake with any degree of accuracy over a short period of time. Foremost is the difficulty in measuring and recording the food eaten and at the same time not influencing the intake by the mere measurement process. Other problems exist as well, for example, premenopausal women are likely to show a 5-10 percent fluctuation in their energy intake over the month's menstrual cycle. In addition, it must be recognized that in any group of individuals there will be a substantial range, perhaps 8-12 percent in BMR even when they are of the same age, sex, height and weight. Therefore, one adult with an intake of 2 400 kcal/day may have an intrinsic need for energy to meet a high BMR of perhaps 1 750 kcal/day, whereas another similar adult may need only 1 350 kcal/day. The 400
kcal difference would allow the adult with a low BMR to engage in up to 3 hours of extra physical activity per day. Thus, the difficulties in assessing an individual's energy intake and the concern that the measurements may provide a very inaccurate indication of whether the adult is receiving enough food led to the evaluation of alternative approaches.
Energy expenditure and CED
A Joint FAO/WHO/UNU Expert Consultation on Energy and Protein Requirements held in Rome, 5-17 October 1981, (WHO, 1985) suggested that energy requirements be based on estimates of energy expenditures rather than energy intakes and that the total energy expenditure of an individual be expressed as multiples of the measured or predicted basal metabolic rate (BMR). This ratio of the total energy expended to the BMR has been termed the physical activity level (PAL). Since BMR is based on body weight, the actual value obtained from this PAL ratio will reflect both the body weight and the level of physical activity of the individual. The minimum level of energy expenditure compatible with health, termed maintenance requirement, may be taken as corresponding to a PAL of 1.4 for the sake of simplicity. Thus, this value of 1.4 x BMR may be used as a cut-off point for assessing the prevalence of CED. Furthermore, studies have confirmed that both total energy expenditure and BMR are
highly reproducible and stable (Shetty & Soares, 1988).
Given the usefulness of knowing the value of PALs, it would be desirable to have national surveys that indicate whether all individuals were able to sustain the levels of activity appropriate for their economic, social and educational welfare. Indeed, the monitoring of PAL seemed of such importance to the IDECG Working Party that they proposed monitoring both body weight and physical activity levels in defining CED. A classification system was proposed which depended upon demonstrating both a low body weight and a poor level of physical activity with a PAL below 1.4 (James et al., 1988). This would conform with current notions of how people adjust to inadequate energy intakes.
According to this method, BMIs were to be derived from the weights and heights of the individuals or group while the energy turnover or PAL was to be based on total energy expenditures assessed in relation to the BMR predicted from body weight. The IDECG Working Party outlined a sequential or stepwise assessment of CED for the epidemiological diagnosis of different grades of CED. An individual with a BMI > 18.5 was expected to have adequate energy reserves and was, therefore, considered normal. The next step involved an additional assessment of the PAL. Those individuals with a BMI of 17.0-18.5 and a PAL > 1.4 were classified as being normal while a presumptive diagnosis of CED grade I was made for those persons with a PAL < 1.4. Those with a BMI between 16.0-16.9 were categorized as having CED grade I if they had a PAL > 1.4 but grade II if the PAL was c 1.4. The different categories proposed by the IDECG Working Party are displayed in Table 1.1.
Later, detailed measurements of adults in Ethiopia and India suggested that the use of a cutoff point of 1.4 PAL can be very problematic. It is possible for women to sustain economically relevant and useful activities for up to 4.5 hours a day without exceeding a daily energy turnover value of 1.4 (Ferro-Luzzi et al., 1992). This is explained by the very low energy costs of activities performed sitting down which are undertaken during the rest of the day and amount to no more than 1.25 x BMR. This contrasts with a theoretical value of 1.4 for residual time decided upon by the Joint FAO/WHO/UNU Expert Consultation (ibid), suggesting perhaps, the need for a reexamination of the value recommended at that time. There was also a marked variation in individuals in terms of their activities from month to month and most of the population at one time or another had PAL values below 1.4. In women, the duration of work was only marginally reduced for those individuals with low BMI.
Even women with a BMI c 16.0 had no apparent reduction in the time spent on these activities. Neither the intensity of work nor the time involved in social and other spontaneous activities was reduced. By contrast, the men did seem to display some evidence of behavioural adaptation and this may reflect their sensitivity to restricted intake of food which is greater than that of women who have a higher body fat content and energy stores for the same, albeit low, BMI. The combination of physical activity (as an indicator of activity turnover) with BMI for estimated degree of CED produced an unusual distribution that did not follow the classical Guassian model; a distribution unlike that of the BMI alone (See Figure 1.1).
TABLE 1.1 Epidemiological diagnosis of CED as proposed by IDECG Working Group
BMI
> 1.4 PAL
CED
CED
Grade III
Grade I
Normal
Normal
CED
CED
CED
< 1.4 PAL
Grade III
Grade II
Grade I
Normal
Source: James et al., 1988.
Figure 1.1 - Grades of CED among Indian adults by BMI and BMI+PAL
Source: Ferro-Luzzi et al., 1992
Measures of food intakes of adults are difficult to match to estimates of food needs. It is also apparent that it is unrealistic to propose the global development of activity monitoring as an aid to the assessment of undernourished adults (Ferro-Luzzi et, al., 1992). The original concern that the developing countries may have large numbers of thin but very athletically fit individuals was also discounted. For the reasons noted above, it is proposed that the direct assessment of the nutritional status of a community in relation to the adequacy of food availability be made by concentrating on a simple anthropometric measure of body weight and height. Two issues are dealt with in the rest of this report: whether the body weight can be a useful index of a society's well-being with implications for food supplies and whether any cut-off points for nutritional adequacy are shown to be functionally meaningful.
CED as diagnosed by anthropometry
One of the simplest ways of diagnosing CED in adults would be to resort to the use of an uncomplicated, reliable and easily obtainable anthropometric measure such as height, body weight or some combined index of weight and height. Recent reports have advocated that height may be particularly useful as an index of socioeconomic conditions in developing societies because populations which are poorly fed and subject to repeated infections rarely grow well in either childhood or adolescence and fail to achieve an adult stature which is commensurate with their full genetic potential (Gopalan, 1987).
Measurements of height are relatively easy to make as are measurements of body weight. However, measuring the height alone of adults does not help with monitoring current nutritional conditions although it may reflect the unfavourable circumstances of their growth years. Long term energy deficiency in childhood does cause stunting and a reduction in the final adult stature attained, but the functional consequences of this short stature and the reduced work capacity and economic productivity seen in short adults cannot be alleviated. If it is undesirable for adults to be small and to not have fulfilled their genetic potential, then clearly attention needs to be directed towards alleviating those factors that lead to stunting in childhood. Thus, to concentrate on height of the adult as a primary measure of nutritional status of the community is inappropriate. The present concern is the need for an index for identifying chronically energy deficient adults in a community. On
this basis a measure of body weight in relation to the height of adults was considered the more promising option.
If a simple, objective, and reliable definition of CED is based on anthropometry, it is important to evaluate the range of weight-height indices suitable for this purpose. While different types of indices may be used, the body mass index (BMI) may be ideal.
In broad terms, the body is composed of: active tissue mass, (lean body mass or fat free mass) and fat mass which is the body's principal energy store:
Body Weight = fat free mass + fat mass
As mentioned, an individual is said to be in a steady state situation, i.e. in "energy balance" when the input of food energy is equal to the output of energy expended by the individual. The latter is the sum of the energy expended at rest (BMR) plus the additional energy costs of digestion and absorption of nutrients and the costs of physical activity including work. Under these conditions, a change in body weight can be an indicator of a change in the steady state, i.e. energy balance of the individual. Although small, short-term fluctuations in body weight can also occur with changes in water balance, the body weight stability can be used in general as a measure of the steady state of energy balance of the individual.
The body weight of an individual is influenced by the person's height; body weight rises with increases in stature if normal body proportions are maintained. The issue of whether body weight differs between people with varying proportions of lean and fat tissues is dealt with in Chapter 2; for the present, weight is chosen as a simple index of both muscle and fat tissues. It is unreasonable to measure the body weight of an adult alone without taking into account their height. Therefore, a simple measure of weight in relation to height is needed. Once this is decided it is necessary to define some point below which the weight-for-height is not compatible with good health and effective ability to work. Measurements of the body weights and heights of individuals within a community could then be used to find the proportion of adults who are too thin or too obese. Before choosing acceptable or desirable weights, however, some simple indices of weight in relation to height must be
established.
Requirements of an ideal nutritional anthropometric index
Two practical considerations determine the usefulness of an ideal nutritional anthropometric index for epidemiological purposes. They are as follows:
(1) the primary measurements used in calculating the index should be simple and easy to obtain in the community at large; and
(2) the index should be simple to calculate or derive from the primary measurements made in the community.
From a mathematical point of view, the index chosen should be highly correlated with body weight which is a proxy for body energy stores and relatively independent of height, i.e. the alterations in the index should not relate simply to differences in stature. This implies that the numerical value of the index of standard weight for height be the same for individuals at different heights.
Such an index will not only reflect the weights of the individuals or group vis-à-vis the range found in the population, but will also give some measure of the change in the body's composition, i.e. reflect changes in both the energy stores and in the active tissues of the body.
Types of weight-for-height indices
There are two basic types of weight-for-height indices in common use for community epidemiological measurements in adults.
1. Relative weight is the ratio of an individual's weight to a standard or expected weight for individuals of his or her sex and height, with age being used as an additional standardizing variable. Relative weight thus expresses the weight of a given individual as a percentage of the average weight of persons of the same height, sex and age. The standard or expected weights are frequently derived from a large population of people of the same height, sex and age. The use of relative weight provides a measure which is readily interpreted. For instance, to say that a group of people was 140-150 percent of the average weight for their age, sex and height conveys a meaningful image to a reader. However, the disadvantage of this approach is that the findings from various studies are difficult to compare when different standards have been employed. Differences among standards of various populations or ethnic groups can be large and hence relative weights are of limited use for
international comparisons. In addition, acceptability of an international standard for relative weight is difficult to obtain.
2. A power-type index, which does not specifically employ a standard, is derived by the ratio
[where p is a value, usually between 1.0 and 3.0.]
[Since these competing power type indices are purported to provide an index of "body bulk" or "energy reserves" and each has been used by different investigators, it is extremely important that their relative merits are examined critically. As noted above, the most desirable of these power indices should be maximally correlated with weight but minimally correlated with height, i.e. unbiased by stature, in all populations.]
[Weight/height ratio (W/H) is a ratio that shows consistently high correlations with body weight of the order of 0.95 to 0.99 in several studies. It is, however, correlated with height and in adult populations the correlations of W/H with height vary from 0.01 to 0.51 (Lee et al., 1981). This implies that W/H as an index is not independent of height.]
[Weight/height^2 (W/H^2), otherwise known as the body mass index (BMI) or Quételet's index also shows a consistently high correlation with body weight based on several different studies in different population groups. In a comparative series of analyses the correlation of W/H^2 with height varied from 0.0 to 0.2. (Khosla & Lowe, 1967; Micozzi et al., 1986).^2 Thus, this index is relatively independent of height and is less biased by height than W/H.]
[[ ^2. Adolphe Quételet (1796-1876) wee a mathematician and statistician and Permanent Secretary of the Royal Observatory of Brussels. Ha proposed this indicator in the Physique sociale ou essay sur lo développement des facultés de l'homme. Bruxelles. C. Muquardt. 1869. ]]
[TABLE 1.2 Correlation between BMI and weight and height measurements from selected studies]
[Location]
[Categories]
[Number]
[Correlation with]
[Weight]
[Height]
[UK^1]
[males]
[0.83 to 0.86 (*)]
[-0.1 to 0.08]
[Polynesians^2]
[males]
[0.88 to 0.92]
[0.02 to 0.05]
[females]
[0.92 to 0.95 (*)]
[-0.01 to -0.12]
[USA^3]
[males]
[females]
[USA^4]
[females]
[Hawaii^5]
[males]
[0.81 to 0.90 (*)]
[-0.01 to -0.12]
[females]
[0.85 to 0.92 (*)]
[-0.23 to -0.09]
[Israel^6]
[males]
[New Zealand^7]
[males]
[females]
[(*) Note: Figures represent a range of correlations from several studies.]
[Sources: ]
[1 Khosla & Lowe, 1967]
[5 Lee et al., 1981.]
[2 Evans & Prior, 1969.]
[6 Goldbourt & Medalie, 1974.]
[3 Florey, 1970.]
[7 Watson a al., 1979.]
[4 Smalley et al., 1990.]
[Weight/height^3 or an inversion of this index (H/W^1/3) (also known as the Ponderal index) has been shown to have a substantially lower correlation with body weight than the other two indices (r = 0.6) and a negative correlation with height (r = -0.3) (Khosla & Lowe, 1967). A comparative analysis showed that in several populations W/H had the highest positive correlation with height, while there was a strong negative correlation for W/H^3 (Lee et al., 1981). Yet, there were only modest correlations with body weight, and W/H^3 was the least useful power type index for epidemiological uses.]
[It has been suggested, on the basis of a comparative analysis of the three power type indices, that W/H^2 or BMI is both highly correlated with weight and consistently independent of height (Khosla & Lowe; 1967). It is, therefore, the index of choice for epidemiological purposes.]
[Several studies, summarized in Table 1.2, support the value of BMI as being highly correlated with body weight and at the same time independent of height. Zero order correlation analyses, as well as age-adjusted partial correlations of BMI with weight and height, show that BMI was highly correlated with weight in each ethnic and sex-specific population but was less influenced by height within each population group. The demonstration of such a relationship between BMI and body weight, unbiased by stature across a range of ethnic groups in populations worldwide, makes BMI a good choice for the anthropometric assessment of nutritional status of adults for epidemiological studies. BMI also has the advantage of being an index that has been reported in the literature over the past century, providing an excellent foundation for comparison purposes.]
<section>3</section>
[Chapter 2 BMI as a reflection of the body energy stores]
[Ways to measure fat and lean body mass]
[Variations in body composition]
[Chapter 2 BMI as a reflection of the body energy stores]
[Ways to measure fat and lean body mass]
[As noted in the previous chapter, the body is composed of active tissue mass (i.e. fat-free mass) and the mass of body fat which is the principal energy store.]
[There are several methods for estimating these two components; some methods are sophisticated and expensive. For example, the K40 natural radioactive potassium content of the body can be measured by carrying out a whole body count, from this the total potassium content can be estimated. From the amount of total potassium it is possible to estimate the mass of lean tissue since potassium is the chief ion within the cells of the active tissue mass. Methods that measure dilution of isotopic (tritiated or deuterated water) or chemical tracers (antipyrine) can provide estimates of total body water which in turn reflects largely the active tissue mass of the body since fat tissues contain little water.]
[Fat mass can be estimated by densitometric measurements since underwater weighing provides a measure of the density of the body which, in turn, reflects the contribution of fat mass to the body density. This is a relatively accurate method although it is a technique confined to laboratories with facilities for weighing humans underwater and, presents a certain amount of discomfort for the person being measured. There are simpler and less costly methods such as measuring skinfold thicknesses or body impedance which have been validated against a reliable estimate of fat mass. BMI has also been used as a simple anthropometric index that reflects the body's fat content and hence the body's energy stores. By comparing BMI with estimations of body fat stores, obtained through reliable methods such as densitometry, it has been shown that the BMI correlates well with body fat (Norgan & Ferro-Luzzi, 1982). (See Table 2.1).]
[An anthropometric study of 138 shipyard workers, aged 22-55 years in northern Italy also shows that the BMI is highly correlated with fat mass of the body (r = 0.87) and is, therefore, a reasonably good index of the body energy stores as fat (Norgan & Ferro-Luzzi, 1982). In international comparisons these relationships exist irrespective of the population group studied. It has also been shown that the BMI correlates well with body fat expressed as a percentage of body weight. The correlations in both males and females are, however, agedependent, with the highest correlations being found among individuals whose ages range between 26 and 55 years. The correlations are not as good among the young and the elderly. Nevertheless, once the age and gender-specific equations are used, the value for percent body fat predicted from BMI is close to that actually derived (Deurenberg et al., 1991). (See Table 2.2).]
[TABLE 2.1 Correlation between densitometric estimates of body fat composition and BMI from selected studies]
[Categories]
[Number]
[Correlations with BMI]
[Males]
[Females]
[Students]
[Executives]
[Males]
[Females]
[Males]
[Females]
[Males]
[Males]
[Females]
[Sources:]
[1 Allen et al., 1956.]
[4 Roche et al., 1981.]
[2 Keys et al., 1972.]
[5 Revicki & Israel, 1986.]
[3 Womersley & Durnin. 1977.]
[6 Smalley et al 1990.]
[Since measurements of subcutaneous skinfold thickness are used as a simple predictor of body fat stores, correlations have also been made between skinfolds and the BMI. There are good correlations between the BMI and the sum of several skinfold measurements (See Table 2.3).]
[The body fat stores in a woman are different from that of a man; thus, a BMI of 20 in a man indicates less body fat than it would in a woman. In either sex, BMI is an index of both the main energy stores, i.e. fat, and the active tissue mass of which muscle is the largest component. When the relationship between the body's fat content and BMI is calculated separately for both sexes, extrapolating the line to the point at which there would theoretically be no body fat reveals a BMI value in both sexes of about 15.5. This implies that women show a greater loss in body fat as a proportion of weight as they become more energy deficient although detailed studies on the body composition of very thin and undernourished men and women are not available.]
[In some age groups, the BMI is as much a measure of lean tissue mass as it is a measure of fatness. The BMI was found to be highly correlated with fat-free mass or active tissue mass of the body (r = 0.68) (Norgan & Ferro-Luzzi, 1982). BMI correlations with estimates of fat mass and lean tissue mass in individuals from developing countries, e.g. among 527 men and 546 women from Papua New Guinea and 159 men and 197 women from Ethiopia, show that BMI is reflective of both fat mass and fat-free masses (Norgan, 1990).]
[TABLE 2.2 Accuracy of BMI as a predictor of percent body fat]
[Percent body fat]
[Number]
[Observed mean BMI]
[Difference with predicted BMI mean]
[Age groups]
[BMI groups]
[Source: Deurenberg et al., 1991.]
[In some circumstances, the effectiveness of work performance depends upon a person's size or more specifically, on the amount of muscle mass. The power of the body to obtain leverage and the stabilizing effect of the body in a variety of tasks are dependent on weight as much as specific measures of lean tissue and body fat. Thus, there are advantages to having a combined index of lean and fat tissues.]
[Variations in body composition]
[Although a case can be made for the BMI as a useful general index of the mass of lean and fat tissue, it is also true that in individuals with the same BMI there will be different proportions of lean and fat tissues. Sometimes this variation is viewed as an indication that body weight or BMI is too crude an index of body energy to be used in classifying individuals as having chronic energy deficiency. It is true that in energy content terms, lean tissue, with its 70 percent water content and the rest principally protein or glycogen, has a much lower energy content on a weight basis than fat. So the purist is correct in claiming that ideally some good measure of the actual energy content of the body is needed. Nevertheless, it must be recognized that in functional terms which relate to energy use in physical activity it may be body bulk and muscle mass which is advantageous as well as having some energy reserves.]
[TABLE 2.3 Correlations BMI with sum of skinfold measurements in several populations]
[Categories]
[Numbers]
[Age]
[Correlations with _ skinfolds (r)]
[US students]
[US executives]
[Bantu]
[Japanese farmers]
[US railwaymen (sedentary)]
[US railwaymen]
[Finland (east)]
[Finland (west)]
[Crevalcore, Italy]
[Montegiorgio, Italy]
[Rome, railwaymen]
[Source: Keys et al., 1972.]
[Body weight is easy to measure in comparison with the currently available methods for estimating body fat in difficult circumstances such as those found in developing countries. Thus, it has been difficult to train field workers in skinfold thickness measurements while impedance methods are only being validated now. Body weight has been widely used in North American and European countries and the body mass index is now internationally recognized as a valid measure of obesity in individuals despite the greater variation in body fat at the top end of the BMI scale. The application of the BMI index in developing countries is consistent with practices in developed countries. Incidentally, the BMI also allows for the simultaneous monitoring of the emerging problem of obesity in developing countries since it is a continuum index from grades of CED to grades of severe obesity.]
[Figure 2.1 - BMI and percentage body fat in adults from selected countries]
[Source: James et al., 1988]
[Data on BMI for men and women in Italy, Papua New Guinea, Ethiopia and Somalia are presented in Figure 2.1. Also included are data from 5,072 medically-screened and physically-fit British soldiers, most of whom were below 25 years of age with a presumed lean body mass at near maximum levels for their presumed genetic potential. Several important conclusions can be drawn from the data presented.]
[First, women in both developing and developed countries have a greater fat mass than men at each level of BMI. This is a clear biological difference between sexes found in other species as well. It is presumed to reflect the greater need for energy stores to maintain a buffer against a nutrition-induced failure in reproductive function and to allow the woman to cope with the substantial energy demands of lactation.]
[Second, the proportion of body fat in individuals from these developing countries (Papua New Guinea, Ethiopia and Somalia) was less than that of the Europeans (Italians and British) at equivalent BMIs. This is true for both men and women, but the effect is particularly marked in women. Perhaps the greater physical demand for activity of men and women in developing countries throughout their childhood, adolescence and adult life promote a greater muscle mass and a lower body energy content at identical body weights. Some genetic differences between races have been inferred from detailed studies of body form, however, there are increasing signs of the important long-term impact of environmental factors. Identifying these environmental factors may not be easy. There is mounting evidence that the nutritional level of an individual during foetal life can have a marked effect on the size and proportions of the body at birth. Breast-feeding rather than bottle-feeding also
influences height growth and particularly the weight-for-height of children. These early events seem to programme the body's propensity to lay down lean and fat tissues later on in life, but other influences, such as mild protein and trace element deficiencies, e.g. zinc, may also be involved.]
[TABLE 2.4 Variation in body fat at a BMI of 20.0 among three rural populations]
[Papua New Guinea]
[Ethiopia]
[India]
[Percent fat:]
[Fat mass (kg):]
[males]
[females]
[Source: Norgan, 1990.]
[An analysis by Norgan (1990) indicates that fatness or energy stores derived from BMI measures may vary in different population groups. Three rural communities in India, Ethiopia and Papua New Guinea were compared using a modelling approach and this indicated that the fat or energy stores at a given BMI differed markedly in the three population groups (See Table 2.4). Quite different levels of energy stores are thus encountered in different population groups (all from developing countries) for the same BMI. The differences between sexes in body energy stores represented by an equivalent BMI are also confirmed.]
[Naturally, these observations pose the question of whether different BMI values should be chosen as optimum for different populations and once more raise the issue of developing more specific measures of body fat. These questions were discussed many years ago when attempts were made to develop a rational approach to monitoring children's growth. Different countries developed their own national standards, however, after several decades it became apparent that well-fed children worldwide tended to grow at the same rate and that coherent objective analyses of comparative performances in different countries required only a single set of reference values. On the basis of this experience, it is probably wise to try to develop a single set of criteria using BMI as an index of chronic energy deficiency. This will maintain consistency with standard practice. Far more research will also be required before more sophisticated approaches to the BMI can be developed; meanwhile, its use
as a simple index has barely begun.]
[Third, at normal ranges of BMI the relationship between BMI and percent body fat is approximately linear (though this tends to vary in different groups of individuals). However, at higher levels of BMI there tends to be a disproportionate increase in body fat.]
[These observations have considerable significance when BMI is used worldwide as an index of CED and may have to be considered when arriving at numbers of persons classified as CED in different populations in developing countries. Nevertheless, low BMI status in any community will reflect a low body energy store of individuals and a low fat free mass or lean body mass for a given stature. This is an equally important matter of concern and may be more typical of CED as a reflection of the state of adult nutrition in a community.]
<section>4</section>
[Chapter 3 BMI as an indicator of CED]
[Chapter 3 BMI as an indicator of CED]
[The optimum range of BMI which is compatible with good health has been based on data available in apparently healthy populations such as army recruits of developed countries. These ranges were described in the FAO/WHO/UNU report (1985) as 18.7 to 23.8 for women and 20.1 to 25.0 for men. These values were taken from the calculations made from the U.S. Metropolitan Life Insurance Tables by the Royal College of Physicians (1983). A simplified use of BMI in the classification of obesity involves normal values of 20-25, a range used for both men and women (Garrow, 1981) which was subsequently adopted in a WHO Report (1990)]
[The issue is whether a range designed for the assessment of obesity in affluent societies can be applied to developing countries. The difference in the lower range for women between < 18 and < 20 is unimportant in relation to obesity, yet it is very important in the assessment of CED in developing countries. Therefore, it was necessary to decide whether a lower value of BMI (i.e. <20.0) could be used. First, the lower limits of BMIs of a large sample of healthy, young British soldiers were examined. The BMI and body composition data obtained from 6,000 members of the U.K. armed forces (about 5,000 men and 1,000 women) are summarized in Table 3.1. More than two-thirds of the men in this group and all the women were aged between 17 to 34 years. The advantage of this highly selective population of young adults was that every individual was healthy and fit and was subjected to exacting medical tests twice a year. If the mean minus 2 standard deviations of the range of BMIs is
taken as the cut-off point for the lower limit of an acceptable range, then the weighted mean lower limit proved to be 18.5 for men and 17.6 for women.]
[Other evidence must be considered before accepting these as generalizable cut-off points. In this healthy adult U.K. population, 12 percent of the individuals had a BMI <20.0. This is probably explained by some reduction in lean tissue as well as in fat stores compared with those with BMIs between 20.0 and 25.0. In this particular population group, the BMI at the lower end of the optimum range must represent an individual's natural "habitue" since there is ho shortage of food. It should be noted that some of the men and women were in their teens and may not be fully grown. It is, however, crucial to realize that apparently healthy individuals may exist in developed and developing countries with BMIs below the suggested lower limit of 18.5 and that the cut-off suggested is arbitrary but based on available data from developed countries. The overlap and hence inclusion of some healthy individuals in the distribution of BMIs below 18.5 does not detract from the usefulness of
this cut-off or its acceptability.]
[TABLE 3.1 Mean BMI, LBM and percent fat in a population of healthy young UK soldiers ^(*)]
[Categories]
[Age]
[BMI]
[LBM (kg)]
[% fat]
[Men]
[Women]
[Source: Durnin et al., 1984]
[(*) Civilians tend at each age and sex to be 1-2 kg lighter than the soldiers, mainly at the expense of fat-free mass. (OPCS, 1984)]
[In most of the adult groups from the developing countries considered by Eveleth and Tanner (1976), the average BMI ranged from 19.0 to 21.0 excluding nomadic tribes such as the Samburu of Kenya and the Dinkas of Sudan. The values have been calculated from mean weights and mean heights. However, considering the large sample sizes this should not introduce any significant error. For urban Indians, there was an average BMI of less than 20 among the younger members of the higher social group, while among the slum dwellers, average BMI was less than 19 (Gopalan, 1987). The rather low fat-free mass of Indian males has been noted elsewhere in this text and this will give lower values of BMI. This may explain why Indians, who were presumably well-fed, still had mean BMIs less than 20.0.]
[Logically, there can be no defensible single cut-off point without the review of very extensive data from many areas of the world. On the basis of the available evidence, the upper limit for the diagnosis of CED using BMI has been taken as less than 18.5, since a BMI above this has been established as compatible with health both in healthy male soldiers and normal women in the U.K. and in men and women of high socio-economic status from developing countries. A lower limit of 20 would thus be inappropriate]
[Ideally, determining the lower limit of cutoff of BMI to indicate the presence of CED should be based on information at the population level. It should be based on the relationships between low BMI and the morbidity or health status of adults. It would also be necessary to show causality, i.e. that a low BMI predisposes to morbidity, rather than the BMI simply reflecting the fact that an individual was ill and had lost weight. Information in this area is largely lacking.]
[TABLE 3.2 The simple classification of adult chronic energy deficiency]
[BMI]
[CED grade]
[III]
[II]
[I]
[Normal]
[Source: Ferro-Luzzi et al., 1992.]
[The lower limit of acceptable BMI and hence of both fat mass and lean body mass, might partially depend on the level of physical activity that has to be maintained. Thin and tall adults with a rather low BMI may be fit and healthy. However, the issue is one of judging their physical effectiveness and their ability to withstand periods of semi-starvation. An extreme example of the problem arises with young women with anorexia nervosa who, in affluent societies, may appear well despite having a low BMI and being physically hyperactive. Yet, it is difficult to imagine that women with this BMI would be capable of doing the kind of agricultural work that is often required of rural women in developing countries. Women with anorexia nervosa also have other functional problems, such as amenorrhoea, and undue proneness to infection. Therefore, these low weights seem incompatible with health despite the intense activity of these women. Male Indian labourers were also found to be
physically fit by standard tests when they had mean BMIs < 17.0 (Shetty, 1984); whether they were capable of sustained and optimum work output is not known. This concern that modestly thin but active healthy adults may be categorized as being CED led the IDECG Working Party to demand additional proof of a low energy turnover along with a BMI below 18.5 before individuals could be classified as having particular grades of CED.]
[For the present time, this activity criterion is not applied and only BMI is now considered in developing the index of CED.]
[In Table 3.2 the limits proposed after taking into account both the BMIs and the compositional studies noted so far are set out. By having three grades of CED, the system conforms to the use of three grades of BMI in classifying obesity (Garrow, 1981) and it relates to the original three grades of infantile malnutrition set out by Gomez et al. (1956).]
[The choice of the same BMI values for both adult men and women is a notable feature of the standard which needs to be justified It was recognized that women naturally have more body fat than men. In physiological terms, this implies that a CED classification based exclusively on body energy or body fat would mean that women can have a lower BMI than men to obtain the same proportion of energy reserves per unit height. The argument based on weight as a measure of physical power was also important because women are usually shorter than men and therefore, disadvantaged if weight dependent activities are demanded. In spite of the knowledge that women tolerate lower BMIs than men, it was considered reasonable to assign the same BMI cut-off for diagnosing CED as that chosen for men because of the additional energy needed by women to sustain pregnancy and lactation and the recognized major burden they bear in child raising, household care, and agricultural activities in developing
countries. An additional advantage is the simplicity of having one criterion for all adults, male and female, for nutritional monitoring and surveillance purposes.]
<section>5</section>
[Chapter 4 BMI and factors affecting access to food]
[BMI and household income]
[BMI and socio-economic conditions]
[BMI and food consumption at the household level]
[BMI and seasonal changes]
[Chapter 4 BMI and factors affecting access to food]
[In both developed and developing countries, height is often considered to be a good general index of socio-economic status of the community. Since it can be safely assumed that poverty and undernutrition are closely linked, one might also expect BMI to be related to the socio-economic status of the population. However, the usefulness of BMI as a socioeconomic indicator in industrialized countries is complicated by several factors, in particular the eating patterns of the different social classes, their physical behaviour and their knowledge and attitudes regarding their body size and shape as well as nutritional and dietary issues. In developing countries, however, it is easier to predict the socio-economic status and the level of development of the community using the BMI.]
[BMI and household income]
[An International Food Policy Research Institute (IFPRI) rural longitudinal survey conducted among 800 rural households in four provinces of Pakistan showed that in households having incomes at the lowest quintile, both males and females had lower BMIs than those belonging to the highest quintile income groups in all provinces except Baluchistan (Garcia & Alderman, 1989). Consistency in the relationship between BMI and an independently assessed measure of socio-economic status was also seen in communities in India, Ethiopia and Zimbabwe despite there being a relatively small range of BMIs among the rural populations of these countries (Ferro-Luzzi et al., 1992).]
[BMI data from Brazil has also been analyzed in relation to income levels (François 1990).^1 In every income class the majority of individuals had acceptable body weights in relation to their heights. There was not a linear relationship between BMI and income. (See Figure 4.1) However, for both males and females between the ages of 20 to 60 years, the median BMI values were lower in the lowest income class (poorest 15 percent, i.e. incomes around US$ 160 per annum) when the study population was stratified into 10 year age bands. It was also noted that in the lowest income class, both males and females had similar BMIs at all age bands while in the high income group, BMI increased with increasing age. This implies that as soon as the households received more than minimal incomes it was common for adults, especially women, to gain weight in middle age. Although the median BMI shows only a small change despite the enormously wide gap in expenditure levels seen in Brazil, this
small change in average BMI was associated with a substantial shift in the BMI frequency distribution. This shift seemed to be continuous with increasing income levels, so the risk of becoming overweight increased progressively as income increased. In Figure 4.1, the percentage of females with BMIs < 17.6 and BMIs >27.0 in the two extreme income classes (US$ 160 and US$ 2,500 per annum) plotted against increasing age is represented. The same relationship is shown for males with BMIs <18.5 and >27.0 for the same income classes. Both figures show that increasing age is linked to an increase in BMI among the rich while the number of men and women with low BMIs increases with advancing age among individuals of the lowest income classes. The distribution of BMI values among the poorest 20 percent and richest 20 percent in Brazil are shown in Figure 4.2. It is evident that BMI is not only a reliable indicator of socioeconomic status among the males and females of developing
countries, but is particularly useful for assessing lower socio-economic groups where there is little increase in weight with age. Differences in socioeconomic status leading to differences in BMI are more marked in the older adults.]
[[ ^1. In Brazil, the Instituto Brasileiro de Geografia e Estadística (IBGE) conducted a nationwide food consumption and expenditure survey, the Estudo Nacional da Despesa Familiar (ENDEF) in 1974-75 that provided anthropometric, dietary and socio-economic data from a nationwide sample of 250,000 individuals in 55,000 households. In 1989, using the same sampling frame but reducing the numbers considerably, the National Food and Nutrition Institute (INAN) and IBGE conducted the national health and nutrition survey, Pesquisa Nacional de Saúde e Nutrição (PNSN) which supplied anthropometric and socio-economic data from 60,000 persons from approximately 17,000 households. ]]
[Figure 4.1 - BMI distribution in Brazil by age and income (IBGE Survey. 1974/75)]
["Functional Significance of Low Body Mass Index (BMI)", Rome,]
[4-6 November, 1992.]
[Figure 4.2 - BMI distribution in Brazil among the poorest and wealthiest segments of the population (PNSN Survey 1989)]
["Functional Significance of Low Body Mass Index (BMI)", Rome,]
[4-6 November 1992.]
[BMI and socio-economic conditions]
[Several surveys conducted in the Congo since 1986 by the Institut français de recherche scientifique pour le développement en coopération (ORSTOM) and la Delegation générale à la recherche scientifique et technique (DGRST), led to analyses of variations of adult BMI according to the socioeconomic characteristics of households. Four representative samples of household members were selected and anthropometric measurements as well as data on socioeconomic and housing conditions were collected. The distribution of urban and rural adults according to different BMI categories in the Congo is represented in Figure 4.3. A tendency to obesity (i.e. BMI over 25.0) is almost absent in the rural "Plateaux" areas but nearly 25 percent of urban adults appear to be obese (16 percent for men, 30 percent for women).]
[Figure 4.3 - BMI Distribution among Congolese adults in urban and rural areas]
[Source: Delpeuch, 1992, based on data presented at a meeting "Functional Significance of Low Body Mass Index (AM/)", Rome, 4-6 November, 1992.]
[The BMI of adults varies according to sex and age. In the rural "Plateaux" areas, the prevalence of low BMI in women increases steadily with age, from 12 percent at 18 years to 50 percent for those aged 60 years or more. For men, the prevalence of low BMI first decreases through the years of most active economic productivity but increases sharply after 40 years of age. For both sexes, low BMI is very common in rural areas at older ages. On the other hand, in urban areas the prevalence of high BMI rises significantly with age, particularly in women.]
[When the socio-economic conditions of urban families improve (for instance, they have electricity, piped water, employment, and assets) the frequency of obesity (BMI >25) increases from 15 percent up to 35 percent. The proportion of people with low BMI (under 18.5) decreases where socio-economic conditions are better. This is indicated in Figure 4.4 where families have been classified into five different groups according to their socioeconomic status. In the rural areas, this phenomenon is not demonstrated, primarily because all the families are poor.]
[The BMI might also be used to monitor the impact on adults of macroeconomic change such as the current structural adjustment process taking place in the Congo. An analysis of the BMIs of urban mothers shows a significant increase of the frequency of low BMI (< 18.5) from 6.8 percent in 1986 to 10.1 percent in 1991, while the prevalence of obesity remained constant and BMI mean values were similar (23.1 and 23.2).]
[During the period 1986-91, the prevalence of low BMI increased among young mothers below 30 years of age. Such worsening is amplified with socio economic class: among the poorest 40 percent of young mothers, the prevalence of CED increased from 8.6 percent to 17.1 percent after five years of structural adjustment. Among the wealthiest 40 percent, the prevalence of low BMI increased from 6.9 percent to 10.6 percent. Although the nutritional status of young mothers of all socio-economic levels deteriorated, the young, poor, urban mothers were most negatively affected by the structural adjustment process in the Congo.]
[Figure 4.4 - CED and obesity in Brazzaville, Congo by Socio-economic quintiles]
["Functional Significance of Low Body Mass Index (BMI)", Rome,]
[4-6 November, 1992.]
[In contrast, the prevalence of CED among those over 30 years of age tends to decrease, although the difference is not significant. Thus, with increasing age the negative impact on BMI during this period of structural adjustment seems to be less.]
[BMI and food consumption at the household level]
[The value of using adult BMIs as an indicator of household food consumption can be assessed by comparing the BMIs of household members with household food consumption data. Such analysis has been carried out using the ENDEF survey data from Brazil (de Vasconcellos, 1993). In this nationwide survey, foods consumed were weighed during seven consecutive days and converted into calories. Based on the meal attendance of each household member and guests, the household energy intake was expressed in terms of adult equivalent. Conceptually, it is problematic to link individual characteristics such as height, weight, sex and age with food consumption data collected for a household unit even though it is expressed on a daily per caput basis. However, a relationship between food consumption and BMI was demonstrated in this study.]
[Five classes of energy intake and the percentages of adults classified by BMI are shown in Figure 4.5. Whereas the proportion of the population with normal weight (i.e. BMI between 18.5 and 25.0) remained approximately the same regardless of intake (70 percent), the proportion of people in the overweight and obese categories increased while the proportion of underweight and CED decreased with greater calories.]
[Figure 4.5 - BMI distribution in Brazil by energy intake levels (IBGE Survey, 1974/75)]
[Source: de Vasconcellos, 1992, based on data presented at a meeting ]
["Functional Significance of Low Body Mass Index (BMI)",]
[Rome, 4-6 November, 1992.]
[Relationships between the BMI of adults and food consumption can also be established through the use of energy adequacy ratios for different families since their food consumption has been compared to their energy requirement. The two extremes of the same phenomenon are represented in Figure 4.6; as the rate of energy adequacy increases, the tendency to leanness (i.e. BMI < 18.5) decreases and the tendency to obesity (i.e BMI > 25) increases.]
[BMI and seasonal changes]
[The term seasonality refers to a regularly recurring set of conditions which lead to cyclical changes in food supplies. These changes often coincide with periods of variable demand for physical labour. Environmental and climatic changes have enormous effects on agricultural activity, the availability of food, and the need for physical labour. These features have a profound effect on the economy of rural households in poor countries. Physiological changes are expected to occur during seasonal cycles when the food availability and the demand for agricultural labour conflict. Since these changes tend to follow an annual agricultural cycle, the body's responses to the availability of energy and the demand for activity are expected to follow similar annual patterns. Serial measurements of body weight should therefore, be an excellent but simple operational indicator of these changes in energy balance or steady state in adults. The extent of body weight changes recorded over
seasonal cycles in many parts of Africa and Asia have been compiled and summarized (Ferro-Luzzi, 1987); they range from 0.7 kg to 3.8 kg. Since heights do not change in adults, BMI can be used as a more specific index of the "risk" to a population of these weight changes.]
[Figure 4.6 - BMI distribution in Brazil by energy adequacy ratio (IBGE Survey, 1974/75)]
[Source: de Vasconcellos, 1992, based on data presented at a meeting ]
["Functional Significance of Low Body Mass Index (BMI)", ]
[Rome, 4-6 November, 1992.]
[A seasonal follow-up study of sedentary farmers in the Sahelian zone of Senegal (Rosetta, 1986) showed variations in body weight during the dry and rainy seasons, both in young men (mean weight loss 1.7 kg) and in older men (mean weight loss 2.7 kg). Women were affected regardless of their ages. The BMIs calculated from mean body weights and heights of adults in Serere, Senegal also showed changes between dry and rainy seasons. Shifts in the seasonal distributions of BMIs in Ethiopian men and women during pre-harvest and post-harvest seasons have been reported (Ferro-Luzzi et al., 1992). The Ethiopian study confirmed that BMI was a very sensitive index of change over six consecutive measurements in an annual agricultural cycle. It responded to seasonal changes that occurred in both sexes, with particularly clear effects being seen among the males.]
[Seasonal food shortages are reflected in data from Benin as well. The BMI distribution for adult men showed a shift during the dry season compared with the wet season; 23 percent of men with acceptable BMIs shifted into a category of CED; the number of men with BMIs between 18.5 and 20.0 increased markedly; and those with BMIs > 20 lost weight (François, 1990). A similar feature is seen in Beninese women (See Figure 4.7).]
[The BMI is thus a simple indicator and seems to be closely related to food consumption levels of adults in a population. It is sensitive to changes in the socio-economic status of communities in developing countries. Seasonal shifts in the BMI of adults are readily demonstrable in association with changes in the availability of food and alterations in the physical activity levels that are induced by the seasonal agricultural cycle.]
[Figure 4.7 - BMI categories among Beninese women by season]
[Source: Berardi, D. and François, P. 1992, personal communication.]
<section>6</section>
[Chapter 5 Functional consequences of low BMI in adults]
[Physical work capacity and productivity]
Physical activity and behavioural adaptation
[Chapter 5 Functional consequences of low BMI in adults]
[Physical work capacity and productivity]
[Several attempts have been made to determine the effects of CED on work efficiency and work output. Physical work capacity, which often is measured and expressed as the body's maximal capacity to consume oxygen is largely determined by muscle mass. In physically strenuous work, positive correlations have been found between work capacity measured in this way and work performance. Taller individuals with larger body and muscle masses have been consistently shown to have a higher work capacity and work performance than short individuals. However, when work capacity is expressed per kilo body weight or per kilo active tissue mass, the evidence is less clear.]
[Undernutrition in young adults in Guatemala reduced their maximal work capacity. However, the effect of undernutrition on work output at submaximal work levels or under normal work situations has not been assessed. When groups of young Colombian adults who were described as having CED of varying degrees of severity were studied, the results showed that only the "severely malnourished" group had a marked reduction in VO2] max^1, expressed in total litres of oxygen per minute (Spurr, 1987). They also had a lower aerobic capacity when this was expressed as VO[2] max corrected for body weight. This severely undernourished group was the only group with a mean BMI < 18.5, the other two groups had BMIs > 18.5. A BMI below 18.5 appeared to impair work capacity. There seemed to be a gradient in aerobic capacity with a change in BMI, with a decrease in aerobic capacity in those with lower BMIs.
[ ^1. VO[2] max or max VO[2] is the point at which the oxygen consumption plateaus and shows no further increase with an additional work load such as increasing the elevation of a treadmill or increasing the resistance to pedalling a bicycle ergometer. It is generally assumed that this represents an individual's capacity for aerobic metabolism and provides a quantitative statement of an individual's physiological work capacity. ]
Detailed studies of migrant agricultural labourers have shown an association of poor nutritional status, identified by anthropometry, with lowered work capacity (Desai, 1989). Among Brazilian adolescent males who were migrants and considered to be undernourished, physical work capacity was assessed in physiological tests using a bicycle ergometer. They had a mean BMI of less than 17.0 compared with the control group of well-to-do Brazilian adolescent males who had a mean BMI of about 20.0. The undernourished adolescents had similar rates of oxygen consumption and gross exercise efficiency when compared to the well-nourished adolescents in south Brazil (Desai et al., 1984). However, it was apparent that the undernourished adolescents achieved this work rate using a higher percentage of their maximum work capacity. Thus, they had a significantly higher heart rate for the same level of oxygen consumption. The lactic acid levels in the blood were also higher during exercise
suggesting that the available muscle mass was under greater stress as the young men tried to accomplish the same task.
General findings from work physiology would suggest that these features indicate a probable limit to the endurance of the undernourished males if they had to work over longer time periods or with higher work loads. Similar data are emerging from India, where good correlations were found between body weight, BMI and work capacity in undernourished individuals in Hyderabad (Satyanarayana et al., 1989). In the Indian study, the undernourished adults with BMIs <18.5 demonstrated similar work capacities expressed in terms of their body weight as did the urban Indians with a mean BMI >20.0. This means that their total work capacity was reduced as a result of their low BMI status. However, they had similar increments in oxygen uptake with increasing work loads which is an expression of no change in mechanical efficiency of the body.
Assessing the link between poor nutritional status and diminished work productivity is complicated by several other variables, such as motivation, the wages paid and the health status of the individual. Low BMI and poor nutritional status may also limit productivity indirectly through their effects on absenteeism and reduced opportunities for recruitment by potential employers who prefer larger individuals. Agricultural labour productivity and wages have been linked with household energy intakes in Sierra Leone (Strauss, 1986) and in Sri Lanka. Labour productivity in South India, measured in terms of wage and farm output, was related to a weight-height index (Deolalikar, 1988), while in the Philippines higher agricultural wages appear to be achieved by taller individuals (Haddad & Bouis, 1991). People with low BMIs from India have been shown to have lower productivity in urban industrial situations as well (Satyanarayana et al., 1977). Low BMIs also seemed to predict lower
productivity in industrial tasks. The productivity, on a per working day basis, of individuals with a low BMI was compared with that of people of the same stature but within a normal range of BMI. In this case, men with the lowest mean BMI (16.5) were the least productive group (Satyanarayana et al., 1989).
Studies from Guatemala compared the agricultural work output of two groups of men who were matched for age and had similar ethnic-cultural backgrounds (Town et al., 1989). When the two groups of men were asked to do heavy, standardized agricultural tasks for 3 to 6 days, including wood-cutting, clearing a stretch of land with a machete and working with a hoe and sickle, the sub-group with significantly less lean body mass and muscle mass were able to do the same amount of agricultural work as their well-nourished counterparts. However, the group with less muscle mass took considerably more time to complete the same amount of work (397 minutes compared with 235 minutes per day) and were able only to perform the task at a less intense level (4.6 versus 5.1 kcal per minute). In this study, the mean BMIs of both groups were over 20, (i.e. means of 20.1 and 23.2). This may indicate that these features of stamina and rate of working relate to body size even within the range of
BMIs now classified as normal. The capacity for work may be progressively lower as body weight declines. Choosing a cut-off point for CED is then somewhat arbitrary, but the evidence so far obtained does not suggest that the cut-off point needs to be set any lower.
It could be speculated that a low BMI will alter physical work capacity from a metabolic point of view. However, the physiological changes seen are only proportionate to the reduction in muscle tissue associated with the low BMI states and the state of muscle activity does not seem to have been impaired. Nevertheless, the physical and economic disadvantages of a low body weight seem to be clear and harmful on their own.
Physical activity and behavioural adaptation
The behavioural adaptation in physical activity patterns that accompanies low BMI states is mainly related to the individual's allocation of time and energy to different productive and leisure activities and to the estimation of the biological and economic consequences of these altered behavioural patterns. When there is both a fall in energy intakes and an increased demand for energy expenditure at work, e.g. during some points in agricultural seasonal activities, individuals will adjust the time they allocate to different tasks: more time is given to work activities and less time and energy are expended for pleasure and dealing with productive tasks at home (Immink, 1987). This is an important form of behavioural adaptation and the pattern of such adaptation may be different for CED individuals than for those who are well-nourished.
The earliest, well-documented study of behavioural alteration during long-term energy deficiency was that by Keys and his colleagues (1950) in the classic Minnesota semi-starvation studies. After 24 weeks of semi-starvation, the Minnesota study participants had BMIs of about 16.5 and showed severe inactivity with a marked reduction in spontaneous activity and clear lack of motivation to undertake much activity. The dramatic reduction in physical activity was an important survival mechanism during this study because the low food intake was fixed. In Asia and Africa, however, there seem to be adults who manage to maintain reasonable levels of daily activity despite having low BMIs equivalent to the Minnesota volunteers. This suggests that the Asians and Africans have a higher energy intake since no ethnic differences in energy metabolism and efficiency have been discovered. The severe weight loss of the tall American volunteers who had never before experienced food deprivation
may have been crucial to their behavioural change. In contrast, in Africa or India the adults probably had been deprived of food over long periods of time and had never achieved a normal BMI. They had maintained their levels of activity at the expense of weight gain.
An analysis of the pattern of physical activity during a voluntary reduction in food intake has shown that the behavioural response to a deficient intake is that the individual changes his or her activity pattern (Gorsky & Calloway, 1983). The loss in body weight associated with the deficient intake was associated with a distinct change in activity patterns: lower effort discretionary activities replaced any which needed greater effort. The obligatory activities were not, however, affected. Gorsky and Calloway (1983) considered that observations such as those of Viteri (1982) and Satyanarayana et al., (1977) may not have provided the same evidence on behavioural adaptation as they had found. Individuals who are motivated to perform activities of highest priority do select and adjust their behaviour accordingly.
Researchers of the Institute of Nutrition of Central America (INCAP) arrived at similar conclusions (Town et al., 1989). The rural Guatemalan men in their studies who had lower muscle masses were able to carry out the specific agricultural task allocated to them but took a much longer time to do it. Additional interesting changes in their activity behaviour were then observed: these individuals took a significantly longer time to walk home after work and they spent approximately 3 hours each day taking a nap or sitting, playing cards or doing other sedentary activities. In contrast, the better nourished age-matched males did not sleep during the day and proved to be active at home in addition to playing soccer for their recreation. The latter group, therefore, remained physically active for a significantly greater proportion of the day. Marginally undernourished individuals, therefore, tend to become more sedentary at the expense of social interactions and discretionary
non-salaried activities.
In Kenya, a study of 220 male roadworkers, also found that there was a highly significant relationship between weight-for-height and the time taken to complete a task (Latham, 1989). Men with low weight-for-height took significantly longer to complete the same task than men with a higher weight-for-height. In this study, anaemia was not a confounding factor. It was concluded that energy deficient individuals will be forced over a period of time to limit their activities in order to conserve energy. Whereas some do so consciously and wilfully, others do it unconsciously.
Careful analysis (Ferro-Luzzi et al., 1992) of more recent data based on two concurrent studies (Norgan et al., 1993; Branca et al., 1993) on seasonal variations in activity patterns of men and women in rural India and Ethiopia showed that individuals with varying degrees of CED spent fewer hours per day working than did individuals in the same socio-cultural milieu whose BMI was > 18.5. Analysis of the hours of productive activity of normal and CED Ethiopian women also revealed that if the women had BMIs less than 18.5 a smaller amount of time was spent on productive activities in a day. Data collated from the National Food Consumption and Household Budget Survey carried out in Rwanda also provided information on the physical activity index of 1,100 women in rural areas (François, 1990). When the physical activity index is expressed as a multiple of the basal metabolic rate, computed for all days on a yearly basis, it shows a gradient in the levels of physical activity.
Those individuals with a BMI < 17.6 have average physical activity levels which are significantly lower and they have increased levels of rest time per day (See Figure 5.1).
Figure 5.1 - Effect of body mass index on physical activities of Rwandese women, 1982
Source: François, P., FAO, 1990, unpublished data.
These carefully analysed studies support the impression that adults with a low BMI are forced to adapt their behaviour in terms of spontaneous, free-living physical activity. Low body weights seem to limit an adults' work output, productivity and income-generating ability. Restricting discretionary or obligatory physical activity becomes an important short-term survival strategy for low-weight individuals but this may reduce their earning power and jeopardize their long-term survival. They may be less able to respond to stressful conditions when they suddenly face greater demands.
All of these analyses point to the same view regarding low BMI which is different than that previously held. The previously accepted view that a low body weight in an adult is not of much consequence now seems not to be true. Low BMIs are associated with a consistent behavioural pattern demonstrable in Asia, Africa, South and Central America. In all communities, there is a clear decline in work output and the ability to sustain productivity throughout the day. The time taken in work has to be extended to the detriment of socially desirable leisure activities. These observations justify the emphasis given to the energy needs at work and at home by the FAO/WHO/UNU 1985 Report and as advocated by FAO for a number of years (Périssé & Kamoun, 1987) and suggest that far greater attention should be paid to adult BMIs. The data also reinforce the view that a cutoff point of 18.5 is not unreasonable. Finally, the BMI seems to be a reasonably sensitive index of function and its
monitoring is necessary if development projects depend on the physical activity of the community.
<section>7</section>
Chapter 6 Health and BMI
Low BMI, pregnancy and lactation
Morbidity and mortality and the BMI of adults
Low BMI and sickness events
Low BMI, mortality and the limits of survival
Chapter 6 Health and BMI
Low BMI, pregnancy and lactation
Maternal undernutrition during pregnancy impairs foetal growth. The Dutch famine during the Second World War provides an excellent example of the effects of maternal nutritional status on foetal outcome (Stein et al., 1975). A study in South India attempted to relate maternal anthropometry with birth weight in 1,642 live births (Kapur et al., 1971) and found that the mean heights of the mothers appeared to be similar in all socio-economic groups while body weights were nearly 10 kg less in mothers who belonged to the group with the lowest socioeconomic status. The birth weights followed the same trend, the mothers of the poorer socioeconomic strata had infants with the lowest birth weights. The birth weights appeared to be linearly correlated with both maternal body weights and heights. Using previous anthropometric studies on maternal nutrition, summarized by Kapur and colleagues (1971), the BMIs can be computed from mean heights and weights, all of which show maternal BMIs
< 20 and in some studies, mean maternal BMIs of < 18.5. In Vietnam, these results were confirmed. The birthweight was always lower with low BMI (< 18.5) whatever the weight gain of the mother was during pregnancy (Giay & Khoi, 1992).
Analysis of data from the National Nutrition Monitoring Bureau (NNMB) suggests that states in India that have women with better nutritional status, i.e. a higher value of BMI (> 18.5) also have better histories of maternal and infant nutrition (Naidu et al., 1991). Maternal BMI was related to the birth weight of the infant with the mean birth weight (in kg) improving as the BMI value moved from grade 3 CED (> 16.0 BMI) to normal BMI ranges between 18.5-20 and 20-25 (See Table 6.1). Even among the mothers with grade 3 CED, the mean birth weight at 2.51 kg was just above the cut-off point of 2.5 kg birth weight for diagnosing newborns as being small for gestational age. Nevertheless, the proportions of low birth weight children increased among those mothers whose BMIs were low. In Table 6.1 the proportions of mothers in each BMI category and the proportions of children classified as having low birth weight in each category are presented. Similar inferences can be made from a
study of Glasgow mothers from poor socio-economic groups where low pre-pregnant body weights were associated with a higher incidence of low birth weights. A study from East Java (Kardjati et al., 1988) also shows that pre-pregnant weight is a determinant of birth weight. The cut-off of 40 kg for pre-pregnant weight appeared to be the risk level of low birth weight in the East Javan community (Kardjati, 1985). This cut-off point for pre-pregnant body weight for a woman of less than 1.5 metre in height works out approximately to a BMI < 18.0. The East Javan study reinforced the fact that birth weight is determined by the pre-pregnant BMI
TABLE 6.1 Maternal anthropometry, BMI and pregnancy outcome in India
Maternal BMI range
Category
Birth weight (g)
Percent low birth wt
Risk ratio
Mothers' age
Mothers' ht (m)
Mothers' wt (kg)
Gravida
Haemoglobin (g/100 ml)
Number
Source: Naidu et at., 1991.
Of the mother. In this study, the incidence of low birth weight fell from 21 percent to 5 percent when the maternal pre-pregnant BMI rose from <16.0 to >18.5 (Kusin et al., 1992).
A low BMI status, indicative of CED, is a particularly important aspect of the nutritional risk of women in a community during the reproductive years. This risk can be exacerbated by early marriage. Statistics from the World Fertility Survey have shown that early marriage is common in some countries. For instance, 25 percent of 14-year old girls in Bangladesh and 34 percent of 15-year old girls in Nepal are married (WHO/UNFPA/UNICEF, 1989). The social pressure to conceive early and thus gain status through fecundity further aggravates the problem. If a pregnancy occurs before the requirements for growth have been adequately met, an additional demand on the body is created and could lead to extra problems. The onset of puberty in girls is earlier than in boys but menarche may be at 12-13 years with the growth spurt still in progress at the age of 14 years and linear growth continuing until the age of 18 years. Peak bone mass is not achieved until about the age of 25 years.
The development of the pelvic birth canal is slower than that of the early teenage spurt of long bones. The birth canal does not reach its mature size until several years after growth in height has ceased by the age of 18 years (Moerman, 1982). The competing nutritional needs of pregnancy and growth in an adolescent mother will affect the growth of the foetus and hence the birth weight of the child. Thus, the incidence of low birth weight, which is an indicator of intra-uterine malnutrition, is higher among adolescent mothers. Since the incidence of low birth weight is higher among all mothers with a low BMI status (Naidu et al., 1991) the combination of a low BMI and adolescence is likely to increase the chances of having a low birth weight infant.
Young adolescent mothers who are not fully grown will naturally have a lower BMI than they would have when mature since the usual pattern in children is for BMIs to increase markedly during adolescence as pubertal changes occur. Whether the BMI cutoffs for adults are also applicable to young, adolescents is uncertain. Frisancho and colleagues (1983) have shown quite conclusively that adolescent mothers of low body weight and hence low BMI are likely to be at a greater risk of having babies with low birth weight. They surmised that among rapidly growing adolescents, the nutritional requirements of pregnancy may be greater than those of older, mature mothers; the increased maternal intake of energy has to compete with the needs for tissue deposition in pregnancy, e.g. in the uterus and placenta and with the needs of the foetus. A study by Sibert and colleagues (1978) in South India has shown that maternal nutritional status, in particular energy stores reflected in skinfold
thicknesses, were positively correlated with low birth weight, decreased length and deficient fat folds in infants. The detrimental impact of low BMIs on foetal outcome of teenage and adolescent mothers is true in both developed and developing countries.
Lactation is considered to be a physiological process that is robust and hence preserved well in spite of the poor nutritional status of the mother. However, there is some evidence to show that poor maternal status exemplified by a low BMI is associated with poor lactational performance and poorer growth in infants (Kusin et al., 1992). Low maternal BMIs are associated with poorer post-partum outcomes such as lower breast milk output and underweight children (Anderson, 1989). Lactational requirements will impose further demands on mothers with CED and this may be an even greater imposition in the young adolescent mother whose pubertal development of fat stores is incomplete. In an environment where the risks of low energy intakes and of increased demands on physical activity are high, pregnancies, particularly when frequent, may not allow sufficient time for the mother to recuperate. This further stresses the mother's nutritional status and reduces her body energy stores
(Merchant et al., 1992). These reductions in body energy stores will in turn affect subsequent pregnancy and lactational performance.
With enhanced nutrient needs in early life the infant is particularly vulnerable to any impediment in a mother's ability to nurse the child and provide an ample supply of milk of an appropriate nutrient composition. Without this normal supply the small baby will be at risk of a long-term handicap which may be only physically manifested as a retardation in the growth in length. Thus, it is important to consider events which are likely to increase the probability of prematurity and a child having additional needs. Low birth weight also has considerable societal costs in the form of increased neonatal mortality and susceptibility to infections due to diminished immunocompetence. It also starts the child's "life fight" with subnormal stores of nutrients (Jelliffe & Jelliffe, 1989). These events will also increase the probability of stunting.
On these grounds alone, the use of the BMI index seems justified as a means of alerting community workers to the vulnerability of mothers. Selective food supplements may benefit mothers with a low BMI whereas mothers with normal weights usually show little benefit. The cut-off point of 18.5 with further lower grades at 17 and 16 thus seem to be justified on the basis of the data presented in Table 6.1.
Morbidity and mortality and the BMI of adults
The relationship between morbidity from chronic disease and mortality and high BMI has been recognized and analysed in developed countries for a number of years (Kushner, 1993) primarily for the purpose of determining life insurance risk. There is now an increased interest in using BMI as an index for those chronic diseases which are common in affluent, industrialized countries and which are now appearing in the urban industrialized regions of developing nations. Thus, the prevalence of coronary heart disease (7.3 percent) in urban India is over six times that seen in the surrounding rural environments and the victims are from the affluent, upper socioeconomic classes (Gopalan, 1988). The prevalence of obesity in Brazil has increased enormously. These findings have emphasized the relationships between BMI and morbidity or mortality at the upper end of the range of optimum BMIs, while similar relationships at the lower end of the acceptable BMI range are only now emerging.
BMI has been used to determine the prevalence of diabetes mellitus in 2,500 government employees in urban Hyderabad. High BMIs were associated with a higher prevalence of diabetes mellitus and glycosuria (Satyanarayana, 1976). The BMI was also found to be greater among the employees who had a higher educational or socio-economic status as well as among those who were older (Rag, 1977). A large study involving 3,314 individuals in urban south India showed that obesity was more common in women than men (27 percent vs 5 percent) and that high BMIs and high incomes were significantly correlated with the presence of diabetes mellitus.
The use of BMI as an index to determine the prevalence of obesity in developing countries is a more recent phenomenon. In urban India, Sood and others (1984) using a cut-off BMI of >27 have reported that among those in the age group of 30-39 years, 20.9 percent of men and 14.3 percent of women were obese; while among those between the ages of 40-49 years, obesity was found among 15.6 percent of men and 34.3 percent of women. In their sample of 836 adults, in the age range of 20-65 years, the prevalence of obesity was 8.4 percent and 20.9 percent among men and women, respectively using a BMI cut-off of >27.0.
BMI has also been used to evaluate the prevalence of diabetes mellitus among undernourished rural adults (Jaya Rao et al., 1972). The rate of diabetes of 2.4 percent in the rural, undernourished population was not very different from those of 1.5-2.5 percent reported in urban surveys. Yet comparisons between rural and urban areas and ethnic groups made in a biracial (Melanesian and Indian) population in Fiji in 1980 (Zimmet et al., 1983) showed a sixfold difference between rural and urban male Melanesians. Such differences were not apparent among Indians. The diabetes associated with early malnutrition is not readily seen when assessing the link between BMI and the prevalence of diabetes mellitus in adult life. These data on morbidity and disease do show, however, the emerging general usefulness of BMI measures in adults in the developing world.
Low BMI and sickness events
There is a considerable volume of data on morbidity and events of illness in malnourished children. However, rarely have similar associations been made between adults with low BMIs and episodes of illness. The National Food Consumption and Household Budget Survey carried out in rural adults in Rwanda has provided some data in this area (François, 1990). When the data on total time spent lying down by adults was calculated and expressed as the number of equivalent days per year spent in bed, (i.e. where 16 hours extra sickness was equivalent to 1 day in bed), there was a disproportionately large amount of time spent in bed among those people with BMIs below 17.6 (see Figure 6.1). Evidence from Bangladesh (Pryor, 1990) also supports this observation, with an association between the percentage of fathers who were not working due to illness and the percentage of fathers with low BMIs (see Figure 6.2).
Figure 6.1 - BMI and "Equivalent days. of illness among Rwandese women, 1982
Source: François, P., FAO, 1990, unpublished data.
Figure 6.2 - BMI and loss of labour days due to illness in Bangladesh
Source: adapted from Pryer, J., 1990.
The same phenomenon occured in Brazil which represents a more developed country. In the 1989 National Health and Nutrition Survey, information was collected regarding the number of days ill (identified as days in bed) over a two week period prior to the interview. In addition to the length of the illness, information was sought regarding the disease or cause itself. If the different BMI categories, ranging from the underweight to the obese, are displayed against the percent of individuals in each category spending more than one day in bed, the result is the pattern shown in Figure 6.3. This follows the U-shape curve similar to that of BMI and the mortality rate. In both situations, the thin as well as the obese have a higher probability of spending time in bed due to illness than those in the normal weight range and this increases with the degree of thinness or obesity.
The costs resulting from episodes of illness may be very high. If low BMIs imply proneness to illness with, for example, a compromised immune system, this has serious implications. It could place enormous additional economic and social burdens on a community because adults have a low BMI. The data are preliminary by necessity because no systematic long-term studies in developing countries have been undertaken to determine whether thin adults who are initially free of infection and infestation are more prone to illness and specific diseases than heavier adults. Although the evidence is now clear in underweight children, data on adults are so limited that we can only state that the condition of low weight is associated with excess illness and an inability to work.
Figure 6.3 - BMI and the probability of illness among Brazilian women (PNSN Survey, 1989)
Source: de Vasconcellos, 1992, based on date presented at a meeting
"Functional Significance of Low Body Mass Index (BMI). Rome",
4-6 November, 1992.
Low adult body weights may not only reflect the effects of recurrent infection, but a combination of problems of food availability and increased energy demand due to increased physical activity resulting in seasonal changes in body weight in many communities. It would be foolish, therefore, to regard low adult weights as simply reflecting disease. It is a remediable nutritional condition which could, when treated, possibly enhance resistance to infection and improve human welfare. It must be remembered that McKeown in his analysis of health trends over the past 200 years in Britain and Europe noted that nutrition and hygiene were major factors in reducing the incidence of infectious disease long before immunization or antibiotics were available. With a huge array of studies now demonstrating the remarkable importance of nutrition for developing and maintaining immunocompetence (Chandra, 1983), it would be best to assume, from a policy point of view, that a low BMI is an
indicator of impaired immunocompetence and an enhanced susceptibility to infection. A low BMI is also associated with alterations in several important cellular functions which may include drug metabolism and pharmacokinetics. This, in turn, may affect the therapeutic responses, the doses required, the length and success of drug treatments, but these issues have been poorly studied.
Low BMI, mortality and the limits of survival
With interest in low BMI as an indicator of CED in adults, new data are emerging which relate low BMIs to mortality rates. In the rural area surrounding Hyderabad, India, data show an inverse relationship between BMI and mortality rates as shown in Table 6.2.
Since more details are not available it is difficult to state categorically whether the low BMI was the result of the disease process leading to death or whether the low BMI state preceded and increased the men's proneness to illness and subsequent death. In a recent communication, Henry (1990) has undertaken a detailed review of the available data on the lower range of BMI and the limits of human survival obtained from a wide range of sources. The BMIs of persons, most of whom were from developed countries, who died of starvation are remarkably consistent: in males, a BMI of around 13 appeared to be fatal whereas women survived to reach a BMI of around 11.0. A mean BMI of around 13.0 was seen in groups of young women with anorexia nervosa: similar values were observed in a group of free-living south Indian females. It was claimed that they were physically active and carrying out their normal daily chores.
TABLE 6.2 Mortality rates for men according to BMI categories (Hyderabad)
BMI range
Mortality rate (deaths/ 1000/year)
Source: Satyanarayana et al., 1 99 1.
This indicates that very low BMIs in women are compatible with survival. Henry (1990) graphically represented the data to show that a BMI around 13.0 sharply divides the male survivors from the non-survivors while there is a much larger variability in the BMIs of surviving and dying women for whom the cut-off point in BMI for survival was not clear. These sex differences in the BMI value for survival may prove to be important and may relate to the greater body reserves of energy at any BMI value of the women. It is clear, however, from the preceding chapters that such low BMIs are very unsatisfactory from a functional and morbidity point of view.
It seems clear therefore that BMI is a useful index in urban areas in developing countries where the risk of the chronic diseases of affluence exists. Yet data on those with a low body weight is limited. To obtain comparable data on the risks of general ill health and specific diseases among those with low BMI will require systematic study. This will be one step towards developing evidence of the functional and medical significance of low body weights. Until these are available we will be forced to use long-term studies linking low body weight to mortality.
<section>8</section>
Chapter 7 BMI distribution in developed and developing countries
A universal reference range of BMI
BMI distribution of populations in developing countries
Chapter 7 BMI distribution in developed and developing countries
A universal reference range of BMI
Earlier, we presented the data on BMIs obtained from men and women from the UK who were in active military service and hence assumed to be physically fit and healthy. This database was the primary source used at the original IDECG workshop for determining the criteria for specifying the range of BMIs to be classed as CED in adults. An important issue still to be addressed is whether a BMI in the 18.5 to 25.0 range is a useful reference standard for normality and hence optimum for health throughout the world.
In Table 7.1, the distribution of BMIs among healthy UK adults, both males and females aged 20-65 years is shown (Knight, 1984; Jones et al., 1986). The percentage distribution of French males and females according to BMI grades, for adults of ages ranging from 20 to 87 years is shown in Figure 7.1. In both of these fairly large databases showing the distribution of BMIs among adult males and females from two European countries, the majority of the population is found to be in the optimum or acceptable BMI range between 20.0 to 25.0. A recent study in the Netherlands (de Boer et al., 1988) has also shown that BMIs of well-nourished adults range between 20.0 and 24.0 irrespective of their ethnicity or country of origin. Active Czechoslovak men who were either middle distance runners, endurance runners, marathon runners, football players or pentathlon participants, all had a BMI between 20.0 to 24.0 (Bunc et al., 1984). The Japanese National Nutrition Survey (1983 - 1986) had
BMI means for adult males and females in three age groups distributed within the same range, i.e. adult males aged 18 to 60+ years, had mean BMIs ranging from 21.6 to 22.9, and adult females of the same age groups had mean BMIs from 20.8 to 22.8. The large Cornell/Oxford Epidemiology Survey in China (Junshi et al., 1990) also indicated that the mean BMIs of Chinese men and women, between the ages of 45-54 years, were 20.5 and 20.7, respectively. Data on BMI of well-nourished individuals from several studies conducted in Africa show the mean BMIs to range from 20.7 to 25.5. In India, the urban affluent population had BMIs of about 24 and both rural well-nourished men and women have BMI means over 20 (Gopalan, 1989b; Satyanarayana et al., 1991). The differences in the mean BMIs of the rural and urban well-nourished populations, i.e. greater mean BMIs of urban dwellers, may be attributed to a higher prevalence of obesity among the urban well-nourished group.
TABLE 7.1 Percent distribution of BMI of UK adults aged 2065 years
Males ^1,2
Females ^1
Sources: 1 Knight, 1984. 2 Jones et al., 1986.
Figure 7.1 - BMI distribution among French adults
Source: adapted from Rolland-Cachera et al., 1991
BMI distribution of populations in developing countries
BMI distributions and their central tendencies among male and female adults of several developing countries are summarized in Table 7.2 although not all the data sets are nationally representative. Mean and median BMIs of both sexes in these data sets lie within the optimum range. The percent distribution of male and female adults according to the BMI categories from four different countries in the developing world is shown in Table 7.3. It is seen that 62 to 76 percent of females and 74 to 84 percent of males have an acceptable range of BMI in these countries. In some of these countries, e.g. Brazil, Togo, and Tunisia, a proportion of individuals have some degree of obesity.
TABLE 7.2 Mean, Median and CV of the BMI among adults in selected countries
Location
Categories
Number of adults
Mean BMI
Median BMI
C.V. BMI (%)
Benin (1987/88)^1
Males
Females
Brazil (1974/75)^2a
Males
Females
China ^(*) (1982)^3
Males
Females
India (1988/90)^4b
Males
Females
Rwanda (1982)^5
Males
Females
Togo (1986)^6c
Males
Females
Tunisia (1980)^7a
Males
Females
Sources: ^1 DANA-the Rep. of Benin/"La Sapienza" University, Rome. ^2 IBGE. ^3 NINFH. ^4 NIN. ^5 François, 1990. ^6 Banque d'information permanente, Ministère du Plan (BIP). ^7 Institut National de la Statistique (INS).
^(*) Sub-sample.
^a urban/rural representative
^b rural representative
^c urban representative
Diagrammatic representation of the distribution confirms that the majority fall within the acceptable BMI ranges (See Figure 7.2).
The distribution of a sub-sample of men and women from a national survey in China, according to BMI categories, is represented in a histogram (See Figure 7.3). The changes in BMI distribution which have occurred over time in Brazil and India, are shown in Figures 7.4 and 7.5, respectively. The distribution for Brazil is based on the Estudio nacional da despesa familiar (ENDEF) and the Pesquisa Nacional de Saúde e Nutrição (PNSN) survey conducted in 1974-75 and in 1989, respectively. The findings for India are based on two sets of aggregated data from two separate series of National Nutrition Monitoring Bureau (NNMB) surveys. The first series was conducted between the years 1974-79 and the second between 198890. The BMI status of Indian adults showed an improvement; nevertheless, the data indicate that India had a high proportion of adults with BMI < 18.5., even in 1989-1990.
TABLE 7.3 Percent distribution of male and female adult populations according to BMI categories
Location
Number of
BMI categories
adults
Brazil^1
Males
Females
China^2
Males
Females
Togo^3
Males
Females
Tunisia^4
Males
Females
Sources: 1 IBGE. 2 INFH (Beijing). 3 BIP. 4 INS.
Figure 7.2 - BMI distribution of males in Brazil, China and Tunisia*
Source: François, P., FAO, 1990, unpublished data.
This finding among populations in India raises the issue of whether the population is constitutionally different from those of other nations. The argument that Indians are unique and, therefore, have fundamentally different needs cannot be sustained since affluent Indians have a "normal" BMI (as noted in earlier chapters) and detailed studies of Indian children growing up in affluent communities within India show that they conform with the global reference WHO standards for height and weight. The data do, however, raise the fundamental question of the state of adult nutrition in countries on South and Southeast Asia. Malaysians evidently do not have a problem of food availability but there are grounds for substantial concern in Vietnam where adult malnutrition is apparent in all groups but is particularly drastic in those persons over 60 years of age.
The distribution of BMI by categories for both male and female adults from 13 countries in the developing world is summarized in Table 7.4. Only those countries whose surveys were nationally representative were selected. Comparisons of nutritional status of adult populations are possible but caution should be taken because the time and length of study periods differ from one country to another. Furthermore, the composition of the groups of adults are not identical in terms of age and sex.
Figure 7.3 - BMI distribution among Chinese adults, 1982
Source: Ge, K., 1992, based on data presented al a meeting
"Functional Significance of Low Body Mass Index (BMI)",
Rome. 4-6 November, 1992.
Figure 7.4 - BMI distribution among Brazilian adults in 1974-75 and 1989
Source: de Vasconcellos, 1992, based on data presented at a meeting
"Functional Significance of Low Body Mass Index (BMI)",
Rome, 4-6 November, 1992.
Figure 7.5 - BMI distribution among Indian adults in 1974-79 and 1988-90
Source: Naidu, A.N. 1992, based on data presented at a meeting
"Functional Significance of Low Body Mass Index (BMI)",
Rome, 4-6 November, 1992.
In general, Latin American countries have a large percentage of adults with a tendency to obesity (BMI _ 25.0), usually more than one-third of the population. Conversely, the percentage of people who tend toward emaciation is far smaller (3 to 6 percent). Percentages of "normal" adults (with BMI between 18.5 and 25.0) are around 60 percent.
In Africa, the tendency toward emaciation (BMI <= 18.5) is greater in Sahelian countries (e.g. Mali, 16.3 percent) than in tropical and subtropical areas. In North Africa, the tendency to obesity is more evident. Data related to BMI of adults in Asian countries show that great proportions of their populations have a BMI under 18.5: from 12.5 percent in Chine to 48.6 percent in India in 1989-90. For some countries of Europe and North America, data indicate a small number of adults with BMIs _ 18.5. On the other hand, the percentage of adults with a tendency towards obesity is extremely high, from 32.4 percent in France to more than 55.0 percent in the USA.
The data presented in this section demonstrate the sort of considerations which are possible using BMI as an objective index of nutritional status of adults in population groups. BMI distributions represented in this manner allow for intercountry or interregional comparisons provided that specific technical considerations be carefully given to the collection of such information during national surveys conducted either for nutritional surveillance or for purposes of nutritional monitoring. The use of the BMI also has the advantage of allowing the assessment of changes over time within a community. This simple indicator can be used to evaluate the impact of intervention strategies and economic development on nutrition status.
TABLE 7.4 Percent distribution of adults by BMI categories for selected country surveys
BMI categories
Location
Year/source
Number of adults
Mean
AFRICA
Congo (women)
Ghana
Mali
Morocco
Tunisia
EUROPE & N. AMERICA
Prance
Hungary
USA
LATIN AMERICA
Brazil
Cuba
Peru
ASIA
China
India
Sources. ^1 ORSTOM. ^2 World Bank. ^3 Direction Nationale de la Statistique et de l'Informatique (DNSI). ^4 Institut National de la Statistique (INS). ^5 National Health and Nutrition Examination survey (NHANES 11). ^6 IBGE/PNSN. ^7 Instituto de Desarrollo de la Salud (IDS). ^8 Encuesta Nacional del Poblador Peruano (ENPPE). ^9 Institute of Nutrition and Food Hygiene (INFH, Beijing). ^10 NIN. ^11 Hungary National Survey (Budapest). ^(*) Median value (teen, women)
<section>9</section>
Bibliography
Bibliography
Allen, T.H., Peng, M.T., Chen, K.P., Huang, T.F., Chang, C., Fang, H.S. 1956. Prediction of blood volume and adiposity in man from body weight and cube of height. Metabolism 5: 328-345.
Anderson, M.A. 1989. The relationship between maternal nutrition and child growth in rural India. Ph.D. thesis, Tufts university.
Berardi, D. & François, P.J. 1992. Personal communication.
Branca, F., Pastore, G., Demissie, T., Sette, S., Bekele, A. & Ferro-Luzzi, A. 1993. Biological impact of agroclimatic seasonality in a rural community of central Ethiopia. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. (In press).
Bunc, V., Sprynarova, S., Parizkova, J. & Leso, J. 1984. Effects of adaptation on the mechanical efficiency and energy cost of physical work. Hum. Nutr. Clin. Nutr. 38C: 317-319.
Chandra, R.K. 1983. Nutrition, immunity and infection: present knowledge and future directions. Lancet 1: 688-691.
de Boer, J.O., van Es, A.J.H., Voorips, L.E., Blokstra, F. & Vogt, J.E. 1988. Energy metabolism and requirements in different ethnic groups. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. 42: 983-998.
Delpeuch, F. 1992. Paper presented at a meeting "Functional Significance of Low Body Mass Index (BMI)". Rome.
Deolalikar, A. 1988. Do health and nutrition influence labor productivity in agriculture? Econometric estimates for rural south India. Rev. Econ. Stat. 70 (3): 406-413.
Desai, I.D. 1989. Nutritional status and physical work performance of agricultural migrants in southern Brazil. Proc. Xiv int. Cong. Nutr., Seoul, pp. 297-301.
Desai, I.D., Wadell, C., Dutra, S., Dutra de Oliveira, S., Duarte, E., Robazzi, M.L., Cevallos Romero, L.S., Desai, M.I., Vichi, F.L., Bradfield, R.B. & Dutra de Oliveira, J.E. 1984. Marginal malnutrition and reduced physical work capacity of migrant adolescent boys in southern Brazil. Amer. J. Clin. Nutr. 40: 135-145.
Deurenberg, P., Westrate, J.A. & Seidell, J.C. 1991. Body mass index as a measure of body fatness: age and sex prediction formulas. Brit. J. Nutr. 65: 105-114.
de Vasconcellos, M. 1992. Paper presented at a meeting "Functional Significance of Low Body Mass Index (BMI)". Rome.
de Vasconcellos, M. 1993. Case studies of the relationship of BMI to food intake and socioeconomic variables: The Brazilian experience. In Functional significance of low body mass index (James, W.P.T. & Schürch, B. eds.) Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. Suppl. (In press).
Durnin, J.V.G.A., Mckay, F.C. & Webster, C.I. 1984. A new method of assessing fatness and desirable weight for use in the Armed Services. Unrestricted report to Army Department Ministry of Defence. UK.
Evans, J.G. & Prior, I.A.M. 1969. Indices of obesity derived from height and weight in two Polynesian populations. Brit. J. Prev. Soc. Med. 23:56-60.
Eveleth, P.B. & Tanner, J.M. 1976. Worldwide variation in human growth, pp. 1-273. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Ferro-Luzzi, A., Pastore, G. & Sette, S. 1987. Seasonality in energy metabolism. In: Chronic energy deficiency consequences and related issues (eds. Schürch, B. & Scrimshaw, N.S.), pp. 37-58. International Dietary Energy Consultancy Group. Lausanne.
Ferro-Luzzi, A. (Ed.). 1990. Biology of adaptation to seasonal cycling of energy intake. Eur. J. Clin. Nut. 44 (Suppl. 1):1125.
Ferro-Luzzi, A., Sette, S., Franklin, M. & James, W.P.T. 1992. A simplified approach to assessing adult chronic energy deficiency. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. 46: 173-186.
Florey, C.D.V. 1970. The use and interpretation of ponderal index and other weight-height ratios in epidemiological studies. J. Chr. Dis. 23: 93-103.
François, P.J. 1970. Enquêtes alimentaires Recherche d'une formule générale pour le calcul de la ration alimentaire par tête, par menage et par groupe. Bulletin de Nutrition 8:4. p. 10-26. Rome, FAO.
François, P.J. 1990. Unpublished data. Rome, FAO.
Frisancho, R.A., Matos, J. & Flegal, P. 1983. Maternal nutritional status and pregnancy outcome. Amer. J. Clin. Nutr. 38: 739-742.
Garcia, M. & Alderman, H. 1989. Patterns and determinants of malnutrition in children in Pakistan. A study for the World Bank. IFPRI.
Garrow, J.S. 1981. Treat obesity seriously a clinical manual. London, Churchill Living stone .
Ge, K. 1992. Paper presented at a meeting "Functional Significance of Low Body Mass Index (BMI)". Rome.
Giay, T. & Khoi, H.H. 1992. Use of body mass index (BMI) in the assessment of adult nutritional status in Vietnam (BMI meeting).
Goldbourt, U. & Medalie, J.H. 1974. Weight-height indices. Choice of the most suitable index and its association with selected variables among 10,000 adult males of heterogeneous origin. Brit. J. Prev. Soc. Med. 28: 116-126.
Gomez, F., Ramos-Galván, R., Frenk, S., Muñoz, J.C., Chávez, R. & Vazquez, J. 1956. Mortality in second and third degree malnutrition. J. Trop. Paed. 2: 77-83.
Gopalan, C. 1987. Heights of population - an index of their nutrition and socio-economic development. Bull. Nutr. Found. Ind. 8: 1-5.
Gopalan, C. 1988. Dietary guidelines for affluent Indians. Bull. Nutr. Found. Ind.9: 1-4.
Gopalan, C. 1989a. Science and nutrition in the future. Plenary lecture, xiv International Congress of Nutrition, Seoul, S. Korea.
Gopalan, C. 1989b. Overview and heights and weights of parents. In Growth of affluent Indian girls during adolescence. NFI Sci. Report 10. New Delhi, Nutr. Found. Ind.
Gorsky, R.D. & Calloway, D.H. 1983. Activity pattern changes with decrease in food energy intake. Hum. Biol. 55: 577-586.
Haddad, L. & Bouis, H. 1991. The impact of nutritional status on agricultural productivity: wage evidence from the Philippines. Oxford Bull. Econ. Stat. 53 (1): 45-67.
Henry, C.J.K. 1990. Body mass index and the limits of human survival. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. 44: 329-335.
Immink, M.D.C. 1987. Economic effects of chronic energy deficiency. In Schürch, B. & Scrimshaw, N.S. (eds.) Chronic energy deficiency: consequences and related issues. International Dietary Energy Consultancy Group. Lausanne.
James, W.P.T., Ferro-Luzzi, A. & Waterlow, J.C. 1988. Definition of chronic energy deficiency in adults. Report of working party of IDECG. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. 42: 969-981.
Jaya Rao, K.S., Mukerjee, S. & Rao, U.K. 1972. A survey of diabetes mellitus in a rural population of India. Diabetes 21: 1192-1196.
Jelliffe, D.B. & Jelliffe, E.F.P. 1989. Community nutritional assessment. Oxford, Oxford University Press.
Jones, P.R.M., Hunt, M.J., Brown, T.P. & Norgan, N.G. 1986. Waist-hip circumference ratio and its relationship to age and overweight in British men. Hum. Nutr. Clin. Nutr. 40C: 239-247.
Junshi, C., Campbell, T.C., Junyao, L. & Peto, R. 1990. Diet, life-style and mortality in China. UK, Oxford University Press.
Kapur, S., Kumar, G., Mammen, K.C. & Jesudian, G. 1971. Height and weight of South Indian women of child bearing age and their effect on birth weight and length of the baby. Ind. J. Med. Res. 59: 1480-1490.
Kardjati, S. 1985. Maternal nutritional profile and birth weight in rural villages in Sampany, Madura (Indonesia). Thesis. Airlangga University, Surabaya, Indonesia.
Kardjati, S., Kusin, J.A. & De With, C. 1988. Energy supplementation in the last trimester of pregnancy in East Java:I. Effect on birth weight. Brit. J. Obstet. Gynae. 95: 783-794.
Keys, A., Brozek, J., Henschel, A., Mickelsen, O. & Taylor, H.L. 1950. Human starvation. Vol. 1, pp. 1-763. Minneapolis: University of Minnesota Press.
Keys, A., Fidanza, F., Karvoven, M.J., Kimura, N. & Taylor, H.C. 1972. Indices of relative weight and obesity. J. Chr. Dis. 25: 329-343.
Khosla, T. & Lowe, C.R. 1967. Indices of obesity derived from body weight and height. Brit. J. Prev. Soc. Med. 21: 122-128.
Knight, I. 1984. The heights and weights of adults in Great Britain. OPCS Social Survey Division. London, HMSO.
Kushner, R.F. 1993. Body weight and mortality. Nutr. Rev. 51: 127-136.
Kusin, J.A., Kardjati, S., Renqvist, U.H. 1992. Chronic undernutrition in pregnancy and lactation. Proc. Nutr. Soc. (In press).
Latham, M.C. 1989. Nutrition and work performance, energy intakes and human wellbeing in Africa. Proc. XIV Int. Cong. Nutr., Seoul, pp. 314-317.
Lee, J., Kolonel, L.N. & Ward-Hinds, M. 1981. Relative merits of the weight-correctedfor-height indices. Amer. J. Clin. Nutr. 34:2521-2529.
Merchant, K., Martorell, R. & Haas, J.D. 1990. Maternal and foetal responses to the stress of lactation concurrent with pregnancy and of short recuperative intervals. Amer. J. Clin. Nutr. 52:2 p. 280-288.
Micozzi, M.S., Albanes, D., Jones, D.Y. & Chumlea, W.C. 1986. (Correlations of body mass indices with weight, stature and body composition in men and women in NHANES I and II. Amer. J. Clin. Nutr. 44: 725-731.
Moerman, M.L. 1982. Growth of the birth canal in adolescent girls. Amer. J. Obstet. Gynae. 143: 528-532.
Naidu, A.N., Neela, J. & Rao, N.P. 1991. Maternal body mass index and birth weight. Nutr. News. 12, National Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad.
Naidu, A.N. 1992. Paper presented at a meeting "Functional Significance of Low Body Mass Index (BMI)". Rome.
Norgan, N.G. 1990. Body mass index and body energy stores in developing countries. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. 44 (Suppl. 1): 79-84.
Norgan, N.G. & Ferro-Luzzi, A. 1982. Weight-height indices as estimators of fatness in men. Hum. Nutr. Clin. Nutr. 36C: 363-372.
Norgan, N.G., Shetty, P.S., Baskaran, T., Nandi, T., Rao, J., Sette, S. & Ferro-Luzzi, A. 1993. Determinants of seasonality in nutritional status over a rural south Indian agricultural cycle. Ecol. Food Nutr. (In press).
Périssé, J. and Kamoun, A. 1987. Trends in urban and rural food consumption and implications for food policies in Tunisia. Food and Nutrition Bulletin (UNU) 9(4):21-32.
Pryer, J. 1990. Socio-economic and environmental aspects of undernutrition and ill health in an urban slum in Bangladesh. Ph.D. thesis. London University.
Rao, H.D. 1977. Income, nutrition and body size. Nutr. News (National Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad, India) 11: 9-14.
Rao, P.N. & Shastry, G.J. 1986. Changes in diet and nutrition profile in ten states in India. Nutr. News (NIN) 7:2.
Revicki, D.A. & Israel, R.G. 1986. Relationship between body mass indices and measures of body adiposity. Amer. J. Public Health 76:992-994.
Roche, A.F., Slevogel, R.M., Chumlea, W.C., Webb, P. 1981. Grading body fatness from limited anthropometric data. Am. J. Clin. Nutr. 34:2831-2838.
Rolland-Cachera, M.F., Cole, T.J., Sempé, M., Tichet, J., Rossignol, C. & Charraud, A. 1991. Body Mass Index variations: centiles from birth to 87 years. Eur. J. Clin. Nutr. 45: 13-21.
Rosetta, L. 1986. Sex differences in seasonal variations of the nutritional status of Serere adults in Senegal. Ecol. Food Nutr. 18: 231-244.
Royal College of Physicians. 1983. Obesity: a report of the Royal College of Physicians. J. Roy. Coll. Physicians, London. 17: 1-58.
Sahn, D. & Alderman, H. 1988. The effects of human capital on wages, and the determinants of labour supply in a developing country. J. Dev. Econ. 29: 157-183.
Satyanarayana, K. 1976. Diabetes in a heterogeneous urban population. Nutr. News (National Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad, India) 10: 13-21.
Satyanarayana, K., Naidu, A.N., Chatterjee, B. & Rao, B.S.N. 1977. Body size and work output. Amer. J. Clin. Nutr. 30: 322-325.
Satyanarayana, K., Venkataramana, Y. & Rao, S.M. 1989. Nutrition and work performance: studies carried out in India. Proc. XIV Int. Cong. Nutr. Seoul, Korea. pp.98-99.
Satyanarayana, K., Rao, S.S., Radhiah, G. & Reddy, V. 1991. Body mass index and mortality rates. Nutr. News. 12. National Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad.
Shetty, P.S. 1984. Adaptive changes in basal metabolic rate and lean body mass in chronic undernutrition. Hum. Nutr. Clin. Nutr. 38C: 443-451.
Shetty, P.S. & Soares, M.J. 1988. Variability in basal metabolic rates of man. In Comparative Nutrition (eds. Blaxter, K. & MacDonald, I.), pp. 141-148. John Libbey.
Sibert, J.R., Jadhav, M. & Inbaraj, S.G. 1978. Maternal and fetal nutrition in South India. Brit. Med. J. 1: 1517-1518.
Smalley, K.J., Knerr, A.N., Kendrick, Z.V., Colliver, J.A. & Owen, O.K. 1990. Reassessment of body mass indices. Amer. J. Clin. Nutr. 52: 405-408.
Sood, A.K., Nath, L.M., Kapil, U. & Gupta, M.C. 1984. Comparison of different criteria for measurement of obesity in a community. Ind. J. Med. Res. 80: 365-371.
Spurr, G.B. 1987. The effects of chronic energy deficiency on stature, work capacity and productivity. In Effects of chronic energy deficiency on stature, work capacity and productivity. (eds. Schürch, B. & Scrimshaw, N.S.), pp. 95-134. International Dietary Energy Consultancy Group, Lausanne.
Stein, Z., Susser, M., Saenger, G., Marolla, F. 1975. Famine and human development. The Dutch hunger winter of 1944-1945. Oxford University Press. Oxford, UK.
Strauss, J. 1986. Does better nutrition raise farm productivity? J. Poll Econ. 94: 297-320.
Torun, B., Flores, R., Viteri, F., Immink, M. & Diaz, E. 1989. Energy supplementation and work performance: Summary of Incap studies. Proc. XIV Int. Cong. Nutr., Seoul, pp. 306-309.
Viteri, F. 1982. Nutrition and work performance. In Nutrition Policy - Implementation (eds. Scrimshaw, N.S. & Wallerstein, M.B.), pp. 3-13. New York, Plenum Press.
Watson, P.E., Watson, I.D. & Batt, R.D. 1979. Obesity indices. Amer. J. Clin. Nutr. 32: 736-737.
WHO. 1985. Energy and protein requirements. Report of a Joint FAO/WHO/UNU Expert Consultation. Technical Report Series no. 724. Geneva, WHO.
WHO. 1986. Use and interpretation of anthropometric indicators of nutritional status. Bull. Wld. Hlth. Org. 64: 929-941.
WHO. 1990. Diet, nutrition, and the prevention of chronic diseases. Report of a WHO Study Group. Technical Report Series 797. Geneva, WHO.
WHO/UNFPA/UNICEF. 1989. The reproductive health of adolescents: a strategy for action. A joint WHO/UNPFA/UNICEF statement. Geneva, WHO.
Womersley, J. & Durnin, J.V.G.A. 1977. A comparison of the skinfold method with extent of overweight and various weight-height relationships in the assessment of obesity. Brit. J. Nutr. 38: 271-284.
World Bank. 1986. Poverty and hunger: issues and options for food security in developing countries. IBRD, Washington D.C., USA.
Zimmet, P., Taylor, R., Ram, P., King, H., Sloman, G., Robin Paper, L. & Hunt, D. 1983. Prevalence of diabetes and impaired glucose tolerance in the biracial (Melanesian and Indian) population of Fiji - a rural-urban comparison. Amer. J. Epidem. 118: 673-688.
FAO TECHNICAL PAPERS
FAO FOOD AND NUTRITION PAPERS
Review of food consumption surveys 1977 - Vol. 1. Europe, North America, Oceania, 1977 (E)
Review of food consumption surveys 1977 - Vol. 2. Africa, Latin America, Near East, Far East, 1979 (E)
Report of the joint FAO/WHO/UNEP conference on mycotoxins, 1977 (E F S)
Report of a joint FAD/WHO expert consultation on dietary fats and oils in human nutrition, 1977 (E F S)
JECFA specifications for identity and purity of thickening agents, anticaking agents, antimicrobials, antioxidants and emulsifiers, 1978 (E)
JECFA - guide to specifications, 1978 (E F)
5 Rev. 1
JECFA - guide to specifications, 1983 (E F)
5 Rev. 2
JECFA - guide to specifications, 1991 (E)
The feeding of workers in developing countries, 1976 (E S)
JECFA specifications for identity and purity of food colours, enzyme preparations and other food additives, 1978 (E F)
Women in food production, food handling and nutrition, 1979 (E F S)
Arsenic and tin in foods: reviews of commonly used methods of analysis, 1979 (E)
Prevention of mycotoxins, 1979 (E F S)
The economic value of breast-feeding, 1979 (E F)
JECFA specifications for identity and purity of food colours, flavouring agents and other food additives, 1979 (E F)
Perspective on mycotoxins, 1979 (E F S)
Manuals of food quality control:
Food control laboratory, 1979 (Ar E)
14/1 Rev.1
The food control laboratory, 1986 (E)
Additives, contaminants, techniques, 1980 (E)
Commodities, 1979 (E)
Microbiological analysis, 1979 (E F S)
Food inspection, 1981 (Ar E) (Rev. 1984, E S)
Food for export, 1979 (E S)
14/6 Rev.1
Food for export, 1990 (E S)
Food analysis: general techniques, additives, contaminants and composition, 1986 (C E)
Food analysis: quality, adulteration and tests of identity, 1986 (E)
Introduction to food sampling, 1988 (Ar C E F S)
Training in mycotoxins analysis, 1990 (E S)
Management of food control programmes, 1991 (E)
Quality assurance in the food control microbiological laboratory, 1991 (E)
Pesticide residue analysis in the food control laboratory, 1993 (E)
Quality assurance in the food control chemical laboratory, 1993 (E)
Imported food inspection, 1993 (E)
Carbohydrates in human nutrition, 1980 (E F S)
Analysis of food consumption survey data for developing countries, 1980 (E F S)
JECFA specifications for identity and purity of sweetening agents, emulsifying agents, flavouring agents and other food additives, 1980 (E F)
Bibliography of food consumption surveys, 1981 (E)
18 Rev. 1
Bibliography of food consumption surveys, 1984 (E)
18 Rev. 2
Bibliography of food consumption surveys, 1987 (E)
18 Rev. 3
Bibliography of food consumption surveys, 1990 (E)
JECFA specifications for identity and purity of carrier solvents, emulsifiers and stabilizers, enzyme preparations, flavouring agents, food colours, sweetening agents and other food additives, 1981 (E F)
Legumes in human nutrition, 1982 (E F S)
Mycotoxin surveillance - a guideline, 1982 (E)
Guidelines for agricultural training curricula in Africa, 1982 (E F)
Management of group feeding programmes, 1982 (E F P S)
23 Rev. 1
Food and nutrition in the management of group feeding programmes, 1993 (E)
Evaluation of nutrition interventions, 1982 (E)
JECFA specifications for identity and purity of buffering agents, salts; emulsifiers, thickening agents, stabilizers; flavouring agents, food colours, sweetening agents and miscellaneous food additives, 1982 (E F)
Food composition tables for the Near East, 1983 (E)
Review of food consumption surveys 1981, 1983 (E)
JECFA specifications for identity and purity of buffering agents, salts, emulsifiers, stabilizers, thickening agents, extraction solvents, flavouring agents, sweetening agents and miscellaneous food additives, 1983 (E F)
Post-harvest losses in quality of food grains, 1983 (E F)
FAD/WHO food additives data system, 1984 (E)
30 Rev. 1
FAD/WHO food additives data system, 1985 (E)
JECFA specifications for identity and purity of food colours, 1984 (E F)
JECFA specifications for identity and purity of food additives, 1984 (E F)
Residues of veterinary drugs in foods, 1985 (E/F/S)
Nutritional implications of food aid: an annotated bibliography, 1985 (E)
JECFA specifications for identity and purity of certain food additives, 1986 (E F**)
Review of food consumption surveys 1985, 1986 (E)
Guidelines for can manufacturers and food canners, 1986 (E)
JECFA specifications for identity and purity of certain food additives, 1986 (E F)
JECFA specifications for identity and purity of certain food additives, 1988 (E)
Quality control in fruit and vegetable processing, 1988 (E F S)
Directory of food and nutrition institutions in the Near East, 1987 (E)
Residues of some veterinary drugs in animals and foods, 1988 (E)
Residues of some veterinary drugs in animals and foods. Thirty-fourth meeting of the joint FAD/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives, 1990 (E)
Residues of some veterinary drugs in animals and foods. Thirty-sixth meeting of the joint FAD/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives, 1991 (E)
Residues of some veterinary drugs in animals and foods. Thirty-eighth meeting of the joint FAD/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives, 1991 (E)
Residues of some veterinary drugs in animals and foods, 1993 (E)
Traditional food plants, 1988 (E)
Edible plants of Uganda. The value of wild and cultivated plants as food, 1989 (E)
Guidelines for agricultural training curricula in Arab countries, 1988 (Ar)
Review of food consumption surveys 1988, 1988 (E)
Exposure of infants to lead, 1989 (E)
Street foods, 1990 (E/F/S)
Utilization of tropical foods: cereals, 1989 (E F S)
Utilization of tropical foods: roots and tubers, 1989 (E F S)
Utilization of tropical foods: bees, 1989 (E F S)
Utilization of tropical foods: tropical beans, 1989 (E F S)
Utilization of tropical foods: tropical oil seeds, 1989 (E F S)
Utilization of tropical foods: sugars, spices and stimulants, 1989 (E F S)
Utilization of tropical foods: fruits and leaves, 1990 (E F S)
Utilization of tropical foods: animal products, 1990 (E F S)
Residues of some veterinary drugs In animals and foods, 1990 (E)
JECFA specifications for identity and purity of certain food additives, 1990 (E)
Traditional foods in the Near East, 1991 (E)
Protein quality evaluation. Report of the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Consultation, 1991 (E F)
Compendium of food additive specifications - Vol. 1, 1993 (E)
Compendium of food additive specifications - Vol. 2, 1993 (E)
52 Add. 1
Compendium of food additive specifications Addendum 1, 1992 (E)
52 Add. 2
Compendium of food additive specifications Addendum 2, 1993 (E)
Meat and meat products in human nutrition in developing countries, 1892 (E)
Ex situ storage of seeds, pollen and in vitro cultures of perennial woody plant species, 1993 (E)
Sampling plans for aflatoxin analysis in peanuts and corn, 1993 (E)
Body mass index - A measure of chronic energy deficiency in adults, 1994 (E)
Availability: January 1994
Ar
Arabic
Multil
- Multilingual
C
Chinese
Out of print
E
English
In preparation
F
French
P
Portuguese
S
Spanish
The FAO Technical Papers are available through the authorized
MO Sales Agents or directly from Distribution and Sales Section FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
<section>e</section>
Foreword
Foreword
Raising the levels of nutrition of all peoples is a basic FAO mandate and forms a fundamental part of the FAO programme. FAO and WHO jointly sponsored the International Conference on Nutrition (ICN), held at FAO Headquarters in December 1992, to emphasize the need for stronger action to solve the malnutrition problems which persist throughout the world. ICN delegations from 159 countries and the European Economic Community unanimously adopted a World Declaration and Plan of Action for Nutrition. These ICN documents call on every country to take steps to improve the nutritional status of all. The ICN reaffirmed that practical, accurate and cost-effective methods to identify nutritionally at-risk populations are essential to the design and implementation of effective policies and programmes to promote nutritional well-being, and to monitor the impact of such programmes.
The Food Policy and Nutrition Division of FAO has worked with member countries over many years in the implementation of policy and operational recommendations for improved nutrition monitoring. While nutrition monitoring data is a critical element needed to design and implement many types of nutrition improvement programmes, many proposed monitoring systems have proven to be very expensive to operate and too complex to enable the production of quick and accurate results. Because of this, FAO has carried out further work on simple indicators of chronic energy deficiency for adults which could provide cost-effective, quick and accurate information to planners and field workers when they are determining the nutritional needs of families, communities, special population groups, regions within countries, or countries as a whole.
After examining a wide range of possible monitoring tools, FAO selected the body mass index (BMI) as a potentially valuable monitoring approach. BMI measurements of adults' heights and weights can be quickly carried out and results are immediately available. At the community, regional, or country level at risk groups can be identified, effects of seasonal variations in food availability can be noted, and country wide trends can be detected and quantified.
To carry out an in-depth examination of the utility of the body mass index, FAO worked with the Rowett Research Institute in a programme to determine the validity of the BMI on the basis of data from different regions. The results of this work are presented in this book, Body Mass Index: a measure of chronic energy deficiency in adults. We hope that this book will be of use to government agencies, research institutes, universities and others which carry out nutrition monitoring. FAO believes that use of the BMI will serve as an extremely valuable nutrition monitoring tool, particularly for vulnerable groups such as the rural and urban poor in developing countries, and in monitoring the effects of nutrition improvement programmes. We would welcome comments, observations, and reports of use of this book in further nutrition monitoring work.
John R. Lupien
Director
Food Policy and Nutrition Division
