<title>Drylands development and combating desertification </title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
Research and development programmes sustainable management of arid and semi-arid lands and in combating desertification have been implemented in various regions of the world. In each of them, diverse approaches have been adopted which do not benefit as much as they could from the experiences and results obtained in other regions. The case of the countries of the Community of Independent States (CIS), which until 1989 made up the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR), is representative of this: what has happened there in the management of arid and semi-arid zones and in the combat against desertification has remained until now little or unknown by specialists in these fields in other regions. As one of FAO's roles is to collect and diffuse information on agricultural and rural development and corresponding fields of research, and on the conservation of natural resources, it was therefore decided to undertake a bibliographic study of the work in this sector implemented by
the countries of the CIS.
This study has been conceived and carried out within the framework of the Sub-group on Desertification of the Interdepartmental Working Group on Environment and Sustainable Development of FAO. It has been entrusted to Mr. Florian Plit, Professor of Geography at the University of Warsaw, who has been assisted by Mrs. Joanna Plit of the Polish Academy of Sciences, and by Mr. Wladyslaw Zakowski of the University of Warsaw. FAO would like to thank Mr. F. Plit and his collaborators for the quality of this work, which has been completed in a relatively short period of time considering the extent of information collected. Within FAO, Mr. Aleksander Kawalec, Senior Agricultural Officer at the Investment Centre, has been in charge of coordinating the study.
The mandate of this study was to investigate the principal institutions of CIS countries specializing in this field, and the work they do; to analyze available documents and select those which demonstrate the greatest methodological, technical, or socio-economic interest; and, for each of them, to prepare a bibliographic note including, among other things, a summary of the principal conclusions of the document. The work proceeded in three stages: collection and compilation of the documentation available in Warsaw on CIS institutions and their work; discussions with the personnel of the scientific institutions concerned in Moscow, Kiev and Alma Ata, and the collection of supplementary documents and information from these institutions; and, finally, drafting the summary and the bibliographic entries.
FAO hopes that this study best fulfills its designated objective, which is to usefully inform researchers and managers working in the fields of managing arid and semi-arid lands and combating desertification, of the experiences of their colleagues in CIS countries, so that they may benefit from them.
J.P. Lanly
Chairman
Desertification Group
<section>2</section>
Abbreviations and acronyms
BI Botanika Instituty (Botanical Institute), Academy of Sciences of Kazakhstan, Alma Ata.
BiL Bibliotïeka imïeni Lïenina (Lenin Library), Moscow.
BIV Bibliotïeka imïeni V.I. Vïernads'kogo (V.I. Viernadsky Library), Kiev.
CIS Community of Independent States
ESCAP Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific.
ESKATO (= ESCAP) Ekonomichïeskaïa i Stosial'naïa Kommissiïa OON po stranam Azii i Tikhogo Okïeana.
FAO Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
GNP Gross national product.
IGRAN Institut Gïeografii Rossiïskoï Akadïemii Naouk (Geographical §Institute, Russian Academy of Sciences), Moscow.
IP Institut Pustyn' (Institute of Deserts, Academy of Sciences of Turkmenistan), Ashkhabad.
KR FAK Kazakhstan Rïespublikasy. Fylym Akadïemiiasynym Kitapkhasy (Republic of Kazakhstan. Academy of Sciences Library), Alma Ata.
MGU Moskovskiï Gosudarstvïennyï Univïersitïet imïeni M. Lomonosova (M. Lomonossov University), Moscow.
RAN Russkaïa Akadïemiïa Naouk (Russian Academy of Sciences)
SOPS Sovïet pro Organizatsii Proizvoditïel'nykh Sil (Council for the Organization of Productive Forces)
UAM Uniwersytet Adama Mickiewicza w Poznaniu (Adam Mickiewicz University, Poznan').
UNEP United Nations Environmental Programme.
UNESCO United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization.
USSR Union of Soviet Socialist Republics.
WGiSR UW Wydzial Geografii i Studiow Regionalnych Uniwersytetu Warszawskiego (Department of Geography and Regional Studies, University of Warsaw), Warsaw.
<section>3</section>
List of place names changed between 1990 and 1993
Former name Present name
Ashkhabad* Ashgabat
Alma Ata* Almaty
Frunze Bishkek (Bishkïek)
Karakumy Garagum
Kazakhstan* Kazakstan
Leningrad Saint Petersburg (Sankt Pïetïerburg)
Tukmenia Turkmenistan
* The former name is still accepted.
<section>4</section>
1. Ecological and socio-political context of drylands development and desertification in the ex-USSR
1.1 The processes of change in the Community of Independent States (CIS), whether economic, social, political, or in institutions of research and development, are very rapid. Therefore, the results cited in this report are only provisional. They must be regularly brought up to date by other missions and by consultations with experts and organizations concerned.
1.2 It is impossible to understand desertification and, more widely, any degradation of the natural environment in the countries of the CIS without considering the geography and history of the Soviet Union, even that of Czarist Russia. Until the end of 1991, the Soviet Union was the largest country of the world (22.4 million km^2), extending from the ice deserts of the north, across the tundra, through pine, mixed, and deciduous forests, to the steppes, the semi-deserts and the sub tropical deserts of the south. In the Russian language, as in English, the word "desert" (pustyni) is used both to describe deserts in arid and semiarid zones, where the paucity of vegetation and animal life results from a deficit of water, and to designate ice deserts where this scarcity is essentially due to cold. Occasionally, the term "desert" is used for high-altitude lands above the snow line. However, this term can only be used without an adjective to describe deserts in arid or semi-arid
zones; in other cases, an adjective is indispensable (liedovyïe pustyni - ice desert, gornyïe pustyni - mountain desert). The term "desertification" (opustynivaniïe) is only used to refer to lands in arid or semi-aria zones.
1.3 This mission is concerned exclusively with the deserts of arid and semi-arid zones. The difference between scientific research pertaining to subtropical deserts and to ice deserts is so important that these problems are approached in the CIS by different scientific institutes, and when, rarely, within the same geographic institute, by different teams of scientists. We have not seen a case of collaboration between specialists of subtropical deserts and specialists of ice deserts, nor of a scientist who deals with the problems of both regions.
1.4 Arid and semi-arid zones were described in Russia relatively late, some not until the end of the 19th century (the deserts of central Asia). Scientific research on deserts began at almost the same time as the «conquest." In relation to the questions arising about climate change and the possibility of aridification, research has been carried out by the main centres at St. Petersburg and Moscow. In particular, the limnological work of L.S. Berg has contributed to the dominant opinion that in Central Asia it is a question of the more or less cyclic variation of rainfall rather than of the aridification of the climate or of desertification (cf. bibliographical entry 116). This has undoubtedly caused a lessening of interest in the issue of desertification, especially theoretical work. The emphasis has been on technical questions relating to the management of arid and semi-arid lands.
1.5 After the creation of the Soviet Union, almost all the arid and semi-arid regions of the country were found outside the borders of the Federal Republic of Russia, the largest and the politically and economically dominant republic, in Turkmenistan, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan, in the Caucasus and in the Ukraine. In the Soviet system of organization, the Academy of Sciences had the major research role, not the universities. The centre at Moscow held the dominant position, but all the republics had their Academies of Science which concentrated on their own problems. This meant that questions concerning arid and semi-arid zones (including desertification) came up in the research centres of republics outside Russia. The centres at Ashkhabad (Turkmenistan), Baku (Azerbaijan), and Alma Ata (Kazakhstan) were the most dynamic. Nevertheless, almost all their publications were published in Russian.
1.6 The goal of most scientific projects was to modify the natural environment; the official thesis extolled the harmony between the development of the socialist economy and the rational exploitation of natural resources. This had a considerable effect on the character of scientific research. The problems of desertification in arid lands in the USSR were scarcely addressed.
1.7 In the mid-1970's, information on desertification appeared in only a few articles analytic studies concerning relatively small areas (cf. bibl. entries 76, 110, 147). The same is true for work on the degradation of the natural environment in the USSR at that time. However, there were numerous studies, often very detailed, concerning the natural environment of arid and semi-arid regions (vegetation, soil, geochemistry, landscape cf. bibl. entries 80, 122) which described methods of combating desertification and the implementation of concrete actions (cf. bibl. entries 5, 62, 120).
1.8 At the end of the 1970's, the problem of desertification became one of the most important scientific issues world-wide. Soviet scientists' interest in desertification increased remarkably, all the more because acknowledging the catastrophic state of the natural environment slowly ceased to be taboo, thanks in part to the work of Soviet dissidents (cf. bibl. entry 42). During the United Nations Conference on Desertification in Nairobi in 1977, the USSR presented documents dealing not only with the management of deserts but also with the degradation of arid and semi-arid lands. In their terminological work relative to the natural environment of deserts, Soviet scientists made a significant contribution to global thinking on desertification (cf. bibl. entries 59, 70). However, this work still dealt with desertification in an indirect rather than direct manner. After 1977, documents on desertification were published in the USSR which emphasized the process of degradation and
the biological systems involved (cf. bibl. entries 12, 44, 45, 79, and others). At the end of the 1980's, in "Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn'», articles treating desertification directly become predominant. These are regional studies, analyses of processes, and methodological and terminological texts (cf. bibl. entries 35, 36, 48, 103, 143, and others).
1.9 The evolution of Soviet opinion on the subject of desertification can be seen by taking the example of publications concerning the Aral Sea. At first, official optimism is the rule: thanks to the diversion of Siberian rivers, it was considered possible to accomplish enormous irrigation projects (cf. bibl. entries 49, 61, 87, 106) and to assure the future of the sea. Contemporary publications, on the other hand, describe the catastrophic state of the sea and its surrounding environment, as well as the absence of solutions.
1.10 During the last ten years, there has been a growing interest among Soviet scientists in work taking place in other countries. Although this has always been the case, today it is becoming more and more apparent. The regions which most interest scientists in the CIS are the deserts and semi-deserts of Asia and Africa (cf. bibl. entries 3, 48, 63, 85, 111).
1.11 Works on desertification published in the USSR generally show a marked concentration on biological and geochemical issues and a neglect of social questions. Studies concerning the natural environment are much more concrete than those, less numerous, on social problems, which fall into ideology and are full of generalities. This tendency prevails during the entire period analyzed and is equally apparent today, as is reflected in a bibliography dominated by work in the fields of biology, pedology, geochemistry, etc.
1.12 As for the future of arid and semi-arid lands, it is not easy to pronounce a forecast. During the last several decades, there has been significant development, but at the same time there has been environmental degradation. It is difficult to foresee the consequences of the disintegration of the Soviet Union. Several scenarios are possible. On the one hand, land and water are beginning to acquire an economic value, and privatization and the decentralization of management could contribute to limiting waste. But on the other hand, the solution to these problems - such as the particularly serious one of the Aral Sea, which requires the cooperation of at least 5 countries (Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Kyrgyzstan) and probably Russia - needs financial means that none of these countries has available.
1.13 The break-up of the USSR could have very negative effects on desertification research. The "pessimistic" scenario, which is not inevitable, predicts that the scientific institutes of all the CIS countries will publish their work exclusively in their national languages, which are less known in the world than Russian. It is also feared that cooperation between institutions will stop, many scientists of Russian origin working in other countries will leave for Russia where they will not be able to work as easily in the field of drylands development, and even that scientific institutes might be liquidated due to financial difficulties and internal conflicts. It is also clear that lack of money will limit work on drylands management and on combating desertification.
<section>5</section>
2. Institutions concerned with the issues of desertification and drylands development
A. Turkmenistan
B. Russia
C. Kazakhstan
D. Ukraine
E. Centres in other states of the CIS
F. Projects for change
2.1 In the Soviet Union, all scientific work on desertification and drylands development, whether theoretical or practical, was concentrated in the institutes of the Academy of Sciences of the Soviet Union. These were important establishments with hundreds of employees including administrative and support personnel.
A. Turkmenistan
2.2 The most important research institution in these fields is the Institute of Deserts of the Academy of Sciences of the SSR1 ^1 of Turkmenistan, renamed in late 1991 the Institute of Deserts of the Academy of Sciences of Turkmenistan (Turkm.: Chöllïer Instituty, Turkmïenistan Ylymnar Akadïemiïasy; Russian: Institut Pustyn' Akadïemii Naouk Turkmïenistana). Founded in 1962, it has taken charge of the research stations at Repetek (Rïepïetïek), and has two other stations near Ashkhabad. The Institute has a total of about 400 employees. Its address is: 15 ulitsa Gogolïa, Ashkhabad (Turkm.: Ashgabat). The address "Ashkhabad sad Keshi," which is occasionally seen (for example, in World of Learning), is false.
^1 SSR - Soviet Socialist Republic
2.3 The Institute, currently directed by A. G. Babaïev (Babayev), is interdisciplinary, employing geographers, biologists, engineers, computer experts, agronomists and other specialists. In the 1970's, the work of the Institute concentrated on accumulating knowledge of the deserts of Central Asia and on their management, particularly sand dune fixation. In the 1980's, the Institute took an increasing interest in studies on the degradation of the natural environment, on changes in the Aral Sea region, and on the possibilities of limiting their negative impact. Noteworthy among these researchers is Mr. I.S. Zonn who coordinated this research and is the author of several works on defining desertification (cf. chapter 4 A and bibliographical entries).
2.4 Since 1967 the Institute of Deserts has published the bimonthly "Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn'" (cf. bibl. entry 15; Turkm.: Chöllïeri özlïeshdirmïegin prïoblïemalary) and several publications whose visual presentation leaves something to be desired (small characters, lack of photographs, barely readable graphics). These are mainly team efforts under the direction of A.G. Babaïev. So far, the Institute publishes almost exclusively in Russian, although its scientists come from various republics (many of them, however, are Russian). Its books are written exclusively in Russian, as are the articles in "Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn'," sometimes accompanied by brief summaries in Turkoman and/or English, with the title page in Russian and in Turkoman (since 1992, Turkoman first), and the titles of articles in Turkoman, occasionally in English. The official documents of the USSR were drafted by the Institute in English (cf. bibl. entries 12, 22, 49). Since 1980 the English
version of "Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn"' has been published in the U.S. (by Alerton Press).
2.5 A.G. Babaïev and a delegation from the Academy of Sciences of the USSR participated at the United Nations Conference on Desertification (Nairobi, 1977). Since the conference, the Institute has acquired a privileged position in doing research on desertification in the USSR. It coordinated the programmes USSR/UNEP, USSR/UNEP/FAO, USSR/UNESCO and the cooperation of the USSR in ESCAP.
2.6 The Institute of Deserts has organized courses for specialists from developing countries on the development and management of pasture resources and on integrated development (cf. bibl. entries 20, 21, 71, 144). For scientific expertise, the Institute benefits from the services of the institutes of other republics; the organizational side of its work has been taken over by the Centre of International Projects of the Higher Committee of Science and Technology of Moscow (Tsientr Miezhdunarodoykh Proïektov, Glavnyï Komitïet po Naoukïe i Tiekhnikïe).
2.7 In Turkmenistan, apart from the Institute of Deserts, no other research centre exists which deals with desertification.
B. Russia
2.8 In the Federal Republic of Russia, the Geographical Institute of the Russian Academy of Sciences (Institut Gïeografii Rossiïskoï Akadïemii Naouk; until 1991 the Academy of Sciences of the USSR) is the chief research centre. Its address is: Moscow, Staromonïetnyï Pïerïeulok 29. The institute employs approximately 400 people.
2.9 A large involvement of geographers in the studies on desertification has resulted in a concept of geography entirely different from that in Western European countries. In the USSR the geography has been treated as an exact science, as for example in France, geography is thought of as a social science. In geographical institutes, approximately 80% of the personnel deal with physical geography in departments (kafiedra) such as climatology, hydrology, geomorphology and pedology. In this Institute, the hydrologist and pedologist S. V. Zonn initiated work on desertification (cf. bibl. entry 146). In the 1980's, changes in the natural environment of the Aral Sea and methods of combating these changes were the priority objectives of the Institute's research. This work, directly supervised by the director of the Institute, Mr. V. M. Kotliakov (Kotlyakov) led to several publications, a number of them in English (cf. bibl. entries 43, 77, 109). In the 1990's, the countries of
Central Asia decided that henceforth all work on the restoration of the Aral Sea and on the management of the surrounding region would be completed without Russia's help. The State University of Lomonossov at Moscow (MGU) was virtually uninvolved in the studies of desertification. However, this Institute led research on soil erosion in various regions of Russia, and, in lesser extent, in the other countries of the CIS. Some of these works could be useful in attempts to limit desertification (cf. bibl. entry 92). -It is worth mentioning also the Lenin Library of Moscow (Bibliotïeka imïeni Lïenina -its current name) which fills the function of central library where nearly all publications appearing in the USSR until 1991 can be found. However, the collection is catalogued with a 1 to 2 year delay, and since 1991 a number of the documents which do not concern Russia do not reach the library. This library also has catalogues of the collections of some other Russian libraries. In
Russia, outside of Moscow, there are few individuals who deal with desertification. At St. Petersburg, the second most important scientific centre of the country, problems of desertification are scarcely studied, probably because of the distance between St. Petersburg and the subtropical dry land zones. Nevertheless, since the Institute of Hydrometeorology (in Russian: Institut Gidromïetïeorologii and Gidromïetïeoizdat Publishing House) in St. Petersburg remains the chief centre in Russia for research on long-term climate change, the problems of desertification sometimes come up in the course of work on other issues (cf. bibl. entry 78).
C. Kazakhstan
2.10 Unlike the situation in Russia and Turkmenistan, desertification is the subject of research in several small institutions in Kazakhstan. They have close relations with the Institute of Deserts at Ashkhabad and with the University of Urumchi (China). They also correspond with institutes in Japan, Germany, the United States, and with international organizations, especially UNEP and UNESCO. Contact with Moscow and St. Petersburg is limited. The Botanical Institute of the Academy of Sciences of Kazakhstan has led research in Mongolia, published articles, and is currently preparing a vegetation map. The characteristic features of all the research centres at Alma Ata are a relatively good methodology, poor technical equipment, and enormous printing difficulties which prevent the publication of a number of articles (cf. bibl. entries 121, 124).
2.11 The main centres of Kazakhstan are:
(i) The Botanical Institute (in Russian: Institut Botaniki; Kazakh: Botanika Instituty) of the Academy of Sciences of Kazakhstan. It prepares vegetation maps (of present state and evolution). It also directs studies on the productivity of pastures and work on revegetalization. Several years ago, L.I. Kurochkina was the scientific head of this institute; now it is I.I. Rachkovskaïa.
(ii) The Geographical Institute (in Russian: Institut Gïeografii; Kazakh: Gïeografiïa Instituty) of the Academy of Sciences of Kazakhstan. It has a team of about 15 members led by G.V. Gel'dyeva working on desertification. They prepare maps of the landscape, of the degree of desertification, and of other changes in the natural environment. The regions of study are the areas surrounding the Aral Sea and Lake Balkhash.
(iii) The Council for the Organization of Productive Forces (SOPS, in Russian: Sovïet pro Organizatsii Proizvoditïel'nykh Sil) of the Republican Office of Planning. It prepares maps of natural resources and designee projects for combating desertification, prepares regional development plans and organizes conferences. Considering, among others, the existence of the Ministry of Ecology in the government, the position of this nature group is particularly strong.
(iv) The main library is in Alma Ata, the regional equivalent of the Lenin Library in Moscow. It is also a library of the Academy of Sciences of Kazakhstan (Russian: Biblïotïeka Akadïemii Naouk Rïespubliki Kazakhstana; Kazakh: Kazakhstan Rïespublikasy, Fykym Akadïemiïasynyn Kitapkhanasy).
D. Ukraine
2.12 As in Kazakhstan, there is no central institution dealing with desertification and the problems of combating it. Studies of limited scope are directed by small teams dispersed among different institutions at Kiev, L'viv Ivano-Frankovsk, and elsewhere. The problems of desertification remain in the background and are only dealt with in the course of studies on soil erosion or on vegetation changes (cf. bibl. entries 89, 130). Most scientists work for the Academy of Sciences of the Ukraine. The main collections of specialized literature are kept at the V.E. Vernadski Central Scientific Library of the Academy of Sciences of the Ukraine (Tsïentralna Naoukova Bibliotïeka im. V.I. Vïernadskogo, Akadïemiïa Naouk Ukraini).
E. Centres in other states of the CIS
2.13 Studies on desertification are pursued in other countries which have separated from the Soviet Union, but their scale is smaller and they are carried out by individual researchers. Azerbaijan, however, deserves special mention. At Baku, research has been supervised by the Geographical Institute (in Russian: Institut Gïeografii Azïerskoï Rïespubliki) - Baku, Nartsimanova 31 -and by the Institute of Natural Resource Studies by Remote Sensing (in Russian: Institut Isslïedovaniïa Prirodnykh Rïessursov iz Kosmosa) - Baku, Kommunistichïeskaïa 10. It has not been possible to obtain more precise information about these institutes; contacts with the RAN Geographical Institute are not currently maintained. Both these centres published their works in Russian and in Azeri. A portion of the results especially those obtained via satellite imagery - are not available to the public. Some small-scale projects have been carried out by the Uzbekistan Academy of Sciences (in Tashkent) and
by the Academy of Sciences of Kyrgyzstan (Bishkek, formerly Frunze), generally in close cooperation with the Institute of Deserts at Ashkhabad or the RAN Geographical Institute.
F. Projects for change
2.14 It is understood that scientific structures have not yet adapted to the new political situation (interview with S.V. Zonn, among others). Considering current political conditions, the Institute of Deserts at Ashkhabad could lose the ability to function outside Turkmenistan. Most of the scientists working on desertification are Russian. Russia has no interdisciplinary centre of desertification. The success of reforms introduced since the end of May, 1993, depends above all on the development of the political situation in the countries of the CIS.
2.15 A subsidiary of the Institute of Deserts under the direction of I.S. Zonn has been founded at Moscow. Its future status has not yet been determined. The plan is to locate it in the heart of the city, next to the International Projects Centre. This would undoubtedly lead to the Institute's becoming far more than just the subsidiary of a Turkoman scientific institute.
2.16 The creation of an Institute of Deserts in the Federal Republic of Russia was planned for the end of 1993. It would be located at Elista, capital of the Kalmyk Republic of Russia. The range of activities of this research centre would include the Republic of Kalmyk, which is the most involved in the creation of the institute, the territory of Krasnodar north of the Caucases, the oblast (administrative district) of Astrakhan in the lower Volga, and possibly other regions. However, the structure of the institute had not yet been determined as of July 1993. It will benefit from local scientific potential (the University of Elista, the Russian Academy of Sciences). Financing will come from the Buddhist community in the United States (the majority of Kalmyks are Buddhist), and from Japan. The institute is to conduct complex studies of the natural environment of deserts, to work on endangered species of vegetation, and to study methods of combating sand encroachment and
salinization. It will direct studies on the optimal conditions for irrigated agriculture, methods of irrigation, and pasture management. The institute will also conduct research on the possibility of acclimatizing American plant species to the subtropical zone (oleaginous plants, among others). Noteworthy among local scientists is V.A. Bananova (cf. bibl. entry 25).
<section>6</section>
3. Desertification and drylands development in CIS countries
A. Definitions
B. Theories and hypotheses
C. Methodology and approaches
D. Large-scale development projects for arid and se -arid lands in the USSR - "Conquest of the deserts"
E. Phenomena of desertification
F. Causes of desertification
G. Impact of desertification and drylands development on the environment and on socio-economic conditions
H. Drylands development and combating desertification
I. Results of large-scale projects in drylands development and combating desertification
A. Definitions
3.1 In studying changes in the natural environment of arid and semi-arid regions, researchers often discern two processes: "desertization" and desertification. This is particularly true in the French school of thought. In the USSR, almost all the literature concerned with Desertification has been written in Russian. The term "opustynivaniïe" is used, and is considered by Soviet and post-Soviet researchers to be a synonym for Desertification (cf. bibl. entry 67). Researchers in the Institute of Deserts have not found a Russian language equivalent for the term "desertization"; therefore, they have introduced the term "dïesïertizatsiïa. " This term has not entered the Russian language and we have not seen it outside the work noted above.
3.2 B.G. Rozanov's definition (cf. bibl. entry 52) is the most widely-used. He formulated it in 1977 when he wrote about the United Nations conference in Nairobi, and it can be found, occasionally somewhat modified, in a number of publications, including very recent ones (cf. bibl. entries 12, 60, 63, 90, 141). "Desertification is a natural or human-induced process of irreversible change in the soil and vegetation of drylands zones, towards aridification and a reduction in biological productivity. In extreme cases this process can lead to a total disintegration of the biological potential, and the transformation of the territory into desert."
3.3 Another definition is used by some scientists at the Institute of Deserts at Ashkhabad (cf. bibl. entry 3): "The intensification and/or expansion of desertic conditions constitute a process which leads to a decrease in ecosystem productivity; this decrease, in turn, leads to a decrease in pastoral resources, agricultural productivity and the quality of human life."
3.4 It is S.V. Zonn (cf. bibl. entry 146) who perceives the process of Desertification in the widest sense. In his opinion, it includes all processes of biological degradation whatever the cause and wherever they appear. According to this definition, Desertification can occur in any climate zone. S.V. Zonn identifies a number of Desertification types; in the Amazon there is the "technogeno-erosive" type, in the Maghreb the "erosive" type. However, Zonn's definition has not been accepted in CIS countries.
3.5 There are other definitions which interpret Desertification (opustynivaniïe) in a more limited way, but they are not widely accepted either. Three examples are noted below:
(i) Desertification is the process of the expansion of desert surfaces, notably due to sand movement. It occurs in a narrow band of semi-desert which directly borders on desert. This definition is rarely encountered, and then almost exclusively in the early specialized literature of the 1960's and 1970's (cf. bibl. entry 111). Although it is extremely rare in newer works, it has not disappeared, as is shown in the 1992 publication of Gorshkov V.S. and Losiev K.S. (cf. bibl. entry 91);
(ii) Desertification is the deterioration of the biological conditions of deserts (due solely to human activity), and their transformation into deserts devoid of life (cf. bibl. entries 38,65). It would be suitable in this case to use the term "desertization," or more precisely "desertization due to human activities;"
(iii) Desertification is a term covering an entire group of processes of degradation in arid and semi-arid ecosystems which result from irrational human activity.
3.6 The fact that these definitions emphasize human activity can be explained by the general conviction in Central Asia that it is not a natural evolution of the climate towards acidification; man is considered to be the cause of the degradation of the natural environment.
B. Theories and hypotheses
3.7 The theoretical considerations forming the basis of a systematic definition of desertification and the typology of the processes of desertification have been principally developed by I.S. Zonn in recent years. An analysis of his work (Cf. bibl. entries 34, 59, 60, 143) shows that the author is not seeking to clarify a coherent group of definitions, but rather is experimenting with them. However, he remains consistent in treating desertification as a process. Since every process occurs in time, it can be described in the form of a temporal function O(t) of desertification: 01 (to) = <xo * yo *zo> (x: climate; y: soil; z: vegetation cover; t: time).
Desertification occurs when the critical threshold values, not specified by the author, are exceeded.
3.8 According to I.S. Zonn it is very important to distinguish between processes of cause and processes of effect. If, for example, irrigation is a causal process, it brings on various effect processes: erosion (caused by irrigation), soil salinization, the formation of ponds and estuaries by infiltration, the formation of wholes in the soil, the raising or lowering of the water table, changes in the albedo of the soil surface, etc. The processes of effect, on the other hand, cause changes in the condition of the soil, ground and surface water, vegetation and climate. Processes of cause, processes of effect, and static conditions should not be confused. He reproaches the typology of the World Desertification Map (UNEP/FAO/UNESCO, 1977) in this sense.
3.9 Authors in the ex-USSR and the CIS of today commonly use the concept of desertification caused by technology leading to the degradation of ecosystems in arid and semi-arid zones. This degradation results, for example, from road construction, railways, mines and other large infrastructures. This type of desertification is very widespread in the countries of the USSR/CIS (cf. chapter 4E). It is therefore not surprising that a number of authors acknowledge taking this into account in the preparation of desertification maps or including it in estimations of surface areas affected by desertification (cf. bibl. entries 10, 17, 36 and others).
C. Methodology and approaches
3.10 Soviet researchers work mainly on issues of desert "osvoïeniïe. " Literally, this term means "domestication," but can also be translated as "reclamation" or "management." However, desertification issues are also dealt with in studies of the natural environment of deserts, semi-deserts and steppes, and the changes which follow their management.
3.11 Great importance is given to chemical analyses, to work on the nutrient cycles in the environment and on changes in the chemical composition of soil and water. This is particularly true in studies of the far-reaching effects of salinization. There is a very interesting methodological approach in describing the salt cycle in the environment, which also takes the atmosphere into account (salt deflation, salinization in connection with winds over salty lands -cf. bibl. entries 33, 44, 94, 102, 110, 127).
3.12 Importance is also given to experimental studies carried out in field stations where, for the last several decades, changes occurring in nature have been observed. The best-known station, which records a large number of information, is that of Repetek in Turkmenistan. It has easy access to the Karakumy Desert which is about 50 km. from the Amu-Darya River. This Station was created in 1912; during the period between the two World Wars and it was a field station of the Academy of Sciences of the USSR where mainly Moscow scientists worked. Afterwards, it was incorporated into the Institute of Deserts of the Academy of Sciences of Turkmenistan when the latter was created. This station has undertaken most Soviet projects dealing with sand deserts and their typology, water cycles, vegetation, and sand dune fixation. Repetek was also a field station for research carried out in the central part of the Amu-Darya valley, which explains why that zone has been particularly studied.
3.13 Aerial photographs and satellite imagery have been used a great deal in studies of changes in the natural environment, particularly in desertification studies. Soviet scientists were in a privileged position: they were able to use universally accessible imagery from the satellites Landsat and Spot as well as those from exclusively Soviet satellites (Kosmos, Meteor). Among other things, satellite imagery is used to prepare vegetation maps and record vegetation changes, draw -up maps of soils, of salinization, of sand dunes, of hydrographic changes, and changes in the countours of the Aral Sea. Desertification maps, developed using remote sensing, are the most important accomplishment of this sort of work. In some documents, results obtained from different satellites are compared (cf. bibl. entries 10, 23, 35, 66, 74). Desertification maps are drawn up at different scales, for example the relatively detailed maps of southeastern Turkmenistan and of the lower Murgab River,
and the very general map of all of ex-Soviet Central Asia. This latter well illustrates the technical quality of the maps and graphics included in Soviet scientific books and articles.
Figure 1: Desertification in southeastern Turkmenistan
1 - Patches of desertification in the area between the Tedzhen and Murgab Rivers;
2 - Patches of desertification in the area between the Murgab and Amu-Darya Rivers;
3 - Oases partially affected by salinization;
4 - Desertification along the Karakumy Canal;
5 - Pasture reserves;
6 - Karakumy Canal.
Figure 2: Schematic map of desertification caused by human activities in drylands of the USSR (present conditions)
1 - Areas not affected by desertification;
2 - Degradation of vegetation;
3 - Wind erosion;
4 - Riverbed erosion;
5 - Salinization in irrigated lands;
6 - Soil salinization due to the decline in the sea and the regulation of the flow of streams and rivers;
7 - Desertification caused by technology;
8- Solonchaks;
9 - Sand dunes of natural origin;
10 - Limits of the drylands zone;
11 - Degrees of desertification (1: light; 2: moderate; 3: strong; 4: extreme).
3.14 Compared to the numerous projects on the natural environment and the physical features of desertification, there are few works on its social and economic aspects. These are generally texts: (i) where studies in other countries are described (cf. bibl. entries 16, 63, 73, 111); (ii) where the economic success of the Soviet Union in desert management is discussed; or (iii) where very brief information is given in passing on the losses and failures that have taken place before the success to come in future phases of the "conquest" of the desert. It is only in the last few years, as a result of the problems of the Aral Sea, that more publications have appeared on the social and economic aspects of desertification.
3.15 There is an interesting group of work on «formerly irrigated lands» in Central Asia. The irrigated lands of the past (especially in the 13th and 14th centuries, occasionally until the middle of the 19th) were much more extensive than those irrigated today. Specialists consider these lands particularly suitable for future irrigation. For this reason they have been identified (using remote sensing, and other methods), and their soils are scrupulously studied.
D. Large-scale development projects for arid and se -arid lands in the USSR - "Conquest of the deserts"
3.16 The uniqueness of the process of desertification in the ex-USSR is due to the fact that it is related to enormous programmes of desert "conquest" and management, characteristic of the Soviet period. These include: (i) the transformation of the steppe into arable land; and (ii) the construction of extensive irrigation systems and the development of the monoculture of cotton in Central Asia.
3.17 Although agriculture began in the steppes several centuries ago, it is only the programmes started in 1954 which have had a significant effect on the natural environment. In the first six years, 40 million hectares were ploughed by large, heavy tractors. After 1960, ploughing in the steppes slowed as the activity moved east. After ploughing the steppes in the European part of the USSR, work began in Kazakhstan and in southern Siberia. Today, approximately 75% of the total surface of the steppes has been ploughed. A large part of the steppes later became unfit for cultivation.
3.18 Irrigation development programmes were not begun with the same enthusiasm, although they intensified in the 1970's and early 1980's. The extent of these projects is presented in the following table:
Expansion of the area irrigated in the Soviet Republics of Central Asia (in thousands of ha)
YEARS
REPUBLICS 
Uzbekistan 2696 3476 3930 4155
Turkmenistan 643 927 1107 1245
Tajikistan 518 617 653 694
Kyrgyzstan 883 955 1009 1032
Source: Narodnoïe khozïaïstvo SSSR v 1990g. Statistïchïeskiï ïejïegodnik (The national economy of the USSR in 1990. Statistical yearbook) Gostkomstat SSSR, Moscow 1991, p 490
3.19 In the entire USSR, the surface area irrigated increased from 10.8 million hectares in 1970, to 17.5 million hectares in 1980, 19.9 million hectares in 1985 and 21.2 million hectares in 1990. This of course required an enormous water collection, which in 1988 was a total of 152.5 km^3 divided by 46.2 km^3 in Uzbekistan, 24.4 km^3 in Kazakhstan, 23.3 km^3 in the Federal Republic of Russia, 18.2 km^3 in Turkmenistan, 9.1 km^3 in Kyrgyzstan, and 8.7 km^3 in Azerbaijan.
3.20 In the USSR the consumption of irrigation water in drylands was very high, on the average 8,900 m^3/ha, with at least 13,300 m^3/ha in Armenia, 13,200 m^3 in Uzbekistan, and 12,800 m^3 in Kazakhstan (according to Russian statistics, cf. bibl. entry 54).
3.21 During the 1960's, efforts were directed towards the implementation of a global management programme for the Golodnaïa Stïep' (the Steppe of Hunger) in Uzbekistan. This initiative was to be a model of modifying nature (cf. bibl. entries 12, 46, 67, 86). In the years 1923-1956 about 250,000 ha were irrigated. In order to irrigate an additional 246,000 ha, construction was begun in 1956 on the Golodnaïa Stïep Canal, with a main branch of 246 km in length, plus lateral canals. At the same time, constructions were begun on drainage canals, villages, railroads (93 km), roads (1,746 km), gas pipelines, cotton factories, etc. In the years 1961-1972, cotton harvests in the USSR increased by 650,000 tonnes, almost half of which came from the Golodnaïa Steppe. The population increased rapidly, reaching, in 1974, 113,000 (in 1878 the population was 2,000).
3.22 The Karakumy Canal (or V.I. Lenin Canal) was the other large project begun in 1954. The canal, which in the USSR was considered to be "the largest hydrotechnical construction in the world" measures 1,200 km in length (it was supposed to be 1,400 km but its last part was not completed). It collects water from the Amu-Darya (400m^3/s) and takes it towards the oases of Murgab, Tedzhen, and other smaller ones in the Kopet Dag foothills. It is supplemented by approximately 2,000 km of small canals. Along the canal, 55 large state farms have been created, with areas from 27,000 to 650,000 ha each (cf. bibl. entries 12, 46, 49, 67). In addition to the development of irrigated agriculture, there is also a marked increase in livestock production in Central Asia.
3.23 However, the GNP per ha of irrigated lands, which increased from 1,430 roubles/ha in 1970 to 1,715 roubles/ha in 1980, has diminished since, in some republics even to levels lower than those recorded in 1970. Desertification caused by human action is very likely one of the causes of this decrease.
GNP per ha lands (in roubles)
YEARS
REPUBLICS 
Tajikistan 1880 2409 2310
Uzbekistan 1563 1849 1553
Turkmenistan 1351 1479 1251
Kyrgyzstan 792 986 1046
Average for the region 1430 1715 1533
Source: M. Turnball, 1991, Soviet Environmental Policies and Practices, Dartmouth.
E. Phenomena of desertification
3.24 It has not been possible to find a publication which presents in a complete way the phenomena of desertification in the USSR. Based on various publications (cf. Index), the most important phenomena of desertification are (i) the deflation and mobilization of dunes; (ii) the salinization of soil; and (iii) the degradation of vegetation, notably around wells. The group of desertification phenomena related to the drying up of the Aral Sea affect Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan and Kazakhstan.
3.25 In addition to the above phenomena, there are others, such as soil erosion during the spring thaw (only occurring north of the steppes in western Siberia), the depletion of animal diversity, changes in the level of the water table, water pollution, etc. Quantitative estimations of the dimensions of desertification vary; the differences are sometimes very great.
3.26 As for Central Asia (Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan) and Kazakhstan, one of the most reliable sources is the work of N.G. Kharin and A.A. Kiril'tsïeva (1988, cf. bibl. entry 36). They question the validity of previous estimations and establish the extent of lands affected by desertification at 60.2% of the area of these regions (Uzbekistan 59.2%, Kazakhstan 59.9%, Turkmenistan 66.5%). Regions affected by overgrazing cover 37.3% of the total area of these countries, partially decertified lands around wells represent 5.7% (18.6% in Uzbekistan). Zones affected by wind erosion occupy 3.3% of land, irrigated lands affected by salinization cover 1.3%, salinization due to the lowering of the level of the Aral Sea affect 5.3%, desertification caused by modernization 6.5%, and water erosion 0.7%. Desertification caused by modernization is mentioned in several works; it includes land degradation caused by motor vehicles crossing these regions, leaving a degraded strip of up to 1 km in
width (cf. bibl. entries 10, 17, 64, 65).
Figure 3: Efflorescence of salt on the shores of a drying lake in Kazakhstan, in the lower Syr-Darya valley (photo: F. Plit, May 1993)
Figure 4: Desertification caused by trucking in Kazakhstan (photo: F. Plit, May 1993)
3.27 Soil salinization in the ex-USSR has reached levels which probably exceed any elsewhere. It is therefore not surprising that this phenomenon is mentioned in nearly every publication concerning desertification, as well as in a number of works dealing more generally with the characteristics and processes of the natural environment.
3.28 I. Szabolsc (1991, cf. bibl. entry 135) estimates at 29.5 million hectares the area of saline lands in the European part of the USSR (cf. map). In contrast, in all other European countries taken together, saline lands cover only 3 million hectares. Central Asia has the most salinization. Large white patches of solonchaks, just outside the irrigated zones, are visible both by train and by plane.
3.29 The deflation and formation of dunes is also frequently described (cf. index). In spring and autumn, at the time of the dust-storms, deflation reaches disturbing proportions. The regions most affected by deflation are: the southern Ukraine, the upper Volga, the Aralo-Caspian depression, northern Kazakhstan and southwestern Siberia, a total of 1.6 million km^2. In certain areas, deflation already affects 2 to 7 cm of the topsoil per year; more than 20 days of dust-storm per year are recorded (cf. bibl. entry 50). During the heaviest storms, dust reaches as far as Poland and Hungary.
3.30 In the period 1961-1988, the nearly 15-meter decline in the level of the Aral Sea has bared 25,000 km^2 of the former seabed. This has caused a lowering of the water table up to 200 km from the sea, the drying of lakes in the Syr-Darya delta and a decrease in the productivity of pastures (estimations vary, but the losses seem to be enormous: for example, in the Syr-Darya delta as early as 1975 only 0.8 million tonnes of forage could be harvested on 1.4 million hectares, compared to 3.6 million tonnes in 1960 (cf. bibl. entry 108). This has also caused sand deflation, dust (an increase in the number of dust-storms) and salts in the reservoir, which in turn contributes to an increase in soil salinization, up to 400 km from the sea. These salts even settle on the glaciers of the massifs of Alaï (Alaïskiï khrïebïot) and Zaalaï (Zaalaïskiï khrïebïot), causing them to melt.
Figure 5: Environmental changes in lands near the Karakumy Canal (bibl. Entry 67): 1 - moving sands; 2 - sands partially stabilized by vegetation; 3 - sands stabilized by vegetation; 4 - marshes and wetlands; 5 - lakes caused by infiltration.
Map
F. Causes of desertification
3.31 Natural desertification, even as it occurs in CIS countries, has a very limited range. Although we have not been able to find publications which confirm the existence of this process, the climatic fluctuations of the past, variations in the level of the Aral Sea as well as the Caspian Sea, and the periodic functioning of large irrigation systems in Central Asia in Antiquity and the Middle Ages, leave one to suppose that slow natural processes are the backdrop for the very rapid desertification process that is happening today. Variations in the level of Central Asian reservoirs depend on a number of factors (the current transgression of the Caspian Sea is probably influenced by tectonic movements). However, it is without doubt human activity, especially errors made in the management of arid and semi-arid lands, which is the chief factor in present-day desertification. Publications emphasize above all the negative effects of the over-use of water resources for irrigation
and other purposes (cf. bibl. entries 29, 43, 48, 79, 123, 127). In the early 1980's, use of water from the Amu-Darya was 70 km^3 of the 79.5 km^3 of all its water (87.6%); as for the Syr-Darya, water use exceeded the flow by 24% (by recycling the same water). In the 1960's the Aral Sea received an average of 55 km^3 of water from the Amu-Darya, which decreased in the years 1978-1981 to 9-10 km^3. In 1982, for the first time, water from the river did not reach the Aral Sea. In 1976, the same phenomenon occurred with the Syr-Darya. In recent years, water from these rivers reaches the Aral Sea only occasionally (for example, during the floods of 1992, cf. bibl. entry 29). By the end of the 1980's the Ili had practically stopped supplying water to Lake Balkhash.
3.32 Losses of irrigation water due to evaporation and infiltration from canals hundreds of km long, sometimes dug in permeable sand, are enormous. For example, in the area around the Karakumy Canal, several small lakes have formed. Rapid evaporation leads directly to salinization (cf. bibl. entries 12, 67, 110, 127). In Central Asia the production of a tonne of cotton requires 2,000 to 3,000 m^3 of water; actual consumption is 1.25 to 1.75 times the acceptable norms and is greater than water consumption in other regions of the world (cf. bibl. entry 123). In some cases an increase in salinization is due to delays in the construction of drainage systems or their malfunction. In 1990 in the entire USSR, of the 23.1 million ha that were irrigated, only 18.5 million ha had drainage systems (bibl. entry 54). The construction of the Kapchagaï Reservoir in the Ili basin (bibl. entry 53) is a spectacular example of salinization caused by human action. Highly saline soil was
submerged, which contributed to the salinization of the reservoir water. This water was then used for irrigation.
3.33 The main factors in wind erosion are believed to be the ploughing of the steppes and over-grazing. Considering the huge extent of deflation from the Aral Sea bed (it is estimated at 100 million tonnes per year), the development of irrigated agriculture can be seen as an important indirect cause. Dune formation is also caused by projects in which machines move large quantities of earth (for example, near the Karakumy Canal or next to mining towns), and by truck movements (their routes are visible - for example, next to Tashkent -from airplanes at an altitude of over 3,000m). Mining and the excessive practice of slash-and-burn in forests and brush formations are also factors in desertification.
3.34 B. Komarov (cf. bibl. entry 42) feels that the main cause of such severe land degradation is not so much the lack of appropriate regulations as it is the legitimization of an increase in production at any price and by the insufficient ecological awareness of decision-makers.
G. Impact of desertification and drylands development on the environment and on socio-economic conditions
3.35 Despite the extent of desertification and the plentiful specialized literature these past years, the socio-economic impact of desertification remains little-known. Until 1989, information on this subject was very rare and was dispersed among articles dealing with other issues, generally biological in nature. An additional difficulty stemmed from the fact that until 1991, with the central planning of the economy, all attempts at estimating losses were marred by errors because of arbitrary price-fixing. Since 1991, hyperinflation has created difficulties in comparing data from year to year. The example of three calculations, cited by P.R. Pryde (cf. bibl. entry 50), demonstrates the differences in these estimations:
- in 1979, the sum total of losses since the beginning of large-scale irrigation in the Aral Sea basin, within Uzbekistan alone, is estimated to be between 5.4 and 5.7 billion roubles;
- in 1988, annual losses in the Amu-Darya delta (the two deltas of the Amu-Darya and the Syr-Darya are the most affected in Central Asia) are estimated to be only 100 million roubles per year;
- in 1988, the Soviet daily press published estimations according to which losses in the entire Aral region reached 1.5 to 2 billion roubles per year.
3.36 By contrast, according to estimations quoted by V.A. Dukhovnyïa and others (cf. bibl. entry 29), economic losses caused by harvest decreases alone in the years 1974, 1975, 1977 and 1978 (particularly dry years) reached 1.7 billion roubles per year.
3.37 It is for this reason that estimations of the impact of the processes of desertification are limited to information based on physical data which are very fragmentary and useful only as examples.
3.38 Authors emphasize the impact of desertification on:
(i) Agriculture: B. Komarov (cf. bibl. entry 42) shows that at the end of the 1970's, the area of lands rendered unfit for cultivation because of salinization and erosion caused by human activities covered 630,000 hectares in the entire country. In Kazakhstan, deflation caused losses in brown soil reaching 40
(ii) Animal production: a decline in forage resources has caused a reduction in the number and the productivity of animals, particularly a decrease in the milk production of cows. For example, in the Kyzl-Orda oblast in Kazakhstan, as early as 1980, lactation decreased by half, to 998 kg/year in the kolkhozes (cooperative farms) and to 724 kg/year in the sovkhozes (State farms);
(iii) Other losses: the most important are (i) decline in the fish catch in the Aral Sea (from 50,000 tonnes in 1960 to 12,000 tonnes in 1970 - bibl. entry 62); (ii) the suspension of shipping on the Aral Sea; (iii) an increase in the cost of supplying water to villages; (iv) limitations and interruptions in the road network due to sand encroachment; (v) increase in the danger of landslides due to the destruction of forests on mountain slopes; and (vi) hunting losses.
3.39 It is only in very recent years that information has been published on the direct dangers for human health. The health of the inhabitants of the Aral Sea region is in a disastrous state from dust and salt in the air, the high salt levels of drinking water (sometimes over 10/1000), and drinking water that is polluted by mineral fertilizers and herbicides. The results are a high number of contagious diseases (especially typhus and gastro-intestinal illnesses), several eye diseases (most children there wear glasses), a very high infant mortality rate (around 10%, which is higher than the average in the ex-USSR or in Asian countries (cf. bibl. entries 43, 123).
3.40 It has not been possible to find publications which deal with population migration due to desertification. However, according to experts consulted, such migrations exist; for example, regions near the former shores of the Aral Sea are becoming depopulated. One example is the case of the village of Bugun in Kazakhstan, north of the lower Syr-Daria, which has been progressively covered by sand dunes (up to the first floor of dwellings).
<section>7</section>
H. Drylands development and combating desertification
3.41 Combating desertification in CIS countries has a long tradition. In 1912 a research station was founded in Repetek whose purpose was to protect railroads from sand encroachment. This problem has since held a very important place in the work of research centres; results of experiments have been put into practice on a large scale. Various methods of sand dune fixation have been used, such as wood or metal fences, spraying sands with petroleum or its derivatives (in several locations in the Muzhun-Kum Desert, near the railroad, the remains of bituminous covers, damaged and disintegrating, can be seen), and the planting of trees and bushes, especially Maloxylon sp. Generally, on any given terrain, one or two methods are combined, thus increasing the efficiency of sand dune fixation (cf. bibl. entry 8).
3.42 In the 1940's and 50's in the Ukraine, forest strips were planted in a more or less rational way. Today a number of research centres scattered in various CIS countries help in the selection of optimal systems of planting forests (the centres at Ashkhabad, Alma Ata, Baku, and the Panrussian Scientific Institute of Soil Conservation and the Prevention of Erosion at Kursk -Vsïerossiïskiï naouchno-isslïedovatïel'nyï institut zïemlïedïeliïa i zashchity pochv ot erozii). Wind-breaks significantly slow down the speed of the wind, but the results depend on the width and height of the strips, the distance between them and the species of tree used. For example, in Dagestan a strip of forest 160 m long, 7 m wide, and 3 to 4.5 m high, composed mainly of acacias, caused the wind to decrease from 9 m/s to 1.4 m/s (measured 10 cm above the level of the soil), but 100 m behind the strip the speed of the wind increases again to 4.9 m/s (bibl. entry 1). Beneath the forest there is an
increase in humidity and an improvement in the soil structure which allows the simultaneous cultivation of trees and other plants (for example, north of the Caspian Sea, wheat is sown between rows of elm and tamarisk.
3.43 Revegetalization plays a very important role in the management of saline soils (cf. bibl. entries 5, 14, 22, 104, 128). Several experimental projects have been carried out by the centres in Alma Ata, Ashkhabad and Tashkent. The revegetalization of saline lands requires a preliminary preparation of the soil, an improvement in hydrological conditions and a careful selection of plants. Although the methods applied are quite varied, it is almost always necessary to construct a drainage system (canals, furrows). To the north of the Caspian Sea, the cultivation of sorghum is recommended. The stalks left for the winter will retain the snow. Precipitation is light, and since snow is not stopped by obstacles in the topography, it is blown away by the wind. For this reason these areas are called "black lands. " The snow, retained by the sorghum, melts and contributes to the formation of a thin layer of fresh groundwater which settles on top of the saline water. There have also
been experiments where wind-breaks have been planted, with sorghum, maize, "Sudan grass" and even wheat sown between them.
3.44 In the management of small areas where the soil is saline and not very permeable, good results have been obtained by bringing in sand (140 - 160 t/ha) and ploughing it into the soil. Successful experiments have been carried out on the promontories of the Altaï where there are small saline depressions (cf. bib. entry 131).
3.45 In the management of the Aral Sea, a series of methods must be used to limit salt movements. Work must be intensive, carried out during the first 4 to 7 years after the soil is exposed, when the groundwater is still not very deep even if it is saline. The Botanical Institute of the Academy of Sciences of Kazakhstan recommends several plants for revegetalization (especially the saxaouls ^2 and various psammophytes: Halaxylon aphyllum, H. persicum, several species of the genus Calligonum - notably C. caput-mendousae, Tamarix hispida and others), and different techniques of soil preparation (deep ploughing of solonchaks, creation of furrows, installation of bituminous covers on moving sands, etc.). In certain cases it is possible to seed grasses and saxaouls on barkhans ^3 with no soil preparation, preferably by plane.
^2 Small shrubs with thick stalks and cylindrical crowns, of the genus Chenopodiaceae-Salsola.
^3 Crescent-shaped dune which progresses onto a non-sandy area.
3.46 CIS countries have a wide experience in revegetalization and the improvement of saline soils which could be utilized in other regions of the world. Unfortunately, the dissemination of this experience is not systematic, and even other CIS countries do not always benefit from it. During an interview, researchers at the Botanical Institute of the Academy of Sciences of Kazakhstan complained that the dried up bed of the Aral Sea was seeded by plane with grasses and shrubs without taking into account the characteristics of the soil and without prior preparation, with totally ineffective results.
3.47 Revegetalization methods are also used in the management of desert zones. Species with highly developed root systems are preferred, the best being creepers (a good example is Glycyrrhiza glabra L.). In nearly every issue of the periodical "Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn " there is some information on the qualities of particular species and recommendations on their cultivation. Preferred species are the saxaouls (especially Halaxylon aphyllum and H. persicum), Kochia prostrata, and Glycyrrhiza glabra L.. The latter is useful not only for sand dune fixation but also provides raw materials for the pharmaceutical and food industries. Its roots can be used for animal feed (at the end of two years, with irrigation, 16 to 18 tonnes of dry root matter were obtained: cf. bibl. entry 55).
3.48 In sand dune fixation, revegetalization is often used in conjunction with other methods: construction of fences or installation of covers which prevent water from seeping deeply into the sand. The choice of height (generally 20 to 70 cm) and distance between fences is made according to the direction and force of the wind. Since the fences are built mainly from branches and brush, there have been cases where vegetation has been destroyed to build fences. In Turkmenistan chemical methods of sand dune fixation were used in the early 1980's near roads and industrial establishments; among known methods, the use of petroleum derivatives and bitumens was the least expensive. Petroleum guarantees the fixation of dunes for two years, polymers for two to three years, and some oil mulches for five years (cf. bibl. entries 8, 12, 14, 67 and others).
3.49 There is a completely different group of methods for combating desertification that does not disturb (or disturbs to a minimal degree) the natural environment. These are often very simple methods: A. Arnagïel' dyïev (cf. bibl. entry 64) recommends taking into account the direction of the dominant winds in deciding the location of villages, roads and factories. He emphasizes that for the management of takyrs ^4, herd routes must be planned downwind from takyrs; otherwise, the sand kicked up by hooves will be blown towards the fields by the wind. The management of takyrs requires an improvement in hydrological conditions that is, the construction of a canal system and shallow furrows (cf. bibl. entry 45).
^4 See annex 5.
3.50 Revegetalization plays an important role in rational pasture use. Scientists in the Soviet and post-Soviet periods have considerable experience in this. There exist optimal norms of acceptable grazing which take into consideration the flora and its condition. There are also descriptions of the stages of degradation and methods of revegetalization, and of additional techniques such as ploughing (cf. bibl. entries 81, 118, 119 and others). Most works concerning pastures do not take into account economic considerations; it is only in recent years that this situation has changed. It is worth mentioning here the study by B.V. Vinogradov et al. (cf. bibl. entry 56) which presents a model for pastures north of the Caspian Sea. This is a model for attaining high financial profits from livestock farming; during the first years of the development period, revegetalization must cover 20% to 25% of pastures per year, then 10% to 15% per year, until over 80% of the territory has been
improved, with 0.6 sheep/ha. This system could give excellent results in the Aralo-Caspian depression.
I. Results of large-scale projects in drylands development and combating desertification
3.51 It is difficult to determine the precise effects of desert management and of combating desertification. Very concrete assessments can be found in the Moscow press, but they must be interpreted with caution.
3.52 Although statistics can be inexact, and the 1960's, 70's and 80's were dominated by the "propaganda of success," it is nevertheless certain that large irrigation systems have allowed the significant extension of the area of arable land and an increase in harvests. In 1971 in Tajikistan, the length of all the irrigation and drainage canals added up to 142,600 km; today it is around 200,000 km. In other countries of the CIS the length of canals is less; in Turkmenistan, the total length of canals in 1971 was 20,000 km, and in 1982, there were 25,046 hen of irrigation canals and 20,237 km of drainage canals (cf. bibl. entries 12, 22). Considering that the surface area of oases has increased from 1 % to 7% of the total area of Turkmenistan from the 1950's to the end of the 1980's (cf. bibl. entry 75), it is clear that a significant quantitative change has taken place (although it can only be approximated).
3.53 Programmes for developing arid and semi-arid lands and for controlling desertification reached their peak in the 1970's and the beginning of the 1980's.
3.54 The considerable expansion of irrigated areas (cf. chaps. 4.D) has been accompanied by the rapid development of sand dune fixation projects and the creation of forest strips. The greatest successes in sand dune fixation have been recorded in Turkmenistan. 140,000 ha were stabilized between 1951 and 1968, 300,000 ha between 1971 and 1975, and 330,000 ha between 1976 and 1980. Subsequent projects, very ambitious, planned the fixation of all the dunes of Turkmenistan and almost all those in other Republics by the year 2000 (estimations of the area of sand dunes in Turkmenistan vary widely, although the figure most often cited is 1.3 million ha in 1980) (cf. bibl. entries 8, 12, 22, 46, 139).
3.55 As for forest strips, the areas decrease regularly, from 44,000 hectares in 1980 to 39,000 hectares in 1985, and 29,000 hectares in 1987 (cf. bibl. entry 50). Pryde indicates that he can find no explanation for this. He seems to connect it with the beginnings of the collapse of the Soviet economy.
3.56 Positive results in the combat against desertification and drylands management are particularly visible in certain privileged regions.
3.57 The afforestation of lands along the railroad was undertaken to protect the tracks from sand encroachment. In Turkmenistan, the afforestation along the railway covered 150 ha/year (cf. bibl. entry 12). In May 1993, along the Moscow-Saratov-Akhtiubinsk-Alma Ata rail line, through 3,000 km of steppes, semi-deserts and deserts, there is an almost continuous strip of forest, interrupted by only a few gaps.
3.58 Baku is a good example of successful urban afforestation. In 1950, parks covered only 309 ha in Baku, but increased to 1,160 ha in 1960 and to 5,500 ha in 1970. Subsequent years have recorded a continual growth in wooded areas.
3.59 However, generally speaking, the programmes of managing arid and semi-arid lands have been a fiasco with disastrous consequences. It is exactly these large-scale projects - ploughing the steppes and irrigation schemes which absorb enormous quantities of water which are considered to be the main causes of desertification (cf. chaps. 4.F). As a result of these errors, the combat against desertification has become at the same time a factor of desertification - a vicious cycle of degradation. To break it, technical solutions, even the best, are not sufficient; profound changes in the social structures are necessary.
3.60 The countries of Central Asia are currently suffering from an ecological catastrophe which is habitually called the "Aral problem." It is comparable to what happened in the 1930's in the prairies of the United States, and is as serious as desertification in Africa. Lake Balkhash, somewhat less threatened, has remained in the shadow of the "Aral problem." The dangerous situation of the Aral Sea has long been known. A close analysis of the recent evolution of ideas and proposals to solve the "Aral problem" gives hope that structural changes will finally take place.
3.61 Until the 1970's, the dangers were generally ignored. Politicians almost uniformly considered that the diversion of Siberian rivers would solve all the difficulties. They proposed a canal linking the Ob River to the Aral Sea. There was also a plan for a canal that, after connecting the Yenissey and Ob Rivers to the Aral Sea, would continue west to the lower Volga and the Caspian Sea (more than 3,000 km, 25 km^3 of water/year). Detailed management plans for lands near the projected canal were developed (cf. bibl. entries 11, 17, 27). Only at the end of the 1970's and the beginning of the 1980's were the enormous costs and the possibility of the negative ecological impact of such undertakings considered, especially since the errors made in the construction of the Karakumy Canal were fresh in their memory (cf. bibl. entries 17, 87).
3.62 The idea of transferring water from Siberian rivers towards Central Asia was abandoned very recently. However, the question of the future of the Aral Sea is still open. Most often, the plan is to divide the Aral Sea into several separate reservoirs. But even this solution requires a water supply, and the Amu-Darya and the Syr-Darya are nearly dry. The diversion of Siberian rivers being currently impossible, certain authors propose transporting water from the Volga and the Caspian Sea. However, considering the very high cost and the general political situation in the region, this project is unworkable at this time. More and more often, the idea of rational economy (economizing water, improving irrigation and drainage systems, changing crops, etc.) is advocated as the best solution to the problem (cf. bibl. entries 32, 43, 77, 123, 132). Similar propositions have been put forward in the case of Lake Balkhash. For example, G.M. Janaliïeva (cf. bibl. entry 94) estimates
that the water use norms for irrigating rice fields in the Ili valley can be reduced from the current 50,000 - 60,000 m^3/ha to less than 25,000 - 30,000 m^3/ha. A decrease in water consumption would only be possible if there were a fee for water use, and land reforms (cf. bibl. entries 26, 32, 43).
3.63 S.I. Bobylïev takes these ideas further (cf. bibl. entry 77). He proposes giving up the monoculture of cotton in Central Asia and starting the production of synthetic fibres instead. In his opinion, this change could economize up to 40 km^3 of water/year with a much lower cost than other solutions. Although these estimations are questionable, they nevertheless express a new way of thinking.
<section>8</section>
4. Conclusions
4.1 After a short mission in the countries of the CIS and an analysis of specialized documentation, a number of conclusions can be drawn.
4.2 Over the last 40 years, the countries of the CIS have made significant progress in drylands development and management. They have carried out two main actions: (i) ploughing the steppes and (ii) the development of irrigation in Central Asia (dams, irrigation canals, etc.).
4.3 This has allowed the large-scale development of cereal and cotton cultivation, and intensive livestock farming (generally of karakuls) on lands originally used only for extensive nomad and semi-nomad animal husbandry. On these lands, the population density has increased considerably. The development of arid and semi-arid lands has also produced negative effects. Large-scale programmes endeavouring to plough the steppes and to extend the area of irrigated lands were inefficient, and the waste of land and water led to the development of the process of desertification.
4.4 Desertification in the CIS countries reaches very serious dimensions. It is essentially of human origin, and results, among other things, from large-scale management schemes for arid and semi-arid lands, often carried out in an irrational manner.
4.5 In desertification caused by human activities, scientists distinguish desertification caused by modernization, meaning the process of land degradation and the movement of dunes caused by large construction projects (canals, roads, railroads, apartment buildings, factories and others), and also by heavy off-road vehicle traffic. Desertification caused by modernization is particularly developed in the CIS.
4.6 Among all the problems related to desertification in the CIS, the most serious are those related to the drying up of the Aral Sea. During the last 25 years, land has emerged with an area larger than that of Macedonia. Very little vegetation has taken over; it is covered in large part by sand dunes or by friable salt. The drying up of the Aral Sea affects groundwater for over 100 km beyond the former shores, intensive dust-storms extend over 400 to 450 km and salty dust can be transported up to 800 km. The direct and indirect effects of the drying up of the Aral Sea endanger the entire region of Central Asia; the term «ecological catastrophe" is well-founded. Soviet and post-Soviet documentation dealing with desertification is in fact dominated by work on the Aral Sea and its region.
4.7 Scientific centres have acquired a wide experience from their studies of the natural environment and in their knowledge of the physical processes of desertification, particularly salinization. They have also developed a number of original methods of the revegetalization of arid or degraded lands, as well as methods of desalinization and sand dune fixation. The usefulness of these methods has been tested on a truly large scale. Certain of them could be applied in other countries, particularly in the closest Asian countries such as Iran, Afghanistan, China and Mongolia.
4.8 The large institutes of the Academy of Sciences are the chief research centres. The key role is played by the Institute of Deserts (Institut Pustyn') at Ashkhabad in Turkmenistan.
4.9 In recent years an ecological consciousness has developed in the CIS, especially among intellectuals. However, the collapse of the economy has led to a drastic reduction in projects to combat desertification. It is difficult at this moment to predict the consequences of the dissolution of the USSR for the future of research centres studying the problems of desertification. A greater autonomy for the institutes and easier and more direct contacts with the scientific world could be important factors for development.
4.10 It is also difficult to predict the influence of the current economic and political upheavals on desertification. There is hope that the transition to a market economy could help reduce waste and, in this way, limit desertification. The management of large-scale irrigation systems and the combat against desertification demand the cooperation between newly-independent countries. If this does not develop, or if on the contrary tensions surface or continue, ecological degradation can only get worse.
<section>9</section>
Annexes
Annex 1: coordinates of the bibliographic entries
Annex 2: Bibliographic entries for the most important documents (entries 1 to 60)
Annex 3: Bibliographic entries for other documents (61 to 147)
Annex 4: List of consultants 5
Annex 5: Explanation of Russian terms used in this report
Annex 6: Transliteration from the Russian alphabet
Annex 1: coordinates of the bibliographic entries
A. Classification
0. Natural environment of arid and semi-arid zones in the CIS (monographs)
1. Definitions, theories, hypotheses and methodologies
A. Definitions
B. Theories and hypotheses
C. Methodologies for studying the phenomena
1. remote sensing
2. archaeology
3. paleogeography
4. others
D. Scientific cooperation, conferences, etc.
2. Desertification phenomena in the world
A. Principal elements of desertification
1. deflation
2. salinization
3. decrease in the vegetation cover
4. water scarcity
5. others
B. Geographical distribution
1. outside the ex-Soviet Union
2. within the ex-Soviet Union
a. Central Asia and Kazakhstan
b. Kazakhstan
c. Turkmenistan
d. Tajikistan
e. Uzbekistan
f. Aral Sea
g. southern Siberia
h. European Russia
i. the Ukraine
j. the Caucasus (Georgia, Armenia, Azerbaijan)
C. Evolution at the geological scale
D. Evolution at the historical scale
3. Causes of desertification
A. Climate trends at the geological scale
B. Periodic climatic variations
C. Biological causes (including human and animal activities)
1. population pressure
2. exploitation of wood resources (fuelwood and the wood industry)
3. irrigation, overuse of water
4. overgrazing
5. land reclamation, road networks, railways
6. other biological factors
D. Others
4. Impact of desertification and of drylands development on the natural environment and on socio-economic conditions
A. Degradation of resources
1. degradation of agricultural resources
2. degradation of animal husbandry resources
3. degradation of resources for other human activities
4. "desertization"
B. Losses (financial and socio-economic)
C. Degradation of the quality of life
D. Socio-economic instability, population migration
5. Drylands development and combating desertification
A. Socio-economic aspects of combating desertification
1. awareness of the phenomena, policies and strategies
2. national/regional planning
3. adaptability, acceptability of technologies
4. successes and constraints of implementation
B. Economic aspects of combating desertification
1. costs
2. profitability (financial, economic)
C. Techniques and technologies of drylands development and combating desertification
1. irrigation
2. sand dune fixation, combating sand encroachment
3. soil desalinization
4. revegetalization
5. others
D. Drylands management
1. works completed
a. irrigation
b. sand dune fixation, combating sand encroachment
c. soil desalinization
d. revegetalization in drylands
e. others
2. large-scale projects
a. diversion of Siberian rivers
b. others
Annex 2: Bibliographic entries for the most important documents (entries 1 to 60)
Bibliographic entry 1
Bibliographic entry 2
Bibliographic entry 3
Bibliographic entry 4
Bibliographic entry 5
Bibliographic entry 6
Bibliographic entry 7
Bibliographic entry 8
Bibliographic entry 9
Bibliographic entry 10
Bibliographic entry 11
Bibliographic entry 12
Bibliographic entry 13
Bibliographic entry 14
Bibliographic entry 15
Bibliographic entry 16
Bibliographic entry 17
Bibliographic entry 18
Bibliographic entry 19
Bibliographic entry 20
Bibliographic entry 21
Bibliographic entry 22
Bibliographic entry 23
Bibliographic entry 24
Bibliographic entry 25
Bibliographic entry 26
Bibliographic entry 27
Bibliographic entry 28
Bibliographic entry 29
Bibliographic entry 30
Bibliographic entry 31
Bibliographic entry 32
Bibliographic entry 33
Bibliographic entry 34
Bibliographic entry 35
Bibliographic entry 36
Bibliographic entry 37
Bibliographic entry 38
Bibliographic entry 39
Bibliographic entry 40
Bibliographic entry 41
Bibliographic entry 42
Bibliographic entry 43
Bibliographic entry 44
Bibliographic entry 45
Bibliographic entry 46
Bibliographic entry 47
Bibliographic entry 48
Bibliographic entry 49
Bibliographic entry 50
Bibliographic entry 51
Bibliographic entry 52
Bibliographic entry 53
Bibliographic entry 54
Bibliographic entry 55
Bibliographic entry 56
Bibliographic entry 57
Bibliographic entry 58
Bibliographic entry 59
Bibliographic entry 60
Bibliographic entry 1
Author: Abdullaiïev S.A.
Title: Razvitiïe vïetrovoï erozii (dïeflatsii) v iugo-vostochnom Kobystaniïe i mïeropriïatiïa po ïego osvoïeniiou (The development of wind erosion [deflation] southeast of Kobystan and measures of controlling it)
Publisher: Akadïemiïa Naouk Azïerbaïjanskoï SSR. Institut Gïeografii (Academy of Sciences of Azerbaijan, Geographical Institute), Baku, 22 pp.
Date: 1982 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, Thesis available at Baku
Classification: 2A1, 2B1, 5C2
Region: Azerbaijan, Dagestan
Summary: Presentation of a doctoral thesis at Baku. Analysis of soil types and description of wind erosion and the different factors which can contribute to it (results from field work). For example, a strip of forest (windbreak) 160 m long, 7 m wide and 3.0 to 4.5 m high (composed mainly of acacias) causes a significant decrease in wind speed for up to 50 m (from 4.9 m/s to 1.4 m/s, speed measured 10 cm above the ground), but at 100 m from the strip, the speed increases again to 4.9 m/s. Wind erosion affects 53.6% of southeastern Dagestan (light erosion affects 10.4% of the area of the region, moderate erosion - 10.5%, heavy erosion - 28.9%; sand dunes cover 3.8%). Sands and solonchaks are the most eroded. In Dagestan the acceleration of erosion has been caused by over-exploitation (without indicating what types).
Two schematic maps:
1. Soil types (from the point of view of their vulnerability to wind erosion, 13 types)
2. The danger of erosion and measures for controlling it. Six types of terrain are identified and various solutions are suggested, such as: forest strips, drainage as a means of desalinization, revegetalization, regulating livestock farming and others.
Plants: Acacia, Maple
Bibliographic entry 2
Author: Akadïemiïa Naouk Kazakhskoï SSR, Sïektor Gïeografii (Academy of Sciences of Kazakhstan, Geography Section), (Gvozdïetskiï N.A., ea., Moscow)
Title: Landshaftnaïa Karta Kazakhskoï SSR (Map of natural landscapes of Kazakhstan)
Publisher: Akadïemiïa Naouk Kazakhskoï SSR - GUGiK, Alma Ata - Moscow
Date: 1979 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, Institut Gïeografii (Kazakh: Gïeografiia Instituty), Academy of Sciences of Kazakhstan, Alma Ata
Classification: 0
Region: Kazakhstan
Summary: A map to the scale of 1:2,500,000, showing the landscape types in Kazakhstan, prepared using materials of 1:1,000,000 and others more detailed. In all, 485 landscape types are identified, including 80 deserts, 51 semi-deserts, 49 of the arid steppe type.
Desertification processes are not shown on the map. Morphological criteria differentiate landscape types. This is the first map of landscape types drawn up in one of the republics of Central Asia. Contemporary maps which show the processes of desertification, the vulnerability of ecosystems and environmental changes caused by human activities have been developed on the basis of this map of natural landscapes. (The same is true for other states of Central Asia).
Landscape types - deserts, semi-deserts and arid steppes - are identified according to the type of vegetation, and, in particular, the percentage of soil devoid of vegetation, but the map's legend does not take this into account. Within each group, several types can be identified which are uniform in terms of topography, the range in altitude, the soil and the vegetation. For example: semi-deserts; flat coastal plains; clay soils, sandy clay, and sands; landscapes with Festuca sulcuta vegetation types (solonchaks, solonïetz).
Bibliographic entry 3
Author: Akadiemiïa Naouk Turkmïenistana. Institut Pustyn' (Academy of Sciences of Turkmenistan, Institute of Deserts)
Title: Pustynïa Karakumy i pustynïa Tar (Karakumy Desert and Thar Desert)
Publisher: Ylym, Ashkhabad, 316 pp.
Date: 1992 Language: Russian (English version - see note)
Available: In May 1993 - private collections in Moscow, IP Ashkhabad
Classification: 0, 1A, 1C, 1D, 2B1, 2B2c, very generally 2A, 3C
Region: India, Turkmenistan
Summary: A comparative study of the natural environment (very good description) and of the human exploitation of the two deserts. Each chapter is divided into two parts: one prepared by an "ax-Soviet" writer (for the Karakumy Desert), the other by an Indian specialist (for the Thar). Desertification: Kharin N.G. and Babaïeva T.A., pp. 280-288, for Turkmenistan; Venkateswarlu J., Sen A.K., Gupta G.P., pp. 288-302, for India.
Desertification in Turkmenistan: general information. According to the authors the chief factor is overgrazing. The schematic map of Desertification in Turkmenistan shows the intensity of Desertification (6 degrees), the elements of Desertification (5 elements), the causes of Desertification (6 causes: insufficient grazing, overgrazing, over- exploitation of woodlands, use of fragile lands for agriculture, mining, construction, natural processes), and the improvement of the natural desert environment (2 types). The authors also show the differences in the intensity of Desertification in different administrative regions (oblasti) of Turkmenistan.
Note: According to Russian participants there is an English version in India. Title: Karakumy Desert and Thar Desert.
Definition: Desertification (p. 280): "The intensification and/or expansion of desert conditions constitutes a process which leads to a decrease in the productivity of ecosystems; this decrease, in turn, leads to a decline in pastoral resources, agricultural production and the deterioration of the conditions of human life" (Institute of Deserts). The Indian researchers' definition is very different: it is limited to Desertification caused by human activity.
Bibliographic entry 4
Author: Akadïemiïa Naouk Uzbïekskoï SSR. Otdïel gïeografii (Academy of Sciences of Uzbekistan, Geography Section)
Title: Opustynivaniïe v Uzbïekistanïe i bor'ba s nim (Desertification and combating desertification in Uzbekistan).
Publisher: Fan, Tashkent, 156 pp.
Date: 1988 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow
Classification: 1C4 (cartography), A, 2B2e, 3B-C, 5C
Region: Uzbekistan
Summary: A summary of documents, probably the most up-to-date on desertification in Uzbekistan. Presented in 5 chapters: 1) The natural environment as the background of desertification; 2) Factors and causes of desertification; 3) Current conditions and predictions; 4) Cartography of desertification; 5) Combating desertification.
Chapter 2 focuses on the drop in temperature in the 1950's and 1970's, which contributed to droughts. Human activity is considered to be the main factor in desertification, especially overgrazing (examples on pp. 32-35). Desertification caused by modern technology plays a major role, especially trucking, which destabilizes ecosystems. Intensively-used unpaved truck routes often reach 0.5-1 km in width; north of Ustyurt, even up to 1-2 km. The criteria of desertification, chiefly an analysis of vegetation, are described on pp. 44-50.
In chapter 3, five natural regions are identified (with schematic maps). The zone near the Aral Sea is analyzed in the most detail. Predictions are pessimistic.
Chapter 4 presents the method used in the preparation of the map "The danger of erosion in the drylands of Uzbekistan"; there are charts with the criteria of the degradation of vegetation (pp. 80-81), wind erosion (p. 85), water erosion (pp. 89-90), salinization (pp. 93-95), desertification caused by modern technology (6 types, p. 98), a classification of landscape types (pp. 102-103), a chart of the current state of desertification according to landscape type (p. 104). The current state of desertification is shown on the map p. 100. Chapter 5 covers: sand dune fixation; desalinization, pasture improvement, combating desertification south of the Aral Sea, the rational use of pastures and irrigated lands.
Note: Extensive bibliography, exclusively in Russian.
Desertification caused by modern technology: Destruction of the plant cover and soil resulting from the construction of roads, factories, mines, housing developments, railroads, irrigation installations, etc., and intense off-road vehicle traffic.
Bibliographic entry 5
Author: Aliïev G.A. et al.
Title: Prirodnyïe usloviïa i rïesursy Apshïerona (Conditions and natural resources in the Apsheron Peninsula
Publisher: Elm, Baku, 180 pp.
Date: 1979 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, WGiSR UW Warsaw
Classification: 0, 2B2j, 5C2, 5C4
Region: Azerbaijan
Summary: In this description of the environment and natural resources of the Apsheron Peninsula, where Baku is located, problems of the degradation of the environment are treated superficially; damage is mainly due to the mining industry.
The peninsula is affected by soil salinization and by wind erosion. Information is presented on fences which stop sand encroachment and further the formation of dunes in designated places, also on forest strips (recommended species: Ulmus campestris, Haloxylon sp., Ficus carica), seeding (species for sand dune fixation are not mentioned), and on the rinsing of solonchaks (saline soils).
The authors describe the important role of park management in towns for improving the quality of life; for example, at Baku, parks covered respectively: 309 ha in 1950, 1,160 ha in 1960, 5,500 ha in 1975. The plan for the years 1976-1980 was to enlarge these areas by 6,640 ha (charts pp. 128-9). In 1975 parks, forest strips, and tree and shrub planting (including vines) covered 13,169 ha of the peninsula.
Note: Species recommended for windbreaks: Ulmus campestris, Haloxylon sp., Ficus carica.
Bibliographic entry 6
Authors: Andrianov B.V., Kïes' A.S.
Title: Zïemli drïevnïego oroshïeniïa i ikh znachïenïe v sovrïemïennom razvitii oroshaïemogo zïemlïedïeliïa (Irrigated lands in Antiquity and their importance in the contemporary development of irrigated agriculture)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 4, pp. 3-10, Ashkhabad
Date: 1970 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw, UAM Poznan'
Classification: 1Cl-3, 2B2a, 2D
Region: Kazakhstan, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan
Summary: In the ex-Soviet Union, irrigation was begun in Antiquity, covering a territory of 8 to 10 million ha, located in Central Asia and in southern Kazakhstan. Half of these lands were in the basin between two rivers: the Amu-Darya and the Syr-Darya. They have great scientific and practical importance and could be redeveloped. For several years, archaeologists, geomorphologists and pedologists have carried out comprehensive research using aerial photographs. The purpose of these studies was to explain certain issues:
1) when and which crops were grown in which soil and for how long were they irrigated?
2) when and why was farming stopped?
3) how long have they been going through the desertification process?
4) what changes have the landscape and the soil undergone?
5) what are the factors which have determined these changes?
An archaeo-geomorphological map has been drawn up, based on this research, showing cultivated lands in Antiquity, their irrigation system and the time of use. These data are very important in the planning of a new irrigation system.
Bibliographic entry 7
Authors: Andrianov B.V., Zorin L.V., Nikolaïeva R.V.
Title: Kolïebaniïa uvlajnïennosti aral'o-kaspiïskogo rïegiona v golotsïenïe (Fluctuations in humidity in the Aralo-caspian region in the Holocene)
Publisher: Naouka - AN SSSR, Moscow, 226 pp.
Date: 1980 Language: Russian
Available: IG RAN Moscow, WGiSR UW Warsaw
Classification: 2B2a, 2B2, 2C-D, 3A-B
Region: Central Asia, Kazakhstan, the Caucasus
Summary: This collection of 33 articles spans the last 2,000 years. The problems dealt with are diverse, but most work focuses on changes in the sea level and the coast line of the Aral and Caspian Seas. However, the changes in question depend on factors so varied that their usefulness in analyzing climate change is low. Palynological analyses give the most concrete results. They do not show a constant trend in climate change, but long-term variations. Today the climate is evolving towards a dry period.
In the Caucasus, the most humid period was 1750-1300 B.C.; it was followed by a drier period; the driest period was in the 12th and 13th centuries (pp. 61-70, chart p. 69). In Central Asia, aridification and accompanying changes in the flora date from 4,000 years ago (p. 174). The zone with the widest range of temperature and atmospheric pressure began moving 10°-15° to the north, putting Central Asia between the northern and southern zones of atmospheric fronts, which caused a decline in precipitation. In the subsequent period, minute climatic variations have been observed in various regions of Central Asia (for example, in Fergana where the most humid period was the end of the first millenium B.C. and in the 9th and 12th centuries - p. 221). No regularities in these variations were observed.
Bibliographic entry 8
Author: Ataïev A.
Title: Effiektivnost' zakrïeplïeniïa i oblïesieniïa pïeskov (Effectiveness of the stabilization and afforestation of sands)
Publisher: Akadïemiïa Naouk Turkmïenskoï SSR (Turkmenistan Academy of Sciences. Institute of Deserts), Ylym, Ashkhabad, 72 pp.
Date: 1983 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, WGiSR UW Warsaw
Classification: 5C2, SB1-2
Region: Turkmenistan
Summary: This publication is an outline of methods of protection against sand encroachment (fences, barriers, etc.) and the stabilization of sand by mechanical and chemical means. There is no information on the afforestation of sands or on methods of revegetalization, despite the book's title. However, there is a detailed description of techniques of protecting roads and industrial buildings from sand encroachment, an economic calculation for different techniques of chemical stabilization, including transport costs (rare in Soviet literature), and the state of these methods in the early 1980's. At that time, stabilization with petroleum and its derivatives was the least expensive method and lasted 2 to 5 years.
Description of methods of chemical stabilization of sands:
In 1975 in Tashkent, a vehicle was made for the purpose of spraying sand with fixatives. The most frequently used substances were petroleum and its derivatives: nerozine, mulch with bitumen, mulch with fuel oil, bituminous emulsions, polymers K-9 and K-6, sunak, BRP-1, latex, SSB. Occasionally, aqueous solutions of polymers with clay in various proportions have been used; in this case, a permeable or impermeable cover is formed on the sand. Stabilization lasted 2 to 4 years depending on the substance used (the most economical were oil mulch with additives, and polymers).
Bibliographic entry 9
Authors: Ataïev A.A., Frïeïkin, Z.G., Kïerimbïerdïïev S.
Title: Ekonomichïeskiïe aspïekty obvodnïeniïa i uluchshïeniïa pastbishch (Economic aspects of irrigation and the improvement of pastures)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 6, Ashkhabad
Date: 1978 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw, UAM Poznan
Classification: 5B1, 5C1, 5C4, 5D1a, 5D1d
Region: Turkmenistan
Summary: In Turkmenistan, out of 36 million ha of pasturelands 22 million are irrigated, or 60%. There are inequalities among the systems, both in the layout of water points and in the technical condition of their equipment. The optimal distance between water points is 5 to 8 km so as neither to weaken the animals nor destroy the pastures by their movements. Studies of this matter show that when the distance between water points is 2 km, the region irrigated can be 1,256 ha, and the cost of irrigation is 8.4 roubles per hectare. When the distance between water points is 6 km, 11,000 km can be irrigated for a cost of 52 roubles per hectare; when the distance is 10 km, irrigation can cover 31,400 hectares with a cost of 34 roubles per hectare.
As for the depth of wells, the most economical are those 70 m deep. They supply more than 30m^3 of water per 24 hours, with a cost of 22 roubles per m^3 of water.
The irrigation of large areas is planned using aqueducts. In addition to irrigation, work has begun on projects for improving the quality of pasturelands, especially in the Karakumy Desert. Several other projects have been carried out for the purpose of protecting and improving plants as well as for the formation of man-made pasturelands.
During the ninth Five-Year Plan, these projects have consumed 1.835 million roubles. The improvement of pasturelands is planned for an area of 2.5 million hectares.
Bibliographic entry 10
Author: Babaïev A.G. (ed.)
Title: Aerokosmichïeskiïe mïetody izuchïeniïa prirodnykh usloviï pustyn' (The use of aerial photographs and satellite imagery for analyzing the natural conditions of deserts)
Publisher: Akadïemiïa Naouk Turkmïenskoï SSR (Academy of Sciences of Turkmenistan), Ylym, Ashkhabad, 128 pp.
Date: 1986 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow
Classification: 1C1, 2B2c
Region: Central Asia (particularly Turkmenistan), Africa (Libya)
Summary: Presentation of a method of analyzing aerial photographs and satellite imagery used to study the natural environment of deserts and pasturelands. Primarily, imagery from "Salyut" was used, but also some from "Meteor." One article is devoted to the range of desertification in Turkmenistan (pp. 25-43). The area affected by a given type and degree of desertification is indicated for each administrative unit of the republic. Figures are presented for the entire republic: 35.25% of the area is not affected by desertification; 11.05% light desertification; 15.65% moderate desertification; 5.26% strong desertification; 3.87% extreme desertification. Surface water covers 2.07%. Territories affected by the degradation of vegetation cover 38.19% of Turkmenistan, by wind erosion 7.59%, by fluvial erosion 5.12%, by soil salinization 10.97%, by desertification caused by modernization 0.85 % (3,947 km^2). Forests planted on sands cover 0.95% (4,633 km^2), protected lands near
railroad lines 1.36%, improved lands near canals 4.78%, natural reserves 2.78%. This means that on nearly 10% of the territory there seems to be an improvement in natural conditions.
Analyzing satellite imagery:
Satellite imagery is used primarily to interpret the state of the vegetation and the topography. Zones are discerned by their tone, their structure and the clarity of identical borders. All the elements represented by points or lines on the satellite imagery are identified by comparing to maps. In the field, tones and structural elements corresponding to the imagery are identified. Particular attention is paid to the state of vegetation near water points and to dunes. When possible, imagery from different years are compared to understand the dynamics of change.
Bibliographic entry 11
Author: Babaïev A.G. (ed.)
Title: Aktual'nyïe voprosy osvoïeniïa i prïeobrazovaniïa pustyn' SSSR (Contemporary problems of the economic development and transformation of deserts)
Publisher: Ylym, Ashkhabad, 240 pp.
Date: 1981 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, WGiSR UW Warsaw
Classification: 0, 5C1-2, 5C4, 5D1a, 5D2a
Region: Ex-Soviet Union - Central Asia
Summary: An anthology of 15 articles dedicated to M.P. Pïetrov on his 75th birthday, and a bibliography of his work. The articles deal with the natural environment of Central Asian deserts (sand deserts in particular), physical and geographical regionalization and methods of drawing up geomorphological maps using satellite imagery. The study "Large Central Asian canals and the combat against desertification" (pp. 136-146) contains information on the Karakumy and Amu-Bukhara Canals. Conditions for the year 1976 and plans (in parentheses) are as follows:
- The Karakumy Canal: length - 1000 km (1400 km), rate of flow 400 m^3/sec (800 m^3/sec), gravitation system, irrigated area 520,000 ha (1 million ha);
- The Karchin Canal: 200 km, 200 m^3/sec (550 m^3/sec), 200,000 ha irrigated (850,000ha);
- The Amu-Bukhara Canal: 196 km (234 km), 269 m^3/sec (300 m^3/sec), 250,000 ha irrigated (400,000 ha). Excessive water consumption decreases the level of the Aral Sea, which brings on desertification, especially in the Amu-Darya and Syr Darya deltas. Short-term prevention: conducting irrigation water into the Aral Sea, possibly the future transfer of water from Siberian rivers. A study (pp. 84-102) of the topography formed by wind effect, and on general methods of sand dune stabilization is completed by information on plants used to this end
Plants used to stabilize sands: Ammodendron conollyi Bunge (sand Acacia), Haloxylon persicum Bunge ex Boiss (white saxaoul), Aellenia subaphylla var. arenaria (Chenopodiaceae), Ephedra strobilacea Bunge (Ephedraceae), Salsola richteri (Mog.) Karl et Litr., S. paletzkiana Litr.., (chenopodiaceae), Calligonum sp. (55 species in Turkmenistan), Gramineaae: Aristida Karelinii, A. pennata, Heliotropium arguzioides, Tourmefortia sogoliana, Carex physodes.
Bibliographic entry 12
Author: Babaïev A.G. (ed.)
Title: Combating Desertification in the USSR: problems and experience
Publisher: UNEP/USSR Commission for UNEP, Centre of International Projects, Moscow, 120 pp.
Date: 1982 Language: English
Available: BiL Moscow
Classification: 1A-B, 2A, 2B2, 3C3-5, 4A1-2, 5A-D
Region: Soviet Central Asia, Kazakhstan
Summary: This document describes the climatic conditions of arid and semi-arid lands in Soviet Central Asia and Kazakhstan, and formulates definitions of desertification. Desertification factors according to B. G. Rozanov (1977, cf. bibl. entry 52) are presented, as are the natural and human factors in desertification, the stages of desertification in Central Asian pasturelands as a result of excessive animal production, (the succession of plant associations, examples, decline in the productivity of pasturelands). Information is given on: desertification observed along the Amu-Darya and Syr-Darya deltas after the diversion of water for irrigation; projects in the USSR in the development and improvement of pasturelands; irrigated agriculture with numerous maps and examples such as the Steppe of Hunger (Golodnaïa Steppe), and the stabilization of sands by afforestation (this information is on Central Asia and the northern Ukraine). The problem of sand stabilization is
presented with a description of traditional and modern methods, species selection, seedling survival, the hardening of soil using chemical methods (fuel oil, petrol, various bituminous substances, etc., information on the depths of these treatments and on the cost: fuel oil mulch 43-53 roubles/ha, petroleum mulch 52 roubles/ha, reinforcement with fences. In Turkmenistan, afforestation and revegetalization projects have been implemented on sands at the rate of 80,000 ha per year (total area of sand dunes: 1,323,000 ha).
Remarks:
1. Rich bibliography (176 titles, mostly in Russian).
2. Russian version - bibl. entry 71.
3. The report is an official document presenting the position of the government of the USSR.
Species used in the afforestation of sands: kandym, cherkez, black saxaoul, Calligonum.
Desertification factors according to B.G. Rozanov (1977)
1. Degradation of the vegetation and soil erosion as a result of overgrazing.
2. Increase in erosion and deflation due to the use of lands for agricultural.
3. Destruction of vegetation for use as energy source.
4. Destruction of vegetation and soil as a result of the construction of roads, factories, mines, housing developments, irrigation installations, geological research.
5. Destruction of vegetation and soil caused by motor vehicle traffic.
6. Destruction of vegetation and soil by livestock near water points.
7. Secondary salinization of soil in irrigated zones.
8. Expansion of saline deserts in basins without permanent stream flow.
Bibliographic entry 13
Author: Babaïev A.G. (ed.)
Title: Opyt rïespublik Srïednieï Azii i Kazakhstana v rïeshïenii zïemïeltno-vodnoï problïemy i bor'by s opustynivaniïem i ïego zoachïeniïe dlïa Afriki (Experiences of the [Soviet] Central Asian republics and of Kazakhstan in developing deserts and in estimating desertification; the importance of these experiences for Africa)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', No 3-4, Ashkhabad
Date: 1989 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw, UAM Poznan.
Region: Central Asia, Kazakhstan, Africa
Summary: This document is a follow-up to a seminar held in Ashkhabad in 1988. Ninety texts are included, 33 of which were published in two subsequent issues of "Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn"'. The largest number (18) are articles concerned with desertification and its intensification in Africa, 6 are devoted to theoretical considerations, to research methods in studying desertification and to techniques for its prevention; 8 articles are on combating desertification in Soviet Central Asia and in Kazakhstan (particularly as it relates to irrigation), and on the possible use of this experience in Africa; 1 text deals with Iraq. The final resolution contains a definition of desertification (see: Definition).
The majority of these articles deal with problems of the environment, while social concerns are treated only marginally. In N° 3, pp. 5-10, the article entitled "From the application of Central Asian experiences to the implementation of agrarian reform in Africa" is a description of reforms introduced in the years 1921-1922, leading to the transition from the former feudal system of land and water in Turkmenistan.
Definition: "Desertification, a process caused by human economic activity, especially the use of water and soil resources in agriculture, results in the degradation of the economic systems of land, not only in arid and semi-arid regions, but also in marginal lands.
Bibliographic entry 14
Author: Babaïev A.G. (ed.)
Title: Prirodnyïe usloviïa i rïesursy pustyn' SSSR, ikh ratsional'noïe ispol'zovaniïe (Resources and natural conditions of the deserts of the USSR and their rational use)
Publisher: Ylym - Akadïemiïa Naouk Turkmïenskoï SSR (Academy of Sciences of Turkmenistan), Ashkhabad, 438 pp.
Date: 1984 Language: Russian
Available: IP Ashkhabad, BiL Moscow, WGiSR UW Warsaw
Classification: 0, 2A1-2, 3C4, 5C1-2, 5C4, 5D2a
Region: Deserts and semi-deserts of the ex-Soviet Union
Summary: An account of the 1981 conference in Ashkhabad. This volume contains 64 brief entries divided into 5 parts: a) climate and natural resources, regionalization and protection of the environment (notably the future of the Aral Sea, description of its degradation, and, again, transfer of water from Siberian rivers); b) research on deserts using remote sensing (9 articles on methodology); c) soil resources (erosion and deflation of deserts and the steppes along the Volga; description of the process whereby an excess of fertilizer and of cultivation influence salinity); d) water resources of deserts (use of groundwater, mineralization of water for irrigation, the importance of the Karakumy Canal; the chemical features of the Aral Sea and its future; e) sand dunes and preventive measures, characteristics of sands and their water balance, protection of railroads from sand encroachment, tree plantation, using sands for the cultivation of sorghum and rice, sand storms, sand
stabilization using chemical methods).
Brief description of methods of desert research: Classical methods of analyzing aerial photographs and satellite imagery (cf. bibl. entry 10) were used to draw up maps of vegetation, the condition of pasturelands, soils, zones requiring protection, soil salinity. A light to completely white phototone, pale contours and the presence of darker patches are important for detecting salinization. The scale of these maps is from 1:10,000 to 1:1,000,000, and smaller. For interpreting satellite imagery, the most rapid method is that which uses maps showing landscape types.
<section>a</section>
Bibliographic entry 15
Author: Babaïev A.G. (ed.)
Title: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn' (Problems of desert management)
Publisher: Akademiïa Naouk Turkmïenii. Institut Pustyn' (Academy of Sciences of Turkmenistan, Institute of Deserts), Ylym, Ashkhabad.
Date: Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw, UAM Poznan
Classification: 1-5
Region: Mainly the arid and semi-arid zones of the ex-Soviet Union; also other arid and semi-arid areas.
Summary: A bimonthly publication concerned exclusively with deserts, containing the following types of entry: articles (5 to 12 per issue), brief notes (up to 10), "Our contribution to the national economy" (also in the form of brief notes which, however, have not appeared in these issues), columns, reviews and discussions. In the years 1971-1978, one issue in five contained a bibliography of publications on the deserts of the Soviet Union published the previous year. The texts are written primarily by employees of the Institute of Deserts and by other scientists in the ex-Soviet Union, rarely by Western specialists. Most of the entries concern ex-Soviet Central Asia (particularly Turkmenistan) and Kazakhstan.
In 1970, few articles appeared on regions outside of the Soviet Union. These articles became more numerous toward the end of the 1980's and dealt mainly with arid and semi-arid territories of Africa, but included Asia as well. Information on projects of international organizations was also presented. In the 1970's, the magazine published almost exclusively articles on the natural environment and the economic development of deserts, whereas environmental degradation and desertification were only touched on in brief notes, then later in sporadic articles. Since the end of the 1980's, these problems take up 1/4 - 1/3 of the content of this publication.
Remark: The title page presents the title in Turkoman and occasionally in English, the summary is written in Russian, Turkoman and occasionally English, some articles are summarized in English, some in Turkoman, and others in the two languages.
Bibliographic entry 16
Author: Babaïev A.G. (ed.)
Title: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', Special N°: Naouchnomu Jurnalu "Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn"' 25 lïet (25 years of the scientific journal "Problems of desert management"
Publisher: Turkmïenistan Ylymlaz Akadïemiïasy (Academy of Sciences of Turkmenistan) Ylym, Ashkhabad, N° 3, 88 pp.
Date: 1992 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow
Classification: 1C, 1D, 2-5 (general information)
Region: Africa, Latin America, Uzbekistan
Summary: This special issue is almost exclusively concerned with problems of desertification at a global level. Articles include information on United Nations programs in combating desertification (pp. 16-22), a text by H.E. Dregne on the restoration of arid lands (pp. 22-27), drought and development in Africa (by M.G. Glantz, pp. 27-33), the future of the Sahara (L. Cloudsley-Thompson, pp. 33-39), "The desert and desertification" (B.G. Rozanov, pp. 45-47, very general information), comparative study of research methods on desertification in the CIS and in Argentina (pp. 47-54, N.G. Kharin, E.M. Abraham de Vásquez), soil salinization in conjunction with arid climates (pp. 54 61, I.I. Pankova), combating desertification in Mali (pp. 66-70) and the stability of arid geosystems in Uzbekistan under human pressure (pp. 70-77) (cf. bibl. entry 125 - Rafikov A.A., 1992). The articles by L. Cloudsley-Thompson and B.G. Rozanov cite a number of definitions for desertification, given
in English or French, without commentary.
Bibliographic entry 17
Authors: Babaïev A.G., Frïeïkin Z.G.
Title: Pustyni SSSR vchïera, sïegodnïa, zavtra (Deserts of the USSR, yesterday, today, and tomorrow)
Publisher: Mysl', Moskva, 352 pp.
Date: 1977 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, WGiSR UW Warsaw
Classification: 0, 5A1-2, 5D2a
Region: Central Asia (Turkmenistan, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan, Kyrgyzstan)
Summary: This monograph concerning the environment of the deserts of Soviet Asia and their economic development demonstrates the considerable success of man in dominating nature. The history of the deserts of the Soviet Union is discussed at length (beginning with the time of Ancient Greece and including Arab travellers). In the chapter entitled "Deserts and man" there is an emphasis on the harmony of traditional agricultural methods in the Central Asian deserts and the local population's profound knowledge of the environment. Subsequent chapters describe in detail the development of the deserts under the Soviet government: development of the mining industry, of irrigation (for cereal cultivation and animal production), of road networks and of railways. A rational approach to the economy of natural resources under socialism improves the use of these resources (p. 286). Technical progress allows the control of individual, exceptional cases of degradation (for example, wind
deflation after the laying of pipes - pp. 290-291). Economic development of Central Asian deserts could be accelerated by the diversion of water from Siberian rivers towards this region (a canal 3000 km long from the Ob River to the Caspian Sea, supplying 25 km^3 of water per year; a detailed map of planned changes is presented pp. 252-253), which would also save the Aral Sea. As for the size and cost of the investment project, extensive studies would be necessary, using the Karakumy Canal as a model. The bibliography contains exclusively Russian publications.
Bibliographic entry 18
Authors: Babaïev A., Kharin N.
Title: Combating Desertification in the USSR
Publisher: Unasylva, vol. 43, N° 168, pp. 48-51, FAO, Rome
Date: 1992 Language: English
Available: BiL Moscow, FAO Rome
Classification: 5
Region: Central Asia (Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan)
Summary: A general publication on combating desertification in three Central Asian countries. It includes charts showing the percentage of lands affected by desertification (58% of the area of Kazakhstan, 59% of Uzbekistan and 66% of Turkmenistan). General information on work since the early 1980's on the afforestation of sand deserts and the restoration of pasturelands in desert foothills. The drying up of the Aral Sea is mentioned. By the year 2000, the area of the lake may have decreased to 2,689 km. Names of plants are given which are used in revegetalization.
Plants used in vegetalization:
Protective strips: Haloxylon, Salsola, Aellenia, Calligonum, Ephedra;
Shrubs: Haloxylon persicum, Calligonum rubens, C. caput-medusue, C. microcarpum, C. setosum, Ephedra strobilacea, Salsola paletzkiana, S. richteri, Aellenia subaphylla;
Semi-shrubs: Kochia prostrata, Salsola orientalis, Artemisia badhysi, A. kemrudica, A. turanica, Astragalus unifoliatus, Eurotia ceratoides;
Perennial plants: Astragalus agameticus, Dorema aichisonii, Ferula assafoetida, F., badrakema, Poa bulbosa;
Annual plants: Salsola paulsenii, Eremopirum orientalis, Catandia memphitica, Eromus tectorum, Agriophyllum latifolium, Malcolmia grandiflora.
Bibliographic entry 19
Authors: Babaïev A.G., Kharin N.G.
Title: Karta opustynivaniïa aridnykh tïerritorii Azii (Desertification map of Asian drylands [conception])
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 5, pp. 37-39, Ashkhabad
Date: 1991 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata
Classification: 1C1, 1C4 (cartography)
Region: Central Asia, Mongolia, Afghanistan
Summary: The following maps have been completely finished:
- desertification map of drylands of the USSR to the scale of 1:2,500,000 (Institute of Deserts in cooperation with scientific institutes of Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan);
- desertification map of drylands of Mongolia to the scale of 1:2,500,000 (Institute of Deserts in cooperation with the Mongolian Institute of Geography);
- desertification map of northern Afghanistan based on satellite imagery furnished by the sputnik "Mir."
All these maps are to be used in subsequent projects. The main criteria in preparing these maps were vegetation degradation, wind and fluvial erosion, and salinization. Preparation of maps to the scales of 1:5,000,000 and 1:10,000,000 is proposed: current state of deserts, aridity indicators, population density, lithoecological desert types, land use.
Maps available:
- IP Ashkhabad;
- Institut Gïeografii Akadïemiï Naouk Kazakhstana (Institute of Geography, Kazakhstan Academy of Sciences) - exclusively manuscripts dealing with part of Central Asia and Kazakhstan.
Bibliographic entry 20
Authors: Babaïev A.G., Orlovskiï N.S.
Title: Osnovnyïe rïezultaty vypoliïeniïa plane dïeïstviï po borbïe s opustyni-vaniïem za 19771985 (Principal results of the programme in combating desertification)
Edition: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 3, pp. 3-10, Ashkhabad
Date: 1985 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw, UAM Poznan'
Classification: 1D, 2B1-2, 5
Region: Global
Summary: In 1977, during the United Nations Conference on Desertification a world-wide plan was prepared up to the year 2000.
The measures taken to combat desertification in the years 1977-1984 and their effectiveness are analyzed here. In addition, the obstacles which prevent the implementation of this programme are identified. The current state of projects and desertification trends for the years to come are discussed. General estimations of the extent of desertification are that 3.475 billion ha, or 75 %, of arable lands in arid regions are affected (out of 4.5 billion ha) and 3.1 billion ha of pasturelands.
Each year 21 million hectares are affected by degradation and 6 million ha are added to deserts; at the same time, local populations have increased from 650 million in 1977 to 850 million in 1983.
During the United Nations Conference, global desertification trends and a forecast for the year 2000 were presented for particular regions of the world and for specific types of land use. A graph was presented showing four trends of the desertification process: ° acceleration of desertification, ° continuation of the process, ° unchanged state of desertification, ° success in combating desertification.
Regional desertification trends
Regional desertification trends: 1- Acceleration of desertification; 2 - Continuation of desertification; 3 - Unchanged desertification; 4 - Success in combating desertification.
Bibliographic entry 21
Authors: Babaïev A.G., Zonn I.S.
Title: Mïezhdunarodnoïe sotrudnichïestvo SSSR v oblasti bor'by s opustyni-vaniïem (International cooperation by the Soviet Union in combating desertification)
Publisher: Akademiïa Naouk Turkmïenskoï SSR. Institut Pustyn' (Academy of Sciences of Turkmenistan. Instute of Deserts), Ylym, Ashkhabad, 48 pp.
Date: 1989 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow
Classification: 1D
Region: Central Asia
Summary: The Soviet Union participated in a number of international programmes in combating desertification. This involvement dates from the 1977 Nairobi Conference where the Soviet delegation participated "constructively". This text presents documents prepared for the conference and often republished subsequently (cf. bibl. entries 46, 70, 115, 139). Other official documents on Soviet experiences are included (cf. bibl. entries 12, 22, 60, 67). The USSR participated in UNEP programmes (with the United States, Kenya, and other countries; FAO is also mentioned), in particular in organizing conferences and courses for specialists from developing countries (rangeland management, sand dune fixation, combating desertification as part of integrated development plans (cf. bibl. entries 20, 49, 71, 100, 144). It also participated in ESCAP/UNEP/UNESCO programmes.
Bibliographic entry 22
Authors: Babaïev A.G., Zonn I.S., Orlovsky N.S.
Title: The USSR Experience in Desert Reclamation and Desertification Control. The USSR National Report.
Publisher: USSR State Committee for Science and Technology. The USSR Commission for UNEP. Academy of Sciences of Turkmenian SSR. Institute of Deserts, Moscow, 104 pp. + 4 maps.
Date: 1984 Language: English
Available: BiL Moscow
Classification: 1-5
Region: Central Asia, primarily Turkmenistan
Summary: This report covers 1) the natural conditions of Central Asian deserts (notably climatic conditions); 2) historical aspects of natural desertification and that which is caused by human activities (discussion of the causes of the decline of ancient civilizations in Central Asia, particularly socio-economic and historical aspects, but the importance of climate change is also mentioned); 3) the process of desertification and its dynamics (examples of rangeland degradation, revegetalization; planned projects; 4) forecast of the process of desertification in Turkmenistan with an optimistic view of the limitation of deflation and salinization and the continuous development of irrigated lands to the year 2000; 5) technologies for controlling desertification (the text is primarily concerned with rangeland revegetalization and the development of irrigation). In 1982, in Turkmenistan, the total length of principal canals was 4,323 km, the length of secondary canals totalled
20,723 km, and collective drainage canals were 20,237.
Supplements:
1. List of publications on the problems of desertification for the period 1977-1983 (177 titles which deal with deserts, not desertification);
2. Physical and geographic regionalism of arid and semi-arid Soviet lands (although the word "regionalism" should be replaced by "region" or "regionalization";
3. Social and economic development of drylands (statistical charts of population, industrial and agricultural production, the number of scientists, etc.);
4. Integrated programme of assessing, monitoring, preventing and combating desertification in drylands of the USSR - this supplement only presents very general preliminary conditions.
Maps:
1. Simplified maps of Central Asian deserts;
2. Schematic map illustrating the state of desertification in Turkmenistan (categories, types and causes of desertification);
3. Schematic map of the danger of desertification in Turkmenistan for the next 20 years;
4. Agricultural methods of desert management in Central Asia.
Bibliographic entry 23
Author: Babaïeva T.Z.
Title: Primïenieniïe distantsionnykh mïetodov dlïa izuchïniïa protsïessov opustynivaniïa v Turkmïenistanïe (The use of remote sensing in studying desertification in Turkmenistan)
Publisher: Ministierstvo Vyshïego i Srïednïego Spïetsial'nogo Obrazovaniïa Uzbïetskoï SSR (Ministry of Higher Education of Uzbekistan), Tashkent, 18 pp.
Date: 1984 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow
Classification: 1C1, 2A3, 2B2c, 3C4
Region: Turkmenistan
Summary: Doctoral thesis presented in Tashkent. The document describes work on desertification outside the USSR, including the "Provisional Methodology for Desertification Assessment and Mapping," FAO 1981. To this classification of processes should be added desertification as a result of modernization leading to the degradation of soil and vegetation.
An interesting chart "Areas of Turkmenistan affected by different desertification processes" is presented (pp. 15-16). Information is given on patches of desertification near water points as identified on "Meteor" satellite imagery: in the land between the Murgab and Tedzhen rivers there are 66 patches of an average diameter of 2.21 km, in southeast Karakumy 94 patches of an average diameter of 2.16 km, in central Karakumy 200 patches with and average diameter of 1.32 km. The largest patches exceed 6 km in diameter. According to Landsat imagery (1972) in southeast Turkmenistan patches have a diameter of 1.58 km, roughly the same as was determined on the base Soyuz-22 (1976): 1.72 km. By comparing imagery the rate of degradation can be estimated.
Bibliographic entry 24
Author: Bakhiïev A.
Title: Problïemy sokhranïeniïa i vosstanovlïeniïa rastitïel'nosti iuzhnogo Priaral'ïa i prognozirovaniïa ikh razvitiïa v svïazi s protsïessom opustynianiïa (The protection and succession of vegetation south of the Aral Sea, and forecast for the desertification process)
Publisher: Izvïestiïa Rossiïskoï Akadïemii Naouk, series: Gïeografichïeskaïa (Geographic), N° 1, pp. 51-60, Moscow
Date: 1993 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw
Classification: 2A3, 2B2f, 3C2, 4A4, 5C4, 5D2b
Region: Aral Sea (Uzbekistan)
Summary: The current state of nature reserves, created to safeguard the environment, is catastrophic. There is degradation due to negative changes in nature as well as to irrational human behaviour (e.g., roads crossing the reserves). Forests bordering on the reserves are being continuously devastated (e.g., in the Shabbaz, Kovïanchik, Akhamysh, Iumalak and Samanbaï regions). Revegetalization has not been sufficient to achieve the goals of the programme to restore vegetation. Suitable conditions must be created so that vegetation can survive, while protecting it from salt winds. This goal can be achieved by planting the Aral Sea shore with halophytes and by planting vegetation in sheltered spots, e.g., in depressions.
In the end, any attempt to combat desertification will be in vain if the area of irrigated land does not decrease and if the dried up seabed is not planted with vegetation.
After desertification is controlled, the region of the Aral Sea should be predominantly agropastoral bush. The author postulates the reinstatement of animal production, recently in a state of ruin in this region.
Bibliographic entry 25
Author: Bananova V.A.
Title: Antropogïennoïe opustynivaniïe aridnykh tïerritoriï Kalmykii (Desertification of arid zones of Kalmyk due to human activity)
Publisher: Akadïemiïa Naouk Turkmïenistana. Institut Pustyn' (Academy of Sciences of Turkmenistan. Institute of Deserts), Ashkhabad, 44 pp.
Date: 1992 Language: Russian
Available: IP Ashkhabad
Classification: 2A, 2B2h
Region: Russia, Kalmyk
Summary: Summary of a doctoral thesis. The arid zone of Russia is located in Kalmyk (80%), in Astrakhan oblast' (district) and southern Volgograd oblast' (20%). The Kalmyk region is the most vulnerable to the danger of desertification given its light rainfall. The level of precipitation can be as little as 120-200 mm, the potential evaporation is more than 1000 mm. There are 14-15 days of dust-storm per year. Six types of desertification exist: degradation of the vegetation, fluvial and wind erosion, salinization, marsh and wetlands formation, and desertification due to human action. The degradation of the vegetation is the dominant type. 47% of the area is in very poor condition. The author presents indicators of four degrees of desertification: light, moderate, strong, and extreme. Five charts have been prepared with numerical indicators of these degrees. The map illustrates types, stages and causes of desertification according to different types of vegetation in
rangelands. The author predicts a reduction in the diversity of the flora and of the types of steppe. The map "Methods of combating desertification" illustrates pastoral norms for rangelands and methods of restoring vegetation and soil.
Example of chart: Criteria of desertification due to modernization (simplified - charts for other types of desertification are more complex).
Criteria
Degrees of desertification
Light
Moderate
Strong
Extreme
1. Degradation of the vegetation cover: a) degradation of the herbaceous cover (% of the surface) b) average cover (%) 5-10 10-50 50-70 70-100
1-2 2-6 6-9 more than 9
2. Percentage of area affected by erosion due to off-road motor vehicle traffic and the mechanization of the construction of irrigation systems 
3. Percentage of area covered by sand as a result of modernization 0.2-1 1-4 4-5 more than 5
Average annual percentage of area affected by desertification in the periods: 
a) 1957-1960 - - - less than 0.01
b) 1978-1988 0.1 0.1-0.6 0.6-0.9 0.9
Mechanical comparison of soils clay, sandy clay sandy clay sand with small amount of clay sand
Bibliographic entry 26
Authors: Borovskiï V.M., Jamalbïekov I. Y.
Title: Pustyni Mangyshlaka i problïemy ikh asvoïeniïa (The deserts of Mangyshlak and their management)
Publisher: Kazakhstan, Alma Ata, 62 pp.
Date: 1982 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata
Classification: 3C5, 5A1
Region: Kazakhstan (Mangyshlak)
Summary: The author describes the natural environment, and discusses hydraulic equipment. There is information on afforestation, gardens and lawns. Homeowners water their gardens regularly, thus avoiding salinization. Public lands are watered irregularly and soil salinity increases. General information is given on the management of pasturage. There is a description of the intense degradation of the natural environment due to public works and trucking (pp. 55-56).
Bibliographic entry 27
Author: Chïernïenko I.M.
Title: Pïerïebroska chasti stoke sibirskikh rïek na fug i optimal'noïe usloviïa sokhranieniïa Aral'a (Optimal conditions for the protection of the level of the Aral Sea by diverting Siberian rivers)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 6, pp. 29-34, Ashkhabad
Date: 1972 Language: Russian (summary in English)
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw, UAM Poznan
Classification: 2B2f, 5A2, 5D2a
Region: Aral Sea and southern Siberia
Summary: A text presenting large-scale environmental projects. As a result of the excessive use of the waters of the Amu-Darya and the Syr-Darya rivers, the level of the Aral Sea has decreased by 2 m "during recent years". The total drying up of the lake would cause an ecological catastrophe (lowering of the water table and salinization of groundwater in the region). The cost of transferring water from the Yenissey-Ob (19 million roubles) and from the Yenissey-Ob (33 million roubles) is considered to be very high. For this reason the project was not begun (at the time of publication), as work could not have been completed rapidly. The author recommends lowering the level of the Aral Sea by 10-15 m, which would require the diversion of 21 km^3 of river water per year. During the decrease to the first 10 meters, the flow from the Amu-Darya would have to be strictly controlled, and, at the next stage, the supply of water to the Aral Sea should be supplemented by water from
Siberian rivers. Compared to previous projects of large-scale water transfer, this author proposes relatively small changes.
Map and 11 bibliographic titles.
Bibliographic entry 28
Authors: Dïanpïeisov R., Dïamalïekov I. U.
Title: Voprosy okhrany poch v Kazakhstanïe (The protection of soils in Kazakhstan)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 4, pp. 63-69, Ashkhabad
Date: 1978 Language: Russian (summary in English)
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw, UAM Poznan'
Classification: 2A1-2, 2B2b, 3C1, 3C4-5, 5Dlb, 5D1e (windbreaks)
Region: Kazakhstan
Summary: 60% of the area of Kazakhstan is located in the arid zone. There are also fertile lands which have been systematically developed.
Towards the end of the 1940's and during the 1950's, cultivation and/or pastoral use was begun on previously unused lands. This caused a sudden increase in water erosion and deflation (e.g., in the brown soil zone, seed destruction caused by deflation and erosion varies between 40% and 90%).
The most intense deflation was observed in the years 1955-1958. This phenomenon threatened approximately 1/4 of the territory of Kazakhstan. Wind erosion has been studied in detail in southern Kazakhstan where animal production has been developed.
To combat desertification in southern Kazakhstan, strips of trees and bushes were used as early as the 1940's, with good results. These strips decrease the spring water deficit by preserving snow longer
In Kazakhstan, 90,000 ha (minimum) of lands destroyed by erosion and deflation require redevelopment.
Bibliographic entry 29
Authors: Dukhovnyï V.A., Razakov R.M., Ruziïev I.B., Kosnazarov K.A.
Title: Problïema Aral'skogo Morïa i prirodookhrannyïe mïeropriïatiïa (The problem ot the Aral Sea and natural methods of its preservation)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoieniïa pustyn', N° 6, pp. 3-15, Ashkhabad
Date: 1984 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw, UAM Poznan
Classification: 2A1-4, 2B2f, 3C3, 4A1-4, 4B, 5B1, 5D2b
Region: Aral Sea (Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan)
Summary: For some years the level of the Aral Sea has lowered by 0.6-0.9 m per year, with serious ecological consequences. During the years 1975 1981, 29 heavy dust-storms occurred, covering a distance of 200 450 km around the lake, particularly towards the west and southwest. Moving sands cover approximately 10,000 km^2 of the former seabed, including islands. The moderating influence of the mass of water on the climate has decreased (the humidity of the air has diminished by 2 points). Several estimations of salt migration are quoted. The water table lowered from 3-5m to 15-20m over a period of 18-20 years in the southwest basin of the Aral Sea. In the Amu-Darya basin, 70 km^3 of water (87.6%) have been used for irrigation, and in the Syr-Darya basin, water consumption exceeds by 24% available resources (due to the recycling of water). In the 1960's, the Amu-Darya supplied 55 km^3 of water to the sea, in the late 1970's 9-10 km^3, and in 1982 nothing at all. More than 50
lakes with a total area of 100,000 ha have dried up in the Amu-Darya delta. The salinity of groundwater below the dried seabed is 50-100 grams/litre.
Economic losses in the years 1974, 1975, 1977 and 1982 are estimated to be 1.7 thousand million roubles, due to a decrease in cereal harvests. There is a project to create polders for the cultivation of sorghum, maize and Sudan grass, and for the economic development of selected parts of the seabed. The cost of revegetalizing 120,000 ha of the seabed will come to 56 million roubles.
<section>b</section>
Bibliographic entry 30
Author: Gïel'dyïeva G.V.
Title: Untitled (Karty antropogïennykh izmïenïeniï landshftov; Map of landscape changes resulting from human activity)
Publisher: Not published
Date: approx. 1980-93 Language: Russian
Available: Gïel'dyïeva G.V., Institute of Geography (Russian: Institut Gïeografii; Kazakh: Gïeographiïa Instituty) of the Academy of Sciences of Kazakhstan, Alma Ata.
Classification: 1C4 (cartography), 2A1-4, 2B2a-b
Region: Kazakhstan, drylands of Central Asia
Summary: A collection of maps at various scales (mostly 1:250,000 to 1:2,500,000) showing changes in the natural environment caused by human activities.
A map of the entire arid region of Central Asia (1:2,500,000); maps of the eastern shores of the Aral Sea and lands located on the shores of Lake Balkhash.
The maps, without indicating the degree of desertification or the degree of danger of desertification, show the regions where vegetation has deteriorated due to lack of water, lands where there has been excessive deforestation, degraded rangelands and zones with high salinity. On some of these maps the changes in lake shorelines are marked as well as various types of dried seabed. Other maps show sand dune formation. These maps were drawn up on the basis of the landscape map of Kazakhstan (1:2,500,000) and the research material which was used in preparing it (cf. bibl. entry 2). In 1993 work was carried out primarily in the region of Lake Balkhash.
Desertification: This term is used to designate those lands which undergo processes caused by natural factors or, more often, by human activity, which consist of a decrease in groundwater resources, vegetation degradation, the development of erosion, especially wind erosion (this information was obtained during an interview).
Bibliographic entry 31
Author: Gïerasimov I.P., Kuznïetsov I.T., Kïes' A.S., Gorodïetskaïa
Title: Problïema Aral'skogo morïa i antropogïennogo opustynivaniïa Priaral'ïa (The problem of the Aral Sea and desertification in the surrounding area)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 6, pp. 22-23, Ashkhabad
Date: 1983 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw, UAM Poznan
Classification: 2A1-4, 2B2f, 3C3, 4A1-4, 4B, 4C, 5A1-2, SD2b
Region: Aral Sea
Summary: Extensive and detailed information on the decline of the Aral Sea, the degradation of the natural environment and hydrological conditions in the surrounding area. The first sand and salt storms appeared on the seabed in the 1970's. They occur 6 to 9 times per year and their range reaches 400-450 km to the west and southwest.
The article examines the process of desertification affecting the shores of the Aral Sea and the Amu-Darya and Syr-Darya deltas. This is one of the first texts to discuss the economic and social losses resulting from the decrease in level of the Aral Sea. In 1980 losses were 92.6 million roubles which included: 39.1 million roubles in agriculture (cotton cultivation 30 million, livestock production 8.0 million, others 1.1 million), 28.9 million in fishing, 7.0 million in transport and 6.9 million roubles in hunting. Several detailed examples supplement this estimation; for example, in the Kyzyl-Orda oblast (district), milk production of cows has decreased two-fold, down to 998 kg/year in the kolkhozes and 724 kg/year in the sovkhoses.
There is a deterioration in the health of the local population due to the mineralization and poor quality of water from the Syr-Darya.
A brief review of methods of combating desertification due to human action is presented (pp. 29-32). There are projects in the following fields: scientific research and planning, socio-economic measures, water balance, and others.
Methods of combating desertification caused by human activities:
1. Scientific research and the preparation of technical projects;
2. Socio-economic action (very general information is given on the necessity of creating new branches of the economy to open future prospects, such as the construction materials industry, and on the necessity of providing the nomad population with good quality drinking water;
3. Water management programmes (diversion of drainage water to the Aral Sea instead of to the Sarykamysh depression);
4. Improvement projects (in particular, the revegetalization of the Aral seabed).
Bibliographic entry 32
Author: Glazovski N.F.
Title: The Aral Crisis. Source, Current Situation and Way Out
Publisher: Artobolevskiy S.S., Kuklin' ski A., "USSR in the Perspective of Global Change," pp. 167-199, Polish Association for the Club of Rome, Warsaw, Globality versus Locality, vol. 3.
Date: 1991 Language: English
Available: ex-Soviet Union - private collections, WGiSR UW Warsaw
Classification: 2B2f, 5D2a-b
Region: Aral Sea
Summary: A study of various proposals for saving the Aral Sea. General information.
The author analyzes:
- the change in the general strategy for developing productive forces; -
- changes in the structure of agriculture;
- the reconstruction of irrigation systems;
- scientific justification for lowering the standards for irrigation and modern irrigation technology;
- rational use of drainage;
- the change in the structure of agriculture and increase in agricultural plant diversity;
- transfers of water from the Caspian Sea to the Aral Sea; transfer of a portion of the water of Siberian rivers;
- increasing the stream flow by stimulating precipitation; intensification of glacier melting;
- regulating the course of rivers;
- diverting water from lakes and reservoirs to the Aral Sea;
- decreasing the flow of drainage water conducted to the Aral Sea;
- the demineralization of water by freezing;
- the large-scale use of groundwater;
- the creation of water reservoirs in the Aral Sea.
Bibliographic entry 33
Author: Glazovski N.F.
Title: Sovrïemïennoïe solïenakaplïeniïe v aridnykh oblastïakh (Current salinization conditions in drylands areas)
Publisher: Naouka (Akademiïa Naouk SSSR - Academy of Sciences of the USSR, Moscow, 192 pp.
Date: 1987 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, WGiSR UW Warsaw
Classification: 2A2, 2B2a, 2B2h, 2B2j
Region: Kazakhstan, Dagestan, Azerbaijan, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, Kyrgyzstan, Tajikistan
Summary: Detailed analysis of salt migration in the groundwater of arid and semi-arid regions in the ex-Soviet Union (without definitions or boundaries). Twenty-eight basins or groups of basins are identified. Characteristics of flow and salinization (quantity, composition of groundwater) are shown on several charts. The quantity of salt carried by groundwater to the Caspian Sea, Lake Balkhash and Issyk-Kul' is estimated. The effect on soil salinization of using deep groundwater is discussed; in certain regions it is the chief factor in the salinization of lands. Although the facts are not complete, a minimun of 7 million tonnes of salt are estimated to enter the soil each year through groundwater. On the Apsheron Peninsula, oil exploitation brings in 1 million tonnes of saline water per year, and in Dagestan the use of groundwater brings in yearly almost 2.7 million tonnes.
In this work there is also an interesting study of salt migration in the atmosphere: mechanisms by which salt enters the atmosphere (deflation), return of salt to the soil, an attempt to estimate the extent of this phenomenon.
Note: A very extensive bibliography, almost exclusively in Russian.
Bibliographic entry 34
Authors: Glïants M.K. (Glanz M.H.), Zonn I.S., Orlovskiï N.S.
Title: Ob oprïedielïenii protsïessa opustinivaniïa (Definitions of the Process of Desertification)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoieniïa pustyn', No 2, pp. 3-12, Ashkhabad
Date: 1984 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw, UAM Poznan
Classification: 1A
Region: -
Summary: This publication presents different definitions of desertification, from A.M. Aubréville (1949) * to L.I. Kurakova (1983). Most of these definitions are presented in a chart where factors and symptoms of desertification are classified. The definition according to L.I. Kurakova (1983) is given below. The authors point out that in defining desertification the following factors are emphasized: long-term climate trends, climate fluctuations, droughts, methods of soil use, overgrazing, collecting fuelwood, "use of technology" (routes, mines, etc.)
* A, M. Aubréville, Climats, forêts et désertification de l'Afrique Tropical (Climates. Forests and Desertification in Tropical Africa), Paris, 1949
Definition: Factorial definition of desertification according to L.I. Kurakova: Factor irrational use of ecosystems by man in arid lands or lands subject to drought; symptoms deterioration of the condition of the natural environment in arid and semi-arid zones, manifested by the appearance and development of processes characteristic of deserts: the degradation of vegetation and soil, the disappearance of water resources and a rapid decrease in biological productivity.
Bibliographic entry 35
Author: Grigorrïev A.A.
Title: Krupnomashtabnyïe izmïenïeniïa prirody Priaral'ïa po nabliudïeniïam iz kosmosa (Large-scale environmental changes in the area surrounding the Aral Sea as seen in satellite imagery)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 1, pp. 16-21, Ashkhabad
Date: 1987 Language: Russian (summary in English)
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw, UAM Poznan
Classification: 2A1-5, 2B2f, 4A
Region: Aral Sea
Summary: For over 25 years, changes in the Aral Sea region have been observed by means of satellite imagery. From 1961 to 1984 the level of the sea decreased by 10 m (an average of 0.45 m per year). Five zones were identified and studies were made of the primary natural and man-made processes in the regions in question:
1) The region of the mainland showing the formation of marshes and wetlands, and dry areas (25 to 50 km wide);
2) The formerly underwater zone, now dried up, 40 to 50 km wide with an area of 21,000 km^2, covered with initial vegetation;
3) The Syr-Darya and Amu-Darya deltas, formerly marshy areas partially covered with riverside forest. Today, the water table has lowered from 3-5 m to a maximum of 8 m. The deterioration of vegetation, salinization of marshes and desertification are evident;
4) The 30-40 km zone of deserts in the seaside area. The drying up of the sea has caused the upper level of groundwater to lower by 5-9 m;
5) The zone which includes all the deserts and semi-deserts as well as irrigated regions which manifest acute changes resulting from human activity.
Bibliographic entry 36
Authors: Kharin N.G., Kiril'tsïeva A.A.
Title: Novyïe dannyïe o ploshtchadïakh opustynïennykh zïemïel' v aridnoï zonïe USRR (New data on the area of lands affected by desertification in the drylands of the USSR)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 4, pp. 3-8, Ashkhabad
Date: 1988 Language: Russian (summary in English)
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw, UAM Poznan
Classification: 2A, 2B2a
Region: USSR drylands, particularly Kazakhstan, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan
Summary: Data presented at the Nairobi Conference (1977), published in "World Desert and Desertification Map," UNESCO/CNRS, Paris, 1976. These data do not show the true extent of desertification. A chart is presented showing the regions threatened by desertification (Kazakhstan, Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan) and a classification of the areas where the following phenomena are evident:
- degradation due to overgrazing (37.3% of the area of these republics);
- degradation due to insufficient grazing;
- regions affected by wind erosion (3.3%);
- salinization caused by the decrease in level of the Aral Sea and by regulating the stream flow of rivers (5.3%);
-desertification caused by modernization (6.5%);
- water erosion.
All in all, the regions affected by desertification cover 60.2% of these regions (Uzbekistan 59.2 %, Kazakhstan 59.9%, Turkmenistan 66.5 %). The text also presents schematic maps of drylands in the USSR: degree of desertification, rate of desertification in the years 1965-1985, intrinsic danger of desertification. One map shows the resistance on the part of ecosystems and the influence of animals on the natural environment. On each map, four degrees of this phenomenon are identified: absence, light, moderate, strong.
Bibliographic entry 37
Authors: Kharin N.G., Orlovskiï N.S., Kogaï N.A., Makul'bïekova G.B.
Title: Sovrïemïennoïe sostoïaniïe i prognoz opustynivaniïa v aridnoï zonïe SSSR (Current conditions and forecast for desertification in drlylands of the Soviet Union)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 5, pp. 58-66, Ashkhabad
Date: 1986 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw, UAM Poznan
Classification: 1B, 1C4 (cartography), 2A, 2B2a, 3B
Region: Soviet Central Asia and Kazakhstan
Summary: Short description of the climate of drylands in the ex-USSR, notably droughts which (according to the article) are instrumental in the process of desertification because they contribute to an increase in the earth's albedo. Presentation of a formula for the danger of desertification (cf. Note). A desertification map of arid and semi-arid lands in the ex-USSR was drawn up to the scale of 1:2,500,000 (reproduction of a generalized form of the map - page 31). This map takes into account detailed analyses of vegetation changes, wind and water erosion, desertification caused by modernization and the salinity of irrigated lands. The article indicates which aspects were considered, e.g., vegetation changes, but their boundaries are not shown. The map was prepared using aerial photos and satellite imagery.
Towards the end of the article, regional examples are given which illustrate the size of desertification.
Bibliography: 34 titles.
Note: SOO danger of desertification:
SOO = SS + TO + VOO + VJP + SAV, where:
SS - current state of the natural environment; TO - rate of desertification; VOO - intrinsic vulnerability of ecosystems to desertification; VJP - influence of animals on the natural environment; SAV- degree of direct human influence on the natural environment.
Bibliographic entry 38
Authors: Kharin N.G., Petrov M.P.
Title: Glossary of Terms on Desert Environment and Land Reclamation
Publisher: Ylym, Ashkhabad, 144 pp.
Date: 1975 Language: English
Available: BiL Moscow, WGiSR UW Warsaw
Classification: 1A
Region: Global
Summary: This work was prepared for the International Geographical Congress which took place in Moscow in 1976. It is a dictionary containing more than 1,200 entries, mainly in the field of physical geography, relating to arid and semi-arid lands and humid savannahs in Africa and South America.
"Aridification" is defined as a natural process of decreasing precipitation and the intensification of evapotranspiration.
Definition: "Desertification = the process whereby a desert becomes a region devoid of life. During this process all signs of organic life are reduced and the desert environment slowly changes into a "dead desert." Desertification is habitually related to the improper use if arid lands. The desiccation which often accompanies desertification accelerates the process. "
Bibliographic entry 39
Author: Kharin N.S.
Title: Primïenïeniïe distantsionnykh mïetodov dlïa izucheniïa protsïessov opustynivaniïa v aridnoï zonïe (Use of satellite imagery to analyze the process of desertification in drylands)
Publisher: OON. Mïejdunarodnyï uchïebnyï sïeminar OON po praktichïeskomu primïenïeniïu zïemli v oblasti lïesnogo khozïaïstva, Moskva 21/5 - 916184. (UN. United Nations international scientific seminar on the application of remote sensing to forest management, Moscow, 21/5 -916184), 16 pp.
Date: 1984 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow
Classification: 1C1
Region: Central Asia, Turkmenistan
Summary: The author presents different estimations made by researchers of the total area of moving sands in Turkmenistan. The figures vary from 13,200 km^2 to 40,000 km^2. Aerial photos and satellite imagery are necessary for analyzing wind erosion, using the same criteria and classification for both. Unfortunately, this is not always possible. The author presents the criteria for measuring wind erosion according to "Provisional Methodology for Assessment and Mapping of Desertification", FAO, 1983 (p. 5). He also gives the criteria used by the Institute of Deserts of Ashkhabad (pp. 8-9), which are only a simplification of those used by FAO (degree of desertification - 4 categories instead of 5, rate of desertification - 2 instead of 4, danger of desertification - 3 instead of 4). Unfortunately, the author has not explained the criteria for the simplification.
Bibliographic entry 40
Authors: Kiïevskaïa R.K., Mozhaïtsïeva N.F., Bogachïev V.P.
Title: Izmïenïeniïe prirodnykh uslovii sovrïemïennoï dïelty Syrdar'i v svïazi s zarïegulirovanïem ïeïe stoke (Environmental changes in the present-day Syr-Darya delta resulting from water use)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 4, pp. 11-17, Ashkhabad
Date: 1979 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw, UAM Poznan
Classification: 2A4, 2B2b, 3C3, 4A2
Region: Kazakhstan (Syr-Darya)
Summary: An alarming document on land degradation. The regulation of the flow and the use of water of the Syr-Darya have produced catastrophic effects. At Kazalinsk, the annual flow decreased from 9.8 km^3 in 1960 to 0.61 km^3 in 1975. During the last decade, the area of irrigated land in the lower part of the river has diminished. The depth of groundwater has lowered by 3.0-4.5 m. Lakes such as Kauk, Kokkol, Tabankol, and others have dried up. The vegetation has undergone important changes. On three experimental areas detailed analyses (1:25,000) of vegetation types and the* productivity (charts pp. 14-15) have been made. In each case, a significant decrease in the productivity of vegetation was observed:
- area located in the upper part of the delta (337 ha): from 5,181 tonnes to 1,947 tonnes;
- area located in the middle of the delta (337 ha): from 581 tonnes to 351 tonnes;
- area located in the lower part of the delta (280 ha): from 642 tonnes to 258 tonnes.
Bibliographic entry 41
Authors: Koksharova I.H., Isakov G.J.
Title: O lïesomïelioratsii osushïennogo dna Aral'skogo Morïa (Revegetalization of the dried up Aral seabed)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 5, pp. 48-55, Ashkhabad
Date: 1985 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw, UAM Poznan
Classification: 2A3, 2B2f, 5C2, 5C4
Region: Central Asia, Kazakhstan, Aral Sea
Summary: During the last twenty years, the catastrophic decrease in the level of the Aral Sea has caused the drying up of 1.5 million ha of seabed. 300,000 ha of this are today sandy, non-saline areas with the ground covered by the spontaneous growth of psammophytes. These areas are perfectly suited to the planting of shrubs. Diverse species of plants were introduced experimentally in a variety of places and topographical situations. Results have been promising. During the subsequent two years the growth of these plants was recorded - from 80 to 150 cm, their capacity to survive, generally satisfactory, varies according to the topography.
The revegetalization of slightly saline lands has also begun. Strips of shrubs visibly limit wind processes.
The afforestation of sandy areas of the seabed is recommended on a larger scale.
Species planted in the Aral seabed: Haloxylon aphyllum (Minkw) Iljin, H. persicum Bunge, Calligonum caput-medusae Schrenk., Tamarix hispida Willd. and others.
Bibliographic entry 42
Author: Komarov B.
Title: Le rouge et le vert. La destruction de la nature en URSS (The Red and the Green: the destruction of nature in the USSR)
Publisher: Seuil, Paris, 218 pp.
Date: 1981 Language: French (see Note)
Available: Centre International des Recherches sur l'Environnement et le Développement, Maison des Sciences de l'Homme, Paris; in Moscow private collections
Classification: 2A2-4, 3D (communist system)
Region: Ex-Soviet Union
Summary: A dissident study of the degradation of the natural environment in the ex-Soviet Union, concerned especially with chemical pollution in the entire country and the deforestation of Siberia.
The term "desertification" is virtually absent and only appears in the analysis of the problem of the decline in the area of arable lands.
The author points to the significant losses in water during irrigation (40-70 % by evaporation and infiltration from the Karakumy and South Fergana Canals), the erosion and salinization of irrigated soil in Central Asia, wind erosion in the steppes of Kazakhstan and the Kalmyk republic.
The area of lands so degraded by human action as to be no longer cultivable is estimated to be 1.45 million km^2 including 630,000 km^2 which are degraded because of salinization and erosion (as of 1977).
The political system is blamed as the primary cause of this state of affairs (centralized planning, huge industries, lack of respect for nature, lack of respect for the law).
Note: This book is published in Russian: B. Komarov, Unichtozhïeniïe prirody, Posser Verlag, Frankfurt/Main, 1978; and in English: B. Komarov, The Destruction of Nature in the Soviet Union, Pluto Press, London. This book has sensitized the countries of Central Europe and Soviet dissidents in the, USSR to ecological problems. It is little known in the USSR.
Bibliographic entry 43
Authors: Kotlïav V.M., Glazovski N.F., Mukitanov N.K., et al.
Title: Osnovnyïe polozhïeniïa kontsïeptsii sokhranieniïia i vosstanovlïeniïa Aral'skogo rïegiona, normalizatsii ekologichïeskoï, sanitarno-gigiïenichïeskoï, mïediko-biologichïeskoï i sotsial'no-ekonomichïeskoï situatsii v Priaral'ïe (Main ideas for safeguarding and restoring the Aral Sea, and the ecological, sanitary, medico-biological and socio-economic normalization of the situation in the Aral Region)
Publisher: Izvïestiïa Akadïemii Naouk SSSR, serïa Gïeografishïeskaïa (Geography series), N° 4, pp. 8-22
Date: 1991 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow
Classification: 2B2f, 5C5
Region: Aral Sea
Summary: Beginning in the 1970's, the level of the Aral Sea has decreased by 14 15 meters, the salinity of the water has tripled and 200 species of flora and fauna have disappeared. The absence of economic structures appropriate to the vulnerability of these ecosystems is the main reason for the Aral crisis. Four environmental scenarios are possible in the future: 1) natural: level of the sea above 50 m; 2) changed: level of the sea above 40 m; 3) two separate "sea-lakes"; 4) three separate "sea-lakes" with a level of less than 36 m and very high salinity. Main proposals for solving these problems: changes in the cotton industry; elimination of waste in agriculture (15-40% of production is wasted); substitution of synthetic fibres for cotton; reduction in the surface area of rice cultivation; restructure of irrigation systems; introduction of modern technology for irrigation and revegetalization. By these means it would be possible to achieve the second type of environmental
condition. To implement this program, three stages are proposed: I. 1991-1995 (cost: 21 billion roubles); II. 1996-2000 (35 billion roubles); III. 2001-2010 (10 billion roubles). Total cost: 66 billion roubles at the 1991 value. Water taxes and state, foreign and private investment would be the main financial sources.
Bibliographic entry 44
Author: Kovda V.A.
Title: Problïemy bor'by s opustynivaniïem i zasolïeniïem oroshaïemykh pochv (Problems in Combating Desertification and Salinization of Irrigated Lands)
Publisher: Kolos, Moscow, 304 pp.
Date: 1984 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, WGiSR UW Warsaw
Classification: 2A2, 2B1, 2B2, 2B2a, 5C3, 5D1c
Region: Arid and semi-arid regions of the ex-USSR - Central Asia, the Caucusus - and the world
Summary: This document presents the principal saline regions of the world, illustrated with schematic maps showing the distinctive features of the salinization of groundwater and soil, and the geochemical classification of desert regions, illustrated with examples from the ex-Soviet Union and other regions of the world. Maps showing the mineralization of groundwater and soil in selected deserts and semi-deserts of the ex-Soviet Union are also presented, as are charts showing the chemical composition of groundwater and soil, a description of different methods of desalinization applied throughout the world and in the USSR in particular, and the possibilities of using saline water for irrigation. The efficiency of these desalinization methods depends on the chemical characteristics of the soil; where there is chloride or sulphate in the soil, one chemical treatment is sufficient, whereas the presence of sodium requires several treatments. Thanks to effective treatments,
salinization has been reduced in several regions of the USSR (in Tajikistan, 35% of irrigated soil was formerly saline; in 1972 only 9% remained saline).
Geochemical classification of deserts:
1. Saline deserts and desert steppes (with chlorine and nitrate);
2. Calcareous and gypseous deserts;
3. Clay deserts with takyrs;
4. Sand deserts
Bibliographic entry 45
Authors: Lalymïenko K.K., Lalymïenko I.I., Bïerdyïev S.
Title: Osvoïeniïe takyrovykh pochv s ispol'zovaniïem mïestnogo povïerkhnostnogo stoke (Management of the soils of takyrs using local surface waters)
Publisher: Ylym - Academy of Sciences of Turkmenistan, Ashkhabad, 286 pp.
Date: 1983 Language: Russian
Available: IP Ashkhabad, WGiSR UW Warsaw
Classification: 5C4, 5C1, 5C5
Region: Turkmenistan
Summary: This is a technical report on the development of takyrs. In the ex-Soviet Union, deserts of takyrs cover more than 13 million hectares and the prospects for their economic use are considered as poor as for solonchaks. Takyrs are entirely, or almost entirely, devoid of vegetation. This document gives a very detailed description of the soil structure and the chemical composition of water in takyrs. Successes in developing takyrs using artificial irrigation near the Karakumy Canal are described. Attempts made in western Turkmenistan in the 1950's to plant black saxaoul without irrigation completely failed. There are new projects to construct a network of deep canals on takyrs connected to shallow furrows that collect water for the irrigation of selected areas. One cultivated hectare requires the collection of water from 15-25 hectares. The authors provide examples of the formation of furrows and the distances between them. The planting of black saxaoul was started at
the same time as the cultivation of grasses, vines, almonds, and plants of the squash family. These efforts succeeded. In the authors' opinion, the results of these experiments can be used on similar soils in other regions of the world. The bibliography (437 titles) is exclusively in Russian.
Examples of methods of takyr development:
These experiments show that a significant loss of water occurs in furrows dug along the sides of takyrs. The most efficient furrows were those made in the bottom of takyrs following their contour lines, 10-33 m apart. In the strip of land along the upper side of the furrow, channels were made. To facilitate drainage into surrounding lands; a drainage network was created. This network was formed by ruts made by the wheels of LAZ 63 vehicles (Soviet landrovers) driving in the rain. Distance between these vehicles: 3-5 km; depth of the ruts: 2 cm.
<section>c</section>
Bibliographic entry 46
Authors: Mabutt J.A., Floret C. (eds.)
Title: Case Studies on Desertification
Publisher: Natural Resources Research XVIII, UNESCO/UNEP/UNDP, 280 pp.
Date: 1980 Language: English
Available: BiL Moscow, WGiSR UW Warsaw
Classification: 5A2, 5C1-2, 5D1a-b, 5D1e, 5D2b
Region: Global, ex-Soviet Union, Turkmenistan
Summary: This text consists of regional studies on desertification, and preventive measures. For the entire ex-Soviet Union, only two brief studies were prepared by the government: measures for combating desertification in the Golodnaïa Steppe (Steppe of Hunger, Turkmenistan, pp. 265-267), and methods of controlling desertification in Turkmenistan (pp. 267-269). The two papers cover the following subjects: irrigation, population increase, development of cereal cultivation and animal production. 23,000 ha of the Golodnaïa Steppe were irrigated prior to 1929, and 600,000 ha towards the end of the 1970's. New projects in irrigation development are planned. Irrigation in Turkmenistan is connected to the Karakumy Canal (900 km in length, rate of flow of 400 m^3/sec, supplemented by 2,000 km of lesser canals). It is "the largest desert hydrotechnical project in the world" (p. 267). Its success depends largely on the central planning of irrigation (p. 267) and the size of
agricultural operations (surface areas of state animal production: from 27,000 to 670,000 ha).
Sand dune fixation: 1951-1968: 140,000 ha, 1971-1975: 300,000 ha, 1976-1980 (planned): 330,000 ha.
Note: There is a French version entitled: "Etude de cas de la désertification."
Bibliographic entry 47
Authors: Plisak R.P., Ogar' N.P., Sultanova B.M.
Title: Produktivnost' i struktura lugov pustynnoï zony (The Productivity and the Structure of Prairies in the Desert Zone)
Publisher: Akademiïa Naouk Kazakhskoï SSR. Institut Botaniki - "Naouka" Kazakhskoï SSR (Academy of Sciences of Kazakhstan. Botanical Institute - "Naouka" of Kazakhstan), Alma Ata, 188 pp.
Date: 1989 Language: Russian
Available: KR FAK Alma Ata
Classification: 2A3, 2B2b, 3C3, 4A2
Region: Kazakhstan
Summary: A detailed description is presented of prairies in the valleys of the desert zone (natural environment, floristic composition, productivity). Factors of change in these prairies are given, particularly desertification caused by human action. The 5 stages of desertification are described in plains located in river deltas (pp. 71-73: degradation of water conditions, decrease in productivity); the length of time of each stage of desertification and the time necessary for the regeneration of vegetation once conditions return to normal are also presented. Charts show the changes in the floristic composition during the salinization process. The decrease in productivity due to desertification is presented in detail (pp. 92-152). It has fallen from 10,668 to 848 g/m^2; the pastoral potential has diminished 30 times and more (p. 152); however, the root biomass decreases more slowly.
Recommendations: pp. 153-165: increase in and improved management of stream flows, controlled fires, improvement in agricultural techniques.
Bibliographic entry 48
Author: Poliïenko V.G.
Title: Razvitiïe sïel'skogo khozïaïstva i problïemy opustynivaniïa v rïegionïe ESKATO (Agricultural Development and Problems of Desertification in the Countries of Asia and the Pacific)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 4, pp. 3-10, Ashkhabad
Date: 1986 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw, UAM Poznan
Classification: 1D, 2B1, 3C
Region: Countries of Asia and the Pacific
Summary: The region studied, Asia and the Pacific, covers 31 million km^3, or 23%, of the total area of continents (excluding Antarctica); in 1984 this region had 2.4 billion inhabitants, or 53% of the total world population. Although large areas of this region are affected by desertification (2.2 billion ha, including 440 million ha which are very affected), this area plays an important role in world food production. The chief factors which influence desertification in this region are the destruction of forests, the salinization of soil, the formation of ponds and wetlands by infiltration, wind and water erosion, and the degradation of rangelands.
The study of human factors in desertification is of primary importance for combating the negative effects of the relation between man and ecosystems. The problem of desertification caused by human activities was an important issue of the UN Conference on Desertification.
Current conditions and forecast of ecological parameters in countries of Asia and the Pacific
South Asia
East and Southeast Asia
Pacific
Forests 
Afforestation ¯ ¯ ¯ ¯ ¯ ¯
Extinction of Species 
Irrigation and droughts 
Soil use 
Soil erosion 
Salinization 
Degradation of rangelands 
Degradation of health conditions in the agricultural population 
Illnesses caused by pesticides 
Malaria and bhilarzia 
increase
¯ decrease
strong increase
¯ ¯ strong decrease
Bibliographic entry 49
Author: Programa de las Naciones Unidos pare el Medio Ambiente (PNUMA). Comisión de la URSS de los Asuntos de PNUMA
Title: Colonización de los territorios aridos y lucha contra la desertification: enfoque integral (Colonization of arid lands and combating desertification: the integrated approach)
Publisher: PNUMA (UNEP) - Comisión de la URSS de los asuntos de PNUMA, Moscow, 156 pp.
Date: 1987 Language: Spanish (English and French versions also exist)
Available: IG RAN Moscow
Classification: 1C-D, 2A, 2B1, 2B2b, 2B2c, 2B2d, 2B2h, 4A-D, 5A, 5C-D
Region: Global, including three regions of Central Asia and the Kalmyk Republic (to the west of the Caspian Sea)
Summary: Twenty-one articles are grouped into 4 large chapters: a) Natural and socio-economic aspects of desertification (8 articles, 7 of which were prepared by Soviet researchers; natural resources and various types of human activity in the arid regions of the globe, general views); b) World-wide experience in combating desertification (10 articles including 3 by Soviet researchers; land degradation and combating desertification in Africa [particularly in the Maghreb, the Sahel and Tanzania], the Middle East, South Asia [particularly India], Latin America, the United States, and Australia); c) The Soviet experience in reclaiming arid regions following the principles of integrated development (2 articles, one giving very general ideas and the other consisting of 4 case studies: the "black lands" of the Kalmyk, Golodnaïa Stïep' (the Steppe of Hunger), the Karakumy Canal, Tajikistan; successes in development are emphasized); d) The integrated approach to the economic
development of arid lands (1 article written by Soviet researchers; stages in the preparation of programmes of integrated regional development).
Stages in the preparation of programmes of integrated regional development:
Structure of the diagram of regional development and stages of its formation:
A - limits of the region and its national importance; B - Objectives for development at the national level; C - Item of information; D - Definition of objectives; E - Analysis of current conditions and definition of principal problems; F - Forecast of main trends of environmental and economic transformation; G - Expected resources; H - Preparation, evaluation and alternative choices for development; J - Preparation of integrated programmes.
1 - economic objectives; 2 - social objectives; 3 - ecological objectives; 4 - economy; 5 population and human resources; 6 - infrastructure of production and technology; 7 - system of land use; 8 - system of population distribution; 9 - specific crops; 10 - level of the population's supplies of provisions; 11 - natural conditions and resources; 12 - unfavourable natural phenomena; 13 - effects of human action on the environment; 14 - limits of the region covered; 15 - definition of regional objectives; 16 - estimation of the level of development of the region; 17 material resources; 18 - human resources; 19 - land resources; 20 - human and social potential; 21 - mineral and raw material resources; 22 water resources; 23 - biological resources; 24 energy resources; 25 - level of development of the region in relation to existing resources; 26 principal trends in economic development; 27 - principal trends in social development; 28 principal trends in the transformation of the
environment; 29 - options for economic development; 30 - options for social development; 31 - options for the guided change of the environment; 32 - evaluation of options and optimal choice; 33 - integrated programme of economic development; 34 - integrated prograrnme of infrastructure development; 35 development of an integrated programme of a system of population distribution; 36 - integrated programme of social development; 37 - integrated programme of the protection and improvement of the environment; 38 - specific programme relating to supplies of provisions of the population of the region; 39 - specific programme for combating desertification,; 40 - other directed programmes; 41 - sub-programme of regional development; 42 - preparation of organizational and technical means for the practical application of these prograrnmes.
Bibliographic entry 50
Author: Pryde P.R.
Title: Environmental Management in the Soviet Union
Publisher: Cambridge Soviet Paperbacks, Cambridge University Press, 314 pp.
Date: 1991 Language: English
Available: private collections
Classification: 2A1, 2A4, 2B2g-h, 2B2f, 4B
Region: Plains of southern Russia, southwestern Siberia, Kazakhstan, Aral Sea
Summary: This book covers a wide variety of problems relating to the degradation of the natural environment in the ex-Soviet Union, from the protection of nature reserves to Chernobyl. Problems of desertification are discussed in two chapters.
1) Land protection, pp. 196-212 - dangers resulting from dust storms. The territories in danger cover 900,000 km^2 in the plains of southern European Russia and 700,000 km^2 in northern Kazakhstan and southwestern Siberia. In the southern plains of Russia, particularly intense deflation has taken place in the years 1953, 1960, 1965, 1969, 1974, and 1984. Certain zones are affected by 20 dust storms per year and by the annual deflation of 2-7 cm of the soil surface. Protection could be assured by the planting of trees to preserve humidity in protective strips around fields. The plantation of protective strips has decreased from 44,000 ha in 1980 to 39,000 in 1985 and to only 29,000 ha in 1987. Included is a map of dust storm frequency.
2) Water crisis in Soviet Central Asia, pp. 213-232 (chapter prepared by P.P. Micklin and L. Harrison Fund). This chapter contains general information on irrigation development in Central Asia and on the problem of the Aral Sea. Various estimations of economic losses are given: in 1979 losses were estimated to be 5.4 - 5.7 billion roubles in Uzbekistan (total over a period of several years); in 1988 estimates were 100 million roubles in the Amu-Darya delta; in 1988, according to the press, losses equalled 1.5 - 2.0 billion roubles in the entire Aral Sea region.
Bibliographic entry 51
Author: Rafikov A.A.
Title: K prognozirovaniïu protsïessov opustynivaniïa iuzhnogo Priaral'ïa (Forecast for the desertification process in the area south of the Aral Sea)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 5, pp. 42-48, Ashkhabad
Date: 1985 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw, UAM Poznan
Classification: 1B, 2B2e, 2B2f
Region: South of the Aral Sea, Uzbekistan
Summary: Desertification in the area south of the Aral Sea is connected, among other things, to hydrological deregulation in the Amu-Darya river delta and to the reduction in the level of the sea. Until 1961, infiltration of water from the sea into the delta caused the formation of lakes and marshes. The level of the sea has decreased 8 m during the years 1961-1981. Due in part to the geological structure of the region, water reflux has declined. It is predicted that the continual decrease in the level of the sea will cause a lowering of the water table within a radius of 200 km. If the level of the sea decreases by 30 m, the water table 15 km from the sea will lower by 20 m, 40 km from the sea it will lower by 15 m, and 75-130 km from the sea it will lower by 10 m. Specialists predict that if current trends continue, salinization of the Aral Sea will reach 34% by the year 2000. In this region soil salinization can be observed; there are patches of salt along the sea coast,
and in dried up marshes and lakes. The deflation of sand and dust with a high concentration of salt constitute a significant danger. They settle mainly in the delta, but dust storms carry them long distances (up to 300 km). The mass of dust carried away each year by the wind is estimated to be 15-17 tonnes. The author suggests possible scenarios of the soil and vegetation change in the different stages of aridification. To conclude, Rafikov states that combating desertification is only possible when there is profound knowledge of the natural environment.
Bibliographic entry 52
Author: Rozanov B.G.
Title: Problïemy dïegradatsii zasushlivykh zïemïel' mire i mïezhdunarodnoïe sotrudnichïestvo po bor'bïe s opustynivaniïem (Problems of the Degradation of Drylands and International Cooperation in Combating Desertification)
Publisher: Pochvovïedïeniïe, N° 8, pp. 5-11, Moscow
Date: 1977 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow
Classification: 1A, 1D, 2A
Region: Global
Summary: Very general article on desertification at the global level. The author discusses the United Nations Conference on Desertification, Nairobi, 1977. Pages 8-9: description of different phenomena of desertification.
Definition: "Desertification is a natural or human-induced process of irreversible change in the soil and vegetation of drylands towards aridification and a decrease in biological productivity. In extreme cases this process leads to the total disintegration of the biological potential and the transformation of the area into desert" (p.6).
Bibliographic entry 53
Authors: Starodubtsïev V.M., Nïekrasova T.F.
Title: Izmïenïeniïa prirodnoï srïedy v bassïeïnïe rïeki Ili v svïazi s vodokho-zïaïstvïennym stroitïel'stvom (Changes in the natural environment in the Ili river basin due to hydrological development)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 1, pp. 25-33, Ashkhabad
Date: 1983 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw, UAM Poznan
Classification: 2A3-4, 2B2b, 3C3, 4A2, 4A4
Region: Kazakhstan
Summary: In the Ili basin, the aridification of the landscape, the increase in the continental character of the climate and the impoverishment in fauna result from the regulation of the stream flow and the collection of water for irrigation.
The Kapchagaï dam (28 km^3; 2,847 km^2): an analysis of changes in the chemical characteristics of water and soil (the reservoir has flooded areas of saline soil), the drying up of the delta, and the decrease in productivity of rangelands. In an area of 50,000 ha the initial productivity of 23-45 q/ha has declined to 7 q/ha. In the region formerly covered with reeds (130,000 ha, 22 q/ha) desertification and salinization can be observed. The surface area of the delta is 8,000 km^2.
Lake Balkhash: as a result of the decrease in water influx in recent years, the level of the lake has decreased by more than 1.5 m, the coastline has moved 2-3 km to the north, in places up to 7-8 km. On the dried up land the soil is strongly saline. There is an increase in the salinization of the lake. The current of groundwater has reversed - water now flows from the lake towards the lower delta. Salinization is 1-3g/l near the sea and 10-20 g/l at the southern limits of the plain surrounding the lake. The negative ecological effects are magnified by the fact that the filling of the reservoir in 1974-77 coincided with a period of low stream flow of the Ili, which lasted several years.
Bibliographic entry 54
Author: Turnbull M.
Title: Soviet Environmental Policies and Practices. The Most Critical Investment.
Publisher: Dartmouth (Aldershot - Brookfield, USA - Hong Kong), 215 pp.
Date: 1991 Language: English
Available: Private collections
Classification: 2A4, 5B1
Region: Central Asia
Summary: The problems of desertification are considered in part in Chapter 1, entitled «Development of agriculture and the natural environment," pp. 33-66. This chapter contains statistical charts on the extent of water resources and consumption for each republic (Chart 3.6, p. 44). Water losses are significant during transport from the water supply point to the consumption points. In the entire USSR, 50.6 billion m^3 were lost for 337 billion m^3 used; in Uzbekistan, 16.9 billion m^3 were lost for 73.9 billion m^33 used; in Turkmenistan, 7.3 billion m^3 lost for 22.5 billion m^3. The author also presents theoretical calculations of water costs in 1983 and 1984, information on progress in irrigation, mineralization of water in the Aral Sea basin, and on page 57, information on the salinity of the water in large reservoirs that collect drainage water.
In 1990, the area of irrigated land in the USSR was 23.1 million hectares with a drainage system covering 18.5 million hectares. By the year 2000, it should extend to 32 million hectares with a drainage system covering 21 million hectares. On page 60, the cost of irrigation reconstruction according to 1985 conditions is estimated (the author's calculations are based on various Soviet sources). Of the 17.1 million hectares of irrigated land in 1985, 6.4 million hectares will require reconstruction, which would cost 32 billion roubles (including Russia with 1.9 million hectares - 9.3 billion roubles, Uzbekistan with 1.3 billion hectares - 9.3 billion roubles, the Ukraine with 0.9 million hectares - 6.7 billion roubles, and Kazakhstan with 0.7 million hectares - 3.6 billion roubles).
Bibliographic entry 55
Authors: Vagranov L.A., Gladyshïev A.I.
Title: Solodka golaïa - pïerspïektivnyï osvoitïel'prioazisnykh pïeskov Turkmïenistana (Glycerrhiza glabra L.) Sand stabilization plan for the oases of Turkmenistan.
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 4, pp. 34-40, Ashkhabad
Date: 1979 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw, UAM Poznan
Classification: 5C4
Region: Turkmenistan
Summary: This text discusses the cultivation of Glycerrhiza glabra L. on sands near the oases of Turkmenistan. The objective is sand stabilization, at the same time providing animal feed, while the roots supply a rare raw material used in the pharmaceutical and food industries. The natural resistance of this plant has considerably diminished during recent years. The authors discuss the ecological requirements of the plant and illustrate its root system. The cultivation of this plant enriches the soil in nitrogen.
An experimental cultivation of Glycerriza glabra L. was started on seven hectares near the Amu-Darya River (in the southeastern Karakumy Desert). This experiment was a success. With optimal irrigation, 16-18 tonnes/ha of dry root matter were obtained in two years. The straw of this plant has proven to be a very useful animal feed.
Plant: Glycerrhiza glabra L.
Bibliographic entry 56
Authors: Vinogradov B.V., Chïerkashin A.K., Gornov A.I., Kulik K.N.
Title: Dinamicheskiï monitoring dïegradatsii i vostanovleniïa pastbishtch chïernykh zïemïel' Kalmykii (Monitoring the process of degradation and the rehabilitation of black lands of the Kalmyk)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 1, pp. 10-19, Ashkhabad
Date: 1990 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw, UAM Poznan
Classification: 2A3, 2B2h, 3B, 3C4, 4A2, 5B2, 5C4
Region: Russia (Kalmyk, black lands)
Summary: A long-term cyclic decline in precipitation in the northern Caspian plain in the years 1940-1950 diminished the rangeland potential. Animal production has increased, especially since the end of the 1960's, which has caused a marked degradation. Calculating the costs of soil rehabilitation and the revenue from animal production, the authors have prepared a mathematical model of optimal rangeland restoration over a period of 20 years. In the first phase, revegetalization should cover 20-25% of rangelands per year, then 10 15 % per year, stopping when 83 % of the land is non-degraded, supporting 0.6 sheep per hectare. This alternative assures the maximum profit.
Bibliographic entry 57
Author: Zhumashov A.
Title: Pïeski Iugo-Zapadnogo Turkmïenistana i ikh osvoïeniïe (The sands of southwest Turkmenistan and their reclamation)
Publisher: Akadïemiïa Naouk Turkmïenskoï SSR. Institut Pustyn' (Academy of Sciences of Turkmenistan. Institute of Deserts) - Ylym, Ashkhabad, 144 pp.
Date: 1980 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow
Classification: 0, 5B1, 5C2
Region: Southwest Turkmenistan
Summary: This text contains a description of the natural environment, the role of wind in the formation and orientation of dunes, the effect of wind on the relief, and the shifting of barkhans. This text, which only slightly relates to the issue of desertification, has a chapter (pp. 120-130) on the fixation of sand dunes. There is a schematic map of southwest Turkmenistan (p. 132) showing which actions are necessary to improve the environment (the author identifies 7 land types). On page 130 a chart shows the cost of sand dune fixation using different techniques. Stabilization by chemical means costs from 300-400 to 800-900 roubles/hectare (1980 prices), depending on the material used to make the mulch; mechanical stabilization with stone walls costs from 100 200 to 200-350 roubles/hectare, mechanical fixation by revegetalization (saxaoul, Calligonum arborescens and others) costs 150 to 300 roubles/hectare.
Note: Bibliography (144 entries, exclusively in Russian) Index of plant names: Turkoman, Russian, Latin
Plants used: Calligonum arborescens - sand dune fixation. Haloxylon sp.
Bibliographic entry 58
Author: Zhumashov A.P.
Title: Ekologo-gïeografishïeskiïe usloviïa i tipy pustyn' Srïednïei Azii (Ecological and Geographical Conditions and Desert Types in Central Asia)
Publisher: Akadïemiïa Naouk Turkmïenskoï SSR (Academy of Sciences of Turkmenistan), Ylym, Ashkhabad, 316 pp.
Date: 1990 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, WGiSR UW Warsaw
Classification: 0, 2A1-4, 2B2a, 3C1-5, 3D (sand storms), 4A, 5B, 5C2, SD la, 5D1b
Region: Central Asia (Tajikistan, Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan)
Summary: This publication is probably the most up-to-date report on the deserts of Central Asia. The history of research on deserts and their economic development is discussed, including the topography of sand deserts (pp. 213-236), the desertification process and means of combating it (pp. 236-266), and predictions of future ecological changes in deserts resulting from human activity (the chapter with this title is a regional look at zones lending themselves to irrigation, containing information on the potential ecological risks). Desertification is perceived as "a process which initially manifests itself by a decrease in the biological productivity of ecosystems" (p. 236). The natural factors in desertification are treated superficially, with emphasis on sand and dust storms, chief factors in this group. Greater attention is given to human factors; numerous examples are given, such as overcropping and overgrazing, excessive use of water for irrigation, transport routes
crossing deserts, etc. There are also examples of the degradation of the natural environment. Among the methods of combating desertification, sand dune stabilization is emphasized, in particular using chemical methods.
Definition: "Desertification": process initially manifested by a decrease in the biological productivity of ecosystems.
Natural factors of desertification: Chief factors: cold autumns and winters, slowing the development of short-lived vegetation, less than average precipitation over several years, decrease in the flow of large rivers, development of erosion and deflation, modifications in the surface area of lakes, and increase in the salinity of enclosed lakes.
<section>d</section>
Bibliographic entry 59
Author: Zonn I.S.
Title: Sistïemodïeïatïel'nostnaïa kontsïeptsiïa ponïatiïa antropogïennogo opustynivaniïa (A systematic approach to the concept of desertification caused by human action)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 6, pp. 13-18, Ashkhabad
Date: 1978 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw, UAM Poznan
Classification: 1A, 1B
Region: -
Summary: At the present time, there are several dozen definitions of desertification formulated in the extensive specialized literature on the subject. The term was introduced in 1949 by A. Aubréville, a French geobotanist working in West Africa.
Aubréville's definition, however, is neither precise nor comprehensive; he defines desertification as the transformation of arable land into desert, caused by soil erosion connected to human activity.
Some researchers working on the problems of desertification see it as a process of change, others as the result of change. The process of change is a progressive intensification of biological changes in arid and semi-arid ecosystems. By contrast, desertification as the result of change means the appearance of desert features where they did not previously exist.
The author introduces the concept of system. It consists of: process - P; functional structure containing the elements and the relations among the elements - S; morphology or form of organizing the material - F; material of the system - M. This is expressed as a product: System = P*S*F*M.
The system is formed by two perpendicular planes: 1st plane - biological environment, that is, arid and semi-arid regions; 2nd plane - human organization and activity (agriculture, animal production, industrialization). Man in contact with nature creates an anthro-biological system, or, more precisely, a functional-biological system. The functional-biological system is presented as two-dimensional and the biological system resulting from human activity as three dimensional.
Desertification is studied as a complex process composed of diverse elements which may lose their quantitative and qualificative value during this process.
The process can be expressed by the following formula: O[1](t) = <x*y*z> where x = climate, y = soil, z = vegetation cover, t = time. Desertification is reached when a critical threshold value of a parameter is reached, according to the formula: O[1](t[0]) = <xo*yo*zo>. Desertification is the process by which the above values of the parameters are exceeded by their critical threshold values: O[1](t) (r) O[1](t[0])
Definition: Desertification is a complex process which can be expressed by the following formula: O (t) = < x*y*z* > where x = climate, y = soil, z = vegetation cover, t = time, and the parameters x, y, and z reach their critical threshold values.
Bibliographic entry 60
Authors: Zonn I.S., Orlovskiï H.S.
Title: Opustynivaniïe. Stratïegiïa bor'by. (Desertification. Combat Strategy)
Publisher: Akadïemiïa Naouk Turkmïenskoï SSR (Academy of Sciences of Turkmenistan), Ylym, Ashkhabad, 320 pp.
Date: 1984 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow
Classification: 1A, 1D, 2-5
Region: Global (with the exception of the Soviet Union!)
Summary: This document is a long monograph on world-wide Desertification (except in the Soviet Union); results of research by international organizations (UNESCO, FAO, UNEP) are often quoted, particularly materials from the Conference on Desertification in Nairobi in 1977. Numerous definitions of Desertification (p. 25) are cited; according to the authors the best is that of Rozanov (see below, cf. bibl. entry 52). The text shows the global distribution of arid and semi-arid lands according to different authors (in particular, the map of drylands of the world, UNESCO, 1977), as well as natural and human factors in Desertification (pp. 35-60), with a discussion of different hypotheses of climatic cycles (from a few years to the geological scale). The role of droughts is stressed in desertification. But "very often the human factor plays the main role" (p. 46). A short description of human factors is provided. There is a long account (pp. 61-175) of regional desertification:
causes, consequences, intensity, possible combat against (in Africa, Asia except the USSR, North America, South America, and Australia). Recommendations and commentaries from the Nairobi Conference of 1977 are included. Technology for combating Desertification is discussed, including various projects for "green barriers," which the authors favour). The last chapter (pp. 269-291) covers actions and international organizations engaged in combating Desertification (only UN programmes are included).
Note: Bibliography - 257 publications in English, French and Russian.
Definition: (Rozanov, bibl. entry 52) Desertification is a natural or human-induced process of irreversible change in the soil and vegetation of drylands towards aridification and a decrease in biological productivity. In extreme cases this process leads to the total disintegration of the biological potential and the transformation of the area into desert.
Annex 3: Bibliographic entries for other documents (61 to 147)
Bibliographic entry 61
Bibliographic entry 62
Bibliographic entry 63
Bibliographic entry 64
Bibliographic entry 65
Bibliographic entry 66
Bibliographic entry 67
Bibliographic entry 68
Bibliographic entry 69
Bibliographic entry 70
Bibliographic entry 71
Bibliographic entry 72
Bibliographic entry 73
Bibliographic entry 74
Bibliographic entry 75
Bibliographic entry 76
Bibliographic entry 77
Bibliographic entry 78
Bibliographic entry 79
Bibliographic entry 80
Bibliographic entry 81
Bibliographic entry 82
Bibliographic entry 83
Bibliographic entry 84
Bibliographic entry 85
Bibliographic entry 86
Bibliographic entry 87
Bibliographic entry 88
Bibliographic entry 89
Bibliographic entry 90
Bibliographic entry 91
Bibliographic entry 92
Bibliographic entry 93
Bibliographic entry 94
Bibliographic entry 95
Bibliographic entry 96
Bibliographic entry 97
Bibliographic entry 98
Bibliographic entry 99
Bibliographic entry 100
Bibliographic entry 101
Bibliographic entry 102
Bibliographic entry 103
Bibliographic entry 104
Bibliographic entry 105
Bibliographic entry 106
Bibliographic entry 107
Bibliographic entry 108
Bibliographic entry 109
Bibliographic entry 110
Bibliographic entry 111
Bibliographic entry 112
Bibliographic entry 113
Bibliographic entry 114
Bibliographic entry 115
Bibliographic entry 116
Bibliographic entry 117
Bibliographic entry 118
Bibliographic entry 119
Bibliographic entry 120
Bibliographic entry 121
Bibliographic entry 122
Bibliographic entry 123
Bibliographic entry 124
Bibliographic entry 125
Bibliographic entry 126
Bibliographic entry 127
Bibliographic entry 128
Bibliographic entry 129
Bibliographic entry 130
Bibliographic entry 131
Bibliographic entry 132
Bibliographic entry 133
Bibliographic entry 134
Bibliographic entry 135
Bibliographic entry 136
Bibliographic entry 137
Bibliographic entry 138
Bibliographic entry 139
Bibliographic entry 140
Bibliographic entry 141
Bibliographic entry 143
Bibliographic entry 144
Bibliographic entry 145
Bibliographic entry 146
Bibliographic entry 147
Bibliographic entry 61
Author: Akadïemïa Naouk Kazakhskoï SSR (Academy of Sciences of Kazakhstan)
Title: Okhrana pochv i ratsional'noïe ispol'zovaniïe zïemïel'nykh rïesursov Kazakhstana (Soil protection and the rational exploitation of the resources of Kazakhstan)
Publisher: Naouka, Alma Ata, 184 pp.
Date: 1976 Language: Russian
Available: KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw
Classification: 2A1, 2B2b, 4A1, 5D2a
Region: Kazakhstan
Summary: A collection of 18 articles prepared by pedologists of Kazakhstan for the Congress of Soviet Pedologists which took place in Minsk.
The majority of the texts discuss the geochemistry of various types of soil. Two of the texts are soil studies prepared for the needs of the planned canal for transporting water from Siberian rivers. Two other documents deal with the problem of wind erosion in Kazakhstan (pp. 4-18 and 26-36). Wind erosion threatens 52.5 million ha of territory in Kazakhstan, while riverbed erosion affects 17.7 million ha. The chart on page 12 shows the lands threatened by erosion.
This work by the Academy also contains charts indicating the extent of deflation on experimental fields and the loss in humus (a comparison is made between arable lands and the steppe). In the case of soil where erosion is moderate, there is a reduction in humus at the level of 0-5 cm.
This work also contains information on the loss of different elements in the soil due to erosion, on dust storms which have affected this region since the 1960's, and some information on agriculture.
Bibliographic entry 62
Author: Akramov Z.M.
Title: Okhrana prirody i uluchshïeniïe okruzhaiushchïeï srïedy (Protecting nature and improving the environment
Publisher: Fan (Academy of Sciences of Uzbekistan), Tashkent, 136 pp.
Date: 1975 Language: Russian
Available: WGiSR UW Warsaw
Classification: 2A2, 2A4, 2B2e, 4A3
Region: Central Asia - Uzbekistan
Summary: This collection of 18 articles is principally concerned with cartography (methods of preparing maps of the natural environment) and physical geography; the problem of desertification remains secondary.
There are articles on soil salinization and on water economy (pp. 35-45).
Currently, irrigation systems in Central Asia cover 5.5 million ha. The area of land suitable for irrigation is 35 million ha, while water reserves are sufficient for irrigating 12 million ha.
The drying of the Aral Sea has caused a reduction in the fish catch from 50,000 tonnes in 1960 to 12,000 tonnes in 1970.
Included is a commentary on the financial capacity for transporting water from Siberian rivers (1 km^3 of water = 1 billion roubles). The author points out that knowledge of physico-geographical conditions is necessary to efficiently combat salinization.
In southern Uzbekistan, the destruction of mountain forests due to the overexploitation of wood for fuel increases the danger of land and mud slides.
Bibliographic entry 63
Author: Alïeksïeïeva N.N.
Title: Prirodnyïe prïedposylki i faktory opustynivaniïa na sïevïero-zapadïe Indii (Natural preconditions and factors of desertification in northwestern India)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 1, pp. 35-42, Ashkhabad
Date: 1986 Language: Russian (summary in English)
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, WGiSR UW Warsaw, UAM Poznan
Classification: 2B1, 2C, 2D
Region: South Asia (arid and semi-arid lands of India)
Summary: Rozanov and Zonn's definition of desertification (cf. B.G. Rozanov, bibl. entry 52) is adopted. In the process of desertification there is the simultaneous action of two factors: irrational human activity and climatic aridity, punctuated with droughts (p. 35). The author presents the evolution of the climate and wind relief in the areas studied (Thar, Rajasthan) from the Pleistocene (30,000 years B.C.) to the present day, showing that these are fragile regions.
Human pressure in India is very intense, with an average density of 66 inhabitants/km^2 on arid and semi-arid lands (150 in Rajasthan), the world average being 3 to 4 inhabitants/km^2. The search for fuelwood, overgrazing on arid lands and excessive ploughing of semi-arid lands causes significant degradation, especially deflation and the movement of dunes (formed around 20,000 B.C., stabilized in the mid-Holocene).
Desertification process: Deflation (predominant), water erosion, soil degradation, salinization.
Natural preconditions: Significant variation in precipitation (60-70%), frequency of droughts, existence below the surface of a layer of sand (15-20 m in depth), which, in the event of the destruction of the vegetation, forms sand dunes.
Bibliographic entry 64
Author: Arnagïel'diïev A.
Title: Morfodinamika eolovogo rïelïefa pieschanykh pustyn' (Morphodynamics of the wind erosion relief in sandy deserts)
Publisher: Akadïemiïa Naouk Turkmïenskoï SSR (Academy of Sciences of Turkmenistan), Ylym, Ashkhabad, 164 pp.
Date: 1990 Language: Russian
Available: IP Ashkhabad, WGiSR UW Warsaw
Classification: 0,5C2
Region: Central Asia, chiefly Tajikistan
Summary: This work deals with the problems of desertification only marginally; the term is not even used. The main subject is the influence of various factors (origin and character of sands, vegetation, fauna, climate, tectonics, orography, hydrography) on the emergence, development and forms of wind erosion. It is only in the summary (pp. 144-149) that the role of human activity in the formation of the desert relief is considered. In the territory of the ex-Soviet Union there are approximately 1 million km^2 of sands, 12-15% of which are dunes. In the author's opinion, their fixation using revegetalization methods is easier than in other deserts of the world (however, this conclusion is not explained). The layout of unpaved roads has destroyed vegetation along a strip approximately 50 m wide. The development of agriculture along the takyrs has caused deflation in surrounding sands. Herd routes and road construction should be on the downwind side of takyrs so that sand is
not blown onto takyrs by the wind. Wind directions must be studied before planning programmes to protect against sand encroachment.
Bibliographic entry 65
Authors: Arnagïel'diïev A., Kostiukovskiï V.
Title: Pustyni: ratsional'noï ispolzovaniï i okhrana (Deserts: Rational exploitation and protection)
Publisher: Agropromizdat, Moscow, 224 pp.
Date: 1990 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow
Classification: 0, 1A, 2B2, 2-5 (general information)
Region: Global, Central Asia in particular
Summary: This document examines the natural environment, vegetation and animal life in deserts. The history of the exploitation of desert resources is described: nomadic and semi-nomadic animal husbandry, irrigated agriculture, energy resources. Features of desert ecosystems and landscapes are also covered, as well as the nature reserves in ex-Soviet Central Asia. There is a discussion of the salinization of irrigated soils in Central Asia (pp. 112-117) and the effects of the wind which carries off 24-132 mln t of salt per year.
The question of desertification is only briefly mentioned, and is defined as: "The degradation of deserts" (p. 127).
Schematic map of desertification processes in drylands of the ex-Soviet Union, in four categories: light desertification, moderate desertification, strong desertification, and extreme desertification.
Note: Bibliography of 63 titles, 46 of which are in Russian
Definition: "Desertification - the degradation of deserts."
Bibliographic entry 66
Author: Babaïev A.G.
Title: Gïeoekologichïeskiï analiz dinamiki gïeosistïem pustyn' na osnovïe distantsionnykh mïetodov (Geo-ecological analysis of the dynamics of desert geosystems using remote sensing)
Publisher: Ylym, Ashkhabad, 244 pp.
Date: 1991 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow
Classification: 1C1
Region: Turkmenistan
Summary: This document is a manual for using remote sensing to study desert environments. It describes types of satellite imagery and methods of analysis. The most interesting examples are the maps:
a) Land use and changes in the natural environment caused by human activities in Turkmenistan since Antiquity (several maps);
b) Changes in the vegetation and other elements of the natural environment in recent years (using satellite imagery from different times; on these maps can be seen vegetation depletion near wells (pp. 61,99), the emergence of infiltration lakes near the Karakumy Canal (pp. 118, 121, 126 and others), and the appearance of moving dunes; the imagery also facilitated the preparation of a map showing the expansion in area of irrigated lands;
c) Generalized schematic map showing the distribution of negative phenomena (pp. 188-190 and others).
Notes:
1. Data on the phenomena of desertification are few and far between, but the last map could be compared to desertification maps.
2. Extensive bibliography; 53 books and articles in languages other than Russian.
Bibliographic entry 67
Author: Babaïev A.G. (ed.)
Title: Opyt bor'by s opustynivaniïem v SSSR (The Soviet experience in combating desertification)
Publisher: Naouka (Sovrïemïennyïe problïemy biosfiery series), Moscow, 116 pp.
Date: 1981 Language: Russian (English version available)
Available: WGiSR UW Warsaw
Classification: 1A-B, 2A, 3C3-4, 4A1, 4A2, 5A-D
Region: Central Asia, Kazakhstan
Summary: The following aspects of desertification are described: (i) climatic conditions of arid and semi-arid lands in Soviet Central Asia and in Kazakhstan, and (ii) natural and human factors of desertification. This text gives much space to the USSR's successes in desert management: pasture improvement, extension of irrigation, sand dune fixation by afforestation. Two terms are used to define desertification: "opustynivaniïe" = desertification - this term is used several times in the text; "dïezïertizatsiïa" - desertization - this word appears only once (p.25). Numerous definitions of desertification are quoted (those of Le Houéroux, Rapp, Mensching and Ibrahim, Dregne), without commentary.
There is little information on the financial success of enterprises in the field of drylands management. "The construction of the Karakumy Canal, which is named after V.I. Lenin, has had satisfactory results; the net profit of the management of 1 mln ha in the canal zone has reached 1.25 billion roubles per year" (p.77).
Characteristics of the desertification process:
Natural factors: primarily in connection with an increase in the albedo of drylands. This process is furthered by climate warming. Other factors: thawing of glaciers, decrease in the area and increase in the salinity of lakes, degradation of vegetation in watersheds, depletion of the flora, increase in salinization and the quantity of gypsum in soils in watersheds, lowering of the water table.
Human factors: description of the land degradation, in particular the depletion of the flora, on pastures due to overgrazing; increase in soil salinity on irrigated lands; desertification on lands near large construction projects (e.g., the Karakumy Canal), and, above all, development of wind and water erosion.
Bibliographic entry 68
Author: Babaïev A.G. (ed.)
Title: Pïerspiektivy ispol'zovaniïa zïemiel'nykh rïesursov Turkmïenistana v svïazi s razvitiïem oroshaïemogo ziemlïedieliïa (Prospects for the utilization of land resources in Turkmenistan in connection with the development of irrigated agriculture)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 5, pp. 11-21, Ashkhabad
Date: 1971 Language: Russian (summary in English)
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw, UAM Poznan
Classification: 5A2, 5A4, 5D1a
Region: Turkmenistan
Summary: A text on the success of the Soviet Union in the economic development of deserts. During recent years, an irrigation system has been constructed on the Karakumy Canal, and existing systems have been modernized. Consequently, the area of irrigated land has increased by over 200,000 ha; when the projects are completed, 100,000 ha will be added. The author analyzes regional differences in environmental conditions in Turkmenistan (notably climate and soil) to determine their potential for irrigation. A chart shows a synthesis of climatic and soil characteristics. Detailed descriptions of individual administrative units are given. In conclusion the author estimates that 2.9 million hectares of land are suitable for irrigation, 620,000 ha of which are already irrigated.
Bibliographic entry 69
Author: Babaïev A.G. (ed.)
Title: Prirodnyïe uslovïa i voprosy osvoïeniïa Karakumov (The natural environment and issues in the management of the Karakumy Desert)
Publisher: Akadïemiïa Naouk Turkmïenskoï SSR (Academy of Sciences of Turkmenistan) -Ylym, Ashkhabad, 168 pp.
Date: 1977 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, WGiSR UW Warsaw
Classification: 2A1, 2A3, 5C2
Region: Turkmenistan
Summary: Reports presented at a conference of young researchers of the Institute of Deserts (date not specified). It consists of 35 short texts, mainly regional and local studies of the physical environment of deserts: soil (chemical composition, migration of elements, salinization, soil evolution), vegetation and its pastoral potential, dune relief and fixation. The degradation of vegetation and the movement of dunes are mentioned in three texts (pp. 3-8, 8-13 and 17-22). Overgrazing and the overexploitation of woody resources for fuelwood has caused the total or partial extinction of soil in a radius of 3 to 5 km around large watering points and in other localities (p. 9); dunes form there. The same phenomena can be observed at the limits of irrigated lands, near livestock farms and roads. To stop the formation of sand dunes, fragile ecosystems must be exploited in a more rational and controlled way to avoid degradation; mechanical and biological methods of sand dune
fixation are also briefly described. Human settlements in the west, northwest and southwest must be protected.
Bibliographic entry 70
Author: Babaïev A.G. (ed.)
Title: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn' (Issues in desert management, special issue), Konfierïentsiïa po problïemam opustynivaniïa (Conference on Desertification)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 3, Ashkhabad
Date: 1978 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw, UAM Poznan
Classification: 1-5
Region: Global
Summary: This special issue is devoted exclusively to the United Nations Conference on Desertification in Nairobi from 27 August to 9 September, 1977. It consists of 13 articles, including: ° opening lecture by M. Tolba, and introductory remarks by the Soviet delegate (A.V. Sidorïenko, Desertification and environmental protection issues, pp. 3-6), ° the report of the Soviet delegation, "Research and management of deserts and semi-deserts in the USSR" (A.G. Babaïev, I.P. Gïerasimov, N.T. Nïechaïeva, M.P. Pïetrov, A.V. Sidorïenko, pp. 17-24) which contains information on successes in combating desertification in the USSR and on the expansion of irrigated lands in Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan, ° a brief analysis of the conclusions of the Conference ° reports on section debates and summaries of selected reports (Climate and desertification; Ecological changes and desertification; Technology and desertification; Population; Society and desertification; International projects for
the monitoring and control of desertification; Information on desertification in Asia, North America and Australia and on pasture management in Iran).
Note: The article by N.T. Nïechaïeva on the establishment of criteria for desertification was presented at the Nairobi conference and published in "Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn"', N° 4, pp. 18-24, 1978.
Bibliographic entry 71
Author: Babaïev A.G.
Title: Vklad SSSR v rïealizatsiiu plane dïeïstviï po bor'bïe s opustynivaniïem (Contribution of the USSR to the project of combating desertification)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 3, pp. 16-19, Ashkhabad
Date: 1985 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw, UAM Poznan
Classification: ID, 5A
Region: Ex-Soviet Union
Summary: In the Soviet Union several studies and practical works were carried out in the fields of desert management and combating desertification. The area of drylands in the USSR before 1985 covered 14% of the territory of the country, or approximately 300 mln ha. The USSR has contributed to combating desertification by training professionals to meet the needs of the country and of diverse developing countries. The dominant role is played by the Institute of Deserts in Ashkhabad.
Two research projects have been completed with the cooperation of UNEP: "Scientific seminars serving the combat against desertification", and "Combating desertification with integrated development". In the Soviet Union the plan for combating desertification was prepared in 1978. Taking into account the needs of developing countries, the project planned to train specialists in the following fields: improvement of alkaline irrigated soils, sand dune stabilization, ecology, management and productivity of pastoral lands. In autumn 1984, a series of courses was organized, "Afforestation of sand dunes in drylands".
The Soviet Union took part in the FAO/UNEP project "Preparation of maps of zones affected by desertification, and assessment of the desertification process" and in the execution of the UNESCO programme "Man and Biosphere." The USSR has also cooperated with the United States, Peru, Mali, Mongolia, and with ESCAP.
Bibliographic entry 72
Authors: Babaïev A.G., Batyrov A.B.
Title: Lïeninskiïe idïei o prïeobrazovanii prirody i ikh voploshchïeniïe pri osvoïenii aridnykh tïerritorii Srïednïeï Azii Kazakhstana (The Ideas of V.I. Lenin on managing nature, and the role of these ideas in drylands development in Central Asia and Kazakhstan.
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 2, pp. 3-12, Ashkhabad
Date: 1970 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw, UAM Poznan
Classification: 1B
Region: Central Asia
Summary: Number 2 of the journal "Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn'" is entirely devoted to the role of Lenin's thought on managing the natural environment, particularly as it relates to the development of drylands in Central Asia and Kazakhstan.
Bibliographic entry 73
Authors: Babaïev A.G., Zonn I.S., Drozdov N.N., Frïeïkin Z.S.
Title: Pustyni (Deserts)
Publisher: Mysl', Moscow, 320 pp.
Date: 1986 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, WGiSR UW Warsaw
Classification: 0, 1-5 (general)
Region: General
Summary: Monograph on the deserts of the world (including the ex-Soviet Union), their natural environments and human activity. Reduced reproduction of "The World Desertification Map". Desertification is studied pp. 296-309, with a review of definitions of desertification. No definition is selected as universal. The authors emphasize the complexity of the problem and the coexistence of two primary causes of desertification: climate (periodic droughts) and human activity. Information is presented on the extent of desertification in the world, on the work of UNEP, UNESCO and FAO, and on the Nairobi Conference of 1977. "In the Soviet Union, the acceleration of the economic development of deserts and the increase in population have amplified the pressure on ecosystems, but the desertification process has limited range in our country" (p. 307).
Vast zones in the river valleys of Central Asia were cultivated until recent times. Agriculture was abandoned not because of climate changes but due to socio-economic conditions and wars. Two chapters are devoted to the success of the Soviet Union in the conquest of deserts (pp. 20-261 and 262-283), one chapter to desert development outside the ex-Soviet Union (pp. 284-295). Among the subjects related to economic development, the authors give particular attention to the mining industry and to irrigation.
Bibliographic entry 74
Author: Babaïeva T.A.
Title: Ispol'zovaniïe kosmicheïeskikh snimkov "Mietieor" dlïa izuchïeniïa protsïessov opustynivaniïa v Turkmïenistanïe (Application of METEOR satellite imagery to the study of desertification in Turkmenistan)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 6, pp. 33-39, Ashkhabad
Date: 1982 Language: Russian (summary in English)
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw, UAM Poznan
Classification: 1C1
Region: Turkmenistan
Summary: Satellite imagery is often used to study natural processes. Imagery from the satellite METEOR (1979-1981) has been utilized in large-scale studies of deserts. A lithological map of the deserts of Turkmenistan has been drawn up; it distinguishes 7 types of desert. This article discusses theoretical considerations of the possibilities of using satellite imagery in the preparation of maps which illustrate desertification, following the methodology designed by FAO ("Provisional methodology for desertification...", Rome 1981).
In the author's opinion, the classification and typology of desertification can be carried out based on satellite imagery. Other elements of study (the causes of desertification and means of improving the situation) require the reinterpretation of material and supplementary data gathered in the field. Satellite imagery makes it possible to identify various processes of desertification covering large expanses of territory, to observe the dynamics of these phenomena and changes in their range.
Desert types:
1. Typical sand deserts
2. Clay takyr deserts
3. Gypseous gravel deserts (erg)
4. Loessial clay deserts
5. Solonchak deserts
6. Arable lands
7. Mountainous terrains
Bibliographic entry 75
Author: Batyrov A.B.
Title: Naouchnyïe osnovy tïerritorïal'noï organizatsii khozïaïstva i nasïelïeniïa v aridnykh rïegionakh (Scientific principles of population distribution and economic development in arid regions)
Publisher: Ylym, Ashkhabad, 156 pp.
Date: 1990 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, WGiSR UW Warsaw
Classification: 5A2, 5D1
Region: Soviet Union - Turkmenistan
Summary: A collection of 16 texts principally covering theoretical questions of human geography and population distribution in the Soviet Union. The article by A. Batyrov discusses the economic development of deserts: "Types of economic development and the development of the population in the deserts of Turkmenistan" (pp. 122-130). Nine types of population concentration and eleven types of locality are identified in Turkmenistan. In the 1950's, oases occupied 1% of Turkmenistan; the figure is 7 % today. At first, the objective for economic development was to ensure a unilateral use of/natural resources; currently (in the 1980's) the objective is for a much wider utilization. Large multiple-function localities have been formed whose inhabitants are not only those working there, but also factory employees and livestock farmers working within a perimeter of several dozen kilometres.
<section>e</section>
Bibliographic entry 76
Author: Bïelolipskiï V.A.
Title: Osobïennosti vïetrovoï erozii v Tiersko-Kumskoï polupustynïe (Specific characteristics of wind erosion in the semi-desert region of Tersk-Kuma)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoieniïa pustyn', N° 2, pp. 47-53, Ashkhabad
Date: 1974 Language: Russian (summary in English)
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw, UAM Poznan
Classification: 2A1, 2B2h, 4A1, 4A4
Region: Russia (Dagestan)
Summary: 70% of the area of the Tersk-Kuma semi-desert suffers from wind erosion, 40% of which is affected by average or intense deflation. As a result of this erosion, the fertility of the irrigated soils has diminished considerably. For this reason, in the southern part of this zone 1/5 of the 166,000 hectares of agricultural land has been turned into rangeland. Wind erosion has been studied in detail. An analysis of periodic changes in deserts during the year has shown that there are two distinct sub-periods, February-June and August-November, during which times wind erosion is particularly intense. Studies have found that deflation varies according to the speed of the wind. The text discusses the material carried off by the wind, the altitude it is carried, and the distance it is transported. The results are presented as charts or as descriptions. There is particular emphasis on dust storms, which destroy the soil and thus diminish its fertility.
Bibliographic entry 77
Author: Bobylïev S.I.
Title: Strukturnaïa pïerïestroïka narodnogo khozïaïstva i rïeshïeniïe Aral'skoï problïemy (Restructure of the national economy and the Aral Sea issue)
Publisher: Izvïestiïa Akadïemii Naouk SSR, Sïeriïa Gïeografichïeskaïa (Geographic Series), N° 4, pp. 125-131, Moscow
Date: 1991 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, WGiSR UW Warsaw
Classification: 5A1-2, 5B1-2
Region: Aral Sea
Summary: The author proposes a change in perspective on "the Aral question." While until now the practice of irrigated agriculture had never been questioned, the author emphasizes the necessity of saving the Aral Sea. His proposals are timely: in the world market there is a surplus of cotton; the United States is making efforts to reduce its crop. Considering this situation, the author proposes the development of the synthetic fibre industry in the Aral Sea region. This would economize up to 40 km^3 of water. These alternative methods of saving water would cost 11-11.5 billion roubles during a period of 10-15 years. To save 1 km^3 of water would cost approximately 300 million roubles; "traditional" solutions are much more expensive: 700 million roubles/km^3 to transport water from the Caspian Sea, 1-3 billion roubles/km^3 for the complete restructuring of irrigation systems. Water requirements for the chemical industry are not mentioned.
Bibliographic entry 78
Author: Borisïenkov I.P. (ed.)
Title: Kolïebaniïa klimata za poslïednieïe tysïachilïetiïe (Climatic fluctuations during the last millennium)
Publisher: Gidromïetieoizdat, Leningrad, 408 pp.
Date: 1988 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, WGiSR UW Warsaw
Classification: 2B2, 2D, 3A-B
Region: Europe, Asia
Summary: An analysis of climate change in Europe and North Africa from the 4th century B.C. to the present day. The reconstruction of these changes is based on a variety of data (historical sources, geomorphology, particular attention is given to palynological studies and dendrochronological data).
The author concentrates his analysis on the steppes north of the Black Sea and on the deserts and semi-deserts near the Caspian Sea. He concludes that climate changes are not permanent and regular, but are long-term fluctuations lasting several centuries. Truly dry centuries were from the 9th to the 11th centuries, the most humid were the 14th and 19th centuries with a more arid period in the middle. The climate became progressively dryer during the 19th century. The height of grasses in the steppes during humid periods was 1-1.8m, with a number of bushes and trees. Since the beginning of the 19th century, the height of grasses has lowered to 0.5-1m with an increase in sparsely vegetated areas and semi-deserts. A detailed chronology is provided of the last three centuries in the watershed of the Volga and the Ural: between 1750 and 1785, there was a humid period with moderate temperatures, from 1800 to 1835 it was very humid, from 1836 to 1910 there was a dry and mild
period, from 1920 to 1960 the climate was very dry (Chart p. 165 and pp. 368-369).
Bibliographic entry 79
Author: Borovskiï V.M.
Title: Usykhaniïe Aral'skogo morïa i ïego poslïedstviïa (The drying out of the Aral Sea and its consequences)
Publisher: Izvïestiïa Akadïemii Naouk SSSR, Sïeriïa Gïeografichïeskaïa (Geographic series) N° 5, pp. 35-44, Moscow
Date: 1978 Language: Russian (see Note below)
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, WGiSR UW Warsaw
Classification: 2B2f, 3C3, 4A1-4
Region: Aral Sea
Summary: Extensive information is provided on the development of irrigated agriculture in Central Asia and on the expansion of water collection (the Karakumy Canal collected 16.7 m^3/s in 1968. The increase in water collection has led to the mineralization of the Amu-Darya, to an increase in the salinization of the Aral Sea and to the beginning of the process of drying out. The Syr-Darya has not supplied water to the Aral Sea since 1976.
In the Kyzyl-Orda oblast (administrative unit) there has been a lowering of the water table, the progressive lessening of flooding and a decrease in the productivity of pastures (from 10-50 q/ha to 1-2 q/ha) which has led to the reduction of sheep and goat herds.
Information is given on regional differences in the degree of salinization and on the chemical composition of salts on the newly exposed seabed (in the east, between the years 1960 and 1977, the sea receded 40-50 km; the sea level decreased by 7 m).
It is estimated that transporting water from Siberian rivers will be insufficient; it will be necessary to divide the reservoir into separate parts.
Note: English version: Borovskiy V.M., 1980, The Drying Out of the Aral Sea and its Consequences, Soviet Geography, February 1980, Silver Springs.
Bibliographic entry 80
Author: Borovskiï V. M. et al. (eds.)
Title: Mïelioratsiïa zïemïel' i razvitiïe risosïeïaniïa v Kazakhstanie (Land improvement and the development of rice cultivation in Kazakhstan)
Publisher: Akadïemiïa Naouk Kazakhskoï SSR (Academy of Sciences of Kazakhstan), "Naouka" Kazakhskoï SSR, Alma Ata, 144 pp.
Date: 1975 Language: Russian
Available: KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw
Classification: 2A2, 2B1b, 3C3, 4A1
Region: Kazakhstan
Summary: Soil types are examined for their suitability for the development of rice cultivation in the Syr-Darya river basin (the area surrounding the town of Kazanlik). These lands are often flooded by waters from the Syr-Darya, causing soil salinization. In only 5 years, more than 20,000 hectares became no longer cultivable. Various types of solonchak (typology pp. 25-26) today cover 43,600 hectares, or 20% of the total area. Solonchaks result from the desertification of soil in the river delta. In the Kazanlik region, there are unfinished irrigation systems without drainage (work has been delayed). This contributes to an increase in salinity. When the water level exceeds 3 m, salinity increases. The most saline are the marshy soils in the plains - in a 2 m layer of soil, the average salinity is 96 tonnes/ha and the mineralization of groundwater is as much as 10-20g/litre.
The authors emphasize the need for constructing drainage systems.
This publication only marginally approaches desertification. The mineral fertilization of rice fields, soil characteristics and agrotechnology are the main issues. In the Kazanlik region, 64,000 ha of land will be irrigated by canals along the left and right banks of the river.
Bibliographic entry 81
Author: Bykov B.A.
Title: Antropogïennyïe vliïaniïa na pustynnïe pastbishcha (Human influences on desert pastures)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 1, pp. 20-26, Ylym, Ashkhabad
Date: 1985 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw, UAM Poznan'
Classification: 2A3, 2B2a, 3C4, 4A2
Region: Central Asia
Summary: A description of stages of degradation for three plant associations. For each association the author provides the features of the flora, the vegetation cycle, soils (including chemical composition), and fauna. There is an evaluation of changes in the productivity of pastures.
1. Artemisia terrae-albe - Poa bulbosa - Rheum tatrium (absinthe semi-desert). Possibility of grazing 650 sheep for 3 months on 1000 ha. When the fourth stage of degradation is reached, productivity declines to 150 sheep for 3 months.
2. Haloxylon aphyllum - Salsola orientalis - Artemisia terrae-albe on the saline soils of takyrs. Feeding capacity: 520 sheep for 3 months plus a limited number of camels. When the third degree of desertification is reached, the feeding capacity declines to 100-150 sheep for 3 months.
3. Calligonum sp. - Halaxylon persicum - Eremospata aphyllum - Ammodendron argentum - Astragalus ammodendron. Possibility of feeding 890 sheep for 3 months. At the third stage of degradation, feeding capacity decreases to 300 sheep for 3 months on 1000 hectares.
No information is provided on the geographical distribution of degraded pastures or the number of animals causing degradation.
Bibliographic entry 82
Author: Chibilïov A.A.
Title: Lik stïepi (The image of the steppe)
Publisher: Gidromïetïeoizdat, Leningrad, 192 pp.
Date: 1990 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, WGiSR UW Warsaw
Classification: 0, 3C4, 3C5, 3C6 ()
Region: Ex-USSR, arid zone - Ukraine, Russia, Kazakhstan
Summary: This document describes the natural features of steppes in the ex-USSR: climate, soil, vegetation, animals. Pasture degradation began long ago; even the ancient Scythians exploited pastures until the vegetation was destroyed, often by fire. Throughout subsequent centuries, until the present time, degradation caused by animal production has progressed. One sheep leaves approximately 40,000 tracks per day; the pressure of their hooves is 1 kg/cm^2, while those of a tank are 0.5 kg/cm^2. The development of cereal agriculture and ploughing the steppes have accelerated degradation. In 1954, the "triumphant" conquest of the steppes began. In 6 years 40 million ha of land were ploughed; today 75% of the steppes are cultivated. Because of the progressive drying of the soil, irrigation is considered to be a preventive measure. Fertility has declined; for example, near the town of Voronezh, in 1881 the topsoil (0-30 cm) contained 10 13% humus (300-390 tonnes/ha), compared to
7-10% (210 300 tonnes/ha) in 1981. Large agricultural machinery, construction machinery and others which cross the steppes also contribute to the degradation of these regions.
Bibliographic entry 83
Author: Chigazkin A.V.
Title: Optimizatsiïa prirodnoï srïedy pustyn' Kazakhstana na landshaftnoï osnovïe (Optimalization of the natural environment of the deserts of Kazakhstan using landscape analysis)
Publisher: Akadïemiïa Naouk Kirgizskoï SSR. Institut Gïeologii (Academy of Sciences of Kyrgyzstan. Institute of Geology), Bishkek, 44 pp.
Date: 1990 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow
Classification: 0, 5C (in a very general way)
Region: Kazakhstan
Summary: Presentation of a doctoral thesis at Frunze (now Bishkek). The subject is the physico-geographical regionalization of Kazakhstan. The author identifies: 1) nearly-natural landscapes (6% of the area); 2) slightly changed landscapes (49%); 3) changed landscapes (36%); 4) extremely changed landscapes (5.5%, including sands eroded because of overgrazing), 5) modified landscapes (3% in the author's view, these are improved landscapes - cultivated lands in valleys), 6) cultural landscapes (0.5%, artificial, e.g., in towns). This classification is based on changes in the biological and hydrological elements of landscapes. The author gives recommendations for improving different types of changed and extremely changed landscapes. These recommendations are not explained in depth.
Bibliographic entry 84
Author: Chupakhin V.M.
Title: Rïegional'naïa ekologichïeskaïa skhïema bor'by s opustynivaniïem (Regional ecological project in combating desertification)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 2, pp. 13-18, Ashkhabad
Date: 1988 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw, UAM Poznan'
Classification: 5A2
Region: -
Summary: The regional ecological project in combating desertification is one part of the socio-economic development plan for a given region. Its goal is to create optimal conditions for the life and health of the population and to prevent losses in natural resources in lands at risk for desertification. This ecological project plans to coordinate overall interests for the entire country with the interests of specific areas. It addresses the following subjects:
- analysis and evaluation of the current use of natural land conditions and resources,
- comprehensive socio-economic analysis of the development of the region,
- determination of possible trends in the development of the desertification process,
- determination of methods of combating desertification,
- works to carry out within the regional ecological project such as its legal organization, coordination of the project with other programmes and projects, preparation of men and materials, evaluation of the efficiency of the project and other logistical steps.
Although terms are used such as: human factors in desertification, ecological and environmental approach, etc., these terms are not defined.
Bibliographic entry 85
Author: Dorokhov L.A.
Title: Pustyni Avstralii i ikh analogi v Srïednïeï Azii (Australian deserts and similar deserts in Central Asia)
Publisher: Akadïemiïa Naouk Turkmïenskoï SSR, Institut Pustyn' (Academy of Sciences of Turkmenistan, Institute of Deserts), 18 pp.
Date: 1980 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow
Classification: 0
Region: Central Asia, Australia
Summary: Summary of a doctoral dissertation. The work primarily consists of a description of the natural features of Australian deserts. A number of analogies can be made between Australian ecosystems and those of Central Asia. The closest can be made between "clay basins" and "takyrs". In the Australian deserts, there is less water than in deserts of Central Asia, but productivity in Australian deserts is higher. This is due to a more developed organization of pasture use. Maps of each region are presented, illustrating the distribution of vegetal formations totally or partially similar. The problems of desertification are not studied.
Bibliographic entry 86
Author: Dukhovnyï V.A.
Title: Golodnaïa step - primïer komplïeksnogo osvoïeniïa pustyn' v SSSR (The Steppe of Hunger - example of integrated desert management in the Soviet Union)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 6, pp. 3-10, Ashkhabad
Date: 1980 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw, UAM Poznan
Classification: 5A2, 5A4, 5B1-2, 5D1a
Region: Uzbekistan
Summary: Irrigation and development began in Uzbekistan at the end of the 19th century. In 1956 large-scale projects were begun that allowed the expansion of irrigation to 350,000 ha. Main irrigation and drainage canals were constructed, as were railways, roads, energy and communication lines, aqueducts and factories for construction materials. Five colonies were established in the steppe with industrial and construction factories, housing, and cultural centres. The next stage began in 1961 with the foundation of sovkhozes and the large-scale organization of irrigation and development.
In 1980, total production in the managed region of the Steppe of Hunger, with 120,000 inhabitants, was 1.128 billion roubles. In 1974 the management of this region cost 1.459 billion roubles, and revenues exceeded expenses by 207 million roubles. Eleven years after the beginning of these projects, this region's profits were 60-100 million roubles per year.
The per capita income for a worker employed here was 2,947 roubles compared to 1,987 roubles in the rest of the country.
In this document there is an interesting classification of the interaction between irrigation and natural conditions.
Bibliographic entry 87
Author: Dunin-Borkovskiï L.V.
Title: Vodnyïe rïesursy aridnoï zony SSSR i pïerspïektivy ikh ispol'zovaniïa (Water resources in drylands of the USSR and prospects for their use)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 2, pp. 12-21, Ashkhabad
Date: 1977 Language: Russian (summary in Turkoman and English)
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw, UAM Poznan
Classification: 5D1a, 5D2a-b
Region: Ex-Soviet Union (Russia, Central Asia)
Summary: In the USSR, there are vast unexploited possibilities for the development of artificial irrigation. In the Volga valley, hydrological projects have increased the area of irrigated lands to 1 million ha. Water surpluses can be transported to the Ural basin, to the Emba, and possibly farther. In the future, 8-10 million ha could be irrigated in this region, using water from Siberian rivers.
Twenty-five to thirty years ago, it was expected that increasing the area of irrigated land to 0.5 million ha in the Fergana valley, near Tashkent, and in the Steppe of Hunger would cause a 30% decline in the flow of river water in average years, and a 40% decline in dry years. The area of irrigated lands now covers 1 million ha and the river flow has hardly diminished due to the destruction during irrigation of the natural vegetation in the marshy lands of the lower Syr-Darya river basin.
The destruction of thousands of hectares of this vegetation and a decline in evapo-transpiration in the lower Syr-Darya river basin increase the possibilities of irrigating without disturbing the supply of water to the Aral Sea, according to the author.
The article discusses other irrigated regions. The problem of transporting water from Siberian rivers into Central Asia is also mentioned, which would considerably increase the possibilities of irrigation. This project would require a number of preliminary studies to avoid errors.
Bibliographic entry 88
Author: Frïeïkin Z.G.
Title: Kratkiï gïeografichïeskoï slovar'-spravochnik aridnoï zony SSSR (Short encyclopedic and geographic dictionary of the arid zone of the USSR)
Publisher: Akadïemiïa Naouk TSSR. Institut Pustyn' (Academy of Sciences of Turkmenistan. Institute of Deserts), Ylym, Ashkhabad, 142 pp.
Date: 1982 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow
Classification: 1A
Region: Central Asia
Summary: Definition of desertification (opustynivaniïe): "A group of physico- geographic and human processes leading to the disintegration of ecosystems in arid and semi-arid lands and the degradation of all forms of organic life. This means a decrease in the natural and economic potential." (p. 83). A number of other terms are defined: natural environment, economy, management.
Bibliographic entry 89
Author: Galitzkiï V.I.
Title: Optimalizatsiïa prirodnoï srïedy (Optimalization of the environment)
Publisher: Naoukova Dumka, Akadïemiïa Naouk Ukrainskoï SSR (Academy of Sciences of the Ukraine), Kiev, 170 pp.
Date: 1989 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, BiV Kiev
Classification: 2A1, 2B2I
Region: Ukraine
Summary: A study of the impact of man on the natural environment in the Ukraine (pp. 63-155). During the agricultural period of Ukrainian history, the area of steppe and forest has diminished twofold. In the steppes, the expansion of cultivated land has caused a decrease in the humidity of the air, droughts, dry winds and dust storms. Erosion affects 34% of arable land. The most intense erosion is west of Dniepr and in the Donbass region. In the southern steppes, the probability of drought is 30-50%. The number of days with dry winds varies from 1-5 in the west to 5-15 in the east. Black dust storms affect three zones:
1) region south of Driepr and the Crimea - more than 15 storms per year;
2) south of the Odessa region - 10 storms per year;
3) Lugansk and Donetsk regions - approximately 5 storms per year.
In the southeast, dust storms can last 20 days, which can lead to the loss of a 10 cm layer of soil.
Bibliographic entry 90
Authors: Gïeldyïeva G.V., Vïesielïova L.K.
Title: Landshafty Kazakhstana (Landscapes of Kazakhstan)
Publisher: Akadiemiïa Naouk Rïespubliki Kazakhstan (Academy of Sciences of Kazakhstan), Ylym, Alma Ata, 176 pp.
Date: 1992 Language: Russian
Available: KR FAK Alma Ata
Classification: 0, 2A1, 2B2b, 3C4
Region: Kazakhstan
Summary: A detailed environmental study of the natural conditions of Kazakhstan. Pages 23-33 - chapter on "Landscapes of drylands and the desertification process." Several definitions are quoted (pp. 24-25); Rozanov's (1977) is selected (cf. Bibl. Entry 52). Animal production is considered to be a principal factor of desertification in Kazakhstan. The desertification process there affects 632,931 km^2, or 60% of the land. Vegetation degradation caused by excessive irrigation is evident on 481,513 km^2 (44%), partial desertification around wells on 8,714 km^2 (0.8%), salinization of cultivated land on 6,553 km^2 (0.6%), and salinization caused by the decline in the level of the Aral Sea and Lake Balkhash on 75,162 km^2 (7%).
Note: Rich bibliography, exclusively in Russian except for one title.
Bibliographic entry 91
Authors: Gorshkov V.S., Losïev K.S.
Title: Evoliutsiïa krugovorota vody i opustynivaniïe (The evolution of water circulation and desertification)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 1, pp. 15-21, Ashkhabad
Date: 1992 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata
Classification: 1A, 1B, 2C
Region: Global
Summary: In the authors' opinion, desertification is closely linked to the rate of water circulation around the world. Deserts are fewer when water circulation is more rapid. The most important factors in the cycle are evaporation and evapotranspiration.
When people gave up hunting-gathering and began agriculture, the degradation of natural vegetation began. This contributed to a decrease in evapotranspiration, then to the slowing of water circulation, and finally to climatic desertification.
These processes have intensified in the last few centuries as a result of deforestation. In natural forests 90% of solar energy is taken up by evapotranspiration compared to only 40% in cultivated fields.
Desertification is understood to be "expansion of deserts."
Desertification is discussed in geological history since the Cambrian.
Definition of desertification = "expansion of deserts"
Process of desertification: transformation of forests into cultivable lands causing a decrease in evapotranspiration which leads to a decline in precipitation and climatic desertification.
Bibliographic entry 92
Author: Grigor'ïev V.I. (ed.)
Title: Prognozirovaniïe i prïeduprïezhdïeniïe erozii pochv pri oroshïenii (The protection of irrigated soils against erosion)
Publisher: Izdatïel'stvo Moskovskogo Univïersitïeta, Moscow, 206 pp.
Date: 1992 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow (as of May 1993 - not yet available)
Classification: 5C1
Region: Central Asia
Summary: The authors deal with soil erosion on lands which are irrigated by water spreading. Several examples in Central Asia are given. A number of empirical and graphic formulas are presented showing the interrelation between the intensification of soil erosion and diverse factors.
The results of experimental projects show ways in which erosion can be controlled in soils along furrows (e.g., by regulating the rate of water flow according to the type of soil). The author analyzes the efficiency of using plastic materials at the bottom of furrows to limit erosion.
Bibliographic entry 93
Authors: Ivanov I.V., Lïesnik I.N., Malykhina G.G., et al.
Title: Vozmozhnost' vyïavlïeniïa po kosmofotomatïerialam antropogïennogo vozdïeïstva na vnutrieoazisnyïe pïeski Fïergansko ï doliny (Recording human influences on the sands of the Fergana Valley using satellite imagery)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 3, pp. 25-31, Ashkhabad
Date: 1984' Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw, UAM Poznan
Classification: 1C1
Region: Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan (Fergana Valley)
Summary: This article is very methodological. The authors analyze and compare satellite imagery from "Salyut" (1 and 6), "Soyuz 22", aerial photos and vegetation maps dating from 1914 to 1960. A map of land use changes has been prepared from these data. A marked increase in the area of irrigated lands is evident, as is a decrease in the diversity of the natural vegetation.
Bibliographic entry 94
Author: Janaliïeva G.M.
Title: Struktura landshaftov Balkhash-iliïskoï miegagïeosistïemy (The structure of natural landscapes in the mega-ecosystem of Balkhash-Ili)
Publisher: Kazakhskiï Gosudarstvïennyï Univïersitïet im. Al'-Farabi (Al-Farabi University of Kazakhstan), Alma Ata, 344 pp.
Date: 1993 (reprint) Language: Russian
Available: University of Alma Ata, Geography Department
Classification: 1C-D (cartography), 2A2, 2A4, 2B2b
Region: Kazakhstan (Lake Balkhash, Ili Basin region)
Summary: The question of desertification is secondary here. This work is a very detailed analysis of the natural environment of the region. It also discusses types and sub-types of ecosystems and studies their relationships and their chemical characteristics. Information is dispersed throughout the text on the increase in soil salinity and the deficit of water from Lake Balkhash (pp. 210-235, 249-262). The level of the lake has declined since the construction of a dam on the river and the collection of water for irrigation (pp. 250-251 and elsewhere in the text). Pages 223-225: legend of a map of the human modification of ecosystems (only a small fragment of the map is shown). The map does not show the desertification process, but does show the process of salinization.
<section>f</section>
Bibliographic entry 95
Authors: Janpïeisov R., Alimbaïev A.K., Minïat V.U., Smagulov T.A.
Title: Dïegradatsiïa pochv gornykh i pustynnykh pastbishch Kazakhstana (Soil degradation on mountain and desert grazing lands in Kazakhstan)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 4, pp. 19-26, Ashkhabad
Date: 1990 Language: Russian (summary in English)
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata
Classification: 2A1, 2A3, 2B2b, 3C4
Region: Kazakhstan
Summary: In Kazakhstan, 180 million ha of pastures (66% of the territory of Kazakhstan) are used as grazing land for 36 million sheep, 9.5 million cows and 140,000 camels. There is significant land degradation and erosion as a result of disorganized overgrazing. Wind and water erosion have developed, and barkhans have formed. There is a detailed description in this document of changes in the qualities of various types of soil. A regional and typological analysis is presented, illustrated with a chart (p. 21) showing the indices of each degree of intensification of soil erosion in high, medium and low mountains and in sandy plains. The document discusses the resistance of diverse types of pasture to erosion, but no data is given on acceptable grazing capacity. The most intense erosion is found where herds join together for the winter, and in other locations were herds are concentrated. Degradation and deflation are recorded at 2-4 km from places of animal concentration, and
degradation and the formation of barkhans occur along herd routes.
Bibliographic entry 96
Author: Kabulov S.K.
Title: Izmïenïeniïe ekosistïem iujnogo Priaral'ïa v svïazi s ponijïeniïem urovniïa Aral'skogo Morïa (Changes in ecosystems south of the Aral Sea resulting from the decrease in water level)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 2, pp. 77-84, Ashkhabad
Date: 1979 Language: Russian (summary in English)
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw, UAM Poznan
Classification: A3-4, 2B2e-f, 3C3, 4A4
Region: Aral Sea
Summary: In 1977-1978 extensive studies were undertaken on environmental changes, particularly in the vegetation, in transections in the Aral Sea area. There are 3 types of regional change:
1) changes in the vegetation in the delta area are largely due to the lowering of the level of the sea, not to salinization. There is a decrease in the area of cultivable land and a depletion of hydrophyte plant associations. Forests are less abundant near the river. Forty lakes have dried up. Several new plant associations have appeared on the dry beds of the sea and lakes;
2) in a large zone in the Kyzylkam Desert bordering on the Aral Sea vegetation deterioration can be observed. On the Ustyurt Plateau very intense wind effects are evident. Sands cover the former coastline, and sand banks annually increase 0.5-0.7 m in height;
3) the greatest vegetation changes can be seen in depressions: the mesophyte vegetation and grasses regress and change as the ecosystem alters. On the plateau there is a decrease in production and a decline in the number of species. The cause of these changes lies in the lowering of the level of the sea.
Bibliographic entry 97
Author: Kalïenov G.S.
Title: Printsipy sostavlïeniïa karty dïegradirovannoï rastitïel'nosti pustyn' Turkmïenistana i vozmozhnosti ïeïo praktishïeskogo primïenieniïa (Preparation of a map of the degradation of vegetation in Turkmenistan. Possibilities for practical application)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 1, pp. 10-19, Ashkhabad
Date: 1989 Language: Russian (summary in English)
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw, UAM Poznan
Classification: 1C1, 1C4 (cartography), 2A3, 2B2c
Region: Turkmenistan
Summary: This map (1: 1,000,000) of the degradation of vegetation in Turkmenistan has been drawn up on the basis of changes in the structure of vegetation and in the floristic composition resulting from human activities. This map shows existing vegetation. It was prepared with the aid of satellite imagery and cartographic materials. The basis of the map is degradation as shown in the natural vegetation. Stripping the land of vegetation sets off the chain reaction of erosion and deflation.
The author concentrates on human-induced vegetation changes in deserts and semi-deserts were the vegetation has very slowly regenerated.
In the Karakumy Desert, new vegetation covers dunes and takyrs after 20-30 years. It is estimated that climax biocenosis appears after 2000 years.
The map records zones where degradation is concentrated and indicates the phases of vegetation degradation and regeneration.
The article ends with proposals for the practical application of this map for the protection of vegetation.
Bibliographic entry 98
Author: Kaplin V.G. (ed.)
Title: Mïetody izuchïeniïa biogïeotsïenozov pïeschanoï pustyni (Methods of analyzing the biocenosis of sand deserts)
Publisher: Akadïemiïa Naouk Turkmïenskoï SSR (Academy of Sciences of Turkmenistan), Ylym, Ashkhabad, 180pp.
Date: 1990 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, WGiSR UW Warsaw
Classification: 2A3, 2B2c, 3C4, 3C2
Region: Central Asia, Turkmenistan, Karakumy Desert
Summary: The issue of desertification is only marginally discussed in this collection of ten articles on methods of studying the flora and fauna of deserts. There is isolated information on land degradation dispersed throughout, in particular on pp. 14-16, and equally dispersed information on revegetalization. Overgrazing has been an important factor in land degradation since the 1930's. During the last few decades, this has brought about sand dune formation. This process is particularly intense near housing developments where trees and bushes have been cut for fuelwood. Studies have been carried out in the eastern part of the Karakumy Desert. Sands there cover 6,700 km^2, or 23.1% of the total area (results obtained from analyzing satellite imagery), 70% of which are the result of human activity. On page 16, there is a discussion of the slow rate of revegetalization on dunes, a necessary process for the transition to the next stage of ecological evolution (the longest
period, which lasts 100 years, is between psammophyte shrub formation on semi-stabilized dunes and that of sand acacia).
Bibliographic entry 99
Author: Khalmuratov P.
Title: Pïeschanyïe massivy plato Ustiurt i ikh ratsional'noïe ispol'zovaniïe (Sand massifs of the Ustyurt Plateau and their rational exploitation)
Publisher: Karakalpakstan, Nukus, 108 pp.
Date: 1989 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow
Classification: 0, 2A3, 2B2b, 2B2e, 3C4, 4A2, 4A4
Region: Kazakhstan and Uzbekistan (Ustyurt Plateau)
Summary: Description of the natural environment in general and the plant cover in particular on the Ustyurt Plateau (east of the Caspian Sea). Pastoral potential is analyzed. Regional differences are emphasized. The author does not describe the desertification process and hardly mentions degradation. He does however refer several times to the appearance of new barkhans and of moving sands on heavily overgrazed lands. He is opposed to prolonged grazing near wells and describes an example of very advanced degradation near a well where animals stayed throughout the year (Kuscha, 100 km^2 of degraded land near one well, p. 45).
In contrast, on neighbouring lands where animals grazed only in autumn and winter, the vegetation remained in good condition.
Bibliographic entry 100
Author: Kharin N.S.
Title: Aktual'nyïe problïemy bor'by s opustynivaniïem aridnykh tïerritoriï (Current issues in combating desertification in arid lands)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 1, pp. 8-14, Ashkhabad
Date: 1985 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw, UAM Poznan
Classification: 1A, 1D, 2A, 2B, 3C, 5
Region: Central Asia, Turkmenistan
Summary: Each year in the world 50-70% of fertile lands degenerate into deserts. International organizations, in particular UNEP and FAO, have an important role in combating desertification. This text gives information on conferences and international declarations as well as definitions of desertification. Several factors in desertification are specified. In the Karakumy region, pastures degrade after 5-8 years of intense use. The regeneration of vegetation after second degree desertification takes 6 years; after the third degree is reached it takes 17 years. Water erosion (in the Kopet-dag foothills) and wind erosion (in the 13 million hectares of sand dunes in Turkmenistan) are also mentioned. In the V.I. Lenin (Karakumy) Canal zone, desertification processes have lessened. In the year 2000 in the entire country desertification will become less intense and, in some places, degradation will begin to disappear. Desertification is also caused by droughts. In Turkmenistan in
every 10-year period there is an average of 3 low-yield years, 4 years of normal yields, and 3 high-yield years.
Definition: Desertification is currently seen as the degradation of arid ecosystems resulting in a decrease in biological productivity. Factors of desertification are long-term climate changes, variations in short cycles (less than 10 years), droughts, a decline in the vegetation and an increase in the albedo.
Bibliographic entry 101
Author: Kharina I.N.
Title: Ekspïertnaïa sistïema po opustynivaniiu na pïersonal'nom komp'iutïerïe (Using the PC computer in desertification analysis)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 5, pp. 54-60, Ashkhabad
Date: 1990 Language: Russian (summary in English)
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata
Classification: 1C4 (computer)
Region: -
Summary: General information on deserts and on the advantages of computers. This text presents a programme in the "prolog" language which has been used to accumulate data on the condition of vegetation in the Karakumy Desert. Data can be stored on the type of desert, the dimensions of the area examined, the number of shrubs, the area of grass coverage, and the floristic composition (number of species and names of plant associations). The computer adapts all these data to categories of desertification.
The author gives a practical example of dialogue with the IBM PC.
Bibliographic entry 102
Author: Kiïevskaïa R.K., Nïekrasova T.F., Mozhaïtsïeva N.F.
Title: Vliïaniïe aridizatsii na galogïeokhimichieskiïe protsïessy nizovïev Syrdarii (The Influence of aridification on salt formation processes in the Syr-Darya river valley)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 6, pp. 23-28, Ashkhabad
Date: 1980 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw, UAM Poznan
Classification: 2A2, 2B2b, 3C3
Region: Kazakhstan (Syr-Darya river valley)
Summary: A reduction in the stream flow of the Syr-Darya has caused widespread changes in the vegetation and soil in the river delta: the drying up of a large area of hydromorphic soils, deterioration of their geophysical features, and a decrease in real and potential fertility. In addition, the cessation of overflows (which formerly lasted several days) has caused intense salinization in non-irrigated soils, considerably modifying the salt formation on irrigated lands in the lower Syr-Darya basin. The author also examines the influence of aridification on salt formation processes which occur in the Syr-Darya delta.
Conclusions:
1. The regulation of the stream flow of the Syr-Darya and the cessation of overflows has caused widespread salinization in hydromorphic soils and changed their salt content.
2. The accumulation of salt in the banks near the riverbed has extended towards moister soils in the Syr-Darya basin above the delta. In the driest part with the least favourable hydrogeological conditions, salt accumulation has spread to regions near canals, to the mouths of rivers, and to riverbanks with hydromorphic soils already showing a high level of salinization.
3. The development of irrigation and the ensuing processes of aridification, accompanied by the cessation of overflows, has brought about a change in the type of salt accumulating in large areas. Sulphato-chloric and chloric types have replaced sulphate and chloro-sulphate types.
Bibliographic entry 103
Author: Kirsta B.I.
Title: Problïema Aral'skogo Mor'ïa i Karakumskiï Kanal' (Problems of the Aral Sea and the Karakumy Canal)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 5, pp. 10-17, Ashkhabad
Date: 1989 Language: Russian (summary in English)
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw, UAM Poznan
Classification: 2A4, 2B2f, 2D
Region: Turkmenistan, Aral Sea
Summary: For many years there has been a reduction in the level of the Aral Sea, a considerable deficit of water in the Syr-Darya and Amu-Darya rivers and the mineralization of these waters.
The author questions the current opinion that the reduction in the level of the sea is due to the construction of irrigation systems and the Karakumy Canal. Kirsta cites historical evidence, contemporary observations, and evaluations for the years 1956-1986 which show that the collection of water for irrigation is 18-24% of the total quantity of water coming from the lake, which is not very significant. At the same time, improvement projects do not decisively influence the intensification of mineralization in the water of the middle and lower streams of the Amu-Darya.
However, the author stresses the need to modernize the canals in order to diminish water infiltration and evaporation.
Kirsta also proposes economizing water.
Bibliographic entry 104
Authors: Knïazïeva L.A., Olovïannikova I.N. (eds.)
Title: Povyshïeniïe produktivnosti polopustynnykh zïemïel' sïevïernogo Prikaspiïa (Increase in the productivity of semi-arid lands north of the Caspian Sea)
Publisher: Naouka, Akadïemiïa Naouk SSSR (Academy of Sciences of the USSR), Moscow, 197 pp.
Date: 1989 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, BiV Kiev
Classification: 2B2h, 5C1, 5C2
Region: Russia (north of the Caspian Sea)
Summary: Results of studies carried out during the years 1970-1985 in the station of Dzhanynbek north of the Caspian Sea, approximately 30 km north of Lake Elban.
The agricultural use of saline soils (which cover half of this region) is impossible without their restoration. Modern irrigation leads to salinization and waterlogging. The rise in the water table and soil salinization (up to 500 m from canals) are the result of irrigation projects of the last decade.
The best results in desalinization can be obtained from tree plantation. An improvement in the hydrological situation is possible (as trees retain snow) from the planting of protective strips 10-20 m wide along canals. Forests are useful for biodrainage, soil desalinization and snow retention. Agricultural land use is possible without irrigation, with high, stable cereal yields. The productivity of the land depends on the location of the protective forest strips, the distance between the strips and the age of the trees.
Bibliographic entry 105
Author: Kolobov N.V., Murakaïeva S.A.
Title: Zasukhi na tïerritorii Tatarskoï ASSR (Droughts in the Tatar Autonomous Republic)
Publisher: Izdatïel'stvo Kazanskogo Univïersitïeta (University of Kazan), Kazan', 140 pp.
Date: 1980 Language: Russian
Available: WGiSR UW Warsaw
Classification: 3B, 4B
Region: European Russia (Tatar Republic)
Summary: This publication is about droughts - their frequency, their regularity and their relation to atmospheric circulation over Eurasia during the period from 1926 to 1975. A classification of droughts and a description of ensuing economic losses (particularly in cereal cultivation) are given. Although this work is concerned with problems close to desertification, desertification as such is not mentioned.
Bibliographic entry 106
Author: Kolodin M.B.
Title: Ispolzovaniïe i okhrana vodnykh rïesursov Srïednïeï Azii (The use and protection of water resources in Central Asia)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 4, pp. 41-47, Ashkhabad
Date: 1978 Language: Russian (summary in English)
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw, UAM Poznan
Classification: 2A4, 5D2a
Region: Central Asia
Summary: In the years 1913-1980, water consumption in the entire Soviet Union increased 6-7 times, agriculture being the largest consumer.
The most critical water deficits have been recorded in Central Asia and in the Aral Sea basin, leading researchers to study the possibility of diverting Siberian rivers.
It has been calculated that 200 km^3 of water per year could be supplied; the cost of transporting 1 km^3 of water is hundreds of millions of roubles.
A mathematical model for river diversion has been prepared. The project cannot be completed before the 21st century.
The purification and desalinization of drainage water is also mentioned in this document.
Bibliographic entry 107
Author: Kopïekov C.B.
Title: Drïevnïeantropogïennyïe landshafty Prisarykamyshskoï dïelty Amudar'i (Landscapes past and present affected by human activities in the Prisarykamyshskaïa delta of the Amu-Darya)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 2, pp. 33-39, Ashkhabad
Date: 1984 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw, UAM Poznan
Classification: 1C2, 1C3, 2D, 3C2
Region: Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan
Summary: This document analyzes the distribution and dating of soils affected by irrigation and human use during previous centuries. Current land use is also analyzed. The author finds that the youngest soils are the most useful. This historical study of soils covers the period from the 13th to 19th centuries. In some cases the same lands have been irrigated and cultivated during several different periods of history. When cultivation is interrupted, the lands transform into deserts (takyrs), sometimes overtaken by sand dunes. In the central Daoudan region, the irrational cutting of shrubs which retain sands on soils used for cultivation has caused these areas to change into moving dunes, and the soil with high agricultural utility to disappear.
Bibliographic entry 108
Authors: Korniïenko V.A., Kiïevskaïa P.K., Nïekrasova T.F., Mozhaïtsïeva N.F.
Title: Naouchnyïe osnovy ekologichïeskogo prognoza opustynivaniïa gidromorfnykh landshaftov (Ecological forecast for desertification on hydromorphic lands)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 2, pp. 13-21, Ashkhabad
Date: 1983 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw, UAM Poznan
Classification: 1C4 (phytogeography), 2A3, 2B2a, 4A2
Region: Aral Sea
Summary: This text is concerned with desertification in the Aral Sea region. In the plains of the Amu-Darya, with an area of 10.4 million ha of pastures and prairies, there is a decline in productivity on 783,000 ha (1978). Along the Syr-Darya, desertification affects an area of 6.2 million ha and aridification touches 846,000 ha. On the part of the Aral Sea region within Kazakhstan, there is salinization on an area of 6,030 km^2 of sandy plains.
In 1960 in the Syr-Darya delta, 1,414,000 ha of land was covered with hydromorphic soils with grass and reed plant associations. This region, with a yield estimated at 10-50 q/ha, supplied 3.6 million tonnes of grasses for the production of straw and animal feed. By 1975, the productivity of aridified land decreased to 4.5 - 11 q/ha and that of decertified land to 2 q/ha maximum; animal feed production was no more than 800,000 tonnes. The authors present the succession of plant associations on drying lands: delta, plains reaching to the sea, watersheds. In most cases, 13-16 years after the cessation of the water supply, plant associations form which are typical of desert landscapes (takyrs, sand dunes). For each stage, information is given on the production of animal feed, on soil salinization, and occasionally on hydrological conditions. There is emphasis on the possibility of using information about plant succession in the economic planning of Kazakhstan.
Bibliographic entry 109
Author: Kotliakov V.M.
Title: The Aral Sea Basin. A Critical Environment Zone.
Publisher: Environment, vol. 33, N° 1, pp. 4-9 and 36-38
Date: 1991 Language: English
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow
Classification: 2A1-4, 2B2f, 2D, 3C3, 4A, 4C
Region: Aral Sea
Summary: From 1960 to 1989 the level of the Aral Sea declined from 53.3 to 39 metres, its area from 67.9 to 37.0 thousand km^2, its volume decreased by three, and the volume of river water flowing into the sea by eight- from 40 to 5 km^3. Before the decline in its level, the Aral Sea influenced the climate of the region within a 100-200 km perimeter. During the last two decades, the area of reed-covered plains regularly flooded by waters from the Amu-Darya has decreased from 550,000 to 20,000 ha and the yield from pastures has declined approximately 20%. In the last 15 years, cases of typhus have increased almost 30 times and cases of hepatitis 7 times. A significant number of babies are born underdeveloped and sickly, and the infant mortality rate is more than 50 per 1000. This article contains a general map of the Aral Sea region, showing rivers, canals and irrigated lands.
Bibliographic entry 110
Authors: Kovda V.A., Lobova E.V.
Title: Aridnyïe pochvy, ikh gïenïezis, gïeokhimiïa, ispol'zovaniïe (Soils of arid regions origins, geochemistry, utilization)
Publisher: Naouka (Academy of Sciences of the USSR), Moscow, 268 pp.
Date: 1977 Language: Russian (summary in English)
Available: IG RAN Moscow, WGiSR UW Warsaw
Classification: 0 (soils), 2A1, 3C2, 3C4
Region: Turkmenistan, Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan, Asia (Afghanistan, India, Mongolia), East Africa
Summary: In this collection of 15 articles, 8 are concerned with the Soviet Union and the 7 others are general or are concerned with other regions. The issue of desertification is treated superficially; the concept does not even appear in the text. The chemical characteristics of soils and their absorption capacity are emphasized, as are agricultural management and the use of various types of water.
The authors point out the degradation of certain pastures in Uzbekistan due to poor grazing practices and to deforestation. There is an extensive analysis of the possibility of planting saxouls (Halaxylon aphyllum) which flourish in saline soil (p. 123). Overgrazing also leads to the activation of wind processes. In the Karakumy Canal region, barkhans have appeared where there were none in the 1940's.
In 1962, in the central Fergana region, the steppes were ploughed and canals were filled with water; the sandy soil was to be seeded in the spring of the following year. However, by autumn the terrain had deteriorated into a sea of sand with barkhans (near Mazgïalana).
Bibliographic entry 111
Authors: Kurakova L.I., Milanova I.V.
Title: Antropogïennyie landshafty tropichïeskikh pustyn' (Tropical desert landscapes affected by human activities)
Publisher: Problïemy osvïeniïa pustyn', N° 5, pp. 3-9, Ashkhabad
Date: 1973 Language: Russian (summaries in English and Turkoman)
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw, UAM Poznan
Classification: 2A, 2B1, 3C
Region: Africa, Asia (with the exception of Central Asia), Australia
Summary: According to climatic criteria, deserts cover 36% of the total land area of the world; according to soil criteria, the figure is 43%. As a result of the intense exploitation of the resources of steppes and savannahs, more and more territory is degenerating into desert. The principle factors are the following: animal husbandry of herds too large for the given area (especially in the case of goats), deforestation by local populations to meet their needs in wood, and soil salinity in irrigated regions. Examples from various regions of the world are given: the Sahara, Lake Turkana (in Kenya and Ethiopia, with an increase in desert area of 10 km^2 per year), Iran, Rajasthan, Australia. Methods of combating the formation of deserts are also discussed: rational irrigation, installation of nomads in cooperatives specially created for them.
The authors identify three types of human activity influencing landscape: a) overgrazing as practiced by nomads, b) stationary animal production (Australian type), c) irrigated agriculture in oases.
Bibliographic entry 112
Authors: Kurbanov O.R., Arnagïel'dyïev A.
Title: Dinamika rïel'ïefa v zonïe vtoroï ochïerïedi Karakumskogo kanala (Dynamics of the relief in the second zone of the Karakumy Canal)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 3, pp. 21-27, Ashkhabad
Date: 1982 Language: Russian (summary in English)
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw, UAM Poznan
Classification: 2A1, 2B2c (Karakumy Canal), 3C4-5
Region: Turkmenistan
Summary: This article discusses, among other topics, the wind relief which is created beside the Karakumy Canal. Ordinarily, sands and lands on the canal banks become rapidly covered with vegetation, but there are exceptions. Several factors are involved in addition to human activity: soil composition, depth of sands, the wind, etc.
Local changes not connected to the Karakumy Canal occur near wells. A research mission in 1948-1949 found that there are barkhanized sands around wells in an area of 0.5 km in diameter. In the late 1970's satellite imagery showed the existence of over 60 patches of sand dunes around wells near the Murgab oasis and on the Yelchilïeska plain. The majority of these patches have a diameter of 1-3 km, others of 3-7 km, which proves the intensification of relief changes (resulting from human activity) in the Karakumy Canal region. Several schematic maps are included.
Bibliographic entry 113
Authors: Kurochkina L.I., Ishankulov M.C., Korniïenko
Title: O granitsakh vozdïeïstviïa snijïeniïa urovnïa Aralskogo Morïa naokruzhaiushchuïu srïedu (The limits of environmental effects caused by the reduction in level of the Aral Sea)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 2, pp. 25-33, Ashkhabad
Date: 1979 Language: Russian (summary in English)
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw, UAM Poznan
Classification: 2B2f, 2C, 4A4
Region: Aral Sea
Summary: The decrease in the level of the Aral Sea has activated the process of desertification. In the Syr-Darya valley and in the lower Syr-Darya basin, the strip of land affected indirectly by the hydrological situation covers 100 km.
The over-collection of water for projects during the years 1960 1971 caused the water table to lower 3 - 4.5 m and has brought on the emergence of salt, since drainage water was not washed by the river.
The ecosystems of prairies and riverside forests over an area of 2.5 million ha have undergone intense degradation. The coastal zone of the sea (a belt 5 to 20 km wide), formerly underwater, is a land devoid of soil and vegetation, remaining under the influence of saline water. Wind activity affects the area. In the former coastal zone, 20 50 km wide, intense desertification processes are recorded.
The third zone identified is composed of Eocene clays with an altitude of up to 80 m. It is characterized by the association of xerophyte, halophyte, and desert vegetation, and by the development of shrubs.
The lowering of the water table and of the level of the sea has caused a decrease in the level of the erosion base.
<section>g</section>
Bibliographic entry 114
Authors: Kurochkina L.I., Makulbïekova G.B.
Title: K voprosu o fitomïelioratsii osushaïushchikhsïa pobïerïezhiï Arala (Vegetation restoration on the dried out seabed of the Aral Sea)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 4, pp. 27-31, Ashkhabad
Date: 1984 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw, UAM Poznan
Classification: 2A2-3, 2B2f, 5C2, 5C4
Region: Aral Sea
Summary: For 20 years, the Aral Sea has receded to uncover 12,000 km^2 of land which has slowly transformed into desert. It is expected that vegetation will eventually cover 30-70% of this land (depending on the location), in the year 2000 at the earliest.
Vegetalization of these lands has not yet been accomplished. Experimental projects are necessary, beginning 4-5 years after drying, when the soil is still humid, even if the groundwater is saline.
Several methods of vegetalization are advised, according to local conditions: the seeding of saxaouls in furrows, saxaouls and psammophytes in barkhans (by plane), the redevelopment of drying solonchaks by deep ploughing (min. 50 cm), vegetalization accompanied by irrigation with groundwater or with brackish lake water, planting accompanied by sand dune fixation with anti-deflation bituminous covers, and other methods.
The drying up of 4,900 km^2 of the lake is predicted for the years 1980-1990. Considering the increase in salinization, vegetalization will be very difficult. Areas devoid of vegetation cover 4,500 km^2.
It is estimated that during the years 1990-2000, 6,100 km^2 will dry up.
Bibliographic entry 115
Author: Mainguet M.
Title: Desertification. Natural Background and Human Mismanagement
Publisher: Springer-Verlag, Berlin-Heidelberg-New York, 306 pp.
Date: 1991 Language: English
Available: WGiSR UW Warsaw
Classification: 2A1, 2A3-4, 3C3-5, 4A1-3, 5D
Region: World, Central Asia
Summary: This volume has two parts. The first is a review of the ecological situation in arid and semi-arid territories in different regions of the world. The work contains a chapter entitled "Passage from traditional subsistence agriculture to highly industrialized agriculture, and land degradation in the USSR" (pp. 97-121), based on publications by Soviet authors written in English. Rich description of the natural environment, discussion of the processes of desertification in desert zones, ecological considerations in the irrigation of arid lands (taking into account the problem of the Aral Sea, which is treated fairly extensively), environmental consequences of the industrial development of drylands, and information on wind erosion. Also included is information on measures against desertification, which are insufficient. "However, thanks to the knowledge we have, it could be said that 'desertification' is not the correct word, for degradation in the USSR could be checked
with human will and money" (p. 121).
In the second part, devoted to prevention and to remedies at the global level, the Soviet Union is mentioned rarely (essentially, in discussing techniques of revegetalization, pp. 204-205, and techniques of sand dune fixation, p. 261).
The process of desertification in zones adjacent to deserts is due to overgrazing, the cutting of trees and shrubs, and to construction projects. Circles of land degradation can be seen around water points:
1) up to 0.5 km from the water point - the most degraded; very rare vegetation, only 12 species, sand dunes;2) 0.5-1.5 km - sand dunes, absence of perennial grasses, 25 species, domination by Aristida, notably A. Karelinii;
3) 2-3 km - 37 species, plant cover over 50% of the area, domination by Calligonnum, also annual grasses, small trees, Carex physodes, Mausolea eriocarpa, Aristida karelinii, Turnefortia;
4) 4-6 km from the watering place - few changes in vegetation. White saxaoul (Haloxylon persicum) is dominant.
Bibliographic entry 116
Author: Markov K.K.
Title: Vysykhaïet li Srïednïaïa i Tsïentral'naïa Aziïa? (Will Central Asia become drier?)
Publisher: Voprosy gïeografii. Fizichïeskaïa gïeografiïa, vol 24, pp. 98-116, Moscow
Date: 1951 Language: Russian
Available: IG RAN Moscow, WGiSR UW Warsaw
Classification: 1C3, 3A, 3B
Region: Central Asia: Kazakhstan, Turkmenistan, Tajikistan, Uzbekistan
Summary: The author presents the opinions of L. Berg on the probable aridification of Central Asia, published in the years 1900-1950, and shows their similarity to the results of other scientific work. An increasing dryness in the Central Asian climate took place in the distant geological past (between the Cretaceous and the Ice Age), but the aridification did not progress. There are also cyclic climate changes. In Eastern Europe, forests are moving onto the steppes, and in Kazakhstan and in Central Asia there is an increase in the water level of lakes. Works of other authors show that in southern Siberia and northern Kazakhstan the water level of lakes was high during the 14th and 15th centuries, then declined, and is currently beginning to rise.
Bibliographic entry 117
Author: Masson V.M.
Title: Pustyniïa i obshchïestvo: dinamika vzaimodïeïstviïa vistorichïeskom aspïektïe (Desert and Society - the dynamics of their reciprocal relation in history)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 6, pp. 3-10, Ashkhabad
Date: 1977 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw, UAM Poznan
Classification: 1C2, 1C3, 2B2c, 2D
Region: Turkmenistan
Summary: A presentation of the results of archeological research by Russian and Turkoman scientists in various regions of Central Asia, particularly in southern Turkmenistan.
Excavations were mainly carried out at the edge of two deserts: the Karakumy and the Kyzylkum. Artefacts were discovered which enabled researchers to determine the socio-economic development of populations inhabiting these regions and to study their influence on the desert during several historical eras, beginning with the Paleolithic.
In each era, human economic activities adapted themselves to the biological conditions of the desert and semi-desert. The utilitarian nature of human activities often disturbed the natural biological cycles and caused the destruction of vegetation and the intensification of sand dune activity.
In Antiquity, Turkmenistan was highly developed in certain economic fields: hunting, animal production, agriculture, commerce. Several examples attest to this: the aqueduct from Sumbara to Dekhistan, the road network, including the main trade route between Mary (formerly Merv) and Amol.
Turkmenistan is also the region where the Bactrian camel was first domesticated.
Bibliographic entry 118
Author: Niechaïeva N.T.
Title: The Improvement of Arid Pastures in Central Asia
Publisher: Nature and Resources, vol XV, N° 1, pp. 14-15, UNESCO, Paris
Date: 1979 Language: English (French version in "Nature and Ressources)
Available: BiL Moscow, WGiSR UW Warsaw
Classification: 5D1d
Region: Central Asia
Summary: An informative text on pasture improvement in Central Asia. Seeding is carried out to form a mixed plant cover for animal forage, including shrubs, semi-shrubs and grasses. Shrubs reach a height of 2 to 5 m and their roots to 25 m deep. The natural plant cover reaches 25 to 50 cm in height and its roots up to 1 m in depth (p.14 - however, there is no information on the necessary conditions for achieving this improvement). In foothills (annual precipitation: 160-280 mm), the forage productivity of artificial pastures reaches 2.2 - 4.5 tonnes/ha, while natural pastures have only 0.2 - 0.3 tonnes/ha. Improvements in Karakumy pastures (annual precipitation: 140 mm) could be achieved in 4-5 years.
Bibliographic entry 119
Author: Niechaïeva N.T.
Title: Vliïaniïe rïejima ispol'zovanïa na produktivnost' rastitïelnosti Karakumov (Influence of the system of pasture use on the Karakumy Desert)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 6, pp. 8-18, Ashkhabad
Date: 1979 Language: Russian (summary in English)
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw, UAM Poznan
Classification: 2A3, 2B2c, 3C4, 5C4
Region: Turkmenistan (Karakumy Desert)
Summary: This work presents detailed research results. On selected experimental fields, the effectiveness of systems of protection has been studied. Analyses have also been made of the effect of varying degrees of intensity of land use on the composition and density of the plant cover. Pastures degrade in 5-8 years following overgrazing and the cutting of shrubs. With a system of protection, vegetation on sands and takyrs regenerates in 6 years on surfaces with second-degree degradation, whereas it takes 17 years for complete regeneration on sands with third-degree degradation. One of the causes is the absence of seeds after the total destruction of the saxaoul (Haloxylon sp.). Productivity diminishes not only following overgrazing, but also following insufficient use; moderate grazing is recommended. On the most degraded lands, artificial pasture improvement is indispensable: cultivation of herbs, and harrowing. Charts are included which show the influence of
revegetalization on pasture productivity (for example, on sandy fields the forage productivity increases from 0.2 tonnes/ha to 0.6 tonnes/ha).
Bibliographic entry 120
Author: Obïezliïev A.O. (ed.)
Title: Opyt izuchïeniïa i osvoïeniïa pustyn' Zapadnogo Turkmïenistana (Experiences in desert management in western Turkmenistan)
Publisher: Akadïemiïa Naouk Turkmïenskoï SSR. Institut Pustyn' (Academy of Sciences of Turkmenistan. Institute of Deserts), Ylym, Ashkhabad, 108 pp.
Date: 1979 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow
Classification: 5C1-4
Region: Turkmenistan (western)
Summary: This publication was prepared for the 25th anniversary of the biological research station at Nebet Dag. It includes information about the station, a list of publications written by Nebet Dag researchers, and eight articles.
The subjects include: the natural environment near the station and a description of possible techniques for agricultural management; sand dune revegetalization; possibilities for using mineralized groundwater to irrigate some species of tree and shrub; means of developing takyrs by ploughing them (analysis of variations in ploughing, diversified in their form, size, and distance between furrows; study of the influence of ploughing on the water system); possibilities for cultivating pomegranates and cucurbitaceae.
This document contains typically technical texts, illustrated with charts and graphs, presenting possible techniques for use in desert management and in combating desertification.
Bibliographic entry 121
Author: Ogar' N.P.
Title: Untitled (maps of vegetation and its changes)
Publisher: Not published
Date: Approx. 1975-1993 Language: Russian
Available: Ogar' N.P., Botanical Institute of the Academy of Sciences of Kazakhstan (Russian: Institut Botaniki; Kazakh: Botanika Instituty), Alma Ata
Classification: 1C4 (cartography), 2A3, 2B1 (Mongolia), 2B2b
Region: Kazakhstan, Ili valley, Syr-Darya valley, other river valleys in Kazakhstan, Mongolian river valleys
Summary: This entry consists of several vegetation maps in manuscript form which for the most part have never been published.
These maps show the vegetation of various river valleys (including the Syr-Darya and the Ili delta). These maps also show human-caused changes, particularly changes caused by aridification.
Some maps show the degree of vegetation change (light, moderate, strong), a few the vulnerability of ecosystems and the direction of change. Some maps have been prepared using analyses of satellite imagery (Salyut, sometimes also Landsat).
The scale of the maps varies from 1:20,000 to 1:1,000,000; the document suggests methodolgies for general application.
Bibliographic entry 122
Author: Pïetrov M.P.
Title: Pustyni zïemnogo share (Deserts of the World)
Publisher: Naouka, Leningrad
Date: 1973 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow
Classification: 0, 5C, 5D
Region: World
Summary: This document is divided into three parts. The first contains a regional description of world deserts. Only the natural environment is presented for the most part; Asiatic deserts are covered in more detail. This section ends with the morphological and climatic classification of deserts. The second part deals with the conditions of life in desert environments. The third part is concerned with the natural resources of deserts and questions of management. It is the shortest section (65 pp.); the information is very general and simplified. No analysis of cost, return, etc., is given. There is a description of principal sites of mineral exploitation and of large-scale hydrological projects.
Bibliography (separate bibliographies for publications in Russian and in other languages), index of toponyms, annex (68 photographs and maps).
Classification of deserts:
1. Morphological classification: A. bare deserts and pre-Quaternary tectonic deserts; B. plains of structural plates, Tertiary and calcareous plains; C. Quaternary and contemporary accumulation plains. More detailed classification within the framework of the above types.
2. Climatic classification: very arid, arid, semi-arid; with oceanic and continental variants for each type.
Bibliographic entry 123
Author: Precoda N.
Title: Requiem for the Aral Sea
Publisher: Ambio, vol. XX, N° 3-4, pp. 109-114, Stockholm
Date: 1991 Language: English
Available: BiL Moscow, WGiSR UW Warsaw
Classification: 2A1-4, 2A5 (), 2B2f, 4A1-4, 4B, 4C
Region: Aral Sea
Summary: A general discussion of the causes and consequences of the decline of the Aral Sea. This work was prepared mainly on the basis of Soviet press publications. The direct causes and consequences were studied: i) climate change (in general, increase in the temperature range); ii) wind erosion (It is estimated that each year the wind transports 75 million tonnes of dust and salt particles; according to the most recent estimations, up to 100 million tonnes are transported. Agriculture in Bukhara, Khorezm, Samarkand and Karakalpak is being destroyed by salt. Salt from the Aral Sea region reaches the Arctic and Pacific Oceans, and accumulates in the mountains where it accelerates the melting of glaciers); iii) decline of the water table (approximately 300,000 hectares of lakes and marshes have dried up; out of 700,000 hectares only 300,000 hectares of reeds survive); iv) decrease in fishing and shipping. Indirect causes and consequences are analyzed in the same way: large
water losses, especially along the Karakumy Canal, high water consumption (it is estimated that the production of one tonne of cotton requires 2,000-3,000 m^3 of water; in all of Central Asia, the ratios of water use are from 1.25 to 1.75 compared to established norms), secondary salinization, influence on collective and drainage waters, chemical effects, effects on public health (increase in illnesses, in infant mortality, locally up to 10% of births, blindness).
Bibliographic entry 124
Author: Rachkovskaïa I.I. et al.
Title: Karta Iliïskoï Kotloviny 1:50,000 (Maps of the Ili Basin, 1:50,000)
Publisher: Not published
Date: 1993 Language: Russian
Available: Rachkovskaïa I.I., Botanical Institute, Academy of Sciences of Kazakhstan (Russian: Institut Botaniki; Kazakh: Botanika Instituty), Alma Ata
Classification: 1C4 (cartography), 2A3
Region: Kazakhstan, Ili basin
Summary: This project has not been completed. The document consists of a collection of vegetation maps (to the scale of 1:50,000) of the Ili basin (in Kazakhstan, next to the Ili, near the Chinese border).
In addition to a classic vegetation map, there is another showing degrees of change (three types are identified: unchanged ecosystems or those with minimal change, ecosystems with moderate change, ecosystems which are extremely changed), and one which shows the most vulnerable ecosystems.
One map shows the seasons of the year when various types of human activity or even the presence of man should be limited because of the fragility of the ecosystem or the presence of pests (new conception).
These maps were prepared under orders from the Ministry of Ecology which plans to create a natural reserve.
New conception: A map showing seasons of the year when different types of human activity or even the presence of man should be limited because of the fragility of the ecosystem or the presence of pests.
Bibliographic entry 125
Author: Rafikov A.A.
Title: Ustoïchivost' aridnykh gïeosistïem Uzbïekistana k vozdïeïstviiu antropogïennoï nagruzki (The stability of arid geosystems [ecosystems] in Uzbekistan under human pressure)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 3, pp. 70-77, Ashkhabad
Date: 1992 Language: Russian (summary in English)
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, UAM Poznan
Classification: 0, 2A1-3, 2B2e, 3C5
Region: Uzbekistan
Summary: This document is concerned with the mechanisms of human pressure on geosystems (more simply, ecosystems) of the arid zone of Uzbekistan. Not only the intensity of the pressure must be considered, but also the number of repetitions of the human action. Trucking on the Ustyurt plateau is an example: when one truck passes, the vegetation will later return to its initial state, but when 2 or 3 trucks use the same route the changes become irreversible.
The author analyzes the natural factors which influence the vulnerability of an ecosystem (richness of flora, chemical composition, etc.). He identifies stable ecosystems (not very widespread), relatively stable ones, insufficiently stable, fragile, and very fragile. The latter include solonchaks around lakes and unstable sands. Also presented: a schematic map of the stability of ecosystems (p. 73); a chart with ecosystems grouped according to degrees of stability (pp. 74-75); information on lithological structure, water conditions, drainage, the possibilities for regenerating vegetation, and human pressure on ecosystems (their stability decreases as human pressure increases).
Bibliographic entry 126
Author: Rïedïepbaïev K.R., Charzhïev M.K.
Title: Borba z zasolïeniïem oroshaïemykh zïemïel v Srïednïeï Azii (Combating the salinization of irrigated lands in Central Asia)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 4, pp. 55-63, Ashkhabad
Date: 1978 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw, UAM Poznan
Classification: 2B2, 2B1, 3C3
Region: Central Asia
Summary: The salinization of soil in the arid zone is a natural process; in the non-irrigated zone, salinization remains almost constant.
In the irrigated portion, the natural equilibrium is disturbed not only by irrigation but also by ploughing. The annual expansion of salinized soil is 1 - 1.5% of all irrigated lands.
Lands surrounding water reservoirs are especially affected by salinization (rise in the water table, even seepage), as are those around canals (infiltration), river deltas and the Aral Sea region. Salinization has appeared where it did not exist before, e.g., in the Karshin steppe or in the steppes of the Kopet Dag foothills.
Experiments were carried out where the soils of takyrs and solonchaks where salts had infiltrated to a depth of 1 m were desalinized by washing with large quantities of water. Then the order and quantity of the eliminated salt was analyzed. The washing of salt from soil is so costly and long that it is not now economically feasible to apply this method in oases.
The authors propose that future irrigation projects be carried out in a more rational manner.
Bibliographic entry 127
Authors: Rïediïebaiïev K., Ovsïannikov A.S.
Title: Vliïanie Karakumskogo Kanala na zasolïeniïe pochv Murgabskogo Oazisa (Influence of the Karakumy Canal on the degree of soil salinity in the Murgab oasis)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 5, pp. 18-26, Ashkhabad
Date: 1974 Language: Russian (summary in English)
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw, UAM Poznan
Classification: 2A2, 2B2c, 3C3, 4A1
Region: Turkmenistan, Karakumy Canal, Murgab Oasis
Summary: One of the first studies of salinization following a poorly-executed irrigation project. Earlier, water deficits in the Murgab oasis limited the extent of land use. After irrigation (20,000 m^3/year), salinity has tripled. In 1958, irrigation water brought the oasis 725,000 tonnes of salt, and in 1970 - 2,475,000 tonnes of salt. The salinity of groundwater has increased locally to 15g/l and the balance has been disturbed. In the years 1966-1968, 47% of lands in the oasis managed to avoid salinization. 37 % were affected by moderate or high salinization, and on 16% of lands solonchaks have formed. Analyses of changes in salt concentration at the regional level have been made and the results correspond to the period of irrigation work. Soil salinity increases in the spring, beginning from 75 cm below the surface. The chemical composition of the salt has been studied; the results are presented in chart form. These phenomena intensified during the periods 1933-1939,
1952-1954 and 1963-1968. Recently, a local increase in salinization has been observed in the part of the oasis where there has been irrigation work. The technique of irrigation currently used does not allow for the desalinization of the soil for 20-30 years to come.
Bibliographic entry 128
Author: Rodïe A.A.
Title: Bïogïeotsïenotichïeskiïe osnovy osvoïeniïa polupustyni sïevïernogo Prikaspiïa (Biocenosis of semi-deserts north of the Caspian Sea)
Publisher: Akademiïa Naouk SSR (Academy of Sciences of the USSR), Naouka, Moscow, 360 pp.
Date: 1974 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, WGiSR UW Warsaw
Classification: 5C3, 5C4
Region: Kazakhstan, Russia (regions north of the Caspian Sea)
Summary: A collection of eight articles on phytosociology. The problem of desertification is marginal here; the term is not even used. Three articles present the results of concrete projects in revegetalization: 1) drainage and revegetalization of saline soils (pp. 53-62 - to retain snow, the planting of bands of millet whose stalks are left for winter is highly recommended); 2) the influence of forest strips on the water balance and soil humidity (pp. 63-146 - detailed text illustrated with numerous diagrams and charts, analyzing the influence of forests strips with variable numbers of rows and internal structure; vegetation planted: mainly elms and tamarisk, occasionally wheat sown between the rows); 3) results of experiments in changing the natural biocenosis on saline soils (occupying approximately 75% of the area of lands north of the Caspian Sea) into agricultural and forestry complexes (pp. 337-356: ploughing, canals, "Sudan grass" and corn experimentally planted
between rows, and, later, other plants). All of the articles are solidly supported by documentation on the natural environment, particularly on the chemical composition of soils. The economic aspect of these problems is almost entirely neglected, and the social aspect is totally ignored.
Bibliographic entry 129
Authors: Rubanov I.V., Bogdanova N.M.
Title: Kolichïestviennaïa otsïenka solovoï dïeflatsii na osushaïushïemsïa dnïe Aralskogo Morïa (Quantitative estimation of salt deflation on the Aral seabed during the process of drying out)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 3, pp. 9-16, Ashkhabad
Date: 1987 Language: Russian (summary in English)
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw
Classification: 2A2, 2B2f, 4A4 (salinization)
Region: ex-USSR
Summary: The process of soil salinization related to the decline in the level of the Aral Sea began in 1961. In the years 1977-1985, detailed research was undertaken in order to estimate the extent of salt deflation on the dried up seabed at that time and up to the year 2000. In the area where the seabed is emerging, three soil zones have been distinguished: terrigenous, carbonate, and gypseous; for each of these, there are sub-zones where the areas and degrees of salinity for 1 km^2 have been determined (shown on the map). The probable extent of these zones in the year 2000 has also been determined. Accord to estimations, the extent of salt deflation on the dried up seabed in the year 2000 will be similar to today. Currently, annual deflation averages 2,286 tonnes of salt per km^2, or approximately 43 million tonnes of salt per year. In some places, salt deflation reaches the extremely high level of 6,300 tonnes/km^2. By the year 2000, in the regions which dried up in the
years 1960-1984, it will have diminished to 311 tonnes/km^2 while in newly-exposed areas it will reach 2,561 tonnes/km^2. The total is approximately 39 million tonnes/year. This work is one of the most important publications on degradation, especially salinization, in the Aral Sea region.
Bibliographic entry 130
Author: Rudïenko L.G. et al.
Title: Nïeblagoprïatnyïe prirodnyïe protsïessy i ïavlïenïa, Ukrainskaïa SSR karts (Map: Unfavourable natural processes and phenomena, Ukraine)
Publisher: Kafiedra Gïegrafii, Institut Gïeofiziki A.N. Ukrainskoï SSR, Kiev
Date: 1986 Language: Russian
Available: Geographical Institute, Academy of Sciences of the Ukraine, Kiev
Classification: 1C4 (cartography), 1A, 2B2i
Region: Ukraine
Summary: A map illustrating negative natural processes, aggravated by economic activities:
- intensity of fluvial erosion (four degrees);
- salinization (chemical structure and depth);
- wind erosion;
- sand mobility;
- sand storms, etc.
This map is complemented by several small-scale maps presenting certain phenomena: the number of days without rain, sand storms, etc.
The process of desertification takes place mainly in the southern and eastern parts of the Ukraine. The most extensive lands covered with sand are in the north of the lower Dniepr valley (south of the town of Kherson). The process of salinization is also characteristic of the southern part of the Kherson region and of northern Crimea.
Bibliographic entry 131
Author: Shiïeïer M.S.
Title: Sovïeshchaniïe po sïel'skokhozïaïstvïennomu osvoïenniiu pïeschanykh zïemïel' pustyn' i polupustyn' Srïednïeï Azii i Kazakhstana (Conference on the agricultural management of sand deserts and semi-deserts in Central Asia and Kazakhstan).
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 2, pp. 91-92, Ashkhabad
Date: 1970 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw, UAM Poznan
Classification: 1D, 5C4, 5D1b
Region: Central Asia
Summary: The conference on the agricultural development of drylands in Central Asia and Kazakhstan took place in Ashkhabad from 17-20 November 1970. The participants (150 scientists and experts on agriculture and forest economy from Moscow, Volgograd, Alma Ata, Tashkent, Samarkand and Elista) attended 16 lectures on desert management. Much attention was given to the afforestation of deserts and semi deserts. The main lectures were:
- "Scientific forecast, with mathematical programmes, for the optimal management of sand deserts.",
- "The superiority of revegetalization over other methods, which are difficult and costly, of protecting sands from wind erosion.",
- "Analysis of the principal issues of the regionalization of sand deserts in Central Asia and Kazakhstan in view of their agricultural management. ",
- "Results of scientific research and experimentation concerning the agricultural management of sand deserts.",
- "The seasonal cultivation of plants on sand deserts.",
- "study of the comprehensive management of sands located in or near oases".
<section>h</section>
Bibliographic entry 132
Author: Skopin A.
Title: Ekologo-ekonomichïeskiïe problïemy Aralo-Balkhashskogo rï egiona i puti ikh rïeshïeniïa (Ecological and economic problems in the regions of the Aral Sea and Lake Balkhash)
Publisher: Gosplan Kazakhskoï SSR, Kazakhskiï Institut naouchno-tïekhnithïeskoï informatsiï i tiekhniko-ekonomichïeskikh isslïedovaniï, Alma Ata, 41 pp.
Date: 1991 Language: Russian
Available: Gosplan, Alma Ata
Classification: 2B2b, 2B2f, 5D2b ()
Region: Kazakhstan
Summary: Three types of problems are discussed: water consumption, desertification and pollution. The most critical water consumption situation is found in the central part of the Aral Sea region where the annual water deficit is 6-8 km^3. In the Balkhash region, this deficit is 2-3 km^3. Four degrees of desertification are identified: extreme (total degradation of the ecosystem), strong (70% crop reduction), moderate (50% decline in productivity), light (less than 25%). Approximately 60 % of the area of Kazakhstan is affected by desertification. Problems of deserts are most evident in the eastern Aral Sea region and in the southern Balkhash area.
Today, the level of the Aral Sea is 38.5 m. It is possible to preserve two lakes with a level of 35 m. The author proposes raising this to 41 m. To do so, it is indispensable to introduce new economic structures in order to reduce the amount of land which is inefficiently irrigated. New legislation and a special agreement on water partition among the republics would be necessary. The problem could be solved in three steps: 1) 1991-95 - level of the sea: 38.5 m, 2) 1996 2000 - 39 m, 3) 2001-2010 - 41 m. The author proposes transferring water from the Caspian Sea into the Aral system. The length of the proposed canal would be 450-500 km. The volume of water transferred would be 47-52 km^3 annually. The author is optimistic about this three-step program.
Bibliographic entry 133
Authors: Sokolov V.E., Vinodradov B.V.
Title: Man and the Biosphere: the view from above
Publisher: Nature and Resources, vol. XXII, N° 1-2, pp. 13-23, UNESCO, Paris
Date: 1986 Language: English (French version in "Nature et Ressources")
Available: BiL Moscow, WGiSR UW Warsaw
Classification: 1C1
Region: Central Asia
Summary: This document discusses the possibility of applying satellite imagery and aerial photographs to research on the relation between man and the environment. The methodological text is illustrated with examples from Central Asia: state of pastures in Central Asia (p. 15), irrigation systems in the Golodnaïa Steppe (Steppe of Hunger), Uzbekistan (p. 16 - aerial photographs make it possible to identify in advance those lands which are in the process of salinization), the Karakumy Canal (p. 19 - aerial photographs indicate the places where water overflows the banks of the canal, forming water reservoirs around the canal), the formation of sand dunes as a result of nomads overgrazing their herds (p. 21 - Nogaï Steppe, west of the Caspian region, Russia), and the decline in the water level and the drying up of water basins (p. 17 - Karagobaz Bay, Caspian Sea, western part of the Aral Sea).
Bibliographic entry 134
Authors: Svidnitskii B.P., Tsis' A.M., Baran O.V.
Title: Polipshïennïa vtorinno-zasolïenikh gruntiv Alïeïskoï zroshuval'noï sïstïemi mietodom pilkuvannïa (Restoration of saline lands in the Aleysk irrigation system using the method of sand introduction)
Publisher: Tïeorietichni i prikladni problïemi gïeografii, Visnik L'vyvs'kogo Univïersitïetu, 18, pp. 69-73, L'viv
Date: 1992 Language: Ukrainian
Available: Ivan Franko University, L'viv, Ukraine
Classification: 2A2, 2B2g, 5C3
Region: Russia (southern Siberia, Aleysk)
Summary: In the years 1984-1987 it was estimated that over 70% of land in the irrigation system of Aleysk (town in southern Siberia, south of Novosibirsk) was saline. Soils with the highest salinity cover over 20% of the area, forming plots of 0.01-0.05 ha surrounded by less saline soils whose quality is diminished by the presence of the highly saline land. Desalinization has been carried out until now using drainage methods which are sometimes inefficient. In 1988, an experimental method of protecting soils against salinization was tried. Sand was introduced in selected fields of 0.03 ha each. 140 160 tonnes of sand was used per hectare. Then the sand was mixed into the soil by ploughing 30 cm deep. The introduction of sand modified the mechanical and chemical composition of the soil and facilitated drainage.
Bibliographic entry 135
Author: Szabolcs I.
Title: Salinization potential of European soils
Publisher: In - Brower F.M., Thomas A.J., Chadwick M.J. (eds.), "Land Use Changes in Europe", pp. 293-315. Kluwer Academic Publishers, Dortrecht-Boston-London. The GeoJournal Library, vol. 18
Date: 1991 Language: English
Available: Private collections
Classification: 2A2, 2B2h-i
Region: Ukraine and the European part of Russia
Summary: An informative text on the extent of saline soils in Europe. These lands are almost exclusively located in the ex-USSR, where saline soils occupy 29.5 million ha. This includes 16 million ha of sodium and alkaline soils with B horizon structure, and 7.5 million ha of salty soils. In European countries, the area of saline soil is respectively: 840,000 ha in Spain, up to 386,000 a in Hungary, up to 255,000 ha in ax-Yugoslavia, 250,000 ha each in France and Romania. According to estimates (p. 300), the present-day area of saline soil in the ex-USSR is 28 million ha and the area of potentially saline soil is 18 million ha. A map of salinized soils in Europe is given p. 301. This map shows clearly a concentration of salinized soil in the southern European part of the ex-USSR, particularly west of the lower Volga.
Bibliographic entry 136
Author: Tanasiïenko A.A.
Title: Erodirovannyïe chïernozïemy iuga Zapadnoï Sibirii (Eroded chernozems in southwestern Siberia)
Publisher: Rossiïskaïa Akadïemiïa Naouk. Sibirskoïe otdïelïeniïe (Academy of Sciences of Russia. Siberian Section) - Naouka, Novosibirsk, 152 pp.
Date: 1992 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow (in May 1993 - not yet available)
Classification: 2A1, 2A5 (snow melting on frozen soil), 2B2f, 5C4, 5C5 (embankments)
Region: Southern Siberia
Summary: This work centers on the semi-arid zone of southern Siberia. The most intense soil erosion occurs there in the spring when melting snows carry off the upper layer of soil while the deeper ground remains frozen.
Erosion also occurs during violent summer rains and during dust storms.
Recommended anti-erosion techniques are described (strips of perennial grasses, the planting of shrubs, embankments on slopes more than 5°, change in ploughing technique -without turning furrows, leaving strips of land unploughed.
Bibliographic entry 137
Authors: Tulokhov A.R., Dambiïev E.T.
Title: Antropogïennoïe opustynivaniïe v stïepnykh kotlovinakh Baïkal'skogo rïegïona (Development of deserts affected by human activities in the steppes of the Baikal Region)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 1, pp. 65-66, Ashkhabad
Date: 1991 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata
Classification: 2A1, 2B2g, 3C2-3
Region: Russia, Baikal region
Summary: The natural preconditions of desert formation exist on vast stretches of sandy steppes in the Baikal region with an arid climate and low humidity. Agricultural development began here in the 19th century. The area of arable land increased most rapidly in Buryat Republic during the years 1954-1958: 288,000 ha. The area of rangelands was reduced; at the same time, the number of sheep doubled. This caused degradation and soil erosion on pastures. During the 1980's 66% of arable land and 17% of pastures degraded. Sand dunes cover 10% of the arable area. The dunes move 3-10 m per year.
Bibliographic entry 138
Author: Volovik V.V.
Title: Osnovnyïe etapy antropogïennogo izmïenïeniïa landshaftov sïevïernogo Turkmïenistana (Main stages of land change caused by human action in northern Turkmenistan)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 1, pp. 27-34, Ashkhabad
Date: 1992 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata
Classification: 2D, 3C
Region: Turkmenistan
Summary: Human pressure in northern Turkmenistan goes back 5,000-7,000 years. The author analyzes changes in the surface area of irrigated land and in the canal system from Antiquity to the present day. In Antiquity there were 552 km of principal canals, and irrigated agriculture was practiced on 70-100 m of land on each side of the canals.
Aerial photos are used to show that the irrigation systems were very different. Only the differences are shown; the causes are not explained.
Desertification dates from the early 20th century; according to the author, it is strictly connected to the introduction of the capitalist system. The savage and uncontrolled exploitation of mineral resources has caused the devastation of vegetation and the movement of dunes. The most intense human pressure has been during the last 70-75 years. The author sees this as basically a problem of pollution.
Bibliographic entry 139
Author: Wallis J.
Title: Land, Man and Sand. Desertification and its solution.
Publisher: Macmillan, New York, N.Y., 336 pp.
Date: 1980 Language: English
Available: National Library, Warsaw
Classification: 2B2c, 2B2e, SA2-3, 5C1-2, 5D1a-b
Region: Uzbekistan, Turkmenistan
Summary: This book is a collection of regional studies on desertification and its prevention. Two chapters concern the ex-USSR: (12) Golodnaïa Steppe (the Steppe of Hunger), pp. 213-225, and (13) Turkmenistan, pp. 227-243. These chapters were prepared mainly on the basis of Soviet documents presented at the 1977 UN Conference on Desertification in Nairobi. The economic development of deserts is emphasized. The Golodnaïa Steppe (the Steppe of Hunger) in Uzbekistan extends over 600,000 hectares of arable land. In the years 1923-1956, 250,000 hectares were irrigated, to which 262,000 ha were to be added in the future, diminishing the area of saline soil and the degree of salinization. In irrigated regions, new inhabitants were installed, and the transport and industry infrastructures were developed. The author of the report on Turkmenistan discusses irrigation (Karakumy Canal) and sand dune fixation.
An interesting new issue: can nomadic populations adapt to life on sovkhozes (state farms) and kovkhozes (cooperative farms), considering the difficulties of African nomads in the Sahel region? This question remains unanswered.
Bibliographic entry 140
Author: Zalïetaïev V.S.
Title: Ekologichïeski dïestabilizirovannaïa srïeda. Ekosistïemy aridnykh zon v izmïeniaiushchimsïa gidrologichïeskom rïejimïe (The ecological environment destabilized. Ecosystems in arid zones with changing water systems)
Publisher: Naouka, Moscow, 148 pp. + 1 map (separate plate)
Date: 1989 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow
Classification: 0, 1A-B, 1C4 (cartography), 5C4
Region: Central Asia
Summary: A description of changes in flora and fauna on lands where man has significantly modified the water system. Two types of land are analyzed: irrigated lands and the Aral Sea region.
Several examples are given of the degradation in the biocenosis of the two regions. In the case of the Aral Sea, the dried up area covered 25,000 km^2 in the years 1961-1988, but the negative influences of the drying extended much further.
Information is presented on soil salinization and on colonization by flora and fauna of dried up lands.
There are several schematic maps included which are one of the book's most useful features. These maps show, among other things:
1) changes in the ecosystems of deserts in Central Asia and Kazakhstan resulting from changes in the water system caused by human activities;
2) desert and semi-desert terrains suitable for future revegetalization (p. 82).
Note: This book is difficult to read, not to say almost inaccessible, given the numerous complicated terms used.
Bibliographic entry 141
Author: Zonn I.S.
Title: Antropogïennoïe opustynivaniïe v aridnoï zonïe i bor'ba s nim (Desertification caused by human activities in the drylands zone, and the combat against it)
Publisher: Akadïemiïa Naouk Turkmïenskoï SSR. Institut Pustyn' (Academy of Sciences of Turkmenistan. Institute of Deserts), Ashkhabad, 48 pp.
Date: 1990 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow
Classification: 1A, 1B
Region: Global
Summary: This text is the presentation of a doctoral thesis. The author proposes his own definition of desertification (see below), using vectorial calculation. He also presents a chart of the negative effects of various types of human activity on elements of the natural environment (very simple formula: yes/no, with no qualification). This allows him to construct a very simple typology of desertification caused by human activities. In Africa the "irrigatio-agro-pastoral" type dominates, in Asia it is the "agro-irrigatio-pastoral" type, in South America the "techno-agro-pastoral" type.
The author also discusses very general technological interventions in combating desertification (pp. 35-41).
Definition: Desertification - "A group of processes in the degradation and the destruction of arid and semi-arid ecosystems, of natural or human origin. These processes lead to the aridification of vegetation and soil, to the reduction of biological productivity, even to its total elimination and the transformation of these areas into bare lands" (p. 10).
BIBLIOGRAPHY ENTRY 142
Author: Zonn I.S.
Title: Novyïe mïetody osvoïeniïa zïemïel' aridnykh tïerritorii (New methods of soil improvement in arid areas)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 1, pp. 46-55, Ashkhabad
Date: 1972 Language: Russian (summary in English and Turkoman)
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw, UAM Poznan
Classification: 5A3, 5A4, 5C1, 5C2
Region: North America, the Mediterranean region, Australia
Summary: Irrigation is of paramount importance in the economic development of deserts. The author describes techniques which up to now have not been used in the USSR, but could be very useful there: drip irrigation, widely used in the United States, Mexico, Australia and in the Mediterranean region, desalinization of sea water for irrigation purposes, and the bituminization of soil (to form an impermeable bituminous layer) applied in the United States. The text demonstrates, using examples from different countries, how drip irrigation, using a pre-determined quantity of water, allows for more abundant harvests and a reduction of salt concentration in plant leaves. Forming a bituminous layer at a depth of 0.6 m using ploughing and special sprinklers requires 14,195 kg of bituminous mass and costs US $750 per hectare. This process reduces water infiltration by 20%. The bibliography contains 22 titles, 12 of which are in English.
Bibliographic entry 143
Author: Zonn I.S.
Title: O podkhodakh k tipologii opustynivaniïa (Desertification Typology Approach)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeny pustyn', N° 2, pp. 20-29, Ashkhabad
Date: 1990 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw, UAM Poznan
Classification: 1A, 1B
Region: Global
Summary: Diverse definitions of Desertification are presented, and one is adopted (see below). On the basis of this definition, the author proposes a typology of desertification corresponding to process-effects and process-causes. Preceding typologies of Desertification (including those accepted by FAO/UNESCO/UNEP in the 1977 Desertification Map are judged to be incomplete. The proposed typology is illustrated with the example of irrigation. Irrigated fields are part of causal processes which can involve process-effects such as erosion resulting from irrigation, secondary salinization, siltation, waterlogging, the lowering or raising of the water table, changes in the albedo, etc., leading to the modification of soil, ground and surface water, the vegetation and the climate (chart p. 25). A Desertification typology is proposed by continent and region (chart p. 26, after S.V. Zonn, 1983, cf. bibl. entry 146).
Definition: "Desertification is a very general concept designating the group of processes relating to the degradation of natural ecosystems in arid and semi-arid lands, resulting from irrational human activity" (p. 23).
Typology of desertification by specific continent and region. Below, the example of Africa:
Region
Type of desertification
Mediterranean Erosion
Sahara Erosion and deflation
Sahara Wind erosion and deflation with erosion caused by industry and transport
West African Erosion, savannah type
Southern African Erosion and deflation, desert and savannah type
East African Erosion caused by irrigation and overgrazing
Bibliographic entry 144
Author: Zonn I.S.
Title: Pïervyïe itogi vypolnïeniïa vsïemirnogo plane dïeïstviï po borbïe s opustynivaniïem (First results in implementing the world programme for combating desertification)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 6, pp. 10-18, Ashkhabad
Date: 1981 Language: Russian (summary in English)
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw, UAM Poznan
Classification: 1D, 5A1, 5A4
Region: Aral Sea
Summary: Information on the implementation during the years 1977-1980 of resolutions passed during the Nairobi conference of 1977. The Soviet Union occupied an important place there.
The Soviet Union expressed its willingness to become a member-observer of the Consulting Group on Combating Desertification, UNEP (1978).
A brief analysis of programmes implemented by UNEP is given. During the years 1978-1980 in the USSR, training courses were organized for representatives from developing countries: "Pasture improvement and sand dune fixation" and "Combating salinization on irrigated lands." The quality of these courses was evaluated during the Alma Ata conference in May 1979 with the participation of representatives from UNEP, FAO and UNESCO. It was decided to add a supplementary course, "Ecology and pasture management and productivity" which trained approximately 100 specialists, the first of whom finished the course in June 1980.
The Centre of International Projects (UNEP/USSR) published the monograph: "Combating Desertification in the USSR: Problems and Experience" (cf. bibl. entry 12).
Bibliographic entry 145
Authors: Zonn I.S., Skaïni M.
Title: Tiekhnologiïa bor'by s opustynivaniïem (Technology for combating desertification)
Publisher: Gosplan Turkmïenskoï SSR, Ashkhabad, 72 pp.
Date: 1990 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow
Classification: 5A3, 5C1-2, 5C4-5 (artificial ecosystems), 5D2b
Region: Africa
Summary: The authors describe various traditional and modern technologies (irrigation systems, purely artificial ecosystems, methods of sand dune fixation) which can serve in combating desertification or in desert management. Most of the examples are of North Africa. The authors are mainly interested in large, even huge, hydrological programmes, such as the project to build a navigable trans-Sahara canal from Nouakchott, Mauritania, to the Mediterranean Sea (through Mauritania, Mali, Niger, Chad and Libya). This text gives only a very general view of technologies for combating desertification; the authors note that these interventions can also stimulate desertification if they are poorly adapted.
Bibliographic entry 146
Author: Zonn S.V.
Title: Sovrïemiennyïe problïemy gïenïezisa i gïeografii pochv (Current issues in the origin and geography of soils)
Publisher: Naouka, Moscow, 168 pp.
Date: 1983 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow
Classification: 1A, 2B
Region: Global
Summary: This work contains a chapter (pp. 59-67) on desertification problems on different continents. It includes a discussion of various definitions of desertification (p. 59). This term can be understood to mean "the impoverishment or total destruction of biological equilibrium due to the influence of unfavourable conditions." This means that desertification can take place in any climatic condition. This definition should be broadened to include the "processes of impoverishment or decline in productivity in a given territory" while considering desertification caused by human factors. Desertification is most intense in semi-deserts, savannahs, steppes and in part of the forest zone.
The author describes the regional diversity of degradation processes in Africa, South America, Southeast Asia and India. He identifies 22 regions which are characterized by a given type of desertification, presented on schematic maps (p. 61, cf. bibl. entry 143).
Note: The typology and maps presented could raise some questions. Desertification is basically understood to include all types of degradation processes. In the eastern Amazon, fluvial erosion and erosion caused by modernization are understood to be desertification. At the same time, sub-Saharan Africa is judged to be exempt from the desertification process, which is difficult to understand.
Definition: Desertification - "the impoverishment or total destruction of the biological equilibrium due to unfavourable conditions"
Bibliographic entry 147
Author: Zonov G.V.
Title: Vïetrovaïa eroziïa pochv na pastbishchakh sïevïernoï Bïet Pak Daly (Wind erosion in grazing lands north of Biet Pak Daly)
Publisher: Problïemy osvoïeniïa pustyn', N° 3, pp. 38-42, Ashkhabad
Date: 1974 Language: Russian
Available: BiL Moscow, IG RAN Moscow, KR FAK Alma Ata, WGiSR UW Warsaw, UAM Poznan
Classification: 2A1, 2A3, 2B2b, 3C4, 4A2
Region: Kazakhstan, Biet Pak Daly (northern Golodnaïa Steppe - the Steppe of Hunger)
Summary: At the same time as state farms (sovkhozes) were organized in the western part of Golodnaïa Steppe, the number of sheep multiplied and grazing time in any one area lengthened to 30 days. The pressure on the environment increased to such an extent that degradation began, particularly of the vegetation and soil. Analyses of the climate, vegetation and soil have been made. A regional classification of environmental conditions is presented in the form of charts and description. Steppes are categorized by type. Field studies show that deflation is from 10 to 24 tonnes per hectare per year depending on the density of the vegetation and the method of land use. The author concludes that there is a correlation between the intensity of grazing and deflation, and recommends adapting animal production to the productivity of pastures. This publication points out the problem; it neither calculates the productivity of the biomass, nor estimates the maximum herd size.
Annex 4: List of consultants ^5
^5 English transliteration of Russian letters. In parentheses, the English version of names as shown on business cards.
Adamïenko Olïeg Maksimovich (Adamenko Oleg M.) - Geologist, retired professor at the Institute of Ecological Monitoring, Academy of Sciences of the Ukraine (Institut ekologichnego monitoringu, Akadïemiïa naouk tïekhnologichnoï kibïernïetiki Ukraini), Ivano-Frankovsk, Ukraine.
Gïel'dyïeva Galina Viktorovna (Heldyeva Galina V.) - Chairperson of the Ecosystems Studies Department, Institute of Geography (Kaz.: Geografiïa Instituty; Russian: Institut Gïeografii), Academy of Sciences of Kazakhstan, Alma Ata, Kazakhstan.
Gïennadiïev Alïeksandr Nikolaïevich (Gennadiyev Alexander N.) - Professor of soil science, vice-senior member of the Geography Department (Russian: Gïeografichïeskiï Fakultïet), MGU, Moscow, Russia.
Janaliïeva Gulchan Mukhitovna - Head of the Physical Geography section of the Department of Geography, University of Alma Ata, Alma Ata, Kazakhstan.
Mïedïeov Akhmïedkan Rakhmïentaïevich - Vice-director of the Geographical Institute (Kaz.: Geografiïa Instituty; Russian: Institut Gïeografii), Academy of Sciences of Kazakhstan, Alma Ata, Kazakhstan.
Nïefiedova Tat'ïana Grigor'ïevna (Nefedova Tatyana G.) - Ph.D., Institute of Geography (Russian: Institut Gïeografli), RAN, Moscow, Russia.
Ogar' Natal'ïa Pietrovna (Ogar Natali P.) - Ph.D., Cartography of Vegetation, Botanical Institute (Kaz.: Botanika Instituty; Russian: Institut Botaniki), Academy of Sciences of Kazakhstan, Alma Ata, Kazakhstan.
Rachkovskaïa Iekatïerina Pietrovna (Rachkovskaya Ekaterina P.) - Professor, `Cartography of Vegetation, Botanical Institute (Kaz.: Botanika Instituty; Russian: Institut Botaniki), Academy of Sciences of Kazakhstan, Alma Ata, Kazakhstan.
Rudïenko Lïeonid G. (Rudenko Leonid L.) - Cartographer, Director of the Geographical Institute, Academy of Sciences of the Ukraine (Institut Gïeografii AN Ukraini), Kiev, Ukraine.
Skopin Alïeksïeï - Researcher, Council for the Organization of Productive Forces (Russian: Sovïet pro Organizatsii Proizvoditïel'nykh Sil - SOPS), Alma Ata, Kazakhstan.
Stoïko Stïepan (Stoiko S.) - Professor. of Ecology, Academy of Sciences of the Ukraine, L'viv section, Ukraine.
Udra Ivan F. - Botanist, Ph.D., Academy of Sciences of the Ukraine, Kiev, Ukraine.
Zonn Sïergïeï V. - Retired professor of Soil Science, member of the Scientific Council of the University of Moscow, MGU Moscow, Russia.
Annex 5: Explanation of Russian terms used in this report
Solonïetz (solonetz, solonets) - black saline soil, characteristic of arid and semi-arid zones, which forms in better drainage conditions than does solonchak soil.
Solonchak - White alkaline soil, highly saline, found in arid and semi-arid zones. Soluble salt accumulation on the surface of the soil (white efflorescence) or just beneath the surface.
Takyr (takir) - clay depression, shallow and without water flow, found in the deserts of Central Asia. Periodically submerged; after the water evaporates, a dried crust with fissures forms on the surface. Profile of structured soil (see N.G. Kharin, M.P. Petrov, entry 38).
Annex 6: Transliteration from the Russian alphabet
Transliteration from the Russian alphabet
<section>i</section>
FAO technical papers
FAO ENVIRONMENT AND ENERGY PAPERS
1 Natural resources and the human environment for food and agriculture, 1980 (E F S)
2 Environmental impact assessment and agricultural development, 1982 (E F S)
3 Management and utilization of mangroves in Asia and the Pacific, 1982 (E)
4 Mangrove management in Thailand, Malaysia and Indonesia, 1985 (E F S)
5 Rural energy planning in China and other developing countries of Asia, 1985 (E)
6 Natural resources and the human environment for food and agriculture in Africa, 1986 (E F)
7 Report on natural resources for food and agriculture in the Asia and Pacific Region, 1986 (E)
8 Report on natural resources for food and agriculture in Latin America and the Caribbean, 1986 (E S)
9 Environmental guidelines for resettlement projects in the humid tropics, 1988 (E F S)
10 Solar drying of fish and paddy, 1989 (E)
11 The briquetting of agricultural wastes for fuel, 1990 (E)
12 A new approach to energy planning for sustainable rural development, 1990 (E)
13 Bioenergy for development - Technical and environmental dimensions, 1994 (E)
14 Drylands development and combating desertification - Bibliographic study of experiences in countries of the CIS, 1994 (E F)
Availability: December 1995
Ar - Arabic
C - Chinese
E - English
F - French
P - Portuguese
S - Spanish
Multil - Multilingual
* Out of print
** In preparation
The FAO Technical Papers are available through the authorized FAO Sales Agents or directly from Distribution and Sales Section, FAO, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy
This study, commissioned by the Subgroup on Desertification of FAO's Interdepartmental Working Group on Environment and Sustainable Development, is a review of work undertaken by major institutions of the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) working on development of arid lands and combating desertitication. It analyses the experiences and lessons drawn from 147 bibliographic studies of documents of strategic, methodological or technical interest for the region. It contains information previously little or not available outside the CIS, which will prove useful to individuals and institutions working in the field of conservation of natural resources and sustainable development of drylands.
