<title>Making land use choices for district planning. Agro-ecological land resources assessment for agricultural development </title>
<section>1</section>
Acknowledgements
Back to contents - Next file
AEZ methodology - an overview
Any part of this set of computer programs and the corresponding data sets may be modified in the light of new knowledge or new objectives. The model is part of a larger district- and national-level planning tool and is expected to be expanded and refined with use.
The designations employed and the presentation of materiel in this publication do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations or IIASA concerning the legal status of any country, territory, city or area or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries
M-59
ISBN 92-5-103545-8
All rights reserved. No part of this publication may be reproduced, stored in a retrieval system, or transmitted in any form or by any means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying or otherwise, without the prior permission of the copyright owner. Applications for such pemmission, with a statement of the purpose and extent of the reproduction, should be addressed to the Director, Publications Division, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
(c) FAO 1994
Introduction
The potential for sustainable food production, including meat and milk, is determined by physical factors, primarily by soil and climatic conditions, and a complex interaction of socioeconomic, cultural and technological factors, such as farm sizes, level of farming and livestock inputs, management practices including soil conservation and enhancement, veterinary services, economic factors like market prices and access, credit availability, education and extension services. At any given point in time, there are limits to the sustainable levels of food crop and livestock feed production obtainable from any given land area, and hence limits to the human and livestock population that can be supported from any area.
Development of land resources to meet food needs of growing populations should be based on integral assessment and consideration of ecological, social and economic factors. Development policies in the past, while focusing on economic and social considerations, have largely ignored the ecological issues. Recognizing the critical importance of resource literacy, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), with the collaboration of the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA), developed a land resources data base and a methodological framework to assess food production and population supporting potentials in developing countries, FAO (1971-81, 1976a, 1978-80).
FAO has assisted member countries in finding rational solutions to various problems of land resources appraisal for planning sustainable agricultural development. This involves linking land use options with other development goals in such areas as food production, food self-sufficiency, cash crop requirements, population supporting capacity, issues of soil fertility constraints, soil erosion risks and land degradation. The AEZ approach was first applied in a global study of Land Resources for Populations of the Future (FAO/UNFPA/IIASA, 1983), which focused on the determination of ecological potential of land resources for food production and the appropriate policies for their management. Subsequently, the AEZ methodology has been extended, refined and utilized in national and sub-national assessments of land productivity and population supporting capacity in various countries, such as Bangladesh, China, Mozambique, Nigeria, the Philippines, Thailand. To further enhance the
AEZ methodology for national and sub-national applications, FAO, with the concurrence of the Kenyan Government and IIASA's participation, undertook an AEZ case study of Kenya. The Kenya study (FAO/IIASA, 1991) features various advances in AEZ procedures; these include the linkage to Geographic Information Systems (GIS), methodological refinements and development of a resources database. The enhancements encompass representation of multiple cropping systems, livestock and crop sector integration, assessment of fuelwood productivity, optimization of land use. A major GlS-oriented Kenya land resources database at the scale of 1:1 million and a PC and UNIX workstation based software system were developed in the case study. This analysis tool facilitates the integration of ecological, technological, social, demographic and economic recommendations for the appraisal of land resources of individual districts in Kenya for policy formulation and development planning.
The methodology to assess the food crop and livestock production potential includes the following principles which are, fundamental to any sound evaluation of land resources:
* an inter-disciplinary approach, based on inputs from crop-ecologists, pedologists, agronomists, climatologists, livestock specialists, nutritionists, and economists;
* land evaluation is only meaningful in relation to specific land uses;
* land suitability refers to use on a sustained basis, i.e., the envisaged use of land must take account of degradation, e.g. through wind erosion, water erosion, salinization or other degradation processes. Soil regeneration is assumed to be achieved by means of fallowing land, appropriate crop rotations and soil conservation measures;
* evaluation of production potential with respect to specified levels of inputs, e.g., whether fertilizers are applied, if pest control is effected, if machinery or hand tools are used (agricultural inputs and farming technology);
* different kinds of land use must be considered in the context of meeting national or regional food crop-mix and livestock products demand;
* different kinds of livestock feed resources must be considered, e.g., natural pastures and browse, sown pastures, crop residues and by-products and feed concentrates in the context of meeting seasonal and spatial feed requirements.
* land use patterns must be constructed so as to optimize land productivity in relation to political and social objectives taking into account physical, socio-economic and technological constraints.
Accordingly the application of the methodology in this work entitled "Agro-ecological Land Resources Assessment for Agricultural Development Planning: A Case Study of Kenya" is concerned with the determination of land use potentials of land resources in each of the 41 districts in Kenya, and the preparation of scenarios for optimal district land resources allocation as a tool in policy formulation and development planning. The Kenya case study is presented in two main reports supported by technical annexes which deal with details.
The first main report describes the computerized land resources database of Kenya and the crop, livestock and fuelwood productivity models developed for the estimation of potential productivity of land resources. It is supported by the following technical annexes:
1. Land Resources
2. Soil Erosion and Productivity
3. Agro-climatic and Agro-edaphic Suitabilities for Barley, Oat, Cowpea, Green Gram and Pigeon Pea
4. Crop Productivity
5. Livestock Productivity
6. Fuelwood Productivity
7. Systems Documentation Guide to Computer Programs for Land Productivity Assessment 8 Crop Productivity Assessment: Results at District Level.
This is the second main report on "Making Land Use Choices for District Planning". It describes how the results of the crop productivity assessment at district level are used in combination with technological, social, demographic and economic opportunities and constraints to formulate and analyse various scenarios of optimal land use to achieve specific objectives. It is supported by a User Manual, which is a guide to installing and running the PC version of the Kenya software. A demonstration version of the software package on diskettes is part of the User Manual. This report enables the reader to explore the Kenya-AEZ system in its various components, using the computer as an analysis tool as well as a learning tool. If a suitable computer is available, the reader is advised first to install the software and become acquainted with the menu options, and secondly make computer runs while studying the report.
AEZ methodology - an overview
Figure 1.1 gives a general overview of the flow and integration of information as implemented in the Kenya study. In the following explanations, which summarize the contents of the elements of the system, the numbers in brackets relate to the numbering used in Figure 1.1.
(1) LUT description: To define the fundamental objects of analysis which comprise the set of alternative activities available to reach specified objectives, the first step in an AEZ application is the selection and description of land utilization types (LUT) to be considered in the study. FAO (FAO, 1984) defines LUT as follows: 'A Land Utilization Type consists of a set of technical specifications within a socio-economic setting. As a minimum requirement, both the nature of the produce and the setting must be specified'. The description can best be prepared in a hierarchical structure that defines, for example:
* elements common to all land utilization types: typically such elements would include the socio-economic setting of a fairly homogenous region for which a number of land utilization types may be defined;
* elements common to certain groups of land utilization types: e.g. several land utilization types could be defined for a particular farming system. Holding size, farm resources, etc., would best be presented at this level of LUT description;
* elements specific to particular land utilization types: crop specific information such as cultivation practices, input requirements, cropping calendar, utilization of main produce, crop residues and by-products to be described at this level.
FIGURE 1 AEZ application: information flow and integration
The number of aspects that can be meaningfully included in the description as well as the amount and detail of quantitative information provided must match the needs and scale of the study. The Kenya study distinguishes 64 crop LUTs, 31 fuelwood LUTs and a synthetic grassland LUT, each at three levels of input. Similarly, 10 representative livestock systems are considered per input level.
(2) The term 'Crop catalog' refers to a computer representation of the quantitative aspects of the LUT description in a database format. The level of detail regarding the representation of different crop species and varieties in the database should match the study objectives as well as the sophistication of other methodological components and the scale at which the study operates.
(3) The assessment of alternative land utilization types is performed for a set of land units, i.e. areas of land with specified and distinguished characteristics. Ideally, the defined land units should represent unique and homogenous land management units. In practice, land units are often arrived at by super-imposing various thematic maps regarding aspects such as climate, soils, landform, slope, vegetation, present land use, social and economic characteristics, and administrative boundaries.
(4) To facilitate the storage and manipulation of complex spatial information, the maps are best entered into a computerized geographical information system (GIS).
(5) Additional data related to the mapped information, e.g. a description of the soil mapping units in terms of soil associations, soil phases and texture classes, landform, slope, etc., is kept in the computerized system in the form of attribute database files.
(6) Combining overlaid spatial information with the contents of relevant attribute files results in the creation of unique (in terms of a set of selected attributes such as thermal regime, moisture regime, soil type, slope class, etc.) geo-referenced extents of land units, termed agroecological cells, which form the basic unit of analysis used in AEZ applications. The collection of agro-ecological cells constitutes the land resources inventory (LRI). The detailed land resources inventory used in the Kenya study distinguishes some 90000 agro-ecological cells.
(7) The methodology used in larger scale regional or national AEZ applications for determination of agronomically attainable yields in an agro-ecological cell starts out from estimation of maximum agro-climatic yield potential as dictated by climatic conditions. Biomass accumulation is described in terms of photosynthetic characteristics and phenological requirements, to calculate a site specific constraint-free maximum yield. Then agro-climatic constraints are assessed to derive agronomically attainable yields taking into account yield losses occurring due to temperature limitations, moisture stress, pests and diseases, and workability. Attainable yields are estimated for different levels of management and inputs.
(8) Crops, grasses and fuelwood species, as well as livestock species have climatic requirements which must be known for suitability assessment. These include, for instance, temperature limitations for cultivation, tolerance to drought or frost, optimal and marginal temperature ranges for cultivation, and, for some crops, specific requirements at different phonological stages.
(9) To assess the suitability of soils for particular land utilization types, soil requirements of crops must be known. In addition, these requirements must be understood within the context of limitations imposed by landform and other features which, perhaps, do not form a part of soil but may have a significant influence on the use that can be made of the soil. Distinction is made between internal soil requirements of crops, such as soil temperature regime, soil moisture regime, soil fertility, effective soil depth for root development and chemical soil properties, and external requirements related to soil slope, occurrence of flooding and soil accessibility.
(10) Matching rules for comparing requirements of crops and livestock to the attributes of a particular agro-ecological cell are devised by experts and stored in a database.
(11) As a result of the agro-climatic and agro-edaphic matching procedures, each agro-ecological cell is rated in terms of several suitability classes with respect to all land utilization types relevant in that location.
(12) On the basis of crop suitability, the productivity assessment tries to capture important factors that impact upon the production levels that can be attained on an annual basis: production increases due to multiple cropping resulting from intensification of cultivation in space and time are taken into account in the analysis, as are possible productivity losses due to soil erosion. Since the productivity estimates relate to production on a sustainable basis, fallow requirements, to maintain soil fertility and structure and to counteract soil degradation caused by crop cultivation, are imposed depending on climatic conditions, soil type and level of inputs and management.
(13) The productivity assessment records input level specific production of relevant and agro-ecologically feasible cropping activities; the stored information includes amounts of main produce and by-products, input requirements and associated soil erosion. The algorithms applied impose a filter that eliminates activities that are ecologically unsuitable in the agro-ecological cell under consideration, too risky with respect to climatic uncertainties, environmentally unacceptable, or much inferior to other possible activities in this land unit in terms of both expected economic benefit and nutritional value. At this stage of the analysis a database is created that contains for each agro-ecological cell quantified information on all feasible land utilization types. This database lends itself to tabulating or mapping potential arable land by crop or zone; but more important, the database provides the necessary geo-referenced agronomic data for district or national planning
scenarios.
(14) The performance of livestock systems is estimated by describing a representative herd composition, by age and sex, fertility rates and mortality, and quantifying pro duction of meat, milk and other outputs in relation to different management levels and feed quality. Input to output relationships of livestock systems, expressed per reference livestock unit, as implied by feed requirements and resulting production of the total herd is recorded in a livestock systems productivity database for use in the planning model.
(15)Planning scenarios in the AEZ application are specified by selecting and quantifying objectives and various constraints related to aspects such as demand preferences, production targets, nutritional requirements, input constraints, cash flow constraints, feed balances, crop-mix constraints, and tolerable environmental impacts. Given the potentially large number of agro-ecological cells and number of activities to be taken into consideration, the objective function and the constraint set have been defined by means of linear relationships to allow for application of standard linear programming techniques.
(16) Different sets of assumptions, e.g. regarding population growth, availability and level of inputs, consumer demand, etc., are stored in the scenario catalog, a database used by the application programs.
(17) Output from the AEZ application report writer is kept in a scenario summary data base and can be linked to the geographical information system for visualization of the results.
Several of the steps sketched above will be illustrated and further explained in the following chapters. However, it is recommended to install the software system for hands-on practicing, as described in the User Manual.
The User Manual and software described in this Report are available from FAO Distribution and Sales Section, Viale delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy. Fax No. 396-52253152 or 5155. Email: Publications/Sales@fao.org.
<section>2</section>
Exploring Kenya-AEZ
Back to contents - Previous file - Next file
Exploring the land resources inventory
Generating yield tables according to moisture conditions (a)
Generating yield tables according to moisture conditions (b)
The first step is to install the PC version of the KENYA-AEZ software and go through the brief introduction to the file structure and menu options available using the User Manual. The software and the User Manual are provided as diskette files. Now we will start exploring the database and software system by doing some practical exercises. To print results from these exercises make sure the printer is properly connected, turned on and set to condensed mode (132 character page width). After starting the software the main menu (Figure 2.1) appears on the screen.
FIGURE 2.1 Main menu of KENYA-AEZ system
Exploring the land resources inventory
The second option under the main menu (SF2), LAND RESOURCE INVENTORY, allows for viewing the resource inventory, for compiling 2-way and 3-way cross-tabulation statistics, and viewing and printing these tables.
The land resources inventory brings together several layers of information on physical environmental resources and allows the creation of unique ecological land units (agro-ecological cells) within which landform, soil and climate conditions are quantified and considered nearly homogenous.
The climatic resource inventory of Kenya records both temperature and soil moisture conditions. The quantification of temperature attributes has been achieved by defining reference thermal zones. As temperature seasonality effects of latitude are minor, temperature zones are closely correlated to altitude ranges (Braun, 1982). To cater for differences in temperature adaptability of crops, pasture and fuelwood species, nine thermal zones have been distinguished, based on ranges of 2.5° Celsius.
Quantification of moisture conditions was achieved through the concept of reference length of growing period (LGP). Reference LGP is defined as duration (in days) of the period when temperature permits crop growth and soil moisture supply exceeds half potential evapotranspiration; it includes the time required to evapotranspire up to 100 mm of soil moisture storage (FAO, 1978-81). Growing periods which include a sub-period when precipitation exceeds potential evapotranspiration are termed 'normal' LGPs as compared to 'intermediate' LGPs with no such humid sub-period. The moisture period regime has been inventoried by means of three complementary attributes:
* number of separate length of growing periods within a year, summarized as a historical profile of pattern of length of growing periods per year (LGP-pattern). Twenty two such LGPpattern classes are recognized in the inventory;
* the mean total dominant length of growing period, i.e., the sum of mean dominant and associated length of growing periods occurring during the year. Fifteen LGP zone classes, thirteen spanning 30 day intervals each, plus an all-year-dry and all-year-humid zone, are distinguished;
* year-to-year variability of each length of growing period and the associated moisture conditions.
The map of mean total dominant LGP zones and the map of LGP-pattern zones, together with information (in table form) on length and probability of occurrence of associated growing periods, provide the historical moisture profile, compiled from data records of a large number of locations in Kenya.
The Exploratory Soil Map of Kenya (Sombroek et al., 1982), at a scale of 1:1 million, was used to compile the soil resources inventory. 392 different soil map units are distinguished, describing soil associations or soil complexes composed of dominant soils, associated soils and inclusions (390 map units) or relate to water bodies and major urban areas (2 map units). A mapping unit composition table has been provided (van der Pouw, 1983) containing percentage allocation of the map units by soil type, slope class, soil texture and soil phases. It also contains information derived from the legend of the soil map regarding landform and geology/parent material.
In addition to the soil and climate layers, six other layers of information have been incorporated in the land resources database, providing information on cash crop zones, forest zones, national park areas and game reserves, location of irrigation schemes, tse-tse infestation areas, and province and district boundaries.
The individual map layers were digitized and stored in a grid (raster) format of 1085 rows and 900 columns, each grid cell representing an area of one square kilometre. The land resources inventory combines both geo-referenced information as provided in the different map overlays and statistical information (percentage distribution) as contained in the soil mapping unit composition and slope composition tables. The compilation of the resource inventory includes:
* overlaying of map layers and creation of a GIS database file, and
* application of soil mapping unit composition and slope composition tables.
This process produced a collection of about 91000 data records, termed agro-ecological cells; these data records are unique in terms of the combination of land and climate characteristics. This level of detail ensures that each agro-ecological cell represents a fairly homogenous set of agroclimatic and soil physical conditions, as is crucial to adequately matching land unit properties with crop requirements.
From the coded information contained in a land inventory record it is possible to identify the respective grid raster points in the GIS to which an entry relates. Because of the disaggregation implied by the mapping unit composition table and the slope composition table, usually more than one land inventory record will refer to the same set of grid points. Therefore, the results to be transferred to the GIS must be aggregated to average values per raster point. 18 attribute fields are distinguished:
Field Column Field contents
1 1 - 2 province code; class values 1 to 8
2 3 - 4 district code; class values 1 to 13, depending on province
3 5 - 6 thermal zone; 9 classes
4 7 - 8 mean total length of growing period (LGP); 15 classes
5 9 - 10 LGP-Pattern; class values 1 to 22
6 11 - 13 Kenya Exploratory Soil Map unit; 392 map units
7 14 -16 soil unit code; class values 1 to 135
8 17 coarse material indicator; class values 0 to 6
9 18 -19 texture code; class values 1 to 34
10 20 -21 phase combination; class values 0 to 73
11 22 -23 slope class; class values 1 to 11
12 24 -26 slope gradient in 1/10 percent
13 27 -28 cash-crop zone indicator; 19 class values
14 29 forest zone; 4 class values
15 30- 31 irrigation scheme; 21 class values
16 32 Tsetse infestation; 2 class values
17 33 game park; 4 class values
18 34 - 41 cell extent; size of agro-ecological cell in ha
TABLE 2.1
AEZ cross-tabulation, thermal zone vs. forest zone
Field 3 (Thermal zone) versus Field 14 (Forest zone)
After ROW - Normalization
Forest THZ F1 F2 F3 Total
THZ 198.9 .2 .0 1.0 66.5
THZ 2 100.0 .0 .0 .0 9.9
THZ 3 99.5 .5 .0 .0 7.0
THZ 4 97.2 2.8 .0 .0 7.8
THZ 5 86.7 13.2 .1 .0 5.9
THZ 6 52.5 43.5 3.9 .0 2.2
THZ 7 47.9 52.1 .0 .0 .5
THZ 8 57.5 42.5 .0 .0 .2
THZ 9 100.0 .0 .0 .0 .0
Total 96.8 2.5 .1 .7 100.0
After COLUMN - Normalization
Forest THZ 
THZ 1 67.9 4.2 .0 100.0 66.5
THZ 2 10.2 .2 .0 .0 9.9
THZ 3 7.2 1.5 .0 .0 7.0
THZ 4 7.8 8.8 .0 .0 7.8
THZ 5 5.3 31.6 8.4 .0 5.9
THZ 6 1.2 39.1 91.6 .0 2.2
THZ 7 .3 11.3 .0 .0 .5
THZ 8 .1 3.2 .0 .0 .2
THZ 9 .0 .0 .0 .0 .0
Total 96.8 2.5 .1 .7 100.0
The land resource inventory (LRI) file is created by superimposing administrative, climatic, soil and land-use data contained in ten thematic maps. The maps are stored in raster format, i.e., data arranged in 1085 rows and 900 columns of square pixels, each representing an area of one square kilometre. Data is stored by row, from north-west to south-east. In this way, each map contains 976500 pixels, usually stored as one byte each, of which about 40 percent falls outside the national boundaries (in that case coded as pixel value zero). Note that the LRI must be recreated whenever one of the thematic maps is modified. The third item, CREATE INVENTORY, available in the sub-menu under main menu option seven (SF7), GIS-FUNCTIONS, is provided for that purpose.
Example 2.1: Cross-tabulation of land resources data. It provides statistics on the coincidence of pairs of classes of different land resource inventory attributes. For instance, to obtain a crosstable about the occurrence of forest zones according to different thermal zones, proceed as follows:
Step 1: In the main menu of KENYA-AEZ, position the cursor on the second option (SF2), LAND RESOURCE INVENTORY, and press < ENTER> 5.
Step 2: In the sub-menu presented to you, select option two, STATISTICS, and press <ENTER>.
Step 3: The program prompts for the first attribute field to be selected. Classes of this field will form the rows of the cross-table. Enter 3, to choose the thermal zone field.
Step 4: The program prompts for the second attribute field to be selected. Classes of this field will form the columns of the cross-table. Enter 14, to select the forest zone field.
Step 5: The program prompts for the third attribute field to be selected. This is optional and allows for 3-way cross-tables. Enter 0 to obtain a 2-way table.
Now, the program will start processing the land resource inventory and report on progress. Note that processing 3-way cross-tables of the entire LRI may take considerable time.
Depending on software configuration, up to three tables are provided:
(a) percentage of total area occupied by respective combinations of attribute values.
(b) row normalized percentages, i.e., distribution of extents with a particular class value of attribute 1 over the entire range of class values of attribute 2.
(c) column normalized percentages, i.e., distribution of extents with a particular class value of attribute 2 over the entire range of class values of attribute 1.
Table 2.1 shows row and column normalized results of cross-tabulating thermal zones versus forest zones in Kenya.
For instance, the row-normalized table shows that about half the area in thermal zone T7 (52.1 percent) is in forest class F1. The column-normalized table indicates that more than 80 percent (31.6+39.1+11.3 percent) of forest class F1 occur in thermal zones T5 to T7. The border row and column of the tables indicate the percentage of area of classes of attribute 2 and attribute 1, respectively. For instance, the first value in the bottom row of the cross-table shows that most (96.8 percent) Kenyan land falls outside the three forest zone classes; the first value in the last column indicates that about 2/3 of the country (66.5 percent) are in thermal zone T1 (warm tropics, mean annual daily temperature > 25° Celsius).
<section>3</section>
Generating yield tables according to moisture conditions (a)
Back to contents - Previous file - Next file
The third option of the main menu (SF3) is used to generate tables of expected primary yield by crop type for all admissible combinations of pattern codes and length of growing period zone codes. Individual LGP-pattern component yields are added up using pattern distribution probability weights to arrive at expected average annual yields (under single cropping). In addition to average yields, expected output under best and worst climatic conditions is calculated. At this stage, the assessment does not yet consider edaphic constraints.
The yield generating module consists of a four-fold nested loop: over two broad soil unit types (Fluvisols and other soils), a range of LGP-pattern codes, and a range of length of growing period codes. The inner-most loop runs over a range of crop codes. Growth cycle requirements are tested against the number of days available for plant growth. Expected yield by individual LGP-pattern and by component LGP is computed and weighted by the probability of occurrence of each pattern; this results in average yields for given climatic conditions. Minimum, maximum and average yields are stored for use in crop suitability (SF4) and land productivity assessment (SF5). To generate yield tables for the currently selected level of inputs (low, intermediate or high), proceed as follows:
Step 1: In the main menu of KENYA-AEZ, position the cursor on the first option shown (SF1), DATABASE, and press <ENTER>.
Step 2: In the sub-menu on display, select option three (SF3), PREPARE DATA, and press <ENTER> .
Step 3: Return to the main menu of KENYA-AEZ, position the cursor on the third option (SF3), ATTAINABLE YIELDS, and press <ENTER> .
Step 4: In the sub-menu appearing on the screen, select the first option (SF1), GENERATE TABLE, and press < ENTER > .
Step 4 will load the yield generating module and run it to evaluate yields for all possible combinations of LGP-pattern and component LGP.
Example 2.2: Calculating maize yields. In the LRI about 35 percent of Kenya is shown as belonging to LGP-pattern zone 13, LGP-pattern symbol 2-1. According to the pattern proportion table, these areas have two distinct growing seasons in 70 percent of the years, and one growing season in the remaining 30 percent. Over 80 percent of the land in LGP-pattern zone 13 has a mean total dominant LGP of less than 120 days. A small fraction of the area is indicated as having a mean total LGP of 210-239 days (LGP code 9). Let us consider, for instance, maize yields in that zone. According to the LGP-pattern rule table, LGP code 9 in LGP-pattern zone 13 has the following characteristics:
TABLE 2.2
Example of attainable maize yields at intermediate input level
Crop Growth
cycle
(days)
Maximum
yield
(kg/ha)
Thermal
zone
LGP[21]
(kg/ha)
LGP[22]
(kg/ha)
LGP[11]
(kg/ha)
Average
yield
(kg/ha)
Maize 1 70-90 2370 T1,T2,T3 360 1860 2540 2064
Maize 2 90-110 3510 T1,T2,T3 0 2530 3450 2806
Maize 3 110-130 4450 T1,T2,T3 0 3200 4350 3545
Maize 4 120-140 5320 T4 140 3500 4880 3914
Maize 5 140-180 5840 T4 0 0 5200
Maize 6 180-200 6440 T4 0 0 4120 0
Maize 7 200-220 6820 T5 0 0 4560 0
Maize 8 220-280 4490 T5 0 0 2500 0
Maize 9 280-300 4500 T5,T6 . 0 490 0
(a) 2 growing periods in 70 percent of years, with a longer component growing period, LGP[21], of 120-149 days (component LGP code 6), and a shorter component growing period, LGP[22], of 60-89 days (component LGP code 4).
(b) 1 component growing period in 30 percent of years, LGP[11], of 180-209 days (component LGP code 8).
In the yield generating module, both these situations are evaluated and average yields are derived. Table 2.2 sumniarizes the relevant information on maize yields in LGP-pattern zone 13 (dominantly bimodal), mean dominant LGP zone 9 (210-239 days), at intermediate level of inputs. Crop types are considered viable only if the growth cycle fits entirely within the longest growing period (long rains) of the dominant pattern component. In this example, the dominant pattern component is bimodal (70 percent of years), the longest component LGP is LGP[21] with 120-149 days. Table 2.2 shows that in low-land areas (thermal zone T1-T3, i.e., at an altitude < 1550 metres), Maize 3 performs best; in thermal zone T4 (15501950 meters altitude) only the shortest high-land maize types, Maize 4 with 120-140 days growth cycle, could be cultivated. Figure 2.2 shows agronomically attainable yields of lowland maize types according to length of component growing period, at intermediate level of
inputs.
LAND PRODUCTIVITY ASSESSMENT - AN EXAMPLE
The fifth option (SF5) PRODUCTIVITY ASSESSMENT processes the records of the land inventory and computes for each location the production potential by single crop as well as crop combinations according to the following rules:
FIGURE 2.2 Attainable lowland maize yields at intermediate input level
FIGURE 2.3 Screen display, program AEZCCSO3
(1) Crop growth cycle suitability
(2) Thermal zone rating
(3) Soil unit rating
(4) Slope gradient cultivation factor|
(5a) Coarse material rating
(5b) Texture rule
(6) Phase rule
(7) Fallow land requirements rule
(8) LGP-pattern distribution
Application of these rules yields a productivity factor relating average yield to the maximum attainable yield of a particular crop. In each location every admissible crop combination is also evaluated in terms of implied soil loss from erosion (only water erosion is considered).
A record from the land inventory file is read and primary production for each crop is calculated under the specific agro-climatic conditions. Crop productivity assessment takes into account water stress, agro-edaphic requirements, inter-cropping increment multipliers, and rest period requirement factors. If at least one feasible crop, i.e., a crop that is sufficiently productive in the given environment, is identified in the current cell, then relevant cell information is saved and evaluation continues.
As a next step, multipliers of the USLE (Universal Soil Loss Equation), for which evaluation is independent of the actual land-use (i.e., crop combination), are calculated: the rain erosivity factor, the rain erosivity distribution during the growing period, the soil credibility multiplier, the slope length factor, and the protection factor, as relevant under the given agro-ecological conditions and the chosen input level.
A major task in the KENYA-AEZ land productivity assessment is the construction of meaningful sequential crop combinations. Amongst all combinatorically possible combinations, the admissible cropping patterns are filtered out evaluated and, subject to certain performance criteria, saved for later processing.
The crop combinations are also assessed in terms of soil erosion hazards. A crop combination specific multiplier in the USLE is calculated, i.e., a combined crop cover and management subfactor, derived by matching the members of a sequential crop combination to the component LGPs of the current LGP-pattern and mean total LGP codes. Estimated annual soil loss is then translated into estimated productivity loss.
At this point, the program has completed data processing for the current cell and proceeds reading the next land inventory record. The described computations continue until the end of the land inventory file (EOF) is reached, i.e. the last cell has been processed.
The screen display of the productivity assessment module (see Figure 2.3) provides information on the progress of the assessment. It shows the attributes of the agro-ecological cell being processed and indicates the number of crop combinations analyzed and accepted in the current cell. Also, the cumulative number of records is indicated which are saved for later use. On a PC, evaluation of larger districts with several thousand agro-ecological cells, e.g., Meru district, may take several minutes.
After generating yield tables (as explained in the previous section) one can proceed as follows to generate a district productivity file:
Step 1: In the main menu of KENYA-AEZ, position the cursor on the fifth option (SF5), PRODUCTIVITY ASSESSMENT, and press <ENTER>.
Step 2: In the sub-menu which appears on the screen, select option one (SF1), SET DISTRICT/SCENARIO, and press <ENTER>. Specify the district and input level as needed.
Step 3: Return to the sub-menu of PRODUCTIVITY ASSESSMENT, position the cursor on the second option (SF2), CREATE PRODUCTIVITY DB, and press < ENTER > .
Step 3 will load the productivity program and generate a land productivity database file for the specified district and level of input. The output file from the assessment is stored in directory \AEZ\KENYA\BIN for later use in district analysis. If AEZ assessment rules are changed in the database or the land resources inventory is modified, the land productivity file must be generated again.
/Example 2.3: Evaluating an Agro-ecological Cell
The productivity assessment program is a centre-piece of KENYA-AEZ. It creates the necessary database for district planning scenarios. It is, therefore, worthwhile to take a closer look at the operations performed in the program. For that purpose, let us select a record from the land resource inventory, an agro-ecological cell in Meru district, and look at production options generated by the above procedure. The standard setting of the control file is used. It makes the following assumption regarding the construction and filtering of crop combinations:
* a maximum of 3 crops is considered for forming a sequential crop combination, i.e., all crop combinations with one, two or three members are considered;
* longer cycle crops are forced to precede shorter cycle crops. For example, when evaluating crop combinations consisting of maize (e.g., lowland maize type 3, growth cycle of 110-130 days) and gram (e.g., green gram type 1, growth cycle 60-80 days) only the sequence maize/gram is evaluated while gram/maize is disregarded;
* for each primary crop component only crop combinations with the maximum feasible number of components are considered. For instance, if maize/gram can be grown in an agro-ecological cell, then the crop combination consisting of only maize will be disregarded;
* the turn-around time between two crops is set at 10 days;
* estimated yields of crops to be considered must be at least 20 percent of maximum attainable yields;
* the threshold level for acceptance of crop combinations from within a particular crop group is set at 0.95. For instance, among all the crop combinations with one of the maize types as first crop component only those which reach at least 95 percent of the best criterion values for these crop combinations, are retained in the district productivity file;
* the threshold value for overall acceptance of crop combinations is set at 0.10, i.e., only crop combinations that exceed 10 percent of the optimal criterion values in the cell under consideration are retained;
* the crop combination selection filter as configured does not accept mono-cropping;
* in case of crop combinations with wet-land rice as first or last crop component, 30 and 15 days are subtracted from the beginning or end of the LGP, respectively, to cater for the particular moisture requirements of the crop.
If required, the parameters used in the crop combination filter can be customized. For instance, if sequential combinations of particular crops should be avoided the crop combination selection filter can very easily modify to take into account such conditions. Similarly, threshold levels of the two acceptance criteria (within group and overall performance) could be adjusted. The agro-ecological cell data record analyzed in this example reads as follows:
Example
The line underneath the data record indicates the width of the individual attribute fields; the cross marks the end of each field. The record contains the following information:
Field Column Value Contents Explanation
1 1 -2 3 province code Eastern Province
2 3 -4 6 district code Meru
3 5 -6 1 thermal zone mean daily temp. > 25° Celsius
4 7 -8 9 mean total LGP total growing period of 210 - 239 days
5 9 -10 13 LGP-pattern 2-1, with an occurrence of 70:30
6 11 -13 224 mapping unit soil mapping unit Pn1
7 14 -16 33 soil unit code Nito-rhodic Ferralsols
8 17 0 coarse material no coarse material indicated
9 18 -19 34 texture code Clay
10 20 -21 0 phase combination no soil phase indicated
11 22 -23 2 slope class slope class AB: 0-5 %
12 24-26 35 slope gradient average slope gradient of 3.5%
13 27 -28 0 cash-crop zone no cash crop zone indicated
14 29 0 forest zone no forest indicated
15 30 - 31 0 irrigation scheme no irrigation scheme indicated
16 32 0 tsetse infestation no potential for tsetse infestation
17 33 0 game park cell does not belong to game park
18 34- 41 1150 extent extent of agro-ecological cell (ha)
A few remarks may be helpful: Mapping unit Pn1 belongs to the landform of non-dissected erosional plains. In the legend of the Kenya Exploratory Soil Map it is described as: 'well drained, very deep, dark reddish brown to dusky red, friable clay; in places bouldery (nito-rhodic FERRALSOLS)' . The land extent under consideration falls into thermal zone 1, i.e., a mean daily temperature >25° Celsius applies, corresponding to an altitude below 800 m. The mapping unit composition table contains only one entry for mapping unit Pn1, i.e., only one soil type (nito-rhodic Ferralsols) is identified; texture and slope class apply to the whole unit. No phase is indicated.
The attached slope class code is 2, i.e. slope class AB, representing slopes in the range of 0-5 %. According to the slope composition table, the mapping unit must be split into two entries, half the cell relating to a slope range of 0-2 %, the other half relating to a slope range 2-5 %. The land resource inventory record that we have chosen refers to the latter with an average slope gradient of 3.5%.
The inventoried mean total length of growing period for the cell, located in the north-east of Mount Kenya, is LGP code 9, i.e., sufficient moisture supply for a total growing period of 210-239 days, indicating quite favourable conditions.
LGP-pattern code 13 indicates that there are usually two distinct growing periods, in seven out of ten years according to historical profiles, and one combined growing period in about 30 percent of the years. The reference table relating the mean total dominant LGP to the corresponding mean total associated LGPs (see FAO/IIASA: 1991 Tech. Annex 7) lists the following for the bimodal case: the first associated component LGP, LGP21 with code 6, is 120149 days, the second associated LGP, LGP22 with code 4, lasts 60-89 days.
The list of crop types considered in the AEZ assessment for Kenya is listed in Appendix A (Table A.2). It contains 64 types of food and cash crops, pastures, and 31 fuelwood species; 12 species with nitrogen fixation ability, 19 species without. First, the growth cycle requirements of all 64 crop types are tested against the length of the dominant component LGP; in this example, LGP21 with a length of 120-149 days. For the land unit under consideration, 23 crop types pass both the thermal zone screen and the growth cycle matching. These include one or more types of maize, millet, sorghum, dryland rice, cowpea, green gram, pigeon pea, groundnut, soybean, cassava, sweet potato, and sisal.
For instance, consider production of low-land maize type Maize 3, 110-130 days. In the previous section, Example 2.2, the maximum attainable yield in zones with LGP-pattern 13 and LGP 9 was determined at 3.6 t/ha/year. The soil unit rating of nito-rhodic Ferralsols for maize is S2, like with most Ferralsols, i.e., suitable with some limitations depressing yields by 25 percent. The clay texture does not affect the rating. The modest average slope gradient of 3.5 % passes the slope-cultivation association screen which tolerates dryland crops on terrain with slope gradients of up to 30 %. Fallow requirements to maintain soil fertility and ensure sustainable production, under given conditions and input level, are set at 21 percent, i.e., 1 out of 5 years the land would not be permitted to be under crop cultivation.
In a reasonably long mean total length of growing period, as we are considering here, additional yields from multi-cropping must be considered. The inter-cropping increment depends on the level of inputs, the length of the growing period and the overall crop suitability (FAO/IIASA, 1991, Technical Annex 4). At the intermediate level of inputs, with moisture availability well above 120 days, the inter-cropping increment for maize is estimated at around 7.5 percent, i.e., a LER (land equivalent ratio) of 1.075. Combining agro-climatic and agro-edaphic assessment, and allowing for inter-cropping increment, an average yield of 2.9 t/ha/year for low-land type Maize 3 (i.e., 3.6 x 0.75x1.075=2.9) is calculated.
Under the given agro-ecological conditions, Leucaena leucocephalis (crop sequence number 76) and Sesbania sesban (crop sequence number 77) are assessed as the most productive fuelwood species with nitrogen fixation ability. Eucalyptus grandis (crop sequence number 95) and Eucalyptus saligna (crop sequence number 96) fare best among species without such ability.
The prevailing moisture conditions, as expressed by the LGP-pattern and total length of the growing period, allow for two crops to be grown each year. With options set to default values, the selection algorithm constructs a total of 109 feasible crop combinations in the current cell, comprised of one or two sequential crop components.
In addition to agronomic feasibility, a filter mechanism, testing for economic and/or nutritional value, is used to identify the most productive crop combinations. In our example, 19 out of 109 sequential cropping activities were selected. The filter mechanism uses four criteria: revenue per unit of area in average (criterion V3) and bad (criterion V4) years; nutritional value in average (criterion V1) and bad (criterion V2) years. A crop combination is selected and stored for later use if it is reasonably competitive in at least one of the four criteria. Table 2.3 lists the crop combinations which were accepted in the agro-ecological cell under consideration. According to this assessment, the best options include cassava, maize/grams and maize/millet; next is sweet potato with a short crop of millet, maize, green gram or sorghum.
The soil erosion hazard in the agro-ecological cell depends on land use. It is quantified by means of a modified Universal Soil Loss Equation (USLE),
A = R x K x LS x(C* x M) x P, which involves estimates of rain erosivity, soil erodibility, slope effect (slope length factor), crop cover factor and protective management practices. Each of the factors making up the USLE is quantified in each cell, for all viable crop combinations, for pastures and selected fuelwood species. Details of the parameterization used in the Kenya study are described in FAO/IIASA (1991: Technical Annex 2).
<section>4</section>
Generating yield tables according to moisture conditions (b)
Back to contents - Previous file - Next file
TABLE 2.3 Crop combinations selected in land unit of example 2.3
Nr First crop
type
Growth
cycle
Nr Second
crop type
Growth
cycle
Rank by criterion Com-
V1 V2 V3 V4 bined rank^1
6 Maize 3 110-130 16 P.Millet 1 60-80 2 2 11 5 3
6 Maize 3 110-130 37 G.Gram 1 60-80 3 3 4 4 2
17 P.Millet 2 80-100 4 Maize 1 70-90 13 14 16 16 16
25 Sorgh.3 110-130 16 P.Millet 1 60-80 10 5 15 15 14
38 G.Gram 2 80-100 4 Maize 1 70-90 15 16 12 14 15
40 Grndnut 2 100-140 16 P.Millet 1 60-80 12 12 3 3 7
40 Grndnut 2 100-140 37 G.Gram 1 60-80 16 15 2 2 9
48 Soybean 2 100- 140 16 P.Millet 1 60-80 11 10 14 7 12
48 Soybean 2 100-140 37 G.Gram 1 60-80 14 13 10 6 13
49 Cassava 150-330 1 1 1 1 1
50 Sw.Pot. 1 115-125 16 P.Millet 1 60-80 5 4 13 13 9
50 Sw.Pot. 1 115-125 37 G.Gram 1 60-80 9 11 5 12 11
51 Sw.Pot. 2 125-145 4 Maize 1 70-90 6 6 7 8² 5
51 Sw.Pot. 2 125-145 16 P.Millet 1 60-80 4 6 8 8 4
51 Sw.Pot. 2 125-145 23 Sorgh. 1 70-90 7 6 9 8 7
51 Sw.Pot. 2 125-145 37 G.Gram 1 60-80 8 6 6 8 6
63 Sisal 150-270
65 Pasture 0-265
76 Leucaena 120-365
95 Eucalyptus 180-365
^1 Derived from average unweighted rank under the four criteria.
^2 In three out of ten years the second crop fails to complete the growth cycle.
In the given moisture zone, with a mean dominant length of growing period of 210-239 days, the rainfall erosion factor is estimated to be R=369 erosion index units. This value is based on estimated relationships between LGP, rainfall and rainfall erosivity.
The soil credibility factor K accounts for rate of soil loss, in t/ha/year per erosion index unit. It ranges from less than 0.1 for the least erodible soils to approaching 1.0 in the worst possible case. In the model, each agro-ecological cell is assigned to one out of seven erodibility classes, depending on soil type, soil phase and texture. Nito-rhodic Ferralsols with clay texture are considered to be of low erodibility. They are adjudged soil erodibility class 2, with an average soil erodibility factor of K=0.11.
In our example, slopes are fairly gentle, in the range of 2-5 %. For an assumed slope length of 150 metres and an average slope angle of 3.5 %, the resulting slope length factor becomes LS=0.8.
The combined crop cover and management factor, C* x M, is determined by evaluating ground cover for different crop development stages and integrating over the growing season. For example, the crop combination of maize (long rains) and millet (short rains) results in an average cover factor 0.5. This is further adjusted to 0.4, accounting for increased ground cover during rest periods - the fallow requirement is 21 percent, i.e., 1 out of 5 years. From the above, without specific physical protection measures, the soil loss is estimated as:
A[p]=[1.0] = 369 x 0.11 x 0.8 x 0.4 = 13 t/ha/year
This corresponds to about 1.1 mm topsoil loss per year. With well managed protection measures, consisting of tied ridging, trash lines and converse terraces, an estimated physical protection factor P=0.067 results, and annual soil loss would reduce to:
A[p]=[.067] = A[p]=[1.0] x 0.067 = 1 t/ha/year
an amount well below tolerable levels of soil loss. Even without such measures, the regeneration capacity of topsoil - modeled as a function of thermal zone and length of growing period stipulates an annual addition of topsoil of 1.3 mm, making up for the estimated erosion losses. Therefore, the productivity of the crop combination maize/millet is not assumed to be adversely affected by water erosion in the given agro-ecological cell.
Example 2.4: Estimating the Food Production Potential of Kenya
The assessment procedures outlined in the example above have been applied to all LUTs in all 91000 agro-ecological cells of the Kenya land resource inventory. This process produced a georeferenced database containing information on the extent and productivity of potentially arable land resources and associated production potential of crops, pastures and fuelwood species. To quickly get an indication of the food production potential in Kenya, at intermediate level of input, a simple procedure was introduced to decide ad-hoc which of the crop combinations that passed the filter mechanism should be selected as 'best' land use. The objective was to maximize a weighted sum of energy and protein production available for food consumption in each cell.
For presentation, the results were then aggregated over agro-ecological cells to broad agroclimatic zones, as well as district, province and national level. The information base was also summed over crop types to indicate production potentials of crop species, e.g., production of maize rather than nine individual maize types.
Four classes are used in the presentation of results, relating average crop yields in an agroecological cell to maximum attainable yield. Classes C[1] to C[4] represent average yields of > 80 % (very productive), 60-80% (productive), 40-60% (moderately productive), 20-40% (marginally productive), respectively, compared to maximum attainable yields.
Country results at the intermediate level of inputs are given in Table 2.4. The table shows estimates of arable land by productivity class and of potential crop production. Extents of potentially rainfed arable land given in the upper part of the tables are calculated in two steps: (i) All crop combinations were evaluated according to their performance under different climatic conditions as described by the LGP-pattern attribute of a cell. (ii) Among all qualifying crop combinations the one maximizing the weighted sum of food energy plus protein was selected as describing a cell's land potential. The results are indicative of the land capability, but do not take into account any other social, economic or resource constraints. This will be discussed in the next chapter.
TABLE 2.4 Kenya food production potential at intermediate input level
The estimates of arable land were grouped according to mean total dominant LGP into four broad climatic zones: the arid zone (areas with mean total dominant length of growing periods < 120 days), the semi-arid zone (areas with LGPs of 120 to 179 days), the sub-humid zone (areas with LGPs in the range of 180 to 269 days), and a humid zone (areas with LGPs >270 days). Extents of arable land (classes C' to C4) are also expressed as a percentage of total zone area.
In the calculations, all land marked in the resource inventory as forest zone and/or game park is excluded. The extent of potentially cultivated land in Kenya, under the conditions described above. amounts to some 6.6 million ha. 2.6 million ha are adjudged very good or good potential (classes C[1] and C[2]), 2.0 million ha are rated moderately productive (class C[3]). The balance, another 2.0 million ha, is of low potential (class C[4]),
The arable extents in classes C[1] to C[4] account for 11.4 percent of Kenya's total land area. In the sub-humid and humid zones 52 and 58 percent, respectively, of the land is rated suitable for rainfed crop production, and about 1/4 in the semi-arid zone. Maize and millet would account for 2.9 million ha of arable land. The estimated multi-cropping index amounts to 137 percent. The subhumid and humid zones, although only accounting for about 15 percent of Kenya's land area, contribute some 70 percent of potentially arable land.
<section>5</section>
Spatial resource allocation - a linear programming approach
Back to contents - Previous file - Next file
The LP matrix generator
The objective function
The LP constraint set
So far, each agro-ecological cell has been assessed in terms of all feasible agricultural land use options of interest in the analysis. At a given level of input, the suitability assessment records expected production of relevant and agro-ecologically feasible cropping activities, in terms of main produce as well as various by-products (e.g., crop residues and by-products), extents by suitability class, input requirements and degradation hazard, i.e., potential soil and productivity loss due to water erosion. This procedure does not derive optimal land use patterns but rather constructs an inventory of potential agricultural land use options with relevant quantitative information. Such an inventory is essential to devising optimal land use patterns that take into account physical, socioeconomic, technological and political objectives and constraints.
It is important to understand that optimal land use cannot be defined per se but always relates to clearly and well specified objectives and constraints. The algorithms applied try to achieve a maximum fulfillment of the level of the specified objective, operating within the given set of constraints. The AEZ productivity assessment forms the back-bone of the physical layer of the constraint set.
In the Kenya study, the objective function and the constraints have been defined by means of linear relationships to allow for application of standard linear programming (LP) techniques. These algorithms are well established and reliable and, most important, can be applied to large scale problems as can arise in this context, with several thousand decision variables and often more than a thousand constraints. The model specification and solution techniques described here have been developed at the International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA). More demanding techniques, like non-linear programming or multi-criteria optimization, could readily be applied, but at the expense of a significant increase in computational complexity. For instance, several mathematical techniques exist to handle multiple objectives, through weighting or hierarchical ranking of objectives; also, thorough treatment of uncertainty and production risks could be achieved by means of
stochastic optimization techniques.
Before presenting further details of the planning model, it may be illustrative to discuss a simple example of optimal land resource allocation in terms of an LP formulation.
Example 3.1: Allocating Two Crops in Two Land Units, Maximize Food Production
A farmer has a farm that consists of two land units. Land unit LU1, with an extent of 100 ha, is of good quality. Land unit LU2 is of only moderate quality; its extent is 200 ha. Two cropping activities are possible: crop A and crop B. Crop A yields 3 tons per ha on land unit LU1, and 2 tons per ha when cultivated on LU2. It has a good nutritional value: a food energy content of 3000 Kcal per kg, and 5 percent protein content. Crop B gives a yield of 1.5 t/ha and 0.5 t/ha, respectively on land units LU1 and LU2. It contains less energy but more protein: 2000 Kcal food energy per kg of product, a protein content of 20 percent. The farmer wants to:
(1) produce as much food as possible (in energy terms).
(2) produce at least 75 tons of crop B.
(3) obtain a diet with sufficient protein, i.e., the ratio of calories to protein produced must not exceed 40; e.g., in a diet of 2000 Kcal/day there would be at least 50 g protein.
(4) no crop should occupy more than 75 percent of any land unit.
Item (1) states the objective of the farmer; items (2)-(4) formulate constraints to the allocation of land. The simple problem stated above can be written in the format of a standard linear program:
max cx
subject to: Ax <= b
Let x=(x[1], x[2], x[3], x[4]) be the solution of the land allocation problem; x1 denotes the share of land unit LU1 allocated to crop A, x[2] the share of LU1 allocated to crop B. Obviously, the sum of x[1] and x[2] cannot exceed 1, i.e., land can only be used once. Similarly, x[3] and x[4] are the shares of land unit LU2 allocated to crop A and B. respectively. For the same reasons, x[3] +x[4] <= 1 must hold.
The coefficients in the objective function c=(c[1], c[2], c[3], c[4]) express the food energy content per unit of activity level. For instance, allocating all land in LU1 to crop A would earn c[1] = 3 t/ha x 100 ha x 3000 Mcal/t = 900*103 Mcal; allocating all land in LU1 to crop B yields weight c[2] = 1.5 t/ha x 100 ha x 2000 Mcal/t = 300*10^3 Mcal. In the same way, we proceed to determine the remaining weights in the objective function: c[3] = 2 t/ha x 200 ha x 3000 Mcal/t = 1200*10^3 Mcal, and c[4] = 0.5 t/ha x 200 ha x 2000 Mcal/t = 200*10^3 Mcal. Thus vector c becomes c=(900, 300, 1200, 200).
Production q=(q[1], q[2], q[3], q[4]) obtained per unit of activity is easily calculated. For instance, crop A produces q[1] = 3 t/ha x 100 ha = 300 tons on land unit LU1, and q[3] = 2 t/ha x 200 ha = 400 tons on land unit LU2; crop B produces q[2] = 1.5 t/ha x 100 ha = 150 tons on land unit LU1, and q[4] = 0.5 t/ha x 200 ha = 100 tons on land unit LU2. Production of crop B. related to activity levels x[2] and x[4], defines the coefficients to be used in the first constraint (item (2) above). Note that a 'greater or equal' constraint can be converted to 'less or equal', by multiplying with a factor of -1.
Food energy and protein from each activity are calculated in multiplying production by the respective conversion coefficient. The coefficients to be applied in the constraint concerning the ratio of calories to protein produced (second row of LP constraints matrix) can be obtained from:
a[21] = q[1 ]x (3-0.05x40) = 300
a[22] = q[2] x (2-0.20x40) = -900
a[23] = q[3 ]x (3-0.05x40) = 400
a[24] = q[4] x (2-0.20 x40) = -600
Finally, the condition expressed in item (4) is best translated into simple upper bounds on activity levels, i.e., the maximum share of a land unit to be allocated to any crop is 0.75. In this way we construct all coefficients of the LP:
maxz=(900 300 1200 200)x
s.t.:
Even in this simple example, it would be cumbersome to find an optimal solution without the help of computers and appropriate LP Solver software. For communication with such LP packages, the coefficients of the objective function, constraints matrix, right-hand side, and optionally bounds on variables, must be formatted following an established standard, the MPS file format (see Appendix C). In the MPS file, activities are identified by user defined 8-character column names, constraints are addressed by 8-character row names. In the example given here, ROW00000 refers to the objective function, ROW00001 to ROW00004 identify the four constraints of the LP. Coefficients of the constraints matrix are specified by indicating the respective column (name of activity) and row. Only coefficients with non-zero values need to be specified. Similarly, the non-zero values of the constraint vector b are specified in the RHS section of the MPS file. A default value for lower and upper
bounds on activity levels is specified in the specification section (SPECS) of the above file.
The LP Solver can produce detailed information on activity levels, active constraints, etc. The solution x of Example 3.1 is obtained as x=(0.625, 0.375, 0.750, 0.250). Constraint rows 2 to 4 are binding, i.e., the ratio of calories to protein produced is exactly 40, and all the land is used for crop production. Production of crop B is 81.25 tons, exceeding the minimum of 75 tons stated in constraint row 1. The optimal value of the objective function is z=1625*103 Mcal.
Below is a sample MPS input file describing the LP of Example 3.1:
BEGIN
MAXIMIZE
LOWER BOUND 0.0E+00
UPPER BOUND 7.5E-01
SOLUTION YES
PUNCH FILE 19
END
NAME Example 3.1
ROWS 
N ROW00000 
L ROW00001 
L ROW00002 
L ROW00003 
L ROW00004 
COLUMNS 
X0000001 ROW00000 900.00
X0000001 ROW00002 300.00
X0000001 ROW00003 1.00
X0000002 ROW00000 300.00
X0000002 ROW00001 -150.00
X0000002 ROW00002 -900.00
X0000002 ROW00003 1.00
X0000003 ROW00000 1200.00
X0000003 ROW00002 400.00
X0000003 ROW00004 1.00
X0000004 ROW00000 200.00
X0000004 ROW00001 -100.00
X0000004 ROW00002 -600.00
X0000004 ROW00004 1.00
RHS 
RHS1 ROW00001 -75.00
RHS1 ROW00003 1.0000
RHS1 ROW00004 1.0000
ENDATA 
Communication with the LP Solver package is via a LP specification file (LP SPECS) and an LP punch file (LP_PNCH). For example, the LP solution file from Example 3.1 is listed below:
NAME EXAMPLE 5.1 PUNCH/INSERT IER= 0 ITN= 3 NINF= 0
x1 X0000001 ROW00002 6.25000E-01 
x1X0000002 ROW00003 3.75000E-01 
u1 X0000003 7.50000E-01 
x1 X0000004 ROW00004 2.50000E-01 
ENDATA 
The LP solution file indicates the exit status from the LP Solver package; e.g., IER=0 means that an optimal solution was found. The number of iterations, ITN = 3, and the number of infeasibilities, NINF=O, are also listed. Another simple example, which illustrates how the choice of the objective function affects the resulting land allocation, follows.
Example 3.2: Allocating Two Crops in Two Land Units, Maximize Revenue
The problem specification introduced in Example 3.1 remains the same, but the objective of farmer is changed to:
(1') maximize the net revenue from production.
(2) produce at least 75 tons of crop B.
(3) obtain a diet with sufficient protein, i.e., the ratio of calories to protein produced must not exceed 40; e.g., in a diet of 2000 Kcal per day there would be at least 50 g protein.
(4) no crop should occupy more than 75 percent of any land unit.
Item (1') requires different weights in the objective function. Let the prices paid to the farmer be $80 per ton and $200 per ton, respectively for crop A and crop B. Production costs per ha vary depending on crop and land unit, e.g., cultivation of crop A requires $20 per ha on land unit LU1 and $80 per ha on land unit LU2; production costs for crop B are $50/ha and $25/ha, respectively. From this the corresponding weights of the activities in the objective function are derived as:
c[1] = 80 x q[1] - 20 x 100 = 22000
c[2] = 200 x q[2] - 50 x 100 = 25000
c[3]=80 x q[3] - 80 x 200=16000
c[4 ]= 200 x q[4] - 25 x200 = 15000
Then the coefficients of the LP are constructed:
maxz=(22000 25000 16000 15000)x
s.t.:
The solution x of Example 3.2 is obtained as x=(0.250, 0.750, 0.750, 0.250). Within the limits on mono-cropping, each land unit would be allocated to the economically best use, i.e., land unit LU1 to crop B and land unit LU2 to crop A. The optimal value of the objective function is z=40000 $. Note that the optimal solution obtained in Example 3.1 results in a lower net revenue of $ 38875.
In the Kenya study, the land resource inventory is organized by district, and for some districts the inventory consists of several thousand land units, with many possible crop combinations and livestock related activities to be considered. A spatial resource allocation model has been developed for integrating livestock, crop and fuelwood production sectors within the framework of this study on AEZ Land Productivity Assessment and its application to Potential Population Supporting Capacity and Development Planning in Kenya. Like with any model of this kind, the formulation gets revised and improved as new insights, needs or quantified information becomes available. The strength of the approach lies in its extensive and consistent use of spatial information for assessing agricultural land use options within the context of district development planning. An LP matrix generator program is used to evaluate the cropping options and to generate the LP description in MPS file format.
The LP matrix generator
The LP generator, which is the second item of the sub-menu of option (SF6) DISTRICT ANALYSIS, reads the output from the land productivity assessment and prepares a data file for input to a LP package according to the specifications given in the scenario control input file. Output is generated in standard MPS file format.
In the scenario control input file the user specifies the mode of operation, several program control switches and, optionally, a set of constraints of the linear program which is prepared to subsequently arrive at an optimal land use pattern.
The main program loop starts with reading the cell information record from the land productivity file created by the productivity assessment program, option (SF5). Basic accounting of cell extents takes place, population density relevant to the current cell is retrieved, and the crop combination records relating to the current cell are screened. Each crop combination record is assessed for potential food and feed supplies, crop residues and by-products. Input requirements for production in terms of seeds, fertilizer, power and pesticides are derived by interpolation from a technology matrix and the respective weight in the objective function of the LP is determined. Relevant coefficients of the LP constraint matrix are generated.
After all crop combination records available for the current land inventory cell are processed, the program proceeds with reading the next cell information record continuing this sequence of operations until all cells have been read and dealt with.
Finally, the program turns to the livestock systems feeding and distribution constraints. While processing all the crop combination information, the program also calculates and aggregates data on feed supply by livestock zone. This information is used to generate livestock zone and livestock system specific feed balances and livestock system share constraints. The program ends with writing out the LP specification - objective function, constraint matrix, right hand sides and activity bounds - in standard SPECS and MPS data file format. Since the MPS file format is rather verbose, the resulting output file can become fairly large (several Mb in some cases).
In the following a summary of the linear programming formulation is presented, describing the objective function and constraints that were used in the analysis. For a mathematical description of the model the reader is referred to Appendix B of this report.
The objective function
The objective function of a district LP describes, in terms of a linear relationship, the economic or political objective of an assessment. It relates the decision variables to a measure of effectiveness and allows for a quantitative evaluation of a specific setting of decision variables and of a potentially large number of feasible options. There are three groups of decision variables:
a) the land use shares, i.e., the share X[kj] of agro-ecological cell j allocated to a particular cropping activity k,
b) the number of units L[sz] of livestock system s kept in zone z and
c) the feed ration f[iltsz] of feed item I from crop i, allocated to livestock system s, in period t, in zone z.
These variables form the columns of the LP matrix, the set of activities in the linear program. In the current implementation of the LP model, five different specifications of objective functions are optionally available. They relate to the following objectives:
a) Maximize food production in terms of food energy (calories) available for human consumption, i.e., food energy content of production less seed, feed, waste and conversion losses. For instance, this objective function is used to assess population supporting capacity.
b) Maximize net revenues of producers, i.e., gross value of production less the cost of production inputs.
c) Minimize use of arable land required to achieve a given set of production targets.
d) Minimize cost of production for achieving a given set of production targets.
e) Maximize domestic self-sufficiency in agricultural products (in terms of broad commodity groups, such as cereals, root crops, meats, etc.). The objective is, for a given set of demands, to maximize the minimum of the jointly achievable individual commodity group self-sufficiency ratios.
All five types of objective functions outlined lend themselves to linear formulations. They allow for a wide range of assessments relevant to development planning.
<section>6</section>
The LP constraint set
Back to contents - Previous file - Next file
A realistic assessment requires a thorough description of relevant constraints to be considered in the selection of optimal land use. These can relate to technological conditions, physical limitations, social, institutional and economic constraints and political targets. In the following, the set of constraints that has been implemented for use in the Kenya study is briefly discussed. Note, however, that not all the constraints need to be activated in every scenario, but can be included as appropriate and relevant.
Demand Targets by Aggregate Commodity Group
Lower and/or upper bounds or equality constraints on food availability, specified by broad commodity groups, e.g., cereals, pulses, roots, meats, etc., can be used to enforce fulfillment of food demand targets from domestic production (rainfed or irrigated) and imports. Since irrigated production and imports, in the present version, are specified exogenously, these constraints imply production targets by broad commodity groups. For the year 2000 scenarios, levels of food demand have been derived from projected demographic changes and per capita income growth. The model user can either supply absolute levels of target demand or have demand targets constructed by the LP generator from per capita demand targets and demographic information.
Commodity Production Targets
Lower and/or upper bounds or equality constraints on individual commodity production, e.g., wheat, white potato, beef, etc., can be selected to achieve appropriate commodity bundles in the production plan. This, for instance, could be an appropriate device to enforce sufficient production of cash-crops in food maximizing scenarios.
Limits on Harvested Area by Aggregate Commodity Group
The harvested area by commodity group (e.g., cereals, pulses, roots, etc.) can be controlled by means of lower and/or upper bounds and equality constraints implemented at district level. This can be useful to ensure desired allocation of land to cash-crops or fuelwood production.
Crop-wise Land Use Constraints
Lower and/or upper bounds and equality constraints to limit crop-wise use of arable land resources have been implemented. Although not much applied in the assessment of production potentials, these constraints allow for much control over land allocation in the optimization procedure.
Total Arable Land Use Constraint
Lower and/or upper bounds or equality constraints on total arable land use by broad climatic zone and/or district serve to reflect considerations regarding land use other than for agricultural production purposes, e.g., forest areas, specific non-agricultural uses, etc. In the Kenya study, when assessing crop and livestock production potentials, total arable land constraints were usually not enforced, i.e., all potentially suitable land in all zones is assumed to be available for agricultural purposes, except for non-agricultural land use requirements, forest and game park areas.
Production Input Requirements
Associated with the assessment of agricultural production in each land unit is the quantification of production inputs required according to the specified level of technology. Input requirements are derived from a technology matrix by interpolation; i.e., from a set of tabular functions that relate, for each crop and livestock system, different yield levels to input requirements in terms of seed (traditional and/or improved), fertilizer (N. P. and K), power, and plant protection/veterinary inputs. In addition, labor required for soil conservation measures is quantified. This set of constraints provides a means of ensuring that production input requirements and resource use for crop and livestock production stay within the limits of the resource endowment in terms of relevant input categories, e.g., labor, capital, fertilizer, power, etc. Negative input-output coefficients are used in case of activities which generate resources, e.g., power from animals.
Crop-Mix Constraints
A set of constraints, optionally to be specified by district, either by broad climatic zones, i.e., arid and dry semi-arid (mean dominant LGP of 0-120 days), moist semi-arid (LGP of 120180 days), sub-humid (LGP of 180-270 days) and humid (LGP of 270-365 days) zone, or by agro-ecological zone, i.e., overlay of thermal zones with individual LGP zones and zones of LGP pattern, can be used to exercise control on cropping patterns by enforcing limitations on shares (minimum and maximum levels) of arable land use to be occupied by individual crop groups. Of course, care must be taken to ensure that the imposed crop distribution is in accordance with agro-ecological suitability to avoid infeasibilities. The level of enforcement for this set of constraints is controlled by means of scenario parameters.
Human Calorie/Protein Ratio Requirements
These constraints ensure that, by broad climatic zones, the crop production plan is such that the ratio of calories to protein obtained from food products stays within nutritionally acceptable ranges.
Distribution of Livestock Population over Livestock Zones
The concept of livestock zones has been introduced to relate the climatic information contained in the resource inventory to broader climatic zones relevant to describing and delineating different livestock systems and formulating their integration with the crop production plans of the respective agro-ecological zones. For the purpose of this study, it has been assumed that the livestock zones fall into a subset of the climatic subdivision used in the land resource inventory. Sixteen livestock zones are distinguished (see Appendix A, Table A. 18).
The livestock population distribution constraints allow to impose lower and/or upper bounds or equality constraints on shares in total livestock populations (herd TLUs) to be considered in each of the livestock zones.
Distribution of Livestock Systems within Livestock Zones
This set of constraints describes the composition of the supported livestock population within each livestock zone in terms of different livestock systems. This is done by imposing lower and/or upper bounds or equality constraints on the shares of individual livestock systems in the total number of livestock units supported in the zone. In the Kenya study, up to ten livestock systems, out of a total of some thirty systems, at traditional, intermediate and improved management levels, have been considered in each livestock zone: this includes pastoral production systems of camel, cattle, and sheep and goat, and sedentary production systems of cattle, sheep and goat, pigs and poultry.
Constraints on Number of Animals by Livestock System
To cater for situations when the information in the land resources inventory does not provide sufficient data regarding the appropriate livestock systems to select, e.g., water availability in pastoral areas, lower and upper bounds on the number of TLUs by livestock system can be specified.
Livestock Feed Requirement Constraints
In setting up feed demand-supply balance constraints it is important to include relevant aspects of quality and quantity of feed supplies in time and space. In the Kenya study, livestock feed balance constraints are implemented for all livestock zones that have been delineated on the basis of climatic characteristics. The livestock zones are conveniently formulated in terms of the thermal regime and the length of growing period. The required feed supply has to be provided from feed sources within each livestock zone, i.e., crop by-products and residues, pastures and browse, fallow grazing, browse from fuelwood trees, and in some scenarios - primary products. Each set of constraints, by zone, is formulated in terms of four relevant items: minimum and maximum daily dry matter intake, digestible protein of feed ration, and metabolizable energy.
Since the seasonal variation in quality and quantity of feed supplies often plays a critical role for livestock raising in pastoral areas, two feeding periods within the year - wet season and dry season - have been stipulated. The length of each period in a particular agro-ecological cell varies according to the climatic information in the land resources inventory. It is assumed that the length of the wet season equals the site specific length of growing period.
The seasonal crude protein (CP) feed quality constraints ensure that the digestible crude protein (pop) contents of the livestock system specific seasonal feed intake lies within the prescribed tolerance band and that the annual average pop contents of the feed intake does not fall below average annual requirements.
Similarly, the seasonal metabolizable energy (ME) feed quality constraints ensure that the ME contents of the seasonal feed intake lies within the prescribed tolerance band and that the annual average ME contents of the feed intake does not fall below average annual requirements. For example, improved animals with higher productivity also require higher energy concentration in the diet.
In summary, feed balance constraints have been imposed for each of the livestock zones in terms of four relevant nutritional parameters and for each of two feeding seasons.
Zone Level Production Risk Constraint
The AEZ land resources inventory of Kenya includes some information on the variability of rainfall, and hence, the varying length and type of the growing period. This allows for assessing production options in 'good' years, 'bad' years, as well as production on average. While valuations used in the objective function usually refer to average productivity, zone level risk constraints are implemented to ensure that the resulting land allocation emphasizes the stability of the production plan also in 'bad' years, i.e., in vulnerable areas to give preference to crop combinations that will produce also in 'bad' years, even at the expense of lower average performance.
Agro-ecological Cell Use Constraint
Obvious as it may appear to be, the LP algorithm requires to explicitly ensure that the sum of shares allocated to different crop production activities in each land unit does not exceed 100 percent, i.e., that each piece of land can only be used and allocated once (this does not preclude sequential multi-cropping). While the number of constraints described under the above constraint sets is independent of the number of records in the land inventory, a singleuse constraint, as discussed here, has to be implemented whenever more than one cropping activity is feasible in a particular agro-ecological cell. The detailed land inventory of Meru District, for instance, consists of well over 3000 agro-ecological cells resulting in a large number of cell use constraints in the district LP. Similarly, the cell risk and crop rotation constraints, discussed below, operate at the level of a land unit. As a consequence the number of rows in the LP may easily become large.
Crop Rotation Constraints
Continued mono-cropping over time is not considered a sustainable agricultural practice under most circumstances as it exhausts soil fertility more easily and may cause pest and disease problems.
Although the AEZ methodology is essentially static, not explicitly considering crop rotations over time, this element has been captured by imposing upper limits on the share of each cell that can be occupied by an individual cropping activity. For example, imposing a limit of 70 percent as maximum share for maize in a particular cell can be interpreted as requiring that maize cannot be grown in more than 7 out of 10 cropping years, in addition to fallow requirements.
The mono-cropping restrictions are controlled through scenario parameters and are implemented as simple lower and upper bounds on cropping activities. They are not enforced in a cell when no alternative cropping options exist. Also, cassava and perennial crops like banana, oil-palm or sugar cane, or environmentally less demanding land uses, like cropping combinations including legumes, or pastures and fuelwood species, are not restricted by mono-cropping constraints.
It is also advisable to make a provision for biological nitrogen fixation in the cropping patterns at the low level of inputs circumstance. The crop rotation constraints provide a means to control the extent to which crop combinations from a particular crop group can occupy a land unit.
Cell Level Production Risk Constraints
As outlined above for the zone level, crop production risk constraints are also implemented at the cell level to ensure that the resulting land allocation emphasizes the stability of the production plan also in 'bad' years. The constraint is specified such that land use option selected in the optimal solution on the basis of production levels attainable on average should provide output levels also in 'bad' years that do not fall below a user specified threshold level in comparison to the best possible output obtainable in 'bad' years among all viable cropping options.
Environmental Impact Constraints
Environmental impact constraints have been provided to ensure that the optimal production plans are also environmentally compatible, stipulating that the environmental impacts in each cell must not exceed tolerable limits. At this stage, only soil degradation from water erosion is quantified. To keep LP sizes down, tolerable soil loss is dealt with by filtering out unacceptable crop combinations rather than imposing constraints in the LP.
<section>7</section>
Assessing district planning scenarios with Kenya-AEZ
Back to contents - Previous file - Next file
The scenario control file (SCF) (a)
The scenario control file (SCF) (b)
In this chapter several district planning scenarios are discussed to indicate the kind of quantitative analysis that can be addressed with the KENYA-AEZ system. As pointed out earlier, the system has a considerable history of development. It should not been seen as a frozen black box but as a tool that is gradually revised as additional data become available and new tasks are formulated. Bungoma district in Western province of Kenya serves as an illustrative case in the following examples.
Bungoma district is situated on the slopes and foothills of Mt. Elgon bordering Uganda. The district enjoys good soils and generally abundant and well distributed annual average rainfall of 1000-1800 mm, depending on location. The length of the total growing season exceeds 270 days in practically all of the district, allowing for multiple cropping patterns. Altitude of agricultural areas ranges from about 1300 m (thermal zone 3; 20.0-22.5° Celsius) in the southern part of Bungoma to about 3500 m (thermal zone 8; 5.0-10.0° Celsius) on the slopes of Mt. Elgon in the North of the district. Presently grown cereal crops include maize, wheat, barley and finger millet. There is good potential for beans and potatoes. In addition, several cash crops like coffee, tea, cotton, pyrethrum and sugar cane can be cultivated.
Table 4.1 summarizes the AEZ assessment of potentially arable land in Bungoma district and shows the maximum suitable extents by crop. About 200 thousand ha, i.e. over 60 percent of the entire district, is considered potentially arable. About 1/3 of this area is of only marginal quality. Maize, sorghum and beans are suitable on much of the potentially arable land. Cassava and potatoes could provide significant amounts of food energy. The assessment also asserts good potential for cash-crops like coffee, tea and pyrethrum.
In the 1979 census, the recorded population in Bungoma district slightly exceeded 0.5 million people. It is projected to increase to almost 1.3 million in year 2000. As a result, potentially arable land reduces from 0.4 ha/person in 1980 to 0.15 ha/person in year 2000. In the past, the growing population density has lead to increased fragmentation of holdings. Despite of generally favorable conditions the district is facing increased pressure on its resource base and, as the following examples will show, enhanced intensification of agricultural production will be required to secure future food supplies and adequate incomes.
TABLE 4.1 Potentially arable land, Bungoma District
The scenario control file (SCF) (a)
Each program of the Kenya-AEZ system package is controlled by a short input data file. Example 4.1 shows a simple version of the LP control data file for Bungoma district, to optimize land use for maximum food production at intermediate level of inputs, subject to meeting food preferences as expressed by per caput demand targets, and allowing production targets for cash-crops (coffee, cotton, pyrethrum). The LP program is run by using option SF6) DISTRICT ANALYSIS of the main menu. This control file is used both by the LP matrix generator program option (SF2) within option (SF6) as also the LP report writer option (SF4) within option (SF6). In the example, land marked as belonging to forest zones or game parks is excluded from the analysis or restricted in use. Distribution of livestock systems is controlled by equality and inequality constraints on the share that each system takes up in the total number of supported livestock units. For further details see FAO/IIASA (1991,
Technical Annex 7).
Example 4.1: Scenario Control File, Bungoma District
Example 4.2: Potential Population Supporting Capacity, Bungoma, District Scenario A
Population supporting capacity, as defined here, relates to the maximum potential of soil and climatic resources to produce food energy and protein, at a given level of technology. This first example is not concerned how this potential or the stipulated level of technology can be realized, nor does it consider production activities outside agriculture that could provide income for exchange of goods and food. So, population supporting capacity as used here is neither a dynamic concept nor does it include indirect sources of population support. The question is simply how much food can be produced on the potentially suitable land under optimal resource use? In order to compare this potential to the projected year 2000 population level, an intermediate level of inputs is assumed. Production is maximized in terms of energy content available for human consumption (MODE= 1 in the Scenario Control File), i.e., after subtracting appropriate amounts for conversion to food products and
for wastage. All potentially suitable land can be considered in the optimization, including forest and game parks (FPLAND=3 in the Scenario Control File). Minimum food requirements are set at 2320 Kcal/caput/day and 38.8 g protein/caput/day. An LP constraint on human calorie/protein requirements is used to ensure sufficient protein production. The resulting commodity bundle is not constrained in this example, which is called scenario A. The scenario is processed on the computer as follows:
Step 1: In the main menu of KENYA-AEZ, position the cursor on the sixth option (SF6), DISTRICT ANALYSIS, and press <ENTER>.
Step 2: In the sub-menu which is displayed, select option one (SF1), SET DISTRICT/SCENARIO, and press c ENTER > .
Step 3: The currently selected district, input level and scenario will be shown. If necessary change the setting to: province 8 (Western province), district 1 (Bungoma), input level 2 (intermediate), scenario A. This is the default setting of the demonstration version of the software, which is supplied with the User Manual. Press F5 to return to the district analysis sub-menu.
Step 4: Select the second menu item (SF2), LP MATRIX GENERATOR, and watch the processing of the land resources inventory. After completion, the LP SOLVER will start automatically.
Step 5: Select the fourth menu item (SF4), LP REPORT WRITER, to produce scenario summary tables.
Step 6: Optionally, view or print the result by selecting the respective menu option (SF5) or (SF6).
With the assumptions stated above, the assessment results in food production of about 1400 billion Kcal: At the stated minimum requirement of 2320 Kcal/caput/day, some 1.7 million people can be supported, i.e., about 30 percent more than projected for year 2000. The food maximizing production pattern would be largely based on cereals and root crops, respectively 110 kg and 350 kg per person annually, and with additional protein from livestock products, with per caput consumption levels of about 50 kg milk and 2.2 kg meat per year. Maize would account for one third of total harvested area, potatoes for some 25 percent.
FIGURE 4.1 Harvested area under maximum food production, Bungoma District
Figure 4.1 presents the distribution of harvested area obtained from optimal land allocation in scenario A.
Example 4.3: Maximize Food Production according to Preferred Pattern, Scenario F/Int
Although changing the consumption pattern could be an effective adaptation strategy to meet rising food demands, this second scenario example asks what the supported population number would be if: (a) forest zones and game parks were left untouched by agriculturalists (FPLAND=0 in SCF), and (b) the produced commodity bundle was forced to match past per caput consumption patterns of Western province (FLCPP= 1 in SCF). The target consumption levels per caput per year in scenario F are set at 139 kg cereals, 55 kg roots and tubers, 13 kg sugar, 50 kg bananas, 18 kg meat and 77 kg milk. The distribution of livestock units should follow observed patterns, i.e., almost 95 percent cattle, 2 percent each from sheep and goats, the remaining 1 percent from pigs and poultry. The objective in this scenario is specified as maximizing the joint fulfillment (self sufficiency ratio, SSR) of projected demand (MODE= 10 in SCF). The scenario is evaluated at the intermediate level of inputs. To
run this scenario, the procedure is similar to the previous example:
Step 1: In the main menu of KENYA-AEZ, position the cursor on the sixth option (SF6), DISTRICT ANALYSIS, and press <ENTER>.
Step 2: In the sub-menu which is displayed, select option one (SF1), SET DISTRICT/SCENARIO, and press < ENTER > .
Step 3: Change scenario to F. Press F5 to return to the district analysis sub-menu.
Step 4: Select the second menu item (SF2), LP MATRIX GENERATOR, and watch the processing of the land resources inventory. After completion, the LP SOLVER will start automatically.
Step 5: Select the fourth menu item (SF4), LP REPORT WRITER, to produce scenario summary tables.
Step 6: Optionally, view or print the result by selecting the respective menu option (SF5) or (SF6).
TABLE 4.2 Maximize food production according to preferred consumption pattern
Final Product Supply :
COMMODITY Supply Prim. Feed Net Supply Target % SSR
1 CEREALS 141443 10264 131178 176314 74.4
2 PULSES 20713 0 20713 27839 74.4
3 ROOTS 120248 68418 51830 69661 74.4
4 SUGAR 12106 0 12106 16271 74.4
5 OILS 0 0 0 4449 .0
6 BANANAS 48330 0 48330 129916 37.2^1
7 FUELWD 47290 0 47290 63560 74.4
8 MEAT 17214 0 17214 23136 74.4
9 MILK 72542 0 72542 97500 74.4
10 EGGS 946 0 946 1271 74.4
Land Use Statistics (Scenario F. intermediate input):
ha percent
District Area 319300 100.0
- Urban Area 4703 1.5
Agriculture Land 314597 98.5
- Irrigated Land 0 .0
Rainfed Land 314597 98.5
- Forest/Park Land 52445 16.4
of which used 0 .0
- Non-Suitable Land 12297 3.9
- Idle Land 0 .0
of which idle crop land 0 .0
of which idle grassland 0 .0
- Range Land 99086 31.0
- NS-Range Land 0 .0
- Fuelwood Area 4126 1.3
Arable Crop Land 149570 46.8
- Fallow Land 37519 11.8
Area Harvested, primary 112051 35.1
Area Harvested, secondary 95697 
Area Harvested, total 207748
Cropping Intensity 1.854 
^1 Banana is the only fruit commodity represented in the AEZ assessment; banana is assumed to account for about half the fruit consumption in Bungoma.
Table 4.2 shows aggregate production levels and statistics on land-use that result from scenario F. It indicates that under the assumption of intermediate level of inputs not more than 3/4 of the projected year 2000 commodity demand can be met the resource base of Bungoma district.
These results suggest that intensification of agricultural production is essential to meeting the projected district demand for crops, livestock products and fuelwood. The quality of the soil and climatic resources in Bungoma would certainly allow for such intensification; the demographic and socio-economic development, on the other hand, may hinder adoption of high input technologies.
<section>8</section>
The scenario control file (SCF) (b)
Back to contents - Previous file - Next file
Example 4.4: Maximize Food Production according to Preferred Pattern, Scenario F/High
To investigate the effect of an assumed adoption of a high level of inputs, scenario F is evaluated in this example at this most intensified technology level. Assuming that the land productivity database at high level of inputs is not available, the procedure to run this scenario is as follows:
Step 1: In the main menu of KENYA-AEZ, position the cursor on the fifth option (SF5), PRODUCTIVITY ASSESSMENT, and press < ENTER > .
Step 2: In the sub-menu select option one (SF1), SET DISTRICT/SCENARIO, and press < ENTER > . Specify high input, level 3, and press F5 to save the updated configuration..
Step 3: Return to the sub-menu (SF5) PRODUCTIVITY ASSESSMENT, position the cursor on the second option (SF2), CREATE PRODUCTIVITY DB, and press < ENTER > .
Step 4: Return to the main menu of KENYA-AEZ, position the cursor on the sixth option (SF6), DISTRICT ANALYSIS, and press <ENTER>.
Step 5: Select the second sub-menu item (SF2), LP MATRIX GENERATOR, and watch the processing of the land resources inventory. After completion, the LP SOLVER will start automatically.
Step 6: Select the fourth sub-menu item (SF4), LP REPORT WRITER, to produce scenario summary tables.
Step 7: Optionally, view or print the result by selecting the respective menu option (SF5) or (SF6).
TABLE 4.3 Maximize food production according to preferred consumption pattern
Land Use Statistics (Scenario F. high, input)
ha percent
District Area 319300 100.0
- Urban Area 4703 1.5
Agriculture Land 314597 98.5
- Irrigated Land 0 .0
Rainfed Land 314597 98.5
- Forest/Park Land 52445 16.4
of which used 0 .0
- Non-Suitable Land 38681 12.1
- Idle Land 0 0
of which idle crop land 0 .0
of which idle grassland 0 .0
- Range Land 70746 22.2
- NS-Range Land 0 .0
- Fuelwood Area 10504 3.3
Arable Crop Land 145589 45.6
- Fallow Land 14189 4.4
Area Harvested, primary 131400 41.2
Area Harvested, secondary 100800
Area Harvested, total 232200
Cropping Intensity 1.767 
FIGURE 4.2 Optimal land use under different input levels, Bungoma District
The optimal land allocation, assuming a high input level, results in production exceeding the projected demand of year 2000 by about 30 percent in all commodity groups. It produces
some 1260 billion Kcal, enough food for about 1.5 million people at 2320 Kcal/caput/day. In addition, 330 thousand livestock units would be supported to produce the necessary meat and milk products; land for cash-crops and fuelwood production is provided for; forest/game park zones would be preserved. Table 4.3 shows the land-use statistics obtained from scenario F. at high level of inputs.
It is interesting to note that a change in input level leads not only to an overall increased production level, but also results in altered proportions of land used for different production purposes. For instance, the amount of rangeland reduces notably; this is due to more productive (feed efficient) livestock systems and increased availability of crop residues and by-products. Also, an increased share of feed supply must be provided from primary crops, e.g., feed grains. Fallow requirements are reduced under high input level; on the other hand, extents not suitable for agriculture increase because of more severe slope limitations. Figure 4.2 compares land-use by major categories under scenario F. at intermediate and high input levels.
Example 4.5: Minimize Use of Arable Land, Bungoma District, Scenario H/High
The result of the previous example has shown that there is enough land, at least at high level of input, to meet projected district demand of year 2000. Then it is interesting to ask how much arable land would at least be required to produce exactly that amount. The objective becomes now to minimize the use of arable land subject to meeting district demand targets for food crops, livestock products, and fuelwood (MODE=6 of SCF); this is termed scenario H. The same constraints on cash-crop areas and livestock distribution are imposed as in the previous scenarios. Table 4.4 shows the land-use statistics from scenario H. at high level of inputs.
It turns out that under such optimal and intensified use of land resources about 113 thousand ha of arable land would be required for food and cash-crops, about 30 thousand ha of grassland, and some 3 thousand ha for intensified fuelwood production.
Setting aside land in forest/game park zones, making allowance for residential areas and infrastructure, and subtracting non-suitable land, scenario H leaves some 74 thousand ha unallocated, termed 'Idle Land' in Table 4.4. Of this, some 34 thousand ha would be suitable for some crops; the balance of 40 thousand ha could grow grass (or trees).
Figure 4.3 compares land use obtained under scenario F (maximize food production according to preferred target levels) and scenario H (minimize use of arable land subject to meeting demand targets in year 2000), both under high level of inputs.
Example 4.6: Maximize Production according to Preferred Pattern, Western Prov.
The last example in this chapter was chosen to illustrate that KENYA-AEZ can also be used to specify and analyse province level scenarios, and even conduct national analysis. For that reason, the software package contains two versions of the land resources inventory.
TABLE 4.4 Minimize use of arable land to produce district target demand
Land Use Statistics (Scenario H. High Input Level):
ha percent
District Area 319300 100.0
- Urban Area 4703 1.5
Agriculture Land 314597 98.5
- Irrigated Land 0 .0
Rainfed Land 314597 98.5
- Forest/Park Land 52445 16.4
of which used 0 .0
- Non-Suitable Land 33681 12.1
- Idle Land 74221 23.2
of which idle crop land 34071 10.7
of which idle grassland 40150 12.6
- Range Land 34557 10.8
- NS-Range Land 0 .0
- Fuelwood Area 3155 1.0
Arable Crop Land 113183 35.4
- Fallow Land 10948 3.4
Area Harvested. primary 102235 32.0
Area Harvested. secondary 72663 
Area Harvested. total . 174898
Cropping Intensity 1.711 
FIGURE 4.3 Optimal land use under different scenarios, Bungoma District
Detailed LRI files, based on a 1 x 1 km² grid, are kept in directory \AEZ\KENYA\LINV\ of the installation drive; these files are intended for district analysis. A more aggregate set of LRI files, derived from a 5 x 5 km² grid, can be found in directory \AEZ\KENYA\ LINVx5\. These should be used for province level analysis or in case of district analysis if PC resources are at a premium. The appropriate data directory must be specified in configuration file SCEN.CFG in directory \AEZ\KENYA\RUN\CFG.
FIGURE 4.4 Optimal land use, scenario F/High, Western Province
An inventory file for Western province was obtained by concatenating the individual LRI files of Bungoma (801), Busia (802), and Kakamega (803) district. In 1979, average population density in Western province was 225 persons per square kilometre, i.e., about 2 million people in an area of 8.7 thousand km². Population is projected to increase to 4.2 million by year 2000, resulting in a density of 475 persons per km². Obviously, only an intensive agricultural system will be able to provide enough food for this population. Assumptions of scenario F were used in the example, i.e., maximizing food production in accordance with specified target levels of per caput consumption. A high level of input is assumed. Under such conditions 4170 billion Kcal of net food energy can be produced, some 32 percent in excess of the projected minimum requirement. Agriculture, including food crops, cash-crops, pastures and fuelwood production, would account for 75 percent of land use. Maize and
rice would be the dominating crops. About 540 thousand livestock units (TLU) would need to be supported to provide sufficient meat and milk. Figure 4.4 illustrates the optimal structure of land-use and harvested area in Western province according to scenario F assumptions.
Many other scenarios could be constructed for Western province, relating to demographic development, economic criteria, environmental impacts, altered demand preferences, etc. The user of KENYA-AEZ is encouraged to explore the database and experiment with the system.
<section>9</section>
References
Back to contents - Previous file - Next file
Andrews, D.J., & Kassam, A.H., 1976. Importance of multiple cropping in increasing world food supplies. pp. l-10. In: Multiple Cropping. ASA Special Publication, No. 27.
Barr, D.A., 1957. The effect of sheet erosion on wheat yield. J. Soil Conservation Service of New South Wales, 13(1): 27-32.
Blair Rains, A. & Kassam, A.H., 1980. Land resources and animal production [in Africa]. Working Paper No. 8, In: FAO 1980, q.v.
Boonman, J.G., 1979. Development of cultivated pastures in the highlands of East Africa. Nairobi: Ministry of Agriculture.
Boudet, G., & Riviere, R., 1968. Emploi practique des analyses fourrageres pour la l'appreciation des pasturages tropicaux. Revue de l 'Elevage et de Medecine Veterinaire des Pays Tropicaux, 211: 227-266.
Brammer, H., Antoine, J., Kassam, A.H, & van Velthuizen, H.T., 1988. Land resources appraisal of Bangladesh for agricultural development. Technical Reports Nos. 1-7, FAO/UNDP project BGD/81/035, 'Agricultural development advice'. Dhaka: Bangladesh.
Bruinsma, J., Hrabovszky, J., Alexandratos, N., & Petri, P., 1983. Crop production and input requirements in developing countries. European Review of Agricultural Ecology, 10: 197-222.
Cannell, M.G.R., & Last, F.T., 1976. Tree Physiology and Yield Improvement. London: Academic Press.
Colvin, T.S., & Laflen, J.M., 1981. Effect of corn and soybean row spacing on canopy, erosion and runoff. Trans. ASEA, 24(5): 1227-1229.
CRIES [Comprehensive Resource Inventory and Evaluation System], 1983. Kenya Natural Resource Assessment. The Comprehensive Resource Inventory and Evaluation System (CRIES) Project. Michigan State University.
Critchley, W., 1984. Runoff harvesting for crop range and tree production in the BPSAAP [Baringo Pilot Semi-arid and Arid Lands Project] Area. Draft report BPSAAP. Marigat, Kenya: Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock Development.
Davidson, J., 1985. Species and site: what to plant and where to plant. UNDP/FAO project BGD/79/017, 'Assistance to the forestry sector of Bangladesh'. Field Doc. No. 5. Dhaka.
Doorenbos, J., & Kassam, A.H., 1979. Yield Response to Water. [FAO] Irrigation and Drainage Paper, 33. Rome.
Dunne, T., Dietrich, W.E., & Brunengo, M.J., 1978. Recent and past rates of erosion in semi-arid Kenya. Zeitschrift fur Geomorphologie, 29(Suppl.): 99-100.
Edwards, D.C., & Bogdan, A.V., 1968. Importance of grassland plants of Kenya. Nairobi: Pitman and Sons.
FAO, 1974. FAO-Unesco Soil Map of the World. Vol. I. Legend. Paris: Unesco.
FAO, 1976. A Framework for Land Evaluation. FAO Soils Bulletin, 32.
FAO, 1977. Agroclimatological data bank. Rome, FAO/AGPC.
FAO, 1978-81. Report on the Agro-ecological Zones Project. Vol.1, Methodology and results for Africa; Vol.2, Results for Southwest Asia; Vol.3, Methodology and results for South and Central America; Vol.4, Results for Southeast Asia. [FAO] World Soil Resources Report 48/1,-4.
FAO, 1980. Report on the Second FAO/UNFPA Expert Consultation on Land Resources for Populations of the Future. Rome, FAO.
FAO, 1981. Eucalypts for planting. FAO Forestry Series, 11.
FAO, 1984a. Land, Food and People. FAO Econ. Soc. Dev. Series, 30.
FAO, 1984b. Population supporting capacity assessment of Kenya. Mission Report. Rome, AGLFAO.
FAO, 1988. Pig Production in the Tropics. Proceedings of a seminar. Suchow, China. 21-25 September 1987. Edited N.R. Standal. Rome: FAO.
FAO, 1991. Guidelines: land evaluation for extensive grazing. FAO Soils Bulletin, 58.
FAO/IIASA, 1991. Agro-ecological land resources assessment for agricultural development planning: A case study of Kenya: Resources database and land productivity. Main Report and 8 Technical Annexes. Rome, AGL-FAO. 9 vols. 1150p.
FAO/UNFPA, 1980. Report on the Second FAO/UNFPA Expert Consultation on Land Resources for Populations of the Future. Rome, Italy, 4-6 December 1979. Rome: FAO. 379 p.
Goehl, B., 1981. Tropical feeds. FAO Animal Production and Health Series, 12.
Government of Kenya. 1986. Economic management for renewed growth. Sessional Paper No. 1. Government Printer, Nairobi.
Hammer, W.I., 1981. Soil Conservation Consultancy Report. Technical Note No.7, Centre for Soil Research, Bogor, Indonesia.
Higgins, G.M., & Kassam, A.H., 1981. Relating potential productivity to soil base. [FAO] Land and Water Development Division Technical Newsletter, 9 (July 1981).
Higgins, G.M., Kassam, A.H., Naiken, L., Fischer, G., & Shah, M.M., 1982. Potential population supporting capacities of lands in the developing world. Technical Report of project INT/75/P13, 'Land resources for populations of the future', undertaken by FAO/IIASA for UNFPA.
Houerou, H.N. Le. & Hoste, C.H., 1977. Rangeland production and annual rainfall relations in the Mediterranean Basin and the African Sahelo-Sudanian Zone. Journal of Range Management, 30(3): 181-189.
Hudson, N.W., 1981. Soil Conservation. London: Batsford.
Jaetzold, R. & Kutsch, H., 1980. Climatic data bank of Kenya. Department of Cultural and Regional Geography, University of Trier, Germany.
Jaetzold, R., & Schmidt, H., 1982. Farm Management Handbook of Kenya. Vol. II, Parts A, B & C. Nairobi: Ministry of Agriculture in cooperation with German Agency of Technical Cooperation.
Kassam, A.H., 1977. Net biomass production and yields of crops. Consultant's Report. Agroecological Zones project. FAO-AGL.
Kassam, A.H., 1980. Multiple cropping and rainfed crop productivity in Africa. pp. 123-195, In: FAO 1980, q.v.
Kassam, A.H., Kowal, J.M., & Sarraf, S., 1977. Climatic adaptability of crops. Consultants' Report. Agroecological Zones project. FAO-AGL, Rome.
Kassam, A.H., van Velthuizen, H.T., Higgins, G.M., Christoforides, A., Voortman, R.L., & Spiers, B., 1982. Assessment of land resources for rainfed crop production in Mozambique. Field Documents Nos. 32-37, FAO/UNDP project MOZ/75/011, 'Land and Water Use Planning'. Maputo, Mozambique.
King, J.M., Sayers, A.F., Peacock, C.P., & Kontrohr, E., 1982. Maasai herd and flock structure in relation to household livestock wealth and group ranch developement. ILCA Working Document, 27.
Kowal, J.M., & Kassam, A.H., eds., 1978. Agricultural Ecology of Savanna. Oxford: Clarendon Press.
KSS [Kenya Soil Survey], 1975. Soils of the Kindaruma Area (We", R.F. van de, & Mbuvi, J.P., eds.). Nairobi: Kenya Soil Survey.
KSS, 1976. Soils of the Kapenguria Area (Weg, R.F. van de, ed.). Nairobi: Kenya Soil Survey.
KSS, 1982a. Exploratory Soil Map and Agroclimatic Zone Map of Kenya. Eds. Sombroek, W.G., Braun, H.M.H., & van der Pouw, B.J.A. Nairobi: Kenya Soil Survey.
KSS, 1982b. Soils of the Kisii Area (Wielemaker, W.G., & Boxem, H., eds.). Nairobi: Kenya Soil Survey.
Lal, R., 1976a. Soil erosion on alfisols in Western Nigeria, I: Effects of slope, crop rotation and residue management. Geoderma, 16(5): 363-375.
Lal, R., 1976b. Soil erosion on alfisols in Western Nigeria, III: Effects of rainfall characteristics. Geoderma, 16(5): 389-401.
Lal, R., 1976c. Soil erosion on alfisols in Western Nigeria, V: The changes in physical properties and the response of crops. Geoderma, 16(5): 419-431.
Landsberg, J.J., 1986. Physiological Ecology of Forest Production. London: Academic Press.
Leeuw, P.N. de, & Peacock, C.P., 1982. The productivity of small ruminants in the Maasai Pastoral System in Kajiado District of Kenya. ILCA Working Document, 25.
Meadows, S.J., & White, J.M., 1981. Cattle structure in Kenya's pastoral rangelands. ODI Pastoral Network Paper, lie.
Mitchell, A.J., 1986. Soil erosion and soil conservation. Consultancy Report. FAO-AGLS, Rome.
Nilsson, N.E., 1983. An alley model for forest resources planning. Statistics in Theory and
Practice. Umea: Dept. Biometry and Forest Management, Swedish Univ. Agr. Sciences.
Nye, P.H., & Greenland, D.J., 1960. The Soil Under Shifting Cultivation. Bucks: Commonwealth Agricultural Bureaux.
Peacock, C.P., 1983. A rapid appraisal of goat and sheep flock demography in East and West Africa. Method, results and application to livestock research and development. ILCA Working Document, 28.
Peacock, C.P., 1984. Sheep and goat production on Maasai group ranches. PhD Thesis. University of Reading, UK.
Pratt, D.J., & Gwynne, M.D., 1977. Rangeland Management and Ecology in East Africa. London: Hodder and Stoughton.
Rattray, J.M., 1960. The grass cover of Africa. Rome: FAO.
Sanchez, P.A., Couto, W., & Buol, S.W., 1982. The fertility capability soil classification system: interpretation, application and modification. Geoderrna, 27: 283-309.
Semenye, P.P., 1982. A preliminary report of cattle productivity in Olkarkar, Merueshi and Mbirikani group ranches. ILCA.
Siderius, W., & van der Pouw, B.J.A., 1980. The application of the FAO-Unesco terminology of the Soil Map of the World Legend for soil classification in Kenya. Kenya Soil Survey Miscellaneous Soil Paper, No. M15.
Skerman, P.J., 1982. Tropical Forage Legumes [1st edition]. FAO Plant Production and Protection Series, No. 2.
Stallings, J.H., 1957. Soil Conservation. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
Stotz, D., 1983. Production Techniques and Economics of Smallholder Livestock Production Systems in Kenya. Farm Management Handbook of Kenya, Vol. IV. Nairobi: Ministry of Agriculture.
Teel, W., 1980. A Pocket Directory of Trees and Shrubs in Kenya. Nairobi: KENGO.
Unesco, 1982. Resource management for the Rendille Area of Northern Kenya. Integrated Project on Arid Lands (IPAL), Marsabit.
Van der Pouw, B.J.A., 1983. Detailed composition of the soil mapping units of the Exploratory Soil Map of Kenya at scale l :1 million. Wageningen: Stiboka.
Webb, D.B., Wood, P.J., & Smith, J., 1980. A guide to species selection for tropical and subtropical plantations. [Commonwealth Forestry Institute, Oxford] Tropical Forestry Paper, 15.
Wiggins, S. L., & Palma, O.G., 1989. Cost benefit analysis of soil conservation. Land Resources Development Centre [Tolworth, UK] Project Report, 104.
Wischmeier, W.H., & Smith, D.D., 1978. Predicting rainfall erosion losses. United States Department of Agriculture Handbook, No. 536.
Young, A., & Wright, A.C.S., 1980. Rest period requirements of tropical and subtropical soils under annual crops. pp. In: FAO 1980, q.v.
<section>a</section>
Appendix A Kenya case study coding schemes (A1)
Back to contents - Previous file - Next file
The large number of different elements entering a detailed AEZ country study requires a multiplicity of coding schemes to be devised to enter and address the various indicators in a way suitable for data processing. This Appendix contains the coding schemes relevant in the context of the Kenya Case Study including the following sub-sections (for additional coding information see FAO/IIASA (1991: Technical Annex 7):
A.1 Kenya District Codes
A.2 Crop Coding Scheme
A.3 Agricultural Commodities Coding Scheme
A.4 Aggregate Commodity Groups Coding Scheme
A.5 Thermal Zone Coding Scheme
A.6 Rainfall Pattern Coding Scheme
A.7 Length of Growing Periods
A.8 Cash Crop Area Coding Scheme
A.9 Forest Land Coding Scheme
A.10 Irrigation Coding Scheme
A.11 Park Land Coding Scheme
A.12 Tsetse Area Coding Scheme
A.13 Slope Class Coding Scheme
A.14 Soil Texture Coding Scheme
A.15 Coarse Material Coding Scheme
A.16 Soil Phase Coding Scheme
A.17 Soil Unit Coding Scheme
A.18 Livestock Zones Coding Scheme
A.1 Kenya District Codes
Code Nr District Province
01 01 Kiambu Central Province
02 02 Kirinyaga 
03 03 Muranga 
04 04 Nyandarua 
05 05 Nyeri 
01 06 Kilifi Coast Province
02 07 Kwale 
03 08 Lamu 
04 09 Mombasa 
05 10 Taita Taveta 
06 11 Tana River 
01 12 Embu Eastern Province
02 13 Isiolo 
03 14 Kitui 
04 15 Machakos 
05 16 Marsabit 
06 17 Meru 
01 18 Nairobi Nairobi Area
01 19 Garissa North-Eastern Province
02 20 Mandera 
03 21 Wajir 
01 22 South Nyanza Nyanza Province
02 23 Kisii 
03 24 Kisumu 
04 25 Siaya 
01 26 Baringo Rift Valley Province
02 27 Elgeyo Maraquet
03 28 Kajiado 
04 29 Kericho 
05 30 Laikipia 
06 31 Nakuru 
07 32 Nandi 
08 33 Narok 
09 34 Samburu 
10 35 Trans-Nzoia 
11 36 Turkana 
12 37 Uasin Gishu 
13 38 West Pokot 
01 39 Bungoma Western Province
02 40 Busia 
03 41 Kakamega 
<section>b</section>
Appendix A Kenya case study coding schemes (A2)
Back to contents - Previous file - Next file
A.2 Crop Coding Scheme
NR Name Code Description Cycle IAG*)
01 BARL 1 011 BARLEY(spring types) 090-120 01
02 BARL 2 012 BARLEY(spring types) 120-150 01
03 BARL 3 013 BARLEY(spring types) 150-180 01
04 MAIZ 1 021 MAIZE (lowland) 070-090 02
05 MAIZ 2 022 MAIZE (lowland) 090-110 02
06 MAIZ 3 023 MAIZE (lowland) 110-130 02
07 MAIZ 4 031 MAIZE (highland) 120-140 02
08 MAIZ 5 032 MAIZE (highland) 140-180 02
09 MAIZ 6 033 MAIZE (highland) 180-200 02
10 MAIZ 7 034 MAIZE (highland) 200-220 02
11 MAIZ 8 035 MAIZE (highland) 220-280 02
12 MAIZ 9 036 MAIZE (highland) 280-300 02
13 OAT 1 041 OAT (spring types) 090-120 03
14 OAT 2 042 OAT (spring types) 120-150 03
15 OAT 3 043 OAT (spring types) 150-180 03
16 MLLT 1 051 PEARL MILLET 060-080 04
17 MLLT 2 052 PEARL MILLET 080-100 04
18 RICE 1 061 RICE (dryland) 090-110 05
19 RICE 2 062 RICE (dryland) 110-130 05
20 RICE 3 071 RICE (wetland) 080-100 05
21 RICE 4 072 RICE (wetland) 100-120 05
22 RICE 5 073 RICE (wetland) 120-140 05
23 SRGH 1 081 SORGHUM (lowland) 070-090 06
24 SRGH 2 082 SORGHUM (lowland) 090-110 06
25 SRGH 3 083 SORGHUM (lowland) 110-130 06
26 SRGH 4 091 SORGHUM (highland) 120-140 06
27 SRGH 5 092 SORGHUM (highland) 140-180 06
28 SRGH 6 093 SORGHUM (highland) 180-200 06
29 SRGH 7 094 SORGHUM (highland) 200-220 06
30 SRGH 8 095 SORGHUM (highland) 220-280 06
31 SRGH 9 096 SORGHUM (highland) 280-300 06
32 WHEA 1 111 WHEAT (spring types) 100-130 07
33 WHEA 2 112 WHEAT (spring types) 130-160 07
34 WHEA 3 113 WHEAT (spring types) 160-190 07
35 COWP 1 211 COWPEA 080-100 08
36 COWP 2 212 COWPEA 100-140 08
37 GRAM 1 221 GREEN GRAM 060-080 09
38 GRAM 2 222 GREEN GRAM 080-100 09
39 GRND 1 231 GROUNDNUT 080-100 10
40 GRND 2 232 GROUNDNUT 100-140 10
41 BEAN 1 241 PHASEOLUS BEAN 090-120 11
42 BEAN 2 242 PHASEOLUS BEAN 120-150 11
43 BEAN 3 243 PHASEOLUS BEAN 150-180 11
44 PIGP 1 251 PIGEONPEA 130-150 12
45 PIGP 2 252 PIGEONPEA 150-170 12
46 PIGP 3 253 PIGEONPEA 170-190 12
47 SOYB 1 261 SOYBEAN 080-100 13
48 SOYB 2 262 SOYBEAN 100-140 13
49 CASV 311 CASSAVA 150-330 14
50 SPOT 1 321 SWEET POTATO 115-125 15
51 SPOT 2 322 SWEET POTATO 125-145 15
52 SPOT 3 323 SWEET POTATO 145-155 15
53 WPOT 1 331 WHITE POTATO 090-110 16
54 WPOT 2 332 WHITE POTATO 110-130 16
55 WPOT 3 333 WHITE POTATO 130-170 16
56 BANANA 411 BANANA 300-365 17
57 PALM 421 OIL PALM 270-365 18
58 SUGCAN 431 SUGARCANE 210-365 19
59 COFFEE 511 COFFEE (arabica) 240-330 20
60 COTTON 521 COTTON 160-180 21
61 PINE 531 PINEAPPLE 330-365 22
62 PYRETH 541 PYRETHRUM 210-330 23
63 SISAL 551 SISAL 150-270 24
64 TEA 561 TEA 240-365 25
65 GRASS 611 PASTURES/FODDER 0-365 -
66 ACACALB 711 ACACIA ALBIDA 030-240 26
67 ACACGER 712 ACACIA GERRARDII 090-300 26
68 ACACNIL 713 ACACIA NILOTICA 030-270 26
69 ACACSEN 714 ACACIA SENEGAL 030-240 26
70 ACACTOR 715 ACACIA TORTILUS 030-270 26
71 CALICAL 716 CALLIANDRA CALOTHYRUS 150-365 26
72 CONOLAN 717 CONOCARPUS LANCIFOLIUS 030-270 26
73 TAMAIND 718 TAMARINDUS INDICA 030-270 26
74 CASUEQU 731 CASUARINA EQUISETIFOL. 090-300 26
75 CASUCUN 732 CASUARINA CUNNINGHAN. 120-365 26
76 LEUCLEU 751 LEUCAENA LEUCOCEPHALA 120-365 26
77 SESBSES 752 SESBANIA SESBAN 120-365 26
78 CROTMEG 811 CROTON MEGALOCARPUS 120-300 26
79 GLIRSEP 812 GLIRICIDIA SEPIUM 150-365 26
80 GREVROB 813 GREVILLEA ROBUSTA 120-365 26
81 OLEOAFR 814 OLEO AFRICANA 120-300 26
82 BRIDMIC 831 BRIDELLA MICRANTHA 120-365 26
83 CALOCAP 832 CALODENDRUM CAPENSE 150-365 26
84 CASSSIA 833 CASSIA SIAMEA 090-300 26
85 CUPRLUC 834 CUPRESSUS LUCITANICA 180-330 26
86 EUCACIT 835 EUCALYPTUS CITRIODORA 120-300 26
87 EUCAMIC 836 EUCALYPTUS MICROCORYS 150-300 26
88 EUCAMIT 837 EUCALYPTUS MICROTHECA 030-270 26
89 EUCATER 838 EUCALYPTUS TERETICORN 090-210 26
90 FAURSAL 839 FAUREA SALIGNA 120-365 26
91 PARKACU 840 PARKINSONIA ACULEATA 030-180 26
92 PRUNAFR 841 PRUNUS AFRICANUM 150-365 26
93 EUCACAM 851 EUCALYPTUS CAMALDULEN. 090-270 26
94 EUCAGLO 852 EUCALYPTUS GLOBULUS 150-330 26
95 EUCAGRA 853 EUCALYPTUS GRANDIS 180-365 26
96 EUCASAL 854 EUCALYPTUS SALIGNA 150-365 26
*) Aggregation index from crop list to agricultural production list
<section>c</section>
Appendix A Kenya case study coding schemes (A3-A5)
Back to contents - Previous file - Next file
A.3 Agricultural Commodities Coding Scheme a) Crop Production:
NR Commodity IAG^a) Weight Extr^b) Cal^c) Prt^d) Waste^e)
01 BARLEY 01 1.00 0.80 3370 75 2.5
02 MAIZE 01 1.00 0.90 3530 93 10.0
03 OATS 01 1.00 0.50 3940 126 8.0
04 MILLET 01 1.00 0.90 3380 80 10.0
05 RICE 01 1.00 0.63 3630 70 2.5
06 SORGHUM 01 1.00 0.90 3450 107 10.0
07 WHEAT 01 1.00 0.75 3640 110 5.0
08 COWPEA 02 1.00 1.00 3420 234 10.0
09 GRAM 02 1.00 1.00 3400 220 10.0
10 GROUNDNUT 05 0.32 0.69 3840 162 5.0
11 BEANS 02 1.00 1.00 3410 221 10.0
12 PIGEON PEAS 02 1.00 1.00 3430 209 10.0
13 SOYBEANS 05 1.00 1.00 4050 337 10.0
14 CASSAVA 03 1.00 1.00 1100 9 3.0
15 SWEET POTATO 03 1.00 1.00 980 15 10.0
16 WHITE POTATO 03 1.00 1.00 710 15 10.0
17 BANANA 04 1.00 1.00 600 10 15.0
18 OIL PALM 05 1.00 1.00 8840 0 5.0
19 SUGAR CANE 06 0.10 1.00 280 3 0.0
20 COFFEE (ARABICA) -- 1.00 1.00 0 0 0.0
21 COTTON -- 1.00 1.00 0 0 0.0
22 PINEAPPLE -- 1.00 1.00 0 0 10.0
23 PYRETHRUM -- 1.00 1.00 0 0 0.0
24 SISAL -- 1.00 1.00 0 0 0.0
25 TEA -- 1.00 1.00 0 0 0.0
26 FUELWOOD 07 1.00 1.00 0 0 0.0
b) Livestock Production:
NR Commodity IAG^a) Weight Extr^b) Cal^c) Prt^d) Waste^e)
01 MEAT. BOVINE 08 1.00 1.00 2250 147 0.0
02 MEAT, SHEEP+GOAT 08 1.00 1.00 1800 145 0.0
03 MEAT, CAMEL 08 1.00 1.00 1740 127 0.0
04 MEAT, POULTRY 08 1.00 1.00 1220 123 0.0
05 MEAT, PIGS 08 1.00 1.00 4060 105 0.0
06 MILK, COWS 09 1.00 1.00 630 31 5.0
07 MILK, GOATS 09 1.00 1.00 850 34 5.0
08 MILK, CAMEL 09 1.00 1.00 630 20 7.5
09 WOOL, SHEEP -- 1.00 1.00 0 0 0.0
10 EGGS, POULTRY 10 1.00 1.00 1230 104 10.0
a) Aggregation index from agricult. production list to aggregate food list
b) Extraction rate
c)Calorie content (Kcal per kg)
d) Protein content (grams protein per kg)
e) Waste (in percent)
A.4 Aggregate Commodity Groups Coding Scheme:
NR Commodity Group
01 CEREALS
02 PULSES
03 ROOTS
04 SUGAR
05 VEGET.OIL
06 BANANAS
07 FUELWOOD
08 MEATS
09 MILK
10 EGGS
A.5 Thermal Zone Coding Scheme
Code Temperature (°Celsius) Altitude (meters) Explanation
001 > 25.0 800 < fairly hot to very hot
002 22.5 - 25.0 800 - 1200 warm
003 20.0 - 22.5 1200 - 1600 fairly warm
004 17.5 - 20.0 1600 - 2000 warm temperate
005 15.0 - 17.5 2000 - 2350 cool temperate
006 12.5 - 15.0 2350 - 2700 fairly cool
007 10.0 - 12.5 2700 - 3100 cool
008 5.0 - 10.0 3100 - 3900 very cool
009 < 5.0 < 3900 cold to very cold
<section>d</section>
Appendix A Kenya case study coding schemes (A6-A12)
Back to contents - Previous file - Next file
A.6 Pattern Coding Scheme
Code Symbol Pattern Proportion Rules (%)
H 1 2 3 4 D
02 H-1 60 40 
03 1-H 30 70 
04 1-H-2 20 65 15 
05 1-2-H 15 65 20 
09 1-2-D 40 35 25
10 1-D-2 40 25 35
11 1-D 60 40
14 2-1-H 15 30 55 
19 2-1-D 15 70 15
22 D 100
A.7 Length of Growing Periods
Code Symbol # days
001 LGP 01 0
002 LGP 02 1 - 29
003 LGP 03 30 - 59
004 LGP 04 60 - 89
005 LGP 05 90 - 119
006 LGP 06 120 - 149
007 LGP 07 150 - 179
008 LGP 08 180 - 209
009 LGP 09 210 - 239
010 LGP 10 240 - 269
011 LGP 11 270 - 299
012 LGP 12 300 - 329
013 LGP 13 330 - 364
014 LGP 14 365-
015 LGP 15 365+
A.8 Cash Crop Area Coding Scheme
Code Symbol Explanation
001 -- no cash crops
002 01 Tea (secondary)
003 02 Coffee (secondary)
004 03 Sugarcane (secondary)
005 04 Cotton (secondary)
006 05 Pyrethrum
007 06 Sisal (secondary)
008 10 Tea (primary)
009 12 Tea / Coffee
010 13 Tea / Sugarcane
011 15 Tea / Pyrethrum
012 20 Coffee (primary)
013 23 Coffee /Sugarcane
014 30 Sugarcane (primary)
015 34 Sugarcane / Cotton
016 -- n.a.
017 40 Cotton (primary)
018 60 Sisal (primary)
019 70 Pineapple (primary)
A.9 Forest Land Coding Scheme
Code Symbol Explanation
001 -- no forests
002 F1 registered forest
003 F2 unregistered forest
004 F3 proposed forest
A.10 Irrigation Coding Scheme
Code Symbol Explanation
001 -- no irrigation
002 01 Turkwell
003 02 Katilu
004 03 Amolem
005 04 Kaputir
006 05 Bunyala
007 06 Ahero I
008 07 Ahero II
009 08 Marigat
010 09 Mwea
011 10 Malka Daka
012 11 Merti
013 12 Mbalambala
014 13 Carisa
015 14 Hola
016 -- n.a
017 15 Garsen
018 17 Taveta
019 18 Mandere
020 19 Bura (proposed)
021 16 Wema
A.11 Park Land Coding Scheme
Code Symbol Explanation
001 -- outside park area
002 P1 National Park (U.N. Class)
003 P2 Game Reserve
004 P3 National Reserve
A.12 Tsetse Area Coding Scheme
Code Symbol Explanation
001 -- no infestation
002 T high infestation potential
<section>e</section>
Appendix A Kenya case study coding schemes (A13-A16)
Back to contents - Previous file - Next file
A.13 Slope Class Coding Scheme
Code Symbol Slope Class Mean Slopes of Quartiles
Q1 Q2 Q3 Q4
01 A 0 - 2% 0 1 1 2
02 AB 0 - 5% 0 2 4 5
03 B 2 - 5% 2 3 4 5
04 BC 2 - 8% 2 4 6 8
05 C 5 - 8% 5 6 7 8
06 BCD 2 - 16% 2 6 11 16
07 CD 5 - 16% 5 6 7 8
08 D 8 - 16% 8 11 13 16
09 DE 8 - 30% 8 16 22 30
10 E 16 - 30% 16 21 25 30
11 EF >16% 16 30 42 56
12 F >30% 30 39 47 56
A.14 Soil Texture Coding Scheme
Code Symbol Explanation
010 S Sand
011 LCS Loamy Coarse
Sand 
012 FS Fine Sand
013 LFS Loamy Fine Sand
014 LS Loamy Sand
020 FSL Fine Sandy Loam
021 SL Sandy Loam
022 L Loam
023 SCL Sandy Clay Loam
024 SIL Silt Loam
025 CL Clay Loam
026 SICL Silty Clay Loam
027 SI Silt
031 SC Sandy Clay
032 SIC Silty Clay
033 PC Peaty Clay
034 C Clay
A.15 Coarse Material Coding Scheme
Code Symbol Explanation
001 G Gravelly
002 VG Very Gravelly
003 S Stony
004 B Bouldery
005 SB Stony/Bouldery
006 BS Bouldery/Stony
A.16 Soil Phase Coding Scheme
Code Symbol Explanation
001 R Rocky
002 B Bouldery
003 BM Bouldery Mantle
004 S Stony
005 SM Stony Mantle
006 GM Gravel Mantle
007 P Lithic
008 PP Paralithic
009 K Petrocalcic (50-100)
010 KK Petrocalcic (<50)
011 C Pisocalcic (50-100)
012 CC Pisocalcic (<50)
013 M Petroferric (50-100)
014 N Pisoferric (<100)
015 A Saline
016 O Sodic
017 AO Saline-Sodic
018 F Fragican
019 G Gravelly
<section>f</section>
Appendix A Kenya case study coding schemes (A17)
Back to contents - Previous file - Next file
A.17 Soil Unit Coding Scheme
Code Symbol Explanation
001 A Acrisols
002 Ac Chromic Acrisols
003 Ag Gleyic Acrisols
004 Ah Humic Acrisols
005 Aic Ferralo-chromic Acrisols
006 Aif Ferraloferric Acrisols
007 Aio Ferralo-orthic Acrisols
008 Ao Orthic Acrisols
009 Ap Plinthic Acrisols
010 Ath Ando-humic Acrisols
011 B Cambisols
012 Bc Chromic Cambisols
013 Bd Dystric Cambisols
014 Be Eutric Cambisols
015 Bf Ferralic Cambisols
016 Bg GleyAc Cambisols
017 Bh Humic Cambisols
018 Bk Calcic Cambisols
019 Bnc Nio-chromic Cambisols
020 Btc Ando-chromic Cambisols
021 Bte Ando-eutric Cambisols
022 Bv Vertic Cambisols
023 C Chernozems
024 Ch Haplic Chernozems
025 Ck Calcic Chernozems
026 E Rendzinas
027 Ec Cambic Renzinas
028 Eo Orthic Rendzinas
029 F Ferralsols
030 Fa Acric Ferralsols
031 Fh Humic Ferrasols
032 Fnh Nito-humic Ferralsols
033 Fnr Nito-rhodic Ferralsols
034 Fo Orthic Ferralsols
035 Fr Rhodic Ferralsols
036 Fx Xanthic Ferralsols
037 G/Ge Gleysols/Eutric Gleysols
038 Gc Calcaric Gleysols
039 Gd Dystric Gleysols
040 Gh Humic Gleysols
041 Gm Mollic Gleysols
042 Gv Vertic Gleysols
043 H Phaeozems
044 Hg GleYic Phaeozems
045 Hh Haplic Phaeozems
046 Hnl Nito-luvic Phaeozems
047 Hol Ortho-luvic Phaeozems
048 Hrl Chromo-luvic Phaeozems
049 Hth Ando-haplic Phaeozems
050 Htl Ando-luvic Phaeozems
051 Hvl Verto-luvic Phaeozems
052 I Lithosols
053 Ir Ironstone soils
054 J Fluvisols
055 Jc Calcaric Fluvisols
056 Je Eutric Fluvisols
057 Jt Thionic Fluvisols
058 K Kastanozems
059 Kh Haplic Kastanozems
060 L Luvisols
061 La Albic Luvisols
062 Lc Chromic Luvisols
063 Lf Ferric Luvisols
064 Lg Gleyic Luvisols
065 Lic Ferralo-chromic Luvisols
066 Lif Ferralo-ferric Luvisols
067 Lio Ferralo-orthic Luvisols
068 Lk Calcic Luvisols
069 Lnc Nito-chromic Luvisols
070 Lnf Nitoferric Luvisols
071 Lo Orthic Luvisols
072 Lv Vertic Luvisols
073 M Greyzems
074 Mo Orthic Greyzems
075 Mvo erto-orthic Greyzems
076 N Nitisols
077 Nd Dystric Nitisols
078 Ne Eutric Nitisols
079 Nh Humic Nitisols
080 Nm Mollic Nitisols
031 Nth Ando-humic Nitisols
082 Nve Verto-eutric Nitisols
083 Nvm Verto-mollic Nitisols
084 O Histosol
085 Od Dystric Histosols
086 Q Arenosols
087 Qa Albic Arenosols
083 Qc Campic Arenosols
089 Qf Ferralic Arenosols
090 Qk Calcaro-cambic Arenosols
091 Q1 Luvic Arenosols
092 R Reaosols
093 Rc Calcaric Regosols
094 Rd Dystric Regosols
095 Re Eutric Regosols
096 Rtc Ando-calcaric Regosols
097 S Solonetz
098 Sg Gleyic Solonetz
099 Slo Luvo-orthic Solonetz
100 Sm Mollic Solonetz
101 So Orthic Solonetz
102 T Andosols
103 Th Humic Andosols
104 Tm Mollic Andosols
105 Tv Vitric Andosols
106 U Rankers
107 V Vertisols
108 Vc Chromic Vertisols
109 Vp Pellic Vertisols
110 W Planosols
111 Wd Dystric Planosols
112 We Eutric Planosols
113 Wh Humic Planosols
114 Ws Solodic Planosols
115 Wve Vetro-eutric Planosols
116 X Xerosols/Yermosols
117 Xh Haplic Xerosols/Yermosols
118 Xk Calcic Xerosols/Yermosols
119 Xy Gypsic Xerosols/Yermosols
120 Z Solonchaks
121 Zg Gleyic Solonchaks
122 Zo Orthic Solonchaks
123 Zt Takyric Solonchaks
129 Lava Lava
130 Lava 1 Lava flow
131 Lava 2 Lava fields
132 Rock Rock outcrops
133 Ice Ice
134 Lake Lake area
135 Town Town
A.18 Livestock Zones Coding Scheme
Code Thermal Zone LGP (days)
001 T1 0-119
002 T3 T4 T5 0-119
003 T6 0-119
004 T7 0-119
005 T1,T2,T3,T4 120-179
006 T5 120-179
007 T6,T7 120-179
008 T8 120-179
009 T1,T2,T3,T4 180-269
010 T5 180-269
011 T6,T7 180-269
012 T8 180-269
013 T1,T2,T3,T4 270-365
014 T5 270-365
015 T6,T7 270-365
016 T8 270-365
<section>g</section>
Appendix B Linear programming model (B1-B2)
Back to contents - Previous file - Next file
An Optimal Spatial Resource Allocation Model has been developed for integrating livestock, crop and fuelwood production sectors within the framework of AEZ Land Productivity Assessment and its application to Potential Population Supporting Capacity and Development Planning in Kenya. This Appendix gives a mathematical description of the Linear Programming model used for formulating district level scenarios. Like with any model of this kind, the formulation gets revised and improved as new insights, needs or quantified information becomes available. The strength of the approach lies in its extensive and consistent use of spatial information for assessing agricultural land use options within the context of district development planning.
B.1 GLOSSARY
Activity:
In the context of land use, a process using a technology that combines inputs to generate particular outputs for sale, barter or household consumption. An activity is considered to be a subsystem of a farm system.
Agro-ecological Cell:
Basic unit of physical analysis in the AEZ study. Data records are unique in terms of the combination of soil, landform and climate attributes included in land resourcesinventory.
Agro-ecological Zone:
A relatively extensive area consisting of an aggregate of agroecological cells defined in terms of climatic conditions, major landform, hydrological regime, major soil groupings and/or (semi-) natural vegetation, which is suitable for a certain range of crops and cultivars.
Agro-ecological suitability:
The fitness of a given type of land for a specified land use type.
Algorithm:
A set of rules for solving a problem.
Crop Combination:
In areas where temperature and moisture allow to produce more than one crop per year, the multiple cropping activities are defined as sequential crop combinations.
Crop Combination Filter:
In addition to agronomic feasibility, a filter mechanism, testing for economic and/or nutritional value, is used to identify the most productive crop combinations in each agro ecological cell.
Crop Cultivation Factor:
Many soils cannot be continuously cultivated with annual food crops without undergoing some degradation. The crop cultivation factor expresses the number of years crop cultivation can take place within a hundred year cycle.
Crop Group:
For the purpose of formulating feed mix and nutrition constraints, crops can be grouped according to common characteristics into crop groups, e.g. cereals, root crops, oilseeds, etc.
Feed Item:
the term feed item is used to refer to products useful for feeding to animals and related to cultivation of a particular crop, grasses or forage legumes. In this study the following feed items have been considered: primary product, crop residues, and crop by-products (e.g. bran of wheat).
Feeding Period:
For the purpose of formulating feed balance and nutrition constraints and to take into account the distribution of feed supplies throughout the year, the calendar year can be sub divided into several seasons. In this study two feeding periods have been distinguished: wet season and dry season. The length of the wet season is assumed to equal the applicable LGP.
Feed Utilization Factor:
Not all potential feed supplies are actually available for feeding due to accessibility, ecological reasons, seasonality of supply, etc. Feed utilization factors are used to estimate the share of potential feed supply that is available for feeding by crop, feed item and feeding period.
Feed Depreciation Factor:
Feed supplies, when not used up entirely within a season, can potentially be carried over to the next season. To allow for modeling LUT related constraints to carrying over feed supplies as well as losses in feed storage, the model requires the specification of feed depreciation factors that express the share of unused feed supplies that is lost by carrying over to the next season. Specification is by crop, feed item and season.
GIS:
Geographical Information System; software system and specialized computer hardware to input, manipulate, analyze and present spatial information.
LGP:
Length of growing period; reference LGP is defined as duration (in days) of the period when temperature permits crop growth and soil moisture supply exceeds half potential evapotranspiration; it includes the time required to evapotranspire up to 100 mm of soil moisture storage (FAO, 1978-81). Growing periods which include a sub-period when precipitation exceeds potential evapotranspiration are termed 'normal' LGPs as compared to 'intermediate' LGPs with no such humid sub-period.
LGP, Pattern of:
Number of separate length of growing periods within a year, summarized as a historical profile of pattern of length of growing periods per year.
Livestock System:
Quantified description of livestock production activities, relating to animal type, feed requirements (quantity and quality), herd structure and management aspects.
LP:
Linear program; optimization problem involving a linear objective function and a set of linear constraints.
LRI:
Land Resources Inventory; the land resources inventory brings together several layers of information on physical environmental resources and allows the creation of unique ecological land units (agro-ecological cells) within which landform, soil and climate conditions are quantified and considered nearly homogenous.
LUT:
Land Utilization Type; to define the fundamental objects of analysis which comprise the set of alternative activities available to reach specified objectives, the first step in an AEZ application is the selection and description of land utilization types (LUT) to be considered in the study. FAO (FAO, 1984) defines LUT as follows: 'A Land Utilization Type consists of a set of technical specifications within a socio-economic setting. As a minimum requirement, both the nature of the produce and the setting must be specified'. There is a similarity between cropping system, livestock system and land use type.
Scenario:
A scenario comprises of a set of exogenous quantitative inputs to the model system that relate to the mode of operation, the levels of constraints and targets, etc. In the Kenya AEZ study, it is the description of a district planning problem to be solved using LP, in terms of specifying the objective function and the levels of constraints and targets.
Soil Mapping Unit:
Delineated area on a soil map representing an association of soil units which are grouped according to certain patterns.
The Exploratory Soil Map of Kenya (Sombroek et al., 1982), at a scale of 1:1 million, was used to compile the soil resources inventory in the Kenya study. Three hundred and ninety-two different soil map units are distinguished, describing soil associations or soil complexes composed of dominant soils, associated soils and inclusions (390 map units) or relate to water bodies and major urban areas (2 map units). A mapping unit composition table has been provided (van der Pouw, 1983) containing percentage allocation of the soil units by soil type, slope class, soil texture and soil phases. It also contains information derived from the legend of the soil map regarding landform and geology/parent material.
Thermal zone:
A classification based on the quantification of heat attributes, used to represent the prevailing termperature regime of an area. The quantification of temperature attributes has been achieved by defining reference thermal zones. As temperature seasonality effects of latitude are minor, temperature zones are closely correlated to altitude ranges (Braun, 1982). To cater for differences in temperature adaptability of crops, pasture and fuelwood species, nine thermal zones have been distinguished, based on ranges of 2.5° Celsius.
B.2 LIST OF SYMBOLS:
g index of environmental qualities monitored (g= 1,....,G)
h crop group index (h= 1,.......,H)
i crop index (i=1,.....,N)
j cell index (j = 1,.......,J)
k cropping activity index (k=1,.....,K)
I feed item index (I=1,.......,L)
m index of crop production inputs, e.g. Iabor, fertilizer, plant protection, draught power, manure (m= 1,. ..,M)
r region index (r=1, ...,R)
s livestock system index (s=1,......,S)
t feeding period index (t= 1,......,T)
z livestock zone index (z=1,........,Z)
C[r] index set of agro-ecological cells belonging to region r
C[z] index set of agro-ecological cells belonging to livestock zone z
G number of environmental status indicators
H number of crop groups, e.g. cereals, pulses, etc.
J number of land units (agro-ecological cells)
K number of feasible cropping activities
L number of feed items (e.g. residue, by-product, primary product, etc.)
M number of crop production inputs
N number of crops
N[h] index set of crops belonging to crop group h
R number of regions considered
S number of livestock systems
T number of seasons
Z number of livestock zones
Z[r] index set of livestock zones belonging to region r
A[kj] area cultivated with activity k in cell j
A[Lhr] lower limit on land harvested with crops from commodity group h, region r
A[uhr] upper limit on land harvested with crops from commodity group h, region r
CAL[r] maximum tolerable calorie/protein ratio in human diet, region r
CE[ilt] metabolizable energy content per unit of feed supply item FSilt
CP[ilt] crude protein content per unit of feed item FSilt
D[Lh] lower limit on demand for commodity group h
D[Uh] upper limit on demand for commodity group h
DCP[tsz] digestible crude protein contained in feed diet supplied to livestock system s, in season t, livestock zone z
DM dry matter
DP digestible protein
Ej extent of cell j
F[iltz] utilizable production of feed item I (in DM) from crop i, in season t, livestock zone z
FS[iltz] supply of feed item I (in DM) from crop i in season t of livestock zone z, i.e. utilizable production plus carry-over from previous season
L[sz] number of reference livestock system units (RLSU) of system s in livestock zone z
L[Lsz] lower bound on number of RLSU of system s in livestock zone z
L[Usz] upper bound on number of RLSU of system s in livestock zone z
ME[tsz] metabolizable energy contained in feed diet supplied to livestock systems, inseason t, livestock zone z
Q[ijt] total production of crop i, in cell j, in season t
Q[iz] total production of livestock product i, in zone z
Q[Lir] lower limit on production of crop i, region r
Q[Uir] upper limit on production of crop i, region r
RD[st] dry matter (DM) feed requirements per RLSU of livestock system s in feeding season t
RDA[s] average annual dry matter requirement per RLSU of livestock system s
RDL[st] minimum DM intake per RLSU of livestock system s in feeding season t in relation to specified requirement RDst
RDU[st] maximum DM intake per RLSU of livestock system s in feeding season t in relation to specified requirement RDst
RE[st] required metabolizable energy (ME) in feed diet of livestock system s in feeding season t
REA[s] required average annual ME in feed diet of livestock system s
REL[st] minimum ME in feed diet of livestock system s in feeding season t in relation to specified requirement REst
REU[st] maximum ME in feed diet of livestock system s in feeding season t in relation to specified requirement REst
RLSU reference livestock system unit
RP[st] digestible protein (DP) required per unit of livestock system s in feeding season t
RPA[s] required average annual DP in feed diet of livestock system s
RPL[st] minimum DP content in feed diet of livestock system s in feeding season t in relation to specified requirement RPst
RPU[st] maximum DP content in feed diet of livestock system s in feeding season t in relation to specified requirement RPst
S[g] tolerable environmental impact of type g per ha of cultivated land
TA[r] upper limit on arable land use in region r
V[mr] availability of production input m in region r
X[kj] level of activity k in cell j, i.e. share of cell j allocated to cropping activity k
X[Uk] upper limit on cropping activity level
a[jkj] area harvested with crop type i, cultivated as part of cropping activity k, in cell j
c[m] cost/weight per unit of production input m
c[fkj] cultivation factor, activity k, in cell j; i.e. the number of years (in percent) that a piece of arable land can be used for cropping, the remainder of years being under fallow
d[ikt] share of production from crop i, activity k, harvested in season t
f[iltsz] feed use from crop i, feed item 1, allocated to livestock system s in season t, in livestock zone z
p[is] price of livestock product i from livestock system s
q[jkj] production of crop i, from activity k, in cell j
r[ilt] production of feed item I from crop activity i relative to production of primary produce of crop i, i.e. kg of feed item I produced per kg of primary produce
u[ilt] feed utilization factors, by crop i, feed item 1, and season t.
V[ikjm] amount of input type m required per ha of crop i cultivated as part of activity k in cell j
v[sm] amount of input type m required per reference livestock unit of livestock system s (negative coefficient are used in case of net output, e.g. of power or manure)
w[i ] waste share, i.e. share of crop production i wasted in harvesting, marketing and storage
y[ikj] average yield of crop i produced per unit of cropping activity k in cell j
y[Likj] expected yield of crop i produced per unit of cropping activity k in cell j in 'bad' years
y[is] output of livestock product i per RLSU of livestock system s
a [Lr] minimum share of livestock units supported in region r in total number of livestock units
a [Ur] maximum share of livestock units supported in region r in total number of livestock units
b [Lsz] minimum share of livestock system s in total number of livestock units supported in zone z
b [Usz] maximum share of livestock system s in total number of livestock units supported in zone z
e [I] extraction rate, i.e. conversion of produce of crop/livestock product i to food product
k [i] calorie content per unit of food item i
l [h] level of self-sufficiency in product group
p [i] protein content per unit of food item i
m [ilt] feed depreciation factor related to carry-over of feed supplies from crop i, item 1, from season t-1 into season t
r [Lhr] minimum share of area harvested with crops from crop group h in total harvested area of region r
r [Uhr] minimum share of area harvested with crops from crop group h in total harvested area of region r
t [r] risk acceptance factor applied in region r
v [i] weight of produce of crop i in objective function
v [s] weight of livestock system s in objective function
v [Li] weight of produce of crop i risk evaluation
<section>h</section>
Appendix B Linear programming model (B3)
Back to contents - Previous file - Next file
B.3 FORMULATION OF THE SPATIAL OPTIMAL RESOURCE USE MODEL
The mathematical formulation of the Optimal Spatial Resource Allocation Model reflects the study objectives presented in Chapter 5 utilizing the framework of AEZ Land Productivity methodology. The model accepts user specifiable scenario parameters from a control file, reads crop, grassland and fuelwood production potentials by agro-ecological cells as determined in the AEZ assessment, reads livestock system related data derived from herd structure models, and determines simultaneously land use by agro-ecological cell as well as supported levels of different livestock systems, feed supplies and utilization by livestock zone and season. The model provides a framework for specifying different types of objective functions and kinds of constraints. The latter relate to preferred demand baskets, crop specific production targets, risk aversion, economic constraints, land use by individual crop or crop group, crop mix, input use, quality of human diet, environmental limitations,
seasonal feed demand-supply balances, feed quality, and distribution of livestock systems.
B3.1: Derived Variables:
The decision variables in the Optimal Spatial Resource Allocation Model relate to optimal land use, livestock numbers supported and optimal allocation of potential feed supplies to different livestock systems. Hence, there are three groups of decision variables:
(a) the land use shares, i.e., the share X[kj ]of agro-ecological cell j allocated to cropping activity k,
(b) the number of units L[sz] of livestock system s kept in zone z, and
(c) the feed ration f[iltsz] of feed item I from crop i allocated to livestock system s in period t in zone z.
These variables form the columns of the LP matrix, the LP activity set. For notational convenience we define a number of derived variables that are used in the model description:
A[kj ]= X[kj]*E[j]
area in cell j allocated to cropping activity k (including fallow requirements).
a[ikj] = A[kj] * cf[kj] / 100
area harvested of crop i as part of cropping activity k in cell j.
q[ikj] = y[ikj] * a[ikj]
production of crop i from activity k in cell j.
total production of crop i, in season t; summation is over all activities in cell j
production of livestock commodity i, zone z
utilizable production, feed item 1, from crop i, in season t, in livestock zone z
digestible crude protein in feed diet supplied to livestock systems in season t, livestock
zone z
metabolizable energy in feed diet supplied to livestock system s, in season t, livestock zone z
B3.2: Objective Function:
Three kinds of objective functions, depending on the scenario focus, have been employed in the study:
(a) maximize net weighted output:
(b) maximize level of self-sufficiency by commodity group:
(c) minimize use of arable land to achieve district self-sufficiency in food and livestock products: min Z ICE,
B3.3 Demand Targets by Aggregate Commodity Group:
Lower and/or upper bounds or equality constraints on food availability by broad crop commodity groups (e.g. cereals, pulses, roots, etc.) can be used to enforce fulfillment of food demand targets from domestic production (rainfed or irrigated) and imports. Since irrigated production and imports, in the present version, are specified exogenously, these constraints imply rainfed production targets by broad commodity groups.
he{crop commodity group]
he{crop commodity group}
B3.4 Production Targets by Crop:
In addition to specifying production targets by commodity group, the model implementation optionally provides for setting crop-specific production targets by region.
B3.5 Limits on Harvested Area by Aggregate Commodity Group:
The regional levels of harvested area by commodity group can be controlled by means of a set of acreage target constraints.
h= 1,. . .,H; r= 1,. . .,R
h= 1, . . . ,H; r= 1, . . . ,R
B3.6 Total Arable Land Use Constraint:
Lower/upper bounds or equality constraints on total arable land use by region and/or district total serve to reflect considerations regarding land use other than for agricultural production purposes, e.g. forest areas, specific non-agricultural uses, etc. Unless these constraints are imposed, and depending on the chosen form of objective function, all potentially suitable land in all zones is assumed to be available for agricultural purposes, except for non-agricultural land use requirements, forest areas and game parks. k
r=1,...,R
B3.7 Crop-Mix Constraints by Crop Commodity Group:
While the previous set of constraints helps specifying absolute levels, the crop-mix constraints are used to specify the distribution of land to different crop groups.
he {crop group}; r = 1, . . . ,R
he{crop group}; r=1, ,R
B3.8 Demand Targets by Livestock Commodity Group:
Lower/upper bound or equality constraints on food availability by livestock commodity groups (e.g. meats, milk, etc.) can be used to enforce fulfillment of food demand targets from domestic production (rainfed or irrigated) and imports. Since imports, in the present version, are specified exogenously, these constraints imply production targets.
he{livestock commodity group}
he{livestock commodity group}
B3.9 Human Calorie/Protein Ratio Requirements Constraint:
These constraints ensure that, by broad climatic zones, the crop production plan is such that the ratio of calories to protein obtained from food products stays within acceptable ranges.
r=1,...,R
B3.10 Feed Availability Constraints:
The feed availability constraints ensure that feed consumption of a particular feed item from a given crop in a given period does not exceed available feed supply. The aggregate feed availability constraints are imposed for every feed item in each livestock zone z, z= 1,...,Z.
i = 1, . . .,N; I = 1,. . .,L; t=1,...,T
i= 1,....N; l=1, ....,L; t=1,...T
B3.11 Seasonal Feed Requirement Constraints:
The seasonal feed requirement constraints ensure that seasonal feed intake lies within the prescribed tolerance band and that the annual feed intake does not fall below average annual requirements. This set of constraints refers to dry matter intake of feed. The constraints are imposed by livestock system, feeding period and zone.
s=1,...,S; t=1,...,T; z=1,...,Z
s=1,...,S; t=1,...,T; z=1,...,Z
s=1,...,S; z=1,...,Z
B3.12 Seasonal Crude Protein Feed Quality Constraints:
The seasonal CP feed quality constraints ensure that the digestible crude protein (pop) contents of the livestock system specific seasonal feed intake lies within the prescribed tolerance band and that the annual average pop contents of the feed intake does not fall below average annual requirements.
s=1,...,S; t=1,...,T; z=1,...,Z
s = 1,. . .,S; t= 1,. . .,T; z= 1,. ..,Z
s=1,...,S; z=1,...,Z
B3.13 Seasonal Metabolizable Energy Feed Quality Constraints:
The seasonal metabolizable energy (ME) feed quality constraints ensure that the ME contents of the seasonal feed intake lies within the prescribed tolerance band and that the annual average ME contents of the feed intake does not fall below average annual requirements. For example, improved animals with higher productivity also require higher energy concentration in the diet.
s=1,....,S; t=1,....,T; z=1,...,Z
s=1,...,S; t=1,...,T; z=1,...,Z
s=1,...,S; z=1,...,Z
B3.14 Distribution of Livestock over Regions:
The livestock systems distribution constraints allow to impose lower and upper bounds on the distribution of livestock over broad regions. The shares refer to representation in terms of reference livestock system units (RLSU). The information on number of animals per livestock type and region contained in the AEZ database was used to set bounds on the distribution of livestock systems. This limits the flexibility of the model taking into account the historical situation. Both lower and upper bounds can be specified to describe an acceptable bandwidth.
s=1,...,S; r=1,...,R
s=1,...,S; r=1,...,R
B3.15 Distribution of Livestock Systems within Zone:
The relative distribution of livestock systems within individual livestock zones is controlled with this set of constraints. Again, the shares refer to representation in terms of reference livestock system units (RLSU). The information on number of animals per livestock type and region contained in the AEZ database was used to set bounds on the distribution of livestock systems.
s=1,...,S; z=1,...,Z
s=1,...,S; z=1,...,Z
B3.16 Production Input Requirement Constraints:
This set of constraints provides a means of ensuring that production input requirements and resource use for crop and livestock production stay within the limits of the resource endowment in terms of relevant input categories, e.g. labour capital, fertilizer, power, etc.
Negative input-output coefficients are used in case of activities which generate resources, e.g. draught power from animals.
m=1,...,M; r=1,...,R
B3.17 Cell Use Constraints:
While the number of constraints described so far is independent of the number of records in the land resources inventory, cell use constraints are implemented for each agroecological cell that allows for more than one cropping activity. The constraint states that the sum of shares of the cell allocated to different activities cannot exceed one.
j = 1,. . .,J
B3.18 Cell Level Production Risk Constraints:
The cell level risk constraints are implemented to ensure that the resulting land allocation emphasizes the stability of the production plan also in 'bad' years. The constraint is specified such that land use option, selected in the optimal solution on the basis of production levels attainable on average, should provide output levels also in 'bad' years which do not fall below a user specified threshold level in comparison to the best possible output obtainable in 'bad' years among all viable cropping options.
B3.19 Mono-cropping Restrictions:
Mono-cropping restrictions are imposed in the way of simple upper bounds on the maximum share of each cell that can be allocated to a particular cropping activity. No restrictions are imposed for perennial crops, environmentally compatible cropping activities, e.g. beans, forage legumes or grasses, and in cells with only one suitable activity.
j=1,...,J; k=1,...,K
B3.20 Livestock Systems Activity Constraints:
To cater for situations when the information in the land resources inventory does not provide sufficient information regarding the appropriate livestock systems to select, lower and upper bounds on the number of RLSU by livestock system and zone can be specified.
s = 1, . . . ,S; z = 1,. . .,Z
B3.21 Environmental Impact Constraints:
Environmental impact constraints have been considered to ensure that the optimal production plans are also environmentally compatible, stipulating that the environmental impacts in each cell must not exceed tolerable limits.
j=1,...,J; g=1,...,G
<section>i</section>
Appendix C MPS record format
Back to contents - Previous file
The file LPSPECS generated by the LP Matrix Generator program AEZCCS04 (option SF2 on sub-menu of option SF6 DISTRICT ANALYSIS) follows the standard MPS file format which is defined under title 'CONVERT DATA' in IBM document number SH20-0968-1, "Mathematical Programming System-Extended (MPSX), and Generalized Upper Bounding (GUB)", pp. 199-209.
Following a SPECS section where various run-time parameters are set, the objective function and constraint set are specified in various sections of the MPS file which must be given in the following order: NAME, ROWS, COLUMNS, RHS, RANGES, BOUNDS, and ENDATA. Not all of the sections have to be present. An MPS record contains up to six fields:
Card Position Contents
2 -3 field 1: type of constraint, range, bound or right-hand-side
5 -12 field 2: name of row, range set, bound set or right-hand-side
15 -22 field 3: name of row or column
25 -36 field 4: value
40 -47 field 5: name of row or column (second element)
50 -61 field 6: value (second element)
The LPSPECS file generated by program AEZCCS04 uses only field 1 to field 4, i.e. only one value per record is specified. The meaning of the various MPS sections is as follows:
NAME:
LP name starting in column position 15
ROWS:
defines constraint names and types, i.e. the rows in the linear program. Constraints of type =, _, or free may be specified using the characters e, g, I or n, respectively, in column position 2 or 3, and an 8-character LP row name in columns 5 - 12.
COLUMNS:
defines constraint matrix element by specifying the relevant row name (colt 5 - 12), activity name (colt 15 - 22) and the respective value (colt 25 - 36).
RHS:
defines the right-hand-side of the LP constraint set by specifying the RHS name (colt 5 - 12), the row name (colt 15 - 22) and the constraint value (colt 25 - 36).
RANGES:
(not used in AEZCCS04)
BOUNDS:
defines lower and/or upper bounds on activities in cases where the default levels, as set in the SPECS section, do not apply. The record must contain a bound type (colt 2 -3), a bound set name (colt 5 - 12), an activity name (colt 15 - 2) and the bound value (colt 25 - 36). Recognized bound types include:UP (upper bound), LO (lower bound), FX (fixed), FR (free), Ml (negative) and PL (positive).
ENDATA:
indicates end of problem specification.
WORLD SOIL RESOURCES REPORTS
1. Report of the First Meeting of the Advisory Panel on the Soil Map of the World, Rome, 19-23 June 1961.$*
2. Report of the First Meeting on Soil Survey, Correlation and Interpretation for Latin America, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 28-31 May 1962**
3. Report of the First Soil Correlation Seminar for Europe, Moscow, USSR, 16-28 July 1962.**
4. Report of the First Soil Correlation Seminar for South and Central Asia, Tashkent, Uzbekistan, USSR, 14 September-2 October 1962.**
5. Report of the Fourth Session of the Working Party on Soil Classification and Survey (Subcommission on Land and Water Use of the European Commission on Agriculture), Lisbon, Portugal, 6-10 March 1963.**
6. Report of the Second Meeting of the Advisory Panel on the Soil Map of the World, Rome, 9-11 July 1963.**
7. Report of the Second Soil Correlation Seminar for Europe, Bucharest, Romania, 29 July-6 August 1963. * *
8. Report of the Third Meeting of the Advisory Panel on the Soil Map of the World, Paris, 3 January 1964.* *
9. Adequacy of Soil Studies in Paraguay, Bolivia and Peru, November-December 1963.**
10. Report on the Soils of Bolivia, January 1964.**
11. Report on the Soils of Paraguay, January 1964.**
12. Preliminary Definition, Legend and Correlation Table for the Soil Map of the World, Rome, August 1964. * *
13. Report of the Fourth Meeting of the Advisory Panel on the Soil Map of the World, Rome, 16- 21 May 1964.**
14. Report of the Meeting on the Classification and Correlation of Soils from Volcanic Ash, Tokyo, Japan, 11-27 June 1964.**
15. Report of the First Session of the Working Party on Soil Classification, Survey and Soil Resources of the European Commission on Agriculture, Florence, Italy, 1-3 October 1964.**
16. Detailed Legend for the Third Draft on the Soil Map of South America, June 1965.**
17. Report of the First Meeting on Soil Correlation for North America, Mexico, 1-8 February 1965.**
18. The Soil Resources of Latin America, October 1965.**
19. Report of the Third Correlation Seminar for Europe: Bulgaria, Greece, Romania, Turkey, Yugoslavia, 29 August-22 September 1965.**
20. Report of the Meeting of Rapporteurs, Soil Map of Europe (Scale 1:1 000 000) (Working Party on Soil Classification and Survey of the European Commission on Agriculture), Bonn, Federal Republic of Germany, 29 November-3 December 1965.**
21. Report of the Second Meeting on Soil Survey, Correlation and Interpretation for Latin America, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 13-16 July 1965.**
22. Report of the Soil Resources Expedition in Western and Central Brazil, 24 June-9 July 1965.**
23. Bibliography on Soils and Related Sciences for Latin America (1st edition), December 1965.**
24. Report on the Soils of Paraguay (2nd edition), August 1964.**
25. Report of the Soil Correlation Study Tour in Uruguay, Brazil and Argentina, June-August 1964.**
26. Report of the Meeting on Soil Correlation and Soil Resources Appraisal in India, New Delhi, India, 5-15 April 1965.**
27. Report of the Sixth Session of the Working Party on Soil Classification and Survey of the European Commission on Agriculture, Montpellier, France, 7-11 March 1967.**
28. Report of the Second Meeting on Soil Correlation for North America, Winnipeg-Vancouver, Canada, 25 July-5 August 1966.**
29. Report of the Fifth Meeting of the Advisory Panel on the Soil Map of the World, Moscow, USSR, 20-28 August 1966.**
30. Report of the Meeting of the Soil Correlation Committee for South America, Buenos Aires, Argentina, 12-19 December 1966.**
31. Trace Element Problems in Relation to Soil Units in Europe (Working Party on Soil Classification and Survey of the European Commission on Agriculture), Rome, 1967.**
32. Approaches to Soil Classification, 1968.**
33. Definitions of Soil Units for the Soil Map of the World, April 1968.**
34. Soil Map of South America 1:5 000 000, Draft Explanatory Text, November 1968.**
35. Report of a Soil Correlation Study Tour in Sweden and Poland, 27 September-14 October 1968.**
36. Meeting of Rapporteurs, Soil Map of Europe (Scale 1:1 000 000) (Working Party on Soil Classification and Survey of the European Commission on Agriculture), Poitiers, France 21-23 June 1967.**
37. Supplement to Definition of Soil Units for the Soil Map of the World, July 1969.**
38. Seventh Session of the Working Party on Soil Classification and Survey of the European Commission on Agriculture, Varna, Bulgaria, 11-13 September 1969.**
39. A Correlation Study of Red and Yellow Soils in Areas with a Mediterranean Climate.**
40. Report of the Regional Seminar of the Evaluation of Soil Resources in West Africa, Kumasi, Ghana, 14-19 December 1970.**
41. Soil Survey and Soil Fertility Research in Asia and the Far East, New Delhi, 15-20 February 1971.**
42. Report of the Eighth Session of the Working Party on Soil Classification and Survey of the European Commission on Agriculture, Helsinki, Finland, 5-7 July 1971.**
43. Report of the Ninth Session of the Working Party on Soil Classification and Survey of the European Commission on Agriculture, Ghent, Belgium 28-31 August 1973.**
44. First Meeting of the West African Sub-Committee on Soil Correlation for Soil Evaluation and Management, Accra, Ghana, 12-19 June 1972.**
45. Report of the Ad Hoc Expert Consultation on Land Evaluation, Rome, Italy, 6-8 January 1975.**
46. First Meeting of the Eastern African Sub-Committee for Soil Correlation and Land Evaluation, Nairobi, Kenya, 11-16 March 1974.**
47. Second Meeting of the Eastern African Sub-Committee for Soil Correlation and Land Evaluation, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia, 25-30 October 1976.
48. Report on the Agro-Ecological Zones Project, Vol. I - Methodology and Results for Africa, 1978. Vol. 2 - Results for Southwest Asia, 1978.
49. Report of an Expert Consultation on Land Evaluation Standards for Rainfed Agriculture, Rome, Italy, 25-28 October 1977.
50. Report of an Expert Consultation on Land Evaluation Criteria for Irrigation, Rome, Italy, 27 February-2 March 1979.
51. Third Meeting of the Eastern African Sub-Committee for Soil Correlation and Land Evaluation, Lusaka, Zambia, 18-30 April 1978.
52. Land Evaluation Guidelines for Rainfed Agriculture, Report of an Expert Consultation, 12-14 December 1979.
53. Fourth Meeting of the West African Sub-Committee for Soil Correlation and Land Evaluation, Banjul, The Gambia, 20-27 October 1979.
54. Fourth Meeting of the Eastern African Sub-Committee for Soil Correlation and Land Evaluation, Arusha, Tanzania, 27 October-4 November 1980.
55. Cinquième reunion du Sous-Comité Ouest et Centre africain de correlation des sols pour la mise en valeur des terres, Lomé, Togo, 7- 12 décembre 1981.
56. Fifth Meeting of the Eastern African Sub-Committee for Soil Correlation and Land Evaluation, Wad Medani, Sudan, 5-10 December 1983.
57. Sixième reunion du Sous-Comité Ouest et Centre Africain de correlation des sols pour la mise en valeur des terres, Niamey, Niger, 6-12 fevrier 1984.
58. Sixth Meeting of the Eastern African Sub-Committee for Soil Correlation and Land Evaluation, Maseru, Lesotho, 9-18 October 1985.
59. Septième reunion du Sous-Comité Ouest et Centre africain de correlation des sols pour la mise en valeur des terres, Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso, 10-17 novembre 1985.
60. Revised Legend, Soil Map of the World, FAO-Unesco-lSRIC, 1988. Reprinted 1990.
61. Huitième réunion du Sous-Comité Ouest et Centre africain de corrélation des sols pour la mise en valeur des terres, Yaoundé, Cameroun, 19-28 janvier 1987.
62. Seventh Meeting of the East and Southern African Sub-Committee for Soil Correlation and Evaluation, Gaborone, Botswana, 30 March-8 April 1987.
63. Neuvième reunion du Sous-Comité Ouest et Centre africain de correlation des sols pour la mise en valeur des terres, Cotonou, Benin, 14-23 novembre 1988.
64. FAO-ISRIC Soil Database (SDB), 1989.
65. Eighth Meeting of the East and Southern African Sub-Committee for Soil Correlation and Land Evaluation, Harare, Zimbabwe, 9-13 October 1989.
66. World soil resources. An explanatory note on the FAO World Soil Resources Map at 1:25 000 000 scale, 1991. Rev. 1 1993.
67. Digitized Soil Map of the World, Volume 1: Africa. Volume 2: North and Central America. Volume 3: Central and South America. Volume 4: Europe and West of the Urals. Volume 5: North East Asia. Volume 6: Near East and Far East. Volume 7: South East Asia and Oceania. Release 1.0, November 1991.
68. Land Use Planning Applications. Proceedings of the FAO Expert Consultation 1990, Rome, 10 14 December 1990.
69. Dixiè\me reunion du Sous-Comité Ouest et Centre africain de correlation des sols pour la mise en valeur des terres, Bouaké, Odienné, Cote d'lvoire, Cote d'lvoire, 5-12 november 1990.
70. Ninth Meeting of the East and Southern African Sub-Committee for Soil Correlation and Land Evaluation, Lilongwe, Malawi, 25 November - 2 December 1991.
71. Agro-ecological land resources assessment for agricultural development planning. A case study of Kenya. Resources data base and land productivity. Main Report. Technical Annex 1: Land resources. Technical Annex 2: Soil erosion and productivity. Technical Annex 3: Agro-climatic and agro-edaphic suitabilities for barley, oat, cowpea, green gram and pigeonpea. Technical Annex 4: Crop productivity. Technical Annex 5: Livestock productivity. Technical Annex 6: Fuelwood productivity. Technical Annex 7: Systems documentation guide to computer programs for land productivity assessments. Technical Annex 8: Crop productivity assessment: results at district ,level. 1991. Main Report 71/9: Making land use choices for district planning, 1994.
72. Computerized systems of land resources appraisal for agricultural development, 1993.
73. FESLM: an international framework for evaluating sustainable land management, 1993.
74. Global and national soils and terrain digital databases (SOTER), 1993.
75. AEZ in Asia. Proceedings of the Regional Workshop on Agro-ecological Zones Methodology and Applications, Bangkok, Thailand, 17-23 November 1991.
76. Green manuring for soil productivity improvement, 1994.
