<title>The economics of international agreements for the protection of environmental and agricultural resources</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
Back to contents - Next file
We live in an interdependent world, and this means that sound national policies, on their own, cannot ensure that outcomes will be efficient: international fisheries may be overexploited, international groundwater resources may become depleted, potentially containable plant diseases may spread and forests and agriculture may he damaged by transboundary pollution. To ensure more efficient outcomes, international cooperation is required. And yet, as the allegory of the "tragedy of the commons" tells us, national incentives may prevent cooperation, even when every nation could be better off by cooperating.
This paper is a contribution towards understanding when cooperation could improve on nationalistic policy, in what areas cooperation has already been manifested and the determinants of successful cooperation. Contrary to the allegory of the commons, this paper shows that cooperative outcomes can be sustained under certain circumstances. This is encouraging, although the paper also argues that cooperation has not always been successful and identifies the features of certain problems - such as the number of countries sharing a resource - that help to explain why. While offering an analytical framework for examining cooperation, the paper also throws up a challenge. The challenge is to devise means for sustaining cooperation, even when the circumstances would seem not to support such an outcome.
T. Kelley White
Director
Policy Analysis Division
Chapter 1. Introduction
Many environmental and natural resources are shared internationally. Examples relating directly to food and agriculture include fisheries in international waters or fish populations, such as tuna, that move from one country's territorial waters to another's; marine mammals, such as whales and seals; terrestrial species, such as the vicuña, whose territory overlaps national boundaries; and the means of controlling plant diseases and pests. In each case, effective management requires international cooperation. The reason is simple. If countries care only about self interest. they will ignore the international consequences of their actions. When one country harvests tuna, it ignores the fact that its harvest leaves less for others to harvest. Failure on the part of one country to control the importation of pests may damage the crops of other countries in the region. In all such cases, all countries would be better off if they cooperated with each other.
Often, management of international resources affects food and agriculture indirectly. Depletion of the ozone layer and associated increases in ultraviolet radiation are expected to harm the fecundity and growth of marine organisms and reduce both the yields and quality of many crops. Similarly, acid rain emissions affect the productivity of lakes, forests and agricultural lands. Global climate change is likely to affect food and agriculture more than any other economic sector although the magnitude of its effects - especially at the local level - is difficult to estimate. Finally, the experience of Chernobyl shows that safety in nuclear power is also important to agriculture
Since the management of transboundary fluxes' the stratosphere and atmosphere requires international cooperation, it is clear that the distinction between cases where food and agricultural resources are shared directly and cases where the productivity of food and agriculture is dependent on the quality of a shared environmental resource is a technical one. Indeed, while the author is not aware of any study that has estimated the quantitative significance of both types of problem, it is possible that the latter problem is even more important for food and agriculture than the former.
The above environmental problems are examples of reciprocal externalities. If one country harvests more tuna, fewer tuna are left in the sea for other countries to harvest, and other countries are likely to respond to this action by adjusting their own harvest rates. In other words, every country is both the source of the problem and its victim. The reciprocal nature of environmental problems can play an important role in attempts to cooperate in managing the resource more effectively. For example, if all countries harvesting tuna agree to reduce their harvest levels, and one country cheats on the agreement, the others may retaliate by increasing their harvest levels. This retaliation serves to deter cheating and, hence, to support cooperation.
Some environmental problems involve unidirectional externalities.) An example is pollution upstream in country X affecting water quality downstream in country Y. Here, Y is a victim but not a source of the problem. Y cannot influence X's actions by dumping more pollution in the river. To improve the situation, Y may compensate X for the costs of pollution abatement. Alternatively, if X and Y are interdependent in some other way - perhaps through trade - Y may seek to link the issues. Y may respond to increased pollution from X by imposing a duty on imports from X. It is clear from this example that linkage holds certain attractions but may also be dangerous: the effect may be to lose gains from trade while not improving environmental quality.
The conservation of biological diversity is an example of a global environmental problem having unidirectional elements. Most of the earth's biological diversity is found in tropical rain forest countries.
These countries have an incentive to conserve some of their biological resources for nationalistic reasons. But they must accept sacrifices if they conserve all of their biological diversity and, hence, may be reluctant to do so. Other countries, however, benefit from conservation - partly because of the potential value of biological diversity in R&D and partly because of the value attached to the existence of biological diversity. The tropical rain forest countries have no incentive to take the well-being of other countries into account when deciding on their conservation programmes, just as in the above example country X had no incentive to take account of the environmental damage suffered by Y as a consequence of X's pollution emissions. The solution may be for countries that benefit from conservation to compensate the tropical rain forest countries for the incremental costs of conservation.
Compensation, however, reintroduces a reciprocal externality. If one country compensates a tropical rain forest country for the costs of conservation, a great many other countries benefit. The country paying the compensation has no incentive to take the full global benefit into account when deciding how much compensation it should pay. The same is true of all other countries that benefit from the conservation of biological diversity. Hence, there are incentives for countries to offer too little in the way of compensation. All the countries that benefit from the conservation of biological diversity would be better off if they cooperated in choosing compensation levels. As long as more than one country is affected by a unidirectional externality, the problem also has reciprocal externality elements. It is these that this paper seeks to address.
It should be noted that the problems discussed so far are not the only cases that may call for international cooperation. One country's policy regarding the environment may affect the well-being of other countries even if it does not affect the quality of the environment enjoyed by the other countries. In particular, actions by one country may affect the competitiveness of other countries. As an example, in the 1980s, Canada required inspection, counting and monitoring of all exports of unprocessed herring and salmon, ostensibly to protect these fisheries from excessive exploitation. The United States objected to the requirement, however, arguing that it contravened Article XI of the General Agreement on Tariffs end Trade (GATT) and that it was intended to protect the Canadian processing industry - at the expense of its United States rival - and not to conserve Canada's West Coast fisheries. A GATT Disputes Panel set up to hear the case ruled in favour of the United States.
According to Pearce ( 1992, p.14), "most commentators accept that Canada's use of the environmental argument was an attempted disguise of protectionism which the Panel rightly exposed". Had GATT not existed, actions of this kind might have invited retaliation by other countries in the form of further trade restrictions.
In some cases, the aims of international environmental protection and trade may conflict. A recent and well-publicized example concerns the 1988 amendments to the 1972 United States Marine Mammal Protection Act, which restricted the imports of tuna caught using a technology that kills more dolphins than allowed by United States standards. This unilateral action harmed a number of countries, especially Mexico. Mexico complained to GATT and, in this case, a Disputes Panel ruled that Article XX(g) of GATT does not allow restrictions that protect natural resources outside the jurisdiction of the country making the restriction. In contrast to the Canadian regulation, the United States action may have served to protect an international resource (the dolphin) and, hence, been justified on environmental grounds, despite the implications for trade. While trade issues may arise quite independently of the problems considered in this paper, a great many problems exist where trade and
environmental issues overlap.
Indeed, trade restrictions are sometimes employed by international agreements governing the management of shared resources. For instance, the Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer bars signatories from trade with non-signatories in chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs), products containing CFCs or products made using CFCs. This trade ban serves two purposes. The first is to ensure that action taken by signatories to reduce CFC production is not offset by their imports from nonsignatories. The second is to provide an incentive for non-signatories to accede to the agreement. While the use of trade restrictions in this and other international agreements has not been taken to GATT, there is some question as to whether they are GATT-compatible. Clearly, questions of international trade can be important to the analysis of the collective management of shared environmental resources (Anderson and Blackhurst, 1992).
The essential point remains, however, that where countries might be made better off by cooperating in the management of shared resources, strong incentives exist for these countries to free ride on others. It is important, therefore. to know what can be expected of international agreements that codify collective management and how such agreements might be effectively negotiated. The purpose of this paper is to review the economics of international environmental agreements (IEAs) and draw Implications for the international issues that are relevant to the United Nations Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO).
Three chapters follow this introduction. The first of these reviews a number of IEAs that are already in force or are being actively negotiated and have relevance for food and agriculture while the second presents the theory of IEAs, focusing on how countries can agree to cooperate and sustain cooperation despite free rider incentives. Two kinds of problems are considered: the case of a reciprocal externality, such as the management of climate change or plant protection, and the conservation of biological diversity, which has elements of both unidirectional and reciprocal externalities. The final chapter returns to where the paper began, commenting on the ability of IEAs to improve upon the non-cooperative outcome.
<section>2</section>
Chapter 2. International agreements concerning food and agriculture
Back to contents - Previous file - Next file
FAO, established by treaty in 1945 (Caldwell, 1984), is itself an example of international cooperation on common food and agricultural issues.
Specific issues have tended to be addressed through international environmental agreements, however. Table 1 lists the IEAs in which FAO has played an administrative role. The table was constructed by noting where FAO was explicitly mentioned in the agreement. FAO also has played a leading role in the negotiation of other agreements not listed here.
In this section, reference is made not only to the IEAs in Table 1 but also to other IEAs relating to food and agricultural issues. European Community (EC) directives and bilateral agreements are excluded from discussion. Although important, EC directives are negotiated within an institutional framework that makes their analysis different than that of IEAs generally, since many issues are negotiated simultaneously and repeatedly within the EC treaty structure. Similarly, bilateral agreements involve just two countries, and these are usually neighbours who regularly negotiate over other sets of issues.
Plant protection
Plant protection agreements are not concerned with the conservation of endangered plant species, but rather with the prevention of transnational spread of plant pests and diseases and with the control of trade in plants and plant products. Because the distribution of plants is localized, a number of regional agreements have been negotiated.
TABLE 1
International environmental agreements in which FAO has played an administrative role
International Environmental Agreement Dare of adoption Number of signatories Purpose FAO's role
Agreement for the Establishment of a General Fisheries Council for the Mediterranean 1949 19 To improve management of the Mediterranean fisheries Council established within the framework of FAO
Convention for the Establishment of the European and Mediterranean Plant Protection Organization 1951 31 To prevent the introduction and spread of pests and diseases of plants and plant products Coordinates with the established organization
International Plant Protection Convention 1951 81 To facilitate international cooperation in controlling pests and diseases of plant and plant products, and to prevent their introduction and service spread across national boundaries Coordinates convention and establishes a world reporting
Agreement for the Establishment on a Permanent Basis of a Latin-American Forest Research and Training Institute 1959 13 To establish institute to implement FAO's forestry programme in Latin America Institute placed under the auspices of the FAO
Agreement for the Establishment of a Commission for Controlling the Desert Locust in the Eastern Region of its Distribution Area in Southwest Asia 1963 4 To promote research to control the desert locust in the region Commission Established within the framework of the FAO
Agreement for the Establishment of a Commission for Controlling the Desert Locust in the Near East 1965 14 To promote research and control of desert locust in region Commission Established within Framework of FAO
International Convention for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas 1966 19 To maintain tuna populations in the Atlantic Ocean at levels that sustain maximum sustainable catch Commission established to coordinate with FAO
Plant Protection Agreement for the Southeast Asia and Pacific Region 1967 22 To prevent the introduction And spread of destructive plant diseases and pests in the region Coordinates the Agreement
Convention on the Conservation of the Living Resources of the Southeast Atlantic 1969 16 To conserve and exploit rationally the living resources of the Southeast Atlantic Commission established to coordinate and cooperate with FAO
Agreement for the Establishment of a Commission for Controlling the Desert Locust in Northwest Africa 1970 4 To promote research on and control of desert locust in the region Commission established within the framework of the FAO
International Tropical Timber Agreement 1983 48 Agreement between producing and consuming countries to promote tract and sustainable use of Tropical timber Along with other UN Organizations, FAO plays a coordinating role
Agreement on the Network of Agriculture Centres in Asia and the Pacific 1988 9 To assist in expansion of aquaculture development Organization established to have a close working relationship with FAO
Table 1 lists separate agreements for European and Mediterranean countries and for countries in Asia and the Pacific Region. Separate agreements also exist for other regions, including the Phyto-Sanitary Convention for Africa South of the Sahara (adopted in 1954 and signed by 22 countries) and the agreement Concerning Cooperation in the Quarantine of Plants and their ProtectionAgainst Pests and Diseases (adopted in 1959 and signed by 10 Soviet bloc countries).
Why are plant protection agreements needed? The principal reason is that protection by any one country will have little effect if its neighbours do not take similar measures. This is especially true of pests that are highly mobile, such as the Mediterranean fruit fly, or difficult to detect until their destructive effects have become apparent, such as the Dutch elm disease (Caldwell, 1984,p.192). Efforts by one country to control such pests would be costly to administer and would have little effect if its neighbours did not also seek to control the same pests. Before committing itself to a control programme, a country would have to be sure that its neighbours wanted to commit themselves to the same measures
Control of the desert locust
A number of IEAs have been established to control migratory locusts. Three of these are listed in Table 1; a fourth is the Convention on the African Migratory Locust Organization (adopted in 1962 and signed by nine countries).^ Control of locusts is vital to the agricultural interests of many countries. And because locust populations are localized, it is appropriate that the agreements concerning the control of locusts are regional. The need for such agreements is familiar: efforts by one country to control locusts within its own borders would be of little value if similar efforts were not undertaken by neighbouring states. For a country to commit resources to locust control, it must be confident that its neighbours are willing to undertake a similar commitment.
Forestry and aquaculture
Table 1 lists two forestry agreements. One is solely concerned with cooperation in research on the management of forest resources in Latin America and communicating this knowledge through an education programme. The other, the International Tropical Timber Agreement, is an agreement between producing and consuming nations to support research and manage forest resources sustainably.
A forest convention was being negotiated in the run-up to the Earth Summit to be held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, but was abandoned in 1991. In its place, a non-legally binding authoritative statement of principles for a global consensus on the management, conservation and sustainable development of all types of forests was negotiated. It is possible that this declaration of principles may serve as the starting-point for a future forestry convention.
Table 1 also includes an agreement on aquaculture. Like the forestry agreements, it is intended to coordinate research, training and information exchange. Cooperation in research is important because research has characteristics of public good. If one country gives another a piece of information, this does not reduce the amount of information held by the first country.
Fisheries conservation
Table 1 lists two fisheries agreements in which FAO has played an administrative role. Many others have been negotiated. including:
* Convention for the Establishment of an Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission (adopted in 1949 and signed by six countries);
* Agreement Concerning Measures for Protection of the Stocks of DeepSea Prawns, European Lobsters, Norway Lobsters and Crabs (adopted in 1952 and signed by three countries):
* International Convention for the High Seas Fisheries of the North Pacific Ocean (adopted in 1952 and signed by three countries):
* Convention Concerning Fishing in the Waters of the Danube (adopted in 1958 and signed by six countries);
* Convention of Fishing and Conservation of the Living Resources of the High Seas (adopted in 1958 and signed by 34 countries);
* Convention Concerning Fishing in the Black Sea (adopted in 1959 and signed by three countries);
* Agreement Concerning Cooperation in Marine Fishing (adopted in 1962 and signed by six countries);
* Convention for the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea (adopted in 1970 and signed by 18 countries);
* Convention of the Conservation of the Living Resources of the Southeast Atlantic (adopted in 1969 and signed by 16 countries);4
* Convention on Fishing and Conservation of the Living Resources in the Baltic Sea and the Belts (adopted in 1973 and signed by seven countries);
* Convention on Future Multilateral Cooperation in the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries (adopted in 1978 and signed by 12 countries);
* Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (adopted in 1980 and signed by 27 countries and the European Community);
* Convention on Future Multilateral Cooperation in North-EastAtlantic Fisheries (adopted in 1980 and signed by ten countries and the European Community);
* Convention for the Conservation of Salmon in the North Atlantic Ocean (adopted in 1982 and signed by seven countries and the European Community).
Because most of the agreements are concerned with all species of fish within a geographic area or with particular species, they limit the potential number of signatories.
In general, the fisheries commissions established by these IEAs collect data and carry out research necessary to advise on how fisheries could be more effectively exploited. They are often invited to make recommendations on managing the resource. For example, the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas, established by the International Convention for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas, may "make recommendations designed to maintain the populations of tuna and tunalike fishes that may be taken in the Convention area at levels which will permit the maximum sustainable catch".
Quite apart from the fact that "maximum sustainable catch" is generally not justified economically (for example, Clark, 1976), implementation poses great difficulties. The agreement stipulates that commission recommendations must be implemented by parties to the agreement, but only if parties do not "object" to the recommendation. If any party does object to the recommendation, that party is not required to comply with the recommendation. Clearly, stronger mechanisms are needed if these agreements are to succeed in more effective management of fishery resources.
Marine mammal protection
A number of IEAs are concerned with the management of marine mammals. These include the International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling (adopted in 1946 and signed by 24 countries), the Convention on Conservation of North Pacific Fur Seals (adopted in 1957 and signed by tour countries) and the Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals (adopted in 1972 and signed by 11 countries).
The Whaling Convention is perhaps the best known of these agreements, but its fame results as much from its failures as from its successes. The
Whaling Convention was preceded by the 1931 Convention for the Regulation of Whaling, which banned commercial hunting of right and bowhead whales, as well as the killing of calves or female whales accompanied by calves (Lyster, 1985, p. 8). The earlier agreement had little effect, however, partly because it was not signed by five major whaling nations (Japan, Germany, Chile, Argentina and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics). The 1931 agreement did not establish a commission, and hence was not a flexible instrument for managing whaling.
The Whaling Convention was established by the International Whaling Commission (IWC), which sets quotas and regulates whaling methods. Perhaps the greatest success of the Whaling Convention was the commercial ban on whaling adopted in 1986. But that ban - as well as the Convention itself - is now under threat. While the Convention was set up originally to reduce current harvest rates in order to increase future rates, any country may sign the agreement, and the vast majority of current signatories are primarily concerned with bringing all commercial whaling to an end.
Like the fisheries agreements, the Whaling Convention does not impose harsh requirements on its parties. If a party objects to an amendment to the regulations governing the exploitation and conservation of whales, it is not bound by them. In effect, therefore, countries may do whatever they wish. However, two United States laws, known as the Pelly Amendment to the Fisherman's Protective Act of 1967 and the Packwood-Magnusom Amendment to the Fishery Conservation and Management Act of 1976, authorize the United States Government to take economic sanctions against any country whose activities diminish the effectiveness of the conservation measures of the International Whaling Convention. These sanctions include bans on fish imports and on fishing in United States territorial waters. As a result, in 1 983 the United States withheld 171000 tonnes (worth about US$55 million) from Japan's fish allocations within the United States 200-mile coastal zone in retaliation for Japan's
objection to the Whaling Commission's decision to halt commercial whaling in 1986( Lyster, 1 985).
The North Pacific Fur Seal Treaty, first negotiated in 1911,is among the most successful of all IEAs. The agreement was reached as the fur seal population was close to extinction. The seals were being hunted by the United States, Canada, Russia and Japan. Canada and Japan hunted the seals at sea, while the United States and Russia harvested their own breeding populations on land. Pelagic sealing was a particularly wasteful method of harvesting; many seals were killed without being retrieved, and most of the seals taken at sea were female. The 1911 treaty did not limit the total catch of seals, but it banned pelagic sealing. Since the United States and Russia had every incentive to manage their own populations efficiently (on the Pribilof islands and on the Commander, Robben and Kurile islands, respectively), the ban was expected to produce a substantial increase in the present value profit from the resource. Canada and Japan were compensated by being given a fixed share of
the total harvest of the United States and Russia.
The treaty also includes an important enforcement provision. If one party violates the agreement, the agreement becomes null and void. This is a strong deterrent to cheating, since all parties would be worse off without the agreement than with it. Although the agreement has been amended since 191 1, it remains in force today. The agreement is discussed further in the final chapter, "International environmental agreements reconsidered", (p. 43).
Animal welfare
Several European agreements concern animal welfare, including the European Convention for the Protection of Animals Kept for Farming Purposes (adopted in 1976 and signed by 17 countries plus the European Community), the European Convention for the Protection of Animals for Slaughter (adopted in 1979 and signed by 10 countries) and the European Convention for the Protection of Animals During International Transport (adopted in 1968 and signed by 19 countries).
International cooperation is needed in these cases for two reasons: because consumers want to be confident that all the food they purchase satisfies minimum standards for animal welfare and because farmers who must comply with local laws do not want to lose competitive advantage to imports.
Bird protection
Since many bird species are migratory, the policies of one country regarding the harvesting of birds and the protection of their habitat affect the abundance of the species in other countries. Birds are valued for controlling pests that may harm agriculture, as a food source and also for aesthetic and ecological reasons.
Several IEAs are intended to protect bird populations, including the Convention for the Protection of Birds Useful to Agriculture (adopted in 1902 and signed by 12 countries), the International Convention for the Protection of Birds (adopted in 1950 and signed by ten countries) and the Benelux Convention on the Hunting and the Protection of Birds (adopted in 1970 and signed by three countries). The first two agreements have had little effect (Lyster, 1985), while the third has imposed quotas on the taking of particular species.
Terrestrial species
Two lEAs are concerned with the conservation of particular terrestrial species. The Agreement on the Conservation of Polar Bears (adopted in 1973 and signed by five countries) provides for the coordination of research programmes, restricts the killing and capture of polar bears and seeks to protect their ecosystem.
A number of agreements are concerned with the conservation of the vicuna, a relative of the llama, which has long been hunted for its wool. Wild populations are currently found in Argentina, Bolivia, Chile and Peru' and they once existed in Ecuador. The Convention for the Conservation and Management of the Vicuna (adopted in 1979 and signed by four countries) prohibits "the hunting and illegal trade of the vicuña, its products and derivatives within the territory" of the signatories. Like the polar bear agreement, IEAs regulating the conservation of vicuña, have been successful. Lyster (1985,p. 94) states: "It would certainly be hard to give the vicuña, more comprehensive international legal protection than it receives at present, and if the species does not prosper it would raise serious questions as to the worth of negotiating any international wildlife treaties at all."
Endangered species protection
Both polar bears and vicuña, are also cited in the appendices to the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (adopted in 1973 and signed by more than 90 countries). The CITES convention governs international trade in endangered species. It includes a list of endangered species and requires that trade be regulated by permits. Species cited in Appendix I are those that are "threatened with extinction" and by and large prohibited from trade, while Appendix II species are "not necessarily now threatened with extinction [but] may become so unless trade in specimens of such species is subject to strict regulation in order to avoid utilization incompatible with their survival." Appendix 11 species cannot be exported without a permit, and in issuing a permit the designated authority of the state must determine that the "export will not be detrimental to the survival of that species." However, import permits are not required for these species.
The most novel dimension of CITES is the regulation of trade between parties and non-parties. The agreement prohibits parties from trading with non-parties unless the latter produce documentation comparable to that required of parties. The large number of signatories is probably the result of this requirement.
CITES has come under strain recently because of a conflict between African nations seeking a ban on trade in African elephant ivory and those with better managed populations who would like trade to be continued.
Nature conservation
A number of IEAs are concerned with the protection of particular ecosystems. These include the Convention on Nature Protection and Wildlife Preservation in the Western Hemisphere (adopted in 1940 and signed by 17 countries), the Convention on the Conservation of European Wildlife and Natural Habitats (adopted in 1979 and signed by about 17 countries) and the Protocol Concerning Protected Areas and Wild Fauna and Flora in the Eastern African Region (adopted in 1985 and signed by about five countries). Others are concerned with nature in general and include the Convention Concerning the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage (adopted in 1972 and signed by about 98 countries) and the Convention on the Conservation of Biological Diversity (adopted in 1992 and signed by more than 150 countries).
The Convention on Biological Diversity, signed in June 1992 at the Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro, is largely intended as a vehicle for transferring resources from rich to poor countries to pay the cost of conserving biodiversity in the poor countries, especially tropical rain forest countries.The convention establishes the principle that poor countries should be compensated for the "incremental costs" of conservation - roughly, the additional costs of conserving biological diversity that has global value but that otherwise would not be protected. It also states that the Global Environment Facility (GEF), which is administered by the World Bank, the United Nations Environment Programme and the United Nations Development Programme, should administer such resource transfers, at least on an interim basis. The convention is analysed in the next chapter.
Pollution control
Many environmental problems affect food and agriculture indirectly, among them, marine pollution, air and water pollution, ozone depletion, climate change and nuclear incidents. A great many IEAs cover these problems (Barrett, 1991), but two are particularly noteworthy.
Protection of the ozone layer
The Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer (adopted in 1987, revised in 1990 and 1992 and signed by about 86 countries plus the European Community) specifies reductions in the production and consumption of about 20 substances that deplete stratospheric ozone.This agreement is considered one of the great successes of international cooperation. The United States negotiator to the protocol later reflected (Benedick, 1988, p. 429): "... in undertaking collaborative preventive action to protect future generations from potential dangers, the nations represented at Montreal charted new paths in environmental cooperation and established both a precedent and a standard by which future international negotiations will be measured."
The original Montreal Protocol required that developed-country signatories reduce their emissions of eight ozone-depleting substances largely, CFCs - by 50 percent by the year 2000. The agreement was amended in June 1990, when the number of substances controlled was increased to 20 and the reduction of 50 percent was replaced by a virtual ban. In November 1992, the agreement was amended again to move the ban forward to 1996 and to include other substances. Developing countries were required to meet weaker targets in the 1987 agreement, and the 1990 amendment included provisions for transfers of resources from rich to poor countries. These transfers were to be for the "incremental costs" of complying with the agreement, and it was the offer of transfers that made the agreement acceptable to countries such as India and China.
The Montreal Protocol is explicit in stating the obligations of individual countries and it is also unique in that it allows trading in national obligations. Finally, the protocol provides incentives for countries to accede to the treaty, both because transfers are provided to poor countries and because "sanctions" apply to non-signatories.
Global climate change
The Framework Convention on Climate Change (adopted in 1992 and signed by 153 countries) has received more criticism than acclaim. Signed in Rio de Janeiro in June 1992, the Climate Change Convention does not specify precise targets for reducing such greenhouse gas emissions as carbon dioxide. Instead, it commits developed-country parties to develop policies "... with the aim of returning individually or jointly to their 1990 levels of ... anthropogenic emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases not controlled by the Montreal Protocol." Such parties are also committed to "... provide new and additional financial resources to meet the agreed full costs incurred by developing country Parties in complying with their obligations under [the convention]." The extent to which developing country parties are expected to implement their commitments "... will depend on the effective implementation by developed country Parties of their commitments under the Convention
related to financial resources and transfer of technology and will take fully into account that economic and social development and poverty eradication are the first and overriding priorities of the developing country Parties."
Arguably, the most important aspect of the Climate Change Convention is the principle that countries may fulfil their commitments jointly. The principle of "joint implementation" was originally proposed by the governments of Germany and Norway. Although the principle has yet to be defined precisely, it is intended to allow countries to fulfil obligations with greater flexibility. For example, the Norwegian Parliament declared in 1989 that Norway should stabilize its carbon dioxide emissions at the 1989 level by the year 2000. Norway has adopted a number of policies to achieve this end - including a carbon tax. But, for Norway to meet its target unilaterally would be expensive. The country burns little coal and does not have a natural-gas grid; almost all of its electricity is provided by hydro power. Since only global emissions affect climate change, Norway has argued that it could more efficiently achieve its national target by effecting emission reductions offshore. Joint
implementation would allow Norway to pay for abatement in other countries and to receive "credit" for doing so.
While the concept of joint implementation is a potentially important innovation, the Montreal Protocol goes much further by allowing virtually unrestricted international trading to achieve explicit national emission reduction targets. Furthermore, the Climate Change Convention provides no real penalties for countries that remain outside the agreement. Since the problems of stratospheric ozone depletion and climate change appear to be superficially quite similar- both involve all countries - it is critical that the theory of IEAs is able to explain why efforts to obtain international cooperation in these two cases produced such vastly different outcomes. This is discussed in the final chapter, "International environmental agreements reconsidered", (p. 43).
<section>3</section>
Chapter 3. International cooperation in environmental protection
Back to contents - Previous file - Next file
Protection of environmental resources, such as the global climate and biological diversity, is an international public good. It would be expected, therefore, that the pursuit of national self-interest would result in too little protection of resources. But the fact that all countries potentially could be better off if all cooperated to protect these resources equally suggests that countries have incentives to invent institutions that can facilitate cooperation. As discussed in the previous chapter, such institutions do exist; they are IEAs or treaties that establish rules for protecting international environmental resources. More than 140 IEAs have been negotiated, excluding bilateral agreements and European Community directives (Barrett, 1991). The most recent were agreements to protect the global climate and biological diversity signed in Rio de Janeiro in June 1992. An important question is whether such institutions really can be expected to improve environmental
protection, given the incentives countries have to free ride. Both the climate change and biological diversity conventions were signed by about 150 countries - virtually all UN member countries. Does that mean that the agreements achieve the full cooperative outcomes, or do they instead merely codify the non-cooperative outcomes?
While both climate change and biological diversity concern shared environmental resources, they differ in one important respect. As noted in the introduction, climate change is a reciprocal externality: if one country emits more carbon, others may retaliate by emitting more too. Most of the other environmental problems discussed in the last section are similar. If one country eases its plant protection, others may respond by easing theirs. If one country increases its tuna harvest, others may do likewise. Biological diversity is more like a unidirectional externality; the costs of conservation fall primarily on tropical rain forest countries, while the benefits are received by the countries belonging to the Organisation for Economic Cooperation and Development. For this reason, these types of environmental problems are treated separately below. It will be seen, however, that the qualitative results are remarkably similar. As indicated in the introduction, the reason is that
the provision of compensation for the conservation of biological diversity itself involves a reciprocal externality.
The prisoners' dilemma
The situations discussed here are "mixed-motive games", where countries can be made better off through cooperation, although each country could do better still by defecting from a cooperative agreement. Of particular interest is the "prisoners' dilemma game", because it demonstrates that under certain conditions countries may not be able to sustain a cooperative agreement, even though all countries would be better off if such an agreement were sustained.
The prisoners' dilemma game is illustrated in Figure 1. There are two countries, A and B. Each country must choose an action, Y or N. Any one of four outcomes may result: A and B both choose Y; A and B both choose N: A chooses Y and B chooses N; and A chooses N and B chooses Y. Associated with each of these outcomes is a payoff to countries A and B. The figures in the cells represent these payoffs. The figure on the left is A's payoff, and the figure on the right in each cell is B's payoff. Note that for this game only relative payoff magnitudes matter.
Figure 1 might describe a "game" of abating a pollutant that is known to damage the environment of every country, where a country abates its own emissions by choosing Y and does not by choosing N. The rules of the game are that the two players must choose their actions simultaneously, knowing that the game will not be replayed. The Nash equilibrium is easily calculated. Consider A's decision. If B chooses Y. A's best choice is N. If B chooses N. A's best choice is still N. Hence, A will choose N whatever B chooses (N is a dominant strategy for A). Similarly, B will choose N whatever A chooses. As a result, the equilibrium for this game is that neither country abates its emissions. Both countries have an incentive to cooperate and abate their emissions, however, since both countries do better when Y is chosen than they do in the Nash equilibrium where N,N is the outcome.
How can the outcome Y,Y be sustained? The most obvious way would be to have both countries make binding commitments or commitments in which the penalty for breaking the agreement is so great that neither country would ever want to do so. For example, if in Figure I each party agreed to choose Y or to suffer a penalty of 2 if it instead chose N. the payoffs would be changed so that Y becomes a dominant strategy for both players.
Individuals and firms could commit themselves by signing contracts enforceable by a nation's courts although a cartel agreement between firms is not legal in many countries. In international relations, however, there is no third party to enforce an agreement. If an agreement is broken, the injured country can take the offender to the International Court of Justice - but the offender cannot be made to defend itself before the Court. Furthermore, if the Court finds the defendant guilty and imposes a punishment, the offending country cannot be forced to bear the punishment. In other words, international agreements must be self-enforcing.
FIGURE 1 Illustration of the prisoniers' dilemma game
Self-enforcement is a severe constraint. Indeed, with respect to the prisoners' dilemma, self-enforcement ensures that an international agreement cannot be sustained. However, it turns out that in a richer model, a country can do at least a little better than in the Nash equilibrium.
The self-enforcing IEA
One approach to modelling reciprocal externalities, such as plant protection, international fisheries management and climate change, is to assume that countries that sign an IEA collude by maximizing their collective net benefits.6 These countries do so perhaps taking into account the reactions of nonsignatories. Non-signatories choose their actions on the assumption that their choices will not affect the decisions of other countries. Any country may sign the IEA, and any signatory may withdraw from the agreement. The agreement is stable if no signatory wishes to withdraw and if no non-signatory wishes to accede to the agreement. This notion of stability is consistent with international law, which respects sovereignty and, hence, rules out third-party enforcement of an IEA (Barrett, 1990).
To illustrate the procedure, consider a simple example (Barrett, 1992b) involving a shared resource. The precise nature of the example is not important. It may concern pollution or plant protection or a fishery. What is important is that all countries involved take actions that directly affect the stock of the resource (the abundance of fish, the concentration of a pollutant, the prevalence of a pest). Supposing that the problem concerns pollution, there are i = 1,...,N identical countries with net benefit functions
NB[i] = w Q - cq[i]^2/2, (1)
where Q is total pollution abatement, qj is country i's abatement (i.e. Q = åqj) and w and c are positive parameters. The reciprocal externality is reflected by the presence of Q in i's net benefit function.
If countries do not cooperate, it seems reasonable to assume that each country will maximize its own net benefits, taking the abatement choices of other countries as given. The solution (formally, the Nash equilibrium) involves each country setting its own marginal benefit of abatement equal to its own marginal cost. Each country will choose a level of abatement q[0]= w/c, where the subscript o denotes the open access or non-cooperative outcome. In this case, total abatement is given by Q[0] = w N/c. The solution is shown in Figure 2, where the horizontal axis measures total abatement, MC[j] denotes country i's marginal abatement cost schedule and MB and MB[j], respectively, denote the global and national abatement benefit schedules.
Figure 2.Non-cooperative and cooperative outcomes
Suppose now that countries cooperate fully. Since all countries are identical, it is reasonable to assume that countries will choose their abatement levels jointly in order to maximize their collective net benefits. This requires that each country set its own marginal cost of abatement equal to the global marginal benefit of abatement. Each country chooses a level of abatement q[c]= wN/c, where the subscript c denotes the full cooperative outcome; in this case, Q[c] = wN^2/c This solution is also shown in Figure 2. It is obvious from the figure that Q[c] > Q[0]. The outcome Q[0], is not stable, however, because MC[j ]> MB [j] for each country. To improve upon the outcome Q[0], this incentive to free ride must be reduced. One possibility is considered below.
Before turning to free rider deterrence, it should be noted that the extent to which an agreement is able to increase net benefits depends on the nature of the problem at hand. For specification (1 ), it is easy to show that the gap in global net benefits between the non-cooperative and full cooperative outcomes is given by w^2N(N - 1)^2/2c. The larger c is and the smaller ce is, the smaller the total gains to cooperation are. Calculating the gains to cooperation is important, because in some cases the gains may not be very large. For specification (1), if c is large and w is small, countries would not abate their emissions by much even if they cooperated fully. Hence, failure to cooperate would not reduce well-being dramatically. This is not true if c is small and is large.
Suppose now that a fraction a of the N countries sign an IEA, while the remaining (1- a)N countries do not. Denote the former countries by the subscript s and the latter by the subscript n. Assume that non-signatories behave non-cooperatively by choosing an abatement level where each country's marginal benefit of abatement equals its marginal cost; the solution for specification (1) is q[n] = w /c, and Q[n] = åq[n]=(1- a)Nw/c. Assume further that signatories maximize their collective net benefits by choosing Q[s] = å q[s] . Formally, signatories perform the following problem:
max w aN(Q[s] + Q[n]) - cQ[s]^2/2 a N,
Q[s]
the solution to which is q[s] = w aN/c, or Q[s] = w a^2N^2/c.
To solve foraN, the stable number of signatories, a stable IEA is defined as one that satisfies the following conditions:
NB[n](a - 1/N) < =NB[s](a) and NB[n](a) >= NB[s](a + 1/N). (2)
That is, a stable IEA is one from which no signatory wishes to withdraw and to which no non-signatory wishes to accede.
Substituting q,, and q into ( I ) yields:
NB[n](a) = w^2N( 1 - a + a^2N - 1/2N)/c
(3a)
NB[s ](a) = w^2N( 1 - a + a^2N/2)/c
(3b)
NB[n](a - 1/N) = w^2N(1 - 3a + 3/2N + a^2N)/c
(3c)
NB[s](a + 1/N) = w^2N( 1 - 1/2N + a^2N/2)/c.
(3d)
Substituting (3a) and (3d) into (2) yields a a>=2/N. Substituting (3b) and (3c) into (2) and solving for the resulting quadratic equation yields 3/N 2 a 2 I/N. Since stability requires that both of these conditions hold, the stable IEA consists of 3 >=aN >= 2 countries. Clearly, if N = 2, then both countries will sign the IEA. Upon substitution, it is easy to show that NB[s] (3/N) = NB[n](2/N). If it is assumed that an additional country will join the IEA when NB[s](a + 1/N) = NB[n](a), then the equilibrium IEA will consist of three countries whenever N >= 3.
An illustration of the stable IEA for this specification is shown in Table 2, where NB = å NB[s] + å NB[n]. Notice that if two countries form an IEA, they each earn 4 000, which is more than the 3 800 they would earn if there were no agreement. However, free riders do even better than signatories; they earn 4 600. If a third country accedes to the agreement, it receives 4 600, which leaves it no worse off than if it had chosen to free ride. If a fourth country acceded to the treaty, however, it would earn 5 600, which is less than it would earn as a free rider (6 200). Similarly, it can be shown that, starting from an agreement consisting of all countries, there is always an incentive to withdraw as long as four or more countries are in the agreement. Hence, the self-enforcing IEA can sustain no more than three countries. The IEA is able to increase global net benefits from 38 000 to 57 200, although this increase falls far short of that associated with the full cooperative
outcome.
One problem with this analysis is that it is not obvious how the equilibrium would be arrived at in practice, since each country would prefer to be outside the agreement.This problem can be relieved somewhat by allowing countries to differ. Then, because some countries gain more from acceding to an agreement than others, it is fairly easy to see how the IEA might be formed. Allowing countries to be different - to have different parameter values -- complicates the analysis considerably, however. When countries are identical, any solution concept from cooperative game theory would require that all countries in the IEA adopt the same levels of abatement. When countries are different, this is no longer true; the abatement levels of signatories will depend on the "cooperative game theoretic model" employed.
TABLE 2. Illustration of stability analysis for specification*
a q[s] q[n] N B[s] N B[n] Q N B
*Assumes N = I0, w = 10, w^+= 0.25.
For a= a^+ = 0.3, the number of signatories is stable (a^+ = 10 x 0.3 = 3).
What is more' when countries are different, more than one equilibrium may exist. This serves to indicate the difficulty of analysing IEAs in a rich structure. For the purposes of this paper, however, it is better to concentrate on the fundamental problem of free rider deterrence and to consider only the simple case where all countries are identical.
The specification given by equation (1) permits the stable IEA to be calculated analytically. This is not true of all specifications, and, as Table 3 shows, different specifications yield different results; depending on the functional form and parameter values, the number of signatories to the stable IEA ranges from 0 to N.
What is attractive about this model is that it solves endogenously for the number of signatories, the terms of the agreement reached and the abatement effort by non-signatories. In addition, the IEA is selt-enforcing; signatories do not withdraw from and non-signatories do not accede to the IEA, because it is not in their interest to do so. The mechanism that achieves partial cooperation is simple. If an additional country joins the IEA, the other cooperators abate more, and if one signatory withdraws from the IEA, the remaining cooperators abate less. Hence cooperation is rewarded and free riding punished. These rewards and punishments are credible, because signatories are always maximizing their collective net benefits.
Such rewards and punishments may not be large enough to sustain an IEA consisting of many countries, however. Indeed, the one robust conclusion that emerges from this model of an IEA is that when N is large, an IEA can do little to improve global well-being.
TABLE 3 Model results for different functional specifications
Functional specification Number of signatories
(1) b(aQ - Q^2/2)/N - cq^2/2 0-N, depending on parameter values
(2) wQ - cq^2/2 2 when N = 2, 3 when N >= 3
(3) (wQ- as[(1 - q/a)1 n (1 - q/a) + q/a] 2 when N>=2
(4) b(aQ - Q^2/2)/N - dq 0
Source:Barrett(1992b)
This is obviously true for the last specification given in Table 2, but it is also true of the first. Analysis of this specification shows that an IEA will be signed by many countries when N is large only when the gap between the non-cooperative and fully cooperative outcomes is very small (Barrett, 1992b). The reason for this general result is that when N is large, the model cannot deliver a large punishment to deter free riding. When N is large, a defection by any one country reduces the net benefits of the remaining signatories by only a small amount. Hence, it is only credible for these countries to inflict a small punishment. But when the marginal abatement cost curve is steep, the incentive to free ride is great. Hence, free riding cannot be credibly deterred. A different model can inflict harsher punishment.
<section>4</section>
IEAs as repeated games
Back to contents - Previous file - Next file
It is well known that the full cooperative outcome of the one-shot game can be sustained as a subgame perfect equilibrium of the infinitely repeated game if the rate of discount is sufficiently small. This can be shown very easily for the specification given by equation (1). Denote the (common) discount factor by d, net benefits to country i under the full cooperative outcome by NB[j], net benefits to country i under the non-cooperative (or open access) outcome by Nb[i]^o, and net benefits to i if i, and i alone, defects from the full cooperative outcome by NB[i]^d. If all players play the "grim" strategy of cooperating on the first move and cooperating on every successive move - provided all other players cooperated on every previous move - but choosing their noncooperative abatement levels if any player did cheat on a previous move, then no single player would want to deviate if the following condition is satisfied (Shapiro, 1989):
d>=( NB[i]^d - NB[i]^c )/( NB[i]^d - Nb[i]^o), for all i. (4)
For the specification given by equation (1), condition (4) reduces to d>= 1/2, irrespective of N. Provided the common rate of discount does not exceed 100 percent, the full c ooperative outcome can be sustained by any number of countries.
Since environmental games such as climate change and biological diversity conservation are played repeatedly, this result - and the folk theorem, more generally - would seem to suggest, in contrast to the IEA model, that conventions such as those signed in Rio de Janeiro could well reflect the full cooperative outcome. It turns out, however, that the above infinitely repeated game may not be self-enforcing.
Consider the above repeated game. As we have seen, cooperation can be sustained as a subgame perfect equilibrium if players adopt the strategy of indefinite Cournot reversion after any player cheats. However, if one player did cheat, and the others threatened indefinite punishment, all players would have an incentive to renegotiate and begin cooperating again. Since all players would be aware of this incentive to renegotiate, the above grim strategy cannot characterize a self-enforcing IEA; to be self enforcing, IEAs must be renegotiation-proof. As will be shown below, renegotiationproof IEAs may not be able to sustain the full cooperative outcome, even for arbitrarily small discount rates.
Let Nb[i ]now denote country i's average payoff in the infinitely repeated game, and consider the last functional specification given in Table 3, adjusted by a constant:
NB[i] = b(aQ - Q^2/2)/N - dq[i]- (ab - dN)^2/2bN.
The constant term ensures that each country is guaranteed a payoff of at least zero. The full cooperative outcome yields a global payoff of d(N-1)(2ab - d)/2b. Hence, the set of feasible, individually rational payoffs is:
V* = { v | v[i] >=0, å v[i].<=d(N - 1 )(2ab - d)/2b }
Following Farrell and Maskin (1989), a payoff vector v is (weakly) renegotiation-proof (for discount rates near zero) if abatement levels q[j]^j ,q[k]^j can be chosen to punish j for cheating, such that:
max {(b/N)[a(q[j] + (N - 1 )q[k]^j) - (q[j] + (N - 1 )q[k]^j)^2/2] - dq[j] -q[j] (ab - dN)^2/2bN>=v[j]; (6)
(b/N)[a(q[j]^j + (N - 1 )q[k]^j) - (q[j]^i + (N - 1 ) q[k]^i)^2/2] - dq[k]^j - (ab - dN)^2/2bN >= v[k]. (7)
Condition (6) ensures that any one country cannot gain by cheating on the agreement. Condition (7) ensures that countries have no incentive to renegotiate. For this problem, it also makes sense to require that the payoff vector v be Pareto efficient in the punishment phase. If it is also assumed that country j chooses its mini-max abatement level in the punishment phase, it can be shown (Barrett, 1992b) that the full cooperative outcome can be sustained as a self-enforcing agreement if the number of countries N does not exceed:
N = min (ab/d - 1, 2ab/3d - 1/3). (8)
It is easy to see that N is increasing in a and b and decreasing in d. N is calculated for various values of a, b and d in Table 4. The number of countries that can sustain the full cooperative outcome varies substantially, depending on the parameter values, and is higher the larger b is and the smaller d is. Clearly, even infinite repetition may not sustain the full cooperative outcome provided IEAs are self-enforcing.
In comparing these results with those of the previous model, where specification (5) is unable to sustain an IEA of any size, it is apparent that repetition, by increasing the size of credible punishments, may be able to support the full cooperative outcome for arbitrarily small discount rates, provided N is not too large. However, the results of this subsection only identify an upper bound on N that can sustain the full cooperative outcome where the rate of discount is near zero. These results do not indicate what would happen if N were larger than this upper bound. In particular, for the specification in Table 4, if a = 100, b = 1 and d = 9.9, and if N were no greater than 67, the full cooperative outcome could be sustained by a self-enforcing IEA. But, in contrast to the earlier model, the repeated game model does not identify what outcome would result, especially if N were greater than 67.
The last column in Table 4 gives the gains to cooperation (that is, the difference in total net benefits between the full cooperative and non-cooperative outcomes) divided by (N - 1)~. The actual gains to cooperation depend not only on parameter values, but also on N. The last column in Table 4, therefore, gives estimates of the relative magnitudes of the gains to cooperation for N fixed. The table shows that when the gains to cooperation are large, an IEA can be sustained by only a small number of countries if, indeed, it can be sustained at all. This result is consistent with the general result presented earlier. A similar result also arises in the analysis of biological diversity.
TABLE 4. Illustration of maximum number of countries that can sustain the full cooperative outcome.
a b d N Total gains to cooperation
*Assumes N = 100 to ensure interior solutions.
Biological diversity
The conservation of biological diversity is a global public good, if for no other reason than that the existence of biological diversity is valued. That means that the well-being of country i depends not only on the stock of biological diversity in country i but on the global stock of biological diversity. While developed countries may wish to conserve all their biological diversity for their own well-being, developing countries may not. However, since the developed countries benefit from the conservation of biological diversity in developing countries, developed countries may wish to compensate developing countries for the incremental costs of additional conservation. Indeed, provision of such compensation is a major objective of the Biological Diversity Convention. This section explores the problem of achieving cooperation in compensating developing countries for the costs of conserving biological diversity.
How might these costs be measured? If developing countries value biological diversity for domestic reasons, they may conserve biological diversity at a positive marginal cost even if no compensation is forthcoming. However, according to the convention (Article 20, Paragraph 2): "The developed country Parties shall provide new and additional financial resources to enable developing country Parties to meet the agreed full incremental costs to them of implementing measures which fulfil the obligations of this Convention...".
Here, "full incremental costs" can be taken to mean the costs that a country would bear over and above any benefits the country might receive as a result of the compensation policy. Starting from the level of conservation that is optimal under the `'nationalistic" policy, the incremental cost of conserving an additional unit of biological diversity would be expected to approach zero. The reason is that if the country developed a nationalistic conservation policy that maximized its own net benefits, its net marginal benefit of conservation would be zero. The country, therefore, would be indifferent to conserving one more unit of biological diversity. However, it should become increasingly costly to protect successive increases in the stock of biological diversity. Hence, the marginal incremental costs of conservation should increase from the 0 intercept.
To keep the analysis simple, assume that all j = 1,...,N developing countries are identical, and that all i = 1,...,n developed countries are identical, but that developing and developed countries are different.
For any given developing country, assume that the costs of conservation are bS[j]^2/2, where S[j] now stands for the additional quantity of biological diversity that is conserved by j as a result of financial transfers. Clearly, when developed countries offer financial assistance, they will want the assistance to be cost-effective. Given the cost function, the developed countries will want to spread the money out equally, so that the same quantity of incremental biological diversity is conserved by each developing country. Hence, the costs of conservation are åbS[j]^2/2= bS^2/2/2N, where S = åjS[j]. Letting c º b/N, the costs are cS^2/2.
For developed countries, it seems reasonable to assume that the benefit of conserving one additional unit of global biological diversity, S. will be positive and that successive increases in S will yield successively smaller incremental benefits. Assume that country i's benefit function is given by:
B[i] (S) = (b/n)(aS - S^2/2). (9)
Parameter b is the slope of the marginal benefit of conservation summed over all developed countries. If the benefit of conserving the very last unit of biological diversity equals zero, then parameter a may be interpreted as the total quantity of diversity that can feasibly be saved.
Unless developed countries offer compensation to developing countries, no additional conservation will be forthcoming. Developed country i may make a payment of M[i] to conserve biological diversity in developing countries. The same is true for all other developed countries. The total payment offered, therefore, is M = å[i]M[i]. Assuming that all such payments are made in a costeffective manner, the quantity of diversity conserved is:
M = cS^2/2.
Rearranging, produces:
S = (2M/c)^1/2. (10)
Increases in assistance yield increases in additional conservation, but each additional dollar of assistance protects less biological diversity than the last because of the increasing cost of conservation.
Substituting ( l0) into (9), and taking into account the cost of the financial transfer to country i, yields i's net benefit function:
NB[i] (M[i], M[-i]) = (b/n)[a(2(M[i] + M [-i])/c)^1/2 - (M[i] + M[ -i])/c] - M[i], (11)
where M [-i] = M - M[i]. Equation ( 11 ) assumes that the marginal value to i of the first dollar spent on conservation is equal to the marginal value of the millionth dollar spent on conservation. Like all the other assumptions regarding the functional specification of the model, this may be questionable. Changes in the functional specification can, in fact, be quite crucial to the results, as was seen under "The self-enforcing IEA" (p.24).
The Nash equilibrium may be easily solved. Maximizing (11) on the assumption that M[-i] / dM[i] = 0 yields the non-cooperative outcome:
M* = a^2b^2c/2(cn + b)^2, S* = ab/(cn+b). (12)
Not surprisingly, the quantity of biological diversity conserved is proportional to parameter a (which may be taken to be the total quantity of diversity that can feasibly be saved), increasing in b (the slope of the marginal benefit of conservation for all developed countries), decreasing in c (the slope of the marginal cost of biological diversity conservation) and decreasing in n (the number of developed countries).
An important question is how far the non-cooperative outcome departs from the full cooperative outcome. The latter is found by choosing M to maximize:
NB(M) = b[a(2M/c)^1/2 - M/c] - M.
The solution is:
M** = a^2b^2c/2(c + b)^2 S** = ab/(c+b). ( 13)
Obviously, M* = M** and S* = S** if n = 1.
Figure 3 illustrates these two different outcomes. For the non-cooperative outcome, each country sets its own marginal benefit of conservation equal to the marginal cost of conservation. For the full cooperative outcome, each country i sets the marginal benefit to all developed countries equal to the marginal cost of conservation.
Two extreme views might be taken regarding the Biodiversity Convention. The first is that the convention merely codifies what countries would have done unilaterally or that the terms of the convention simply reflect the noncooperative outcome. The other view is that the convention achieves full (nearly) cooperation. One datum supports both views: almost every country signed the convention.
It is of course difficult to say which view is closer to the truth. This is partly because it is not possible to know what countries would have done had the convention never been agreed upon and partly because the gap between the two outcomes might be quite small and, therefore, hard to detect. More fundamentally, the final terms of the agreement will not be decided until the first meeting of the Conference of the Parties. In a sense, the difficult negotiations lie ahead. These will decide how much money is to be contributed by each developed country and how this money is to be distributed among developing countries. What countries have signed up for so far are certain principles and a process by which the important substantive decisions will be taken later.
Theory can provide some insight into how close the treaty will get to the full cooperative outcome. If the modelling approach employed earlier in "The selfenforcing IEA" (p.24) is applied to this problem, it can be shown that the above functional specification yields the result that cooperative agreements of any size are unstable (the specification is essentially the same as that presented as specification (4) in Table 3).This model therefore implies that the convention could achieve little more than the noncooperative outcome.
Figure 3.Non-cooperative and cooperative outcomes
However, this result may not be robust. As shown earlier, cooperation can be made more attractive if the punishment suffered by free riders is increased. To consider the infinitely repeated version of this game, let NB[i] now denote country i's average payoff in the infinitely repeated game. NB[i] is assumed to be given by:
NB[i](M[i], M[-i]) = (b/n [a(2(M[i] + M[-i])/c)^1/2 - (M[i] + M[-i])/c] - M[i] - a^2b^2 /[2n(cn+b)] (14)
Equation (14) includes a constant term, chosen to ensure that each country is guaranteed a payoff of at least zero. The full cooperative outcome yields a payoff to all developed countries of a^2b^2c(n- 1)]/ 2(c+b)(cn+b)]. Hence, the set of feasible, individually rational payoffs is:
V* = {v | v[i] >=0, åv[i] < =a^2b^2c(n -1)/2(c+b)(cn+b) }.
Repeating the procedure carried out in the previous section, it can be shown (Barrett, 1992c) that the renegotiation-proof equilibria can support payoffs v; that lie between the following minimum and maximum values:
If the full cooperative outcome is to be sustained, each country's payoff in the full cooperative outcome, v* = a^2b^2c/2n(c+b)^2, must lie between v^min and v^max The maximum number of countries that can sustain the full cooperative outcome n cannot be solved analytically in this case, but simulation analysis reveals that there is a rather simple relationship between n and c/b. This is shown in Table 5.
According to Table 5, the larger c/b is, the harder cooperation is to reach. An important question is whether Hi is large when the gap between total net benefits in the full cooperative and non-cooperative outcomes is large. The last column in Table 1 yields some insight into this question. It gives the gap assuming n = 20. When c/b = .001 or .0001, the full cooperative outcome can be sustained. But in these cases, the gap is quite small. When b = 100 and c = 10, the gap between the two outcomes is quite large, but, in this case, the full cooperative outcome cannot be sustained. This suggests that when an agreement is signed by many countries, the agreement may not succeed in increasing global net benefits by much, and that when net benefits can be increased substantially through cooperation, the full cooperative outcome may not be sustainable.
TABLE 5.Simulation of maximum number of countries that can sustain the full cooperative outcome.
b c c/b NB(M**)
NB( M*)
* The last column in the Table gives the gap between the total net benefits in the full cooperative and non-cooperative outcomes, assuming n = 20 and a = 10 [the value of a does not affect the relative values of NB(M**) NB(M*)].
Summary
This section has considered the ability of a self-enforcing IEA to improve on the non-cooperative outcome. While a number of model and functional specifications have been investigated, a rather clear insight has emerged from this analysis. When only a small number of countries are involved in the exploitation of a resource, an effective IEA can be sustained and may increase total well-being considerably.
When a large number of countries are involved, it may be possible to sustain an IEA consisting of a large proportion of these countries. However, this is only true when the problem is characterized by parameter values indicating that the gap between the non-cooperative and fully cooperative outcomes is small. In other words, IEAs signed by a large number of countries are unlikely to demand that signatories do much more than they would if the agreement did not exist. When the gains to cooperation are very large, an IEA consisting of many countries cannot be sustained.
Of course, this conclusion emerges from rather special models, and it is possible that this and other conclusions will not be robust to further changes in these models. However, it appears that these results reflect fundamental forces acting on efforts to sustain cooperative agreements. Those forces are the incentives to free ride. When a great many countries are involved in the exploitation of a resource, each is responsible for a small fraction of the problem, and, hence, only small punishments for free riding are credible. But when each country is responsible for a small fraction of the problem, the benefit it receives by taking further action is small in relation to the costs. Small punishments, therefore, are not sufficient to induce countries to want to participate in a self-enforcing IEA.
In the next chapter it will be argued that this theory helps to evaluate the IEAs discussed in the chapter "lnternational agreements concerning food and agriculture" (p. 7).
<section>5</section>
Chapter 4. International environmental agreements reconsidered
Back to contents - Previous file - Next file
Two principal conclusions can be made from the preceding analysis: first, for environmental problems involving only a few countries, international cooperation should be capable of increasing total net benefits significantly, although this is by no means assured, and, second for environmental problems involving a great many countries, international cooperation is sustainable only when the gain in net benefits from cooperation is small. This final chapter draws some implications of these conclusions for the agreements considered in Chapter 2 (p. 7).
The North Pacific Fur Seal Treaty involves just four countries and is an example of an IEA that has proved successful (Lyster, 1985). Fur seals breed on both Russian and United States territory but spend much of their time in the high seas. The seals were hunted extensively in the nineteenth century and nearly became extinct around the beginning of the twentieth century because of the increase in the inefficient practice of pelagic sealing - the harvesting of seals in the water- by both Canada and Japan.
In 1911, the North Pacific Fur Seal Treaty was signed by the United States, Russia, Japan and the United Kingdom on behalf of Canada. The agreement has four remarkable components.
First, it bans pelagic sealing. In doing so, the agreement stops wasteful harvesting and ensures that all harvesting is carried out by Russia and the United States, who have an incentive to manage their own breeding populations efficiently. In other words, the agreement replaces "open access" exploitation with "sole owner" exploitation.
Second, the agreement compensates Canada and Japan by requiring that Russia (later, the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) and the United States give a portion of their annual harvest to the two countries. The 1957 Treaty requires that the United States and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics gave Canada and Japan 15 percent of their annual harvest of pelts.
Third, the Treaty allows authorized officials of each signatory to board and search vessels of other signatories suspected of pelagic sealing in its own territorial waters or in international waters and to seize or arrest the vessel and its crew if the official boarding the vessel has "reasonable cause" to believe that the vessel and crew have violated the prohibition.
Finally, the agreement states that in the event of a violation, and provided signatories cannot agree to "remedial measures", any signatory may give notice of its intention to terminate the agreement. The whole of the agreement would then be terminated nine months later. This is a very strong punishment, for if the agreement were terminated, exploitation could be expected to revert to open access, with all countries losing. Since each signatory must be better off with the agreement than without it, this mechanism provides a strong incentive for full compliance.
Similar mechanisms to punish free riding exist in other agreements, such as those to control locusts. As noted earlier, one country has little incentive to control locusts within its own borders if its neighbours do not reciprocate. Hence, a strong incentive seems to exist for countries to revert to their noncooperative outcomes if their neighbours do as well. In other words, harsh punishments against free riders would seem to be credible.
The Agreement for the Establishment of a Commission for Controlling the Desert Locust in the Eastern Region of its Distribution Area in Southwest Asia was negotiated and signed by Afghanistan, India, Iran and Pakistan. A termination clause states that the agreement "shall be considered terminated if and when the number of Members of the Commission falls below three, unless the remaining two Members of the Commission decide to continue, with the approval of the Conference of the Organization."
Interestingly, the Agreement for the Establishment of a Commission for Controlling the Desert Locust in Northwest Africa, which was open for signature to Algeria, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Morocco and Tunisia "and the countries adjacent hereto" and was signed by the four named countries, contains exactly the same clause. So does the Agreement for the Establishment of a Commission for Controlling the Desert Locust in the Near East, which was open for membership to more than ten countries and signed by l 4. Perhaps it may not have been credible for this last agreement to impose a harsher punishment, despite the larger number of countries involved.
Although care must be taken in drawing inferences from the theory, it is perhaps worth noting that one of the functional specifications shown in Table 3 suggests that the self-enforcing IEA consists of three countries.
The Plant Protection Agreement for the Southeast Asia and Pacific Region, signed by 22 countries, is automatically terminated when the number of parties to the agreement becomes "fewer than three". The agreement establishes a committee that may make "recommendations" to signatory governments regarding "prohibition, certification, inspection, disinfection, disinfestation, quarantine, destruction or other measures." Each signatory is required to "use its best endeavours to apply with respect to the importation of any plants, including their packings and containers, and any packings and containers of plant origin, from anywhere outside the [region covered by the agreement], such measures ... as may be recommended by the Commmittee ...". The committee is made up of one representative of each signatory, and its decisions are taken by a majority of votes cast. In other words, the committee set up by this agreement has significant power.
The International Plant Protection Convention, signed by 81 countries, does not specify a minimum number of signatories. This agreement is weaker than the regional agreements, however, because it calls only for the establishment of national plant protection organizations with the authority to issue a standard phytosanitary certificate and to regulate the entry of plants and plant products. These requirements are so weak that they do not provide a strong inducement for accession. The Convention for the Establishment of the European and Mediterranean Plant Protection Organization, signed by 31 countries, also carries fairly weak obligations and includes no provision for termination.
As noted earlier, fisheries agreements generally provide for both cooperative research and regulation. According to Caldwell (1984, p. 34), these IEAs have been more successful at research than at regulation:
"International cooperative efforts in fisheries research have enjoyed moderate success; difficulties arise when regulatory measures for the conservation of fisheries are proposed. The historical experience has been that freedom of the seas and national rights are invoked to cover the immediate economic interest of the fisheries industries, as in the Cod Wars (1952-76) between Iceland and Great Britain."
Caldwell (1984, p. 35) adds:
"With the exception of the North Pacific Fur Seal Convention, a plausible case could be made that, had none of the international conservation agreements negotiated prior to 1970 been consummated, the state of fisheries and world wildlife generally would not have been significantly different."
It is true that most fisheries agreements impose weak requirements upon signatories. The Agreement for the Establishment of a General Fisheries Council for the Mediterranean, for example, facilitates cooperative research but no management regime.
Some agreements do seem to influence fisheries management to some degree, however. The International Convention for the High Seas Fisheries of the North Pacific Ocean, negotiated by the United States, Canada and Japan, allows its commission to "recommend necessary joint conservation measures" and actually bans fishing of certain species in certain areas by Japan in one case and by Japan and Canada in another. This agreement ceases to remain in force if any one of the parties withdraws.
The Convention for the Conservation of Salmon in the North Atlantic Ocean, signed by seven countries plus the European Community, bans salmon fishing outside territorial waters and establishes a conservation organization, comprised of a council and three regional commissions, which may make recommendations concerning fisheries management. But the powers of the council are limited. For example, Article 4 of the convention states:
"The Council shall have the authority to make recommendations to the Parties and the Commissions on matters concerning salmon stocks subject to this Convention, including the enforcement of laws and regulations, provided that no recommendation shall be made concerning the management of salmon harvests within the area of fisheries jurisdiction of a Party". (emphasis added)
Perhaps the greatest challenge to the theory developed in Chapter 3 is the Montreal Protocol. Like the North Pacific Fur Seal Treaty, this agreement is remarkable in a number of respects.
First, it imposes what seem to be quite harsh obligations. Under the June 1990 revisions, signatories must essentially ban 20 "ozone-depleting substances" by the end of the century. Second, the rev ised protocol establishes a fund that channels resources to developing-country signatories in order to compensate for the "incremental costs" of complying with the agreement. Third, the agreement prohibits trade in CFCs, products containing CFCs or products made using the banned substances. The agreement, therefore, ensures that abatement by signatories is not offset by imports from nonsignatories. Furthermore, non-signatories are provided with an incentive to accede to the agreement.
Unlike the North Pacific Fur Seal Treaty, however, the Montreal Protocol deals with a global environmental problem. The theory presented in Chapter 3 suggested that an IEA may be signed by many signatories, each agreeing to undertake substantial action, when the gap between the non-cooperative and fully cooperative outcomes is very small (Barrett, 1992b). Evidence suggests that this gap is small in the case of ozone depletion. First, a number of countries took unilateral action years before the Montreal Protocol was adopted.The United States, for example, banned the use of CFCs in aerosols in the late 1970s. Second, a cost-benefit analysis carried out by the United States Environmental Protection Agency in 1988 estimated that the benefit to the United States of participating in the Montreal Protocol would be US$3 575 000 million, while the costs of participation would be only US$2 1 000 million. Clearly, the incentives to participate were overwhelming for the United States,
and it must be emphasized that United States costs of participation are likely to be high because of the unilateral action it took previously. Most important, this same study estimates that the benefits to the United States of undertaking the obligations of the Montreal Protocol unilaterally were US$ 1373 000 million compared to US$2 1 000 million in costs. Thus, it was certainly in the interest of the United States to carry out the terms of the Montreal Protocol whether or not other countries did likewise. In other words, the Montreal Protocol, although seeming to have attained very substantial cooperation, may not have achieved much more than would have been realized in the non-cooperative outcome.
Taken together, the theory developed in Chapter 3 (p. 21) seems to be supported by the evidence. The success of international cooperation depends largely on the ability to deter free riding. When few countries exploit a resource, free riding can be effectively deterred. When the number of countries involved is large, however, free riding is much more difficult to prevent.
<section>6</section>
References
Back to contents - Previous file
Anderson, K. & Blackhurst, R., eds. 1992. The greening of world trade issues. London, UK, Harvester Wheatsheaf.
Barrett, S. 1990. The problem of global environmental protection. Oxford Rev. Econ. Policy, 6: 68-79.
Barrett, S. 1991. Economic analysis of international environmental agreements: lessons for a global warming treaty. In Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, ed. Responding to climate change: selected economic issues. Paris, France, OECD.
Barrett, S. 1992a. International environmental agreements as games. In R. Pethig, ed. Conflicts and cooperation in managing environmental resources. Berlin, Germany, Springer-Verlag.
Barrett, S.1992b. Self-enforcing international environmental agreements. London, UK, London Business School. (Mimeograph)
Barrett, S. 1992c. Some economits of the convention on biological diversity. London, UK, London Business School. (Mimeograph)
Benedick, R.E. 1988. A landmark global treaty at Montreal. Natural Res. J., 28: 427-429.
Caldwell, L.K. 1984. International environmental policy. Durham, NC, USA, Duke University Press.
Clark,C.W.1976. Mathematical bioeconomics, NewYork,NY, USA,John Wiley & Sons.
Farrell, J. & Maskin, E. 1989. Renegotiation in repeated games. Games Econ. Behavior, 1: 327-360.
Kiss, A.C., ed. 1983. Selected multilateral treaties in the field of the environment Nairobi, Kenya, United Nations Environment Programme.
Lyster, S. 1985. International wildlife law. Cambridge, UK, Grotius.
Maler, K.-G. 1990. International environmental problems. Oxford Rev. Econ. Policy, 6: 80- 108.
Pearce, D. 1992. "Should GATT be reformed for environmental reasons?" CSERGE Discussion Paper GEC 92-06. University of East Anglia and University College, London, UK.
Rummel-Bulska, 1. & Osafo, S., eds. 1991. Selected multilateral treaties in the field of the environment, Vol. 11. Cambridge, UK, Grotius.
Shapiro, C. 1989. Theories of oligopoly behavior. In R. Schmalensee & R.D. Willig, eds. Handbook of industrial organization, Vol. 1. Amsterdam, the Netherlands, North Holland.
United States Environmental Protection Agency. 1988. Regulatory impact analysis: protection of stratospheric ozone. Vol. 1. Regulatory impact analysis document. Washington, DC, USA. I Aug.
