<title>ADCP/REP/88/32 - A Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in the Pacific</title>
<section>1</section>
FOREWORD
Aquaculture continues to grow in economic importance. The main reason for this is the quantifiable contribution aquaculture is making in many countries to fill the growing gap between supply and demand for fisheries products. This gap continues to widen because of increasing human populations and the static growth rates of capture fisheries brought about by declines in stocks and the increasing cost of obtaining fish through conventional methods. Although this gap can be (and in some cases is already being) met by alternatives, such as inexpensive poultry and white meats, aquaculture particularly provides consumers with a choice of fresh products.
Aquaculture is also evident in earning foreign exchange for many countries through the export of high-value products. It also creates employment, particularly in economically depressed coastal and remote regions, and contributes to the household economy of rural farmers.
This third regional survey prepared by the Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (ADCP) covers the existing aquaculture sector in the countries, territories and free associations of the Pacific, namely Australia, Cook Islands, Federated States of Micronesia (Kosrae, Pohnpei, Truk, Yap), Fiji, French Polynesia, the Republic of Kiribati, the Republic of the Marshall Islands, Nauru, New Caledonia, New Zealand, Niue, the Republic of Palau, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands, Tokelau, the Kingdom of Tonga, Tuvalu, the Republic of Vanuatu, Wallis and Futuna, and Western Samoa. Previous surveys dealt with eleven Middle East countries, and East Asia.
This present survey is not exhaustive. It has been prepared by Stephen Nelson in a relatively brief desk study. For some countries and territories of this vast region detailed information is still difficult to obtain. The ADCP apologizes for any omissions and errors which may exist in the survey, and hopes that these can be corrected in an up-dated survey. New information and notification of changes and errors should be indicated to the ADCP in the Fisheries Department, FAO, Rome. The detailed Table of Contents illustrates the range of information which, hopefully, will be assembled in due course for all regions.
The survey is directed toward administrators, executives, and managers who require broad overviews, rather than for scientists and technologists who require detailed information about species and practices. It is the third of a series of regional surveys. To this end, the ADCP hopes that the reader will find the information described here useful.
Colin E. Nash
Craig B. Kensler
Rome, 1989
<section>2</section>
INTRODUCTION
The nations and island territories which make up the region of the Pacific have neither individually nor collectively much importance as far as global aquaculture production is concerned. For the most part aquaculture production data, like that of other commodities, are included and lost in the regional association 'Asia and the Pacific'.
In spite of its anonymity, compared with that of its important status in neighbouring Asia, aquaculture in the Pacific region is not without some tradition. The ancient Polynesians had considerable understanding of the natural history of useful marine food fishes which enabled them to practise a simple form of husbandry and management in coastal ponds they constructed within the coral reefs. Furthermore, the ownership of fish ponds and fish was an important symbol of chieftainship. Few of these ancient fish ponds remain in production, and in recent years the islanders have applied modern practices onshore.
The Pacific Region which forms this survey is 'made up of the Pacific Islands and the countries of Australasia.
Considerable geopolitical changes have occurred among the Pacific Islands within the last two decades. Predominantly, reference to the Pacific Islands infers the islands of Micronesia, Melanesia, and Polynesia, and excludes islands which are integral parts of other nations, for example, Hawaii. The independent island nations are the Federated States of Micronesia (Kosrae, Pohnpei, Truk, Yap), Fiji, the Republic of Kiribati, the Republic of the Marshall Islands, Nauru, the Republic of Palau, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands, the Kingdom of Tonga, Tuvalu, the Republic of Vanuatu, and Western Samoa.
American Samoa and Guam are territories of the USA, and the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands is a commonwealth of the USA.
The Cook Islands and Niue are free associations with New Zealand, and Tokelau is a non self-governing territory under New Zealand.
French Polynesia, New Caledonia, and Wallis and Futuna are all territories of France.
The countries of Australasia which complete the regional survey are Australia and New Zealand.
The economic and natural resources of these nations and territories for aquaculture vary enormously. At the extremes there are the rich land mass and coastal resources of continental Australia, and the one-island nation of Nauru of 21 km^2. The rest, for the most part, are nations made up of (often) many hundreds of small islands, most of which are atolls, with small populations and distributed over vast distances which makes inter-island transportation costly. Furthermore, the need for aquaculture production for food for island communities is not always important. Although many island populations are under-nourished, the majority have adequate resources of animal protein in the way of natural resources of marine fish and shellfish.
<section>3</section>
1. CONSUMPTION OF FISH AND SHELLFISH AND THE REGIONAL MARKET
1.1 Nutritional benefits of fish and shellfish
1.2 Characteristics of consumption in the region
1.3 Annual consumption of fish and shellfish
1.4 Gross market data
1.5 Specific market data
1.6 Information for the trade
1.7 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
1.1 Nutritional benefits of fish and shellfish
Fish and shellfish are important sources of dietary protein throughout the Pacific. Fish are high in protein (17-20%) and supply important vitamins and minerals, such as calcium and phosphorus. Fish are especially important within the region among populations inhabiting small oceanic islands where long-standing traditions of reliance on marine resources have developed and where other sources of animal protein are scarce. In other countries within the region, fish consumption is increasing in light of the knowledge that the lipid fraction of fish contains largely polyunsaturated fatty acids, a dietary factor which aids in reducing blood cholesterol levels.
1.2 Characteristics of consumption in the region
As a result of the intimate associations between the populations of Oceania and the sea, the per caput consumption of fish and shellfish is high within the region, and a wide variety of fishes and invertebrates is consumed. These include species from pelagic, nearshore, benthic, coral reef, lagoon, mangrove, seagrass, and freshwater habitats.
High-value species, such as lobsters, shrimp, abalone, and oysters, are relatively more important in Australia and New Zealand, while nearshore coral reef species of fish and invertebrates are predominant in the diets of the peoples inhabiting the smaller islands of Oceania. Freshwater fisheries in the Pacific Islands are moderately developed only in Papua New Guinea, for tilapia, and in Fiji, for freshwater clams.
Food production through commercial aquaculture has been developed in only a few nations and is generally associated with the level of economic development rather than with per caput consumption.
1.3 Annual consumption of fish and shellfish
The percentage of the daily protein consumption is affected by a number of factors, the principal one being the availability of fish. Fish is often more important in the diets of coastal populations than for inland populations. In Vanuatu, for example, fish and shellfish constitute 51% of the dietary protein of coastal populations but only 27% of the protein consumed by inland populations. In essentially non-monied economies, availability of fish may be a major determinant of the level of consumption. In monied economies the price of fish relative to other protein sources and the flexibility of the consumer's available finances also contribute to determining the levels of fish consumption.
The available data (Table 1) demonstrate that, on average, the people of the Pacific islands have access to a substantial amount, 10 to 50 kg per caput per year, of fish available for consumption. A recent village household survey conducted in Yap state of the Federated States of Micronesia showed that about 75% of animal protein consumed is fish, and that approximately 90% of the fish consumed comes from the artisanal sector.
In the island nations with low population densities there is generally little economic incentive for the development of aquaculture for local markets. However, in Western Samoa, the population has grown rapidly and over 50% of the fish consumed is imported; this has stimulated interest in commercial aquaculture.
In spite of the relatively high average availability of fish in the Pacific islands in general, there are populations in inland areas with limited access either to coasts or to large rivers. For example, about 85% of the population of Papua New Guinea lives inland, and some villages suffer from protein deficiencies. In such areas, nutritional deficiencies could be alleviated in part through the development of subsistence fish culture. Aquaculture development to address such problems has been initiated for carp in the highlands of Papua New Guinea and for tilapia in parts of Fiji.
In Australia and New Zealand fish and shellfish comprise a relatively small proportion of the food consumed. It is estimated that in Australia about 2% of household expenditures is spent on seafood, and fish is eaten in restaurants more often than in the home. However, even in these areas the per caput consumption of fish, much of which is imported, has been increasing in recent years. Per caput consumption of seafood in Australia is estimated to be 7.5 kg per year. With large domestic markets and significant imports there is considerable economic incentive in the development of aquaculture in these countries, and the farming of aquatic organisms is considered to be among the promising "sunrise" industries.
1.4 Gross market data
The characteristics of the major markets for fisheries products in general vary greatly within the region. In part this reflects the sizes of the domestic markets as indicated by population estimates. The country with the largest number of people within the region is Australia, which has a population of nearly 16 million. This is several times greater than the populations of the next largest countries, Papua New Guinea or New Zealand, which have populations of between 3 and 4 million each. The other countries and territories within the region have populations ranging from 18 000 in the Commonwealth of the Mariana Islands to just over 700 000 in Fiji (Table 2).
Markets depend not only on the size of the population but also on the purchasing ability of the consumers. This is reflected somewhat in a country's GNP. Within the region Australia has the greatest GNP of over US$ 171 thousand million. Although New Zealand and Papua New Guinea have populations of similar size, the GNP of New Zealand (over US$ 24 thousand million) is approximately 12 times that of Papua New Guinea (US$ 2.5 thousand million), and vastly greater than such countries as Tonga (US$ 70 million) or Kiribati (US$ 30 million) (Table 2).
Simple national statistics belie the reality of the size of the countries, and the population distribution. The 23 countries, territories, and commonwealths included in this survey are made up of over 1 000 islands and atolls, many only inhabited temporarily, or not at all. They range in size from Australia, with its continental land mass of 7 682 300 km^2, down to the island nation of Nauru of 21 km^2 (Table 3). Fiji is made up of over 400 islands; Tonga of more than 170. The nation of Kiribati, with its 33 islands, is dispersed over an area of 5 million km^2 - or two-thirds the area of Australia. Consequently national statistics, which are averaged data, at time misrepresent the conditions and markets of people in remote and poorly linked communities.
The domestic markets are greater in Australia and New Zealand than for any of the other countries and territories within the region. Also, major exports of aquaculture products for human consumption occur only in Australia and New Zealand. For areas such as Guam, French Polynesia, and New Caledonia, with smaller domestic markets but with economies supported by tourism and other external sources, the aquaculture enterprises are addressing moderately to highly priced products to supply domestic needs and to reduce reliance on imports.
In other less-developed areas such as Papua New Guinea and Fiji, fish production is primarily aimed at family and village markets through subsistence and artisanal aquaculture, although the development of commercial aquaculture for prawns and shrimp continues.
In addition to the production of fish and shellfish for human consumption, there is interest within the region in producing a number of non-food marine products. Markets for non-food exports are being addressed by the development of pearl culture and the production of seaweeds for use in the phycocolloid industry. These activities are particularly attractive in areas where fish for nutrition is abundant and cheap, and where opportunities for generating income are limited. For example, the culture of pearls has been successful in Australia and in a number of atolls of the Tuamotu and Gambier islands of French Polynesia, and in the Cook Islands. Also, cultivated seaweeds for use in the phycocolloid industry have been marketed from Kiribati and Fiji. Both pearl culture and seaweed culture are being explored at a number of other locations within the region. In addition, Australia has a substantial market for ornamental fish; about 5 million goldfish are marketed annually, of
which two-thirds are imported from Southeast Asia.
1.5 Specific market data
In Australia and New Zealand the markets targeted are those for relatively high-priced commodities both for domestic consumption and for export. The major markets for New Zealand's fishery exports are Australia, Japan, and the United States of America (USA).
Australia's fishery imports are primarily from New Zealand (fresh and chilled products), South Africa (smoked fish), and North America (canned fish). Australia exports primarily to Japan but also to Taiwan PC (Province of China), the Federal Republic of Germany, Saudi Arabia, and others.
Guam and New Caledonia are the only other two countries within the region with significant industrial production of fish and shellfish for domestic consumption. Guam's production of finfishes (Asian catfish, milkfish, and tilapia) with the exception of limited exports to Nauru and the Commonwealth of the Northern Marianas, is marketed locally either live or chilled.
In New Caledonia penaeid shrimp are the major items of production. These high-value products farmed through aquaculture are currently marketed locally and appear on the menus of the hotels and restaurants. Expansion of production in this area is targeted for the international market.
Throughout the island nations one of the most favoured marine fish caught naturally, but also considered suitable for culture in coastal ponds, is the milkfish. The price differentials between islands has created a trade, but also furthered the interest in farming practices. For example, milkfish are abundant in the Cook Islands, but the prices range from NZ$ 5/kg in outer island retail markets to NZ$ 6.5/kg on the main islands. In the Federated States of Micronesia the ex-vessel prices are US$ 1.30-2.20/kg for local fish, but imports have been known to resell for as much as US$ 6/kg. In Hawaii (USA) the current market prices of milkfish, both natural and pond stocks, are about US$ 3.60/kg (ex-vessel US$ 2.05/kg). In Palau the price is US$ 2.53/kg retail, and in the Solomon Islands, where it is not so popular or available, it is -only about US$ 0.75/kg.
Milkfish juveniles (8-12 g size) are also used as baitfish by the tuna industry.
1.6 Information for the trade
There are few regional publications dealing with aquaculture products. Aquaculture marketing and trade information is covered to some degree in Australia in "Austrasian Aquaculture", published by the Australian Aquaculture Association, and the "Fishing Industry News Service (FINS)", published by the Fisheries Department of Western Australia. In New Zealand there is "Catch", "Freshwater Catch", and "Shellfish Newsletter", all published by the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries.
The Pacific region benefits from its proximity to the large aquaculture sector in Asia, and the innumerable marketing information sources available. However, the data are not always relevant to interest and species of the Pacific.
The principal marketing information service in Asia (and the Pacific) is INFOFISH, although it does not differentiate aquaculture products as yet. INFOFISH assists the fishing industry and governments in the region by establishing contacts between buyers and sellers of fish products, and providing technical information and advice on post-harvest aspects of fisheries, such as handling, processing, equipment selection, and quality assurance. INFOFISH is based in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, and its working language is English.
INFOFISH is one of four regional services (Africa, Arab Countries, Latin America, in addition). The network of services produces a fortnightly news bulletin called "Trade News", in English, French, Spanish and Arabic. This deals with prices, cold storage holdings, short-term market trends, and business opportunities. The network also publishes a two-monthly magazine called "INFOFISH International", (incorporating Marketing Digest) in English, which contains articles on market analysis, new products, processing, packaging equipment, and other aspects of fisheries, including aquaculture, with summaries in the other three languages. Again, as yet, little information is relevant to aquaculture in the Pacific region.
A fifth member of the service is the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations' computerized system of fish marketing called "GLOBEFISH". This database stores original information collected by INFOFISH and the other regional services on such things as production and trade statistics, price series, the supply and demand situation, information on aquaculture, investment, joint ventures, and general economic data relevant to fisheries. Specific searches are made on request. FAO also produces "Globefish Highlights", which is a quarterly analysis of medium trends. It is based on the information in the databank and is distributed as a supplement to the "Trade News" (above) in four languages.
Annual fishery statistics are also stored in an FAO database called FISHDAB. As yet, aquaculture statistics are not separated.
The Southeast Asian Fisheries Development Centre (SEAFDEC), which is based in Thailand, produces a Newsletter. This often carries feature articles on marketing of aquaculture products in the Asia and Pacific region, and processing and post-harvest technology. It also produces articles for the consumer on fish and fisheries products.
1.7 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
In the Pacific region as described by the survey there are no consumer-related, technical assistance projects. Most of the countries and territories within the region which usually receive bilateral or international aid have little aquaculture production. A small project focusing on marketing of giant clams has been identified as a priority by the governing board of the Center for Tropical and Subtropical Aquaculture in Hawaii (USA), but is not yet funded. In addition the FAO/Government of Japan's South Pacific Aquaculture Development Programme recently sponsored a cultural anthropologist from the University of Guam to look at the socio-economic factors which might affect the success of a planned milkfish culture project on Mitiaro in the Cook Islands.
The most important technical assistance project in the sub-sector for the Pacific region is in the proximal region of Asia. This is INFOFISH, a marketing information and advisory service specializing in Asian and Pacific fisheries. INFOFISH is part of a network of marketing services established by FAO in four regions (see 1.6). It was financed at its inception by the Government of Norway for a three year period. It is now partly financed by the Government of Norway, by income from its services and publications, and by contributions from its member countries. Malaysia, the host country, provides office facilities and support staff. Although aquaculture information is not separated as yet INFOFISH serves the sector directly, and its publications contain many useful articles on marketing aquaculture products which are also relevant to aquaculture development in the Pacific.
Other externally-funded regional projects which indirectly serve the aquaculture sub-sector in the Pacific include the Regional Fish Market Studies conducted jointly by the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)/FAO South China Sea Programme on important fishery commodities, such as shrimp and tuna; and the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Regional Post-Harvest Technology Project, assisted by the Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA).
<section>4</section>
2. PRODUCTION OF FISH AND SHELLFISH IN REGION
2.1 Characteristics of production in the region
2.2 Regional production data
2.3 Production systems and practices in the region
2.4 Producers in the region
2.5 Organizations of producers
2.6 Financial investment by public and private enterprises
2.7 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
2.8 Capital assistance projects in the sub-sector
2.1 Characteristics of production in the region
Fish culture in the Pacific island communities has been traditional for centuries. Although practising little more than careful fish husbandry, the Polynesians were observant of behaviour and understanding of the life cycles of the food fishes of the reef, particularly the mullet and the milkfish, and skilled in the construction of coastal ponds. Relics of ancient Polynesian fish ponds still exist around many islands throughout the Pacific, and some have been refurbished for modern use due to the revitalized regional interest in aquaculture. However, traditional culture relied on the natural productivity of the ponds to provide food for the fish, but modern practices require the provision of natural food or artificial feeds for maintenance -resources which are not always immediately available or cheap in remote island communities.
With few exceptions, the characteristics of aquaculture production in the region are dictated by the proximity of sparse populations living close to the sea. There are few large urban populations, and most of these are also coastal or within easy distance for the transportation of marine Fisheries products. The emphasis on aquaculture production is therefore on marine species, both fish and shellfish, due to the traditional market preferences as well as the most suitable and exploitable environment.
In spite of the large continental land mass of Australia the interior is predominantly arid. A few river systems offer potential for culture but the indigenous species are migratory, and Tasmania, because of its southerly position, has added advantages similar to New Zealand. The poor communication and transportation systems of Papua New Guinea limit development to small coastal urban areas, although the freshwater resources of the high interior encourage some rural development with selected freshwater fish. New Zealand, because of its climatic range and fast-flowing and short river systems, has an environment which encourages the greatest development for freshwater and anadromous fish, and also for shellfish on the coast.
The islands of the Pacific are characterized by three different types of environment. There are the high islands (French Polynesia, Western Samoa, Fiji, Tonga, etc.) with at times abundant freshwater resources; the low islands (American Samoa, Cook Islands, Solomon Islands, etc.) with some freshwater and limited agricultural space; and the oceanic atolls (Kiribati, Nauru, Niue, etc.) with no freshwater resources and greatly exposed. The natural environments of the three island types greatly dictate their potential for development.
Finally, typical of all island communities worldwide, inter-island transportation costs are high. Consequently aquaculture production for trade has to focus on high-value products, specifically those which are peculiar to the region. Alternatively production has to focus on popular and cheap indigenous species for local markets.
2.2 Regional production data
The range in the region's present economic development of the aquaculture sector is reflected in the variation in both volume and type of aquaculture production between the many countries. For example, some artisanal and subsistence fish culture is practised in the Cook Islands, Kiribati, Nauru, the Kapingamarangi and Pingalap atolls of the Federated States of Micronesia, and the Republic of the Marshall Islands; also in the rural areas of Fiji, Papua New Guinea, and Tonga. Modest commercial aquaculture production of high-value fish and shellfish for organized markets within the region is limited to Australia, Guam, New Caledonia, and New Zealand. Data summarizing production of fish and shellfish for each country or territory in the region are presented in Table 4.
In both Australia and New Zealand the greatest contribution to total aquaculture production is from the culture of oysters and mussels. Commercial salmonid (trout and salmon) culture is well established in both countries. In Australia several other species are cultured including some freshwater fish, freshwater crustaceans, pearl oysters, and marine shrimp.
Production is much less in other areas of Oceania. Milkfish (Chanos chanos) and tilapia (Oreochromis mossambicus, and Oreochromis niloticus primarily) are cultured in several locations. Commercial production of these species occurs primarily on Guam and in Kiribati. Most of the commercial aquaculture production of Guam is currently from the culture of tilapia and milkfish with a smaller contribution from the rearing of Asian catfish (Clarius batrachus). The culture of pearls in French Polynesia has been successful, and the industry has grown rapidly.
A list of species produced in the region is given in Table 5.
2.3 Production systems and practices in the region
A diversity of species is cultured throughout the region in relatively small volumes. Consequently a wide variety of aquaculture practices are used, ranging from intensive and semi-intensive systems for producing salmonids and marine shrimp, to extensive systems for the culture of fish, giant clams, seaweed, and pearl oysters.
The individual practices for producing fish and crustaceans cover a wide range of technological sophistication. High-technology systems include the culture of salmon in offshore cages, which are established and expanding in both Australia (particularly in Tasmania) and New Zealand, and the culture of marine shrimp in onshore ponds at high densities (20 t per ha) in New Caledonia and French Polynesia. Less intensive practices are used in the commercial pond culture of tilapia, milkfish, and Asian catfish on Guam, and in the production of freshwater prawns and fish in Australia, French Polynesia, and a number of other islands. Subsistence level culture practices exist in Papua New Guinea for carp, in Kiribati for milkfish, in Fiji for tilapia, and in Yap proper of the Federated States of Micronesia for tilapia.
Mollusc culture methods vary among countries and territories within the region. The commercial culture of oysters in Australia and New Zealand is accomplished by stick culture, or bag cultivation on rocks. Mussels are grown attached to lines suspended from the surface. The culture of pearl shells in French Polynesia is based on collection of spat from the wild with grow-out on hanging lines. On the other hand, the methods for the culture of giant clams which are being explored at the Micronesian Mariculture Demonstration Center (MMDC) in Palau and at Honiara in the Solomon Islands, involve production of juveniles in land-based hatcheries and nurseries with the subsequent transfer of juveniles for grow-out in reef and lagoon habitats.
Within the Pacific island nations there is considerable interest in the development of culture systems suitable for application in remote locations. For example, projects aimed at development of reef and lagoon-based culture of giant clams (Tridachnidae) have been undertaken at Palau, the Federated States of Micronesia, the Republic of the Marshall Islands, the Solomon Islands, and Australia, although commercial production has not yet been achieved. Similarly, regional interest in the production of commercial seaweeds for the phycocolloid industry has been stimulated by the successful development of reef-flat culture techniques for Eucheuma in the Philippines. As cultivated seaweeds can be sun-dried, stored for extended periods and shipped by boat, seaweed cultivation is particularly suitable for development within Oceania. However, to date only limited commercial production has been achieved within the region, specifically in Fiji and Kiribati. The culture involves growing
the thalli by tying them onto monofilament lines in suitable habitats. The harvested seaweed is then dried in the sun, packed, and shipped to a processor. Approximately 30 t of dried seaweed was produced in Fiji in 1985. Also applicable to remote locations, the commercial production of pearls has been successful in a number of atolls within the Tuamoto and Gambier island chains of French Polynesia.
2.4 Producers in the region
Recent data (1986) from the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) indicate that in Australia between one and two thousand people are engaged in oyster cultivation. There is also a large number of oyster (149) and mussel (346) producers in New Zealand. Producers of other species for consumption are relatively few, although several farms have been established both in Australia and New Zealand to produce salmon in ocean-cage systems. In New Zealand, there are 46 companies engaged in salmon culture either by means of ponds (19), ocean ranching (15), or sea-cages (12). There are a few farms in Australia producing trout, freshwater crayfish, and other freshwater fish. A well-developed pearl industry, valued at A.$ 50 million and employing approximately 300 people, exists in Western Australia.
The culture of marine shrimp is established at several locations within the region. There are 26 shrimp producers in Australia (OECD data), and other commercial shrimp farms are found in French Polynesia, New Caledonia, and Fiji.
There are only a few farms currently active on Guam, and they are producing primarily tilapia and milkfish. The recent establishment of a government-owned hatchery facility is expected to relieve the constraint imposed by lack of seed for stocking, and other farms are expected to begin or resume production of freshwater prawns in the near future. A number of freshwater prawn farms which were operative several years ago on Guam had ceased operation because of the difficulties in obtaining post-larvae for stocking.
From a variety of sources, the following active commercial producers of fish and shrimp were identified within the region apart from those in Australia and New Zealand. The list is not exhaustive. In French Polynesia, Aquapec Farm, Tahiti, produces marine shrimp; as does Sodacal Shrimp Farm, Noumea, in New Caledonia, and Ravi Ravi Prawn Farm Ltd. in Fiji. In Guam Inarajan Aquaculture Enterprises, Liu Island Farm, Tsai's Farm, and Wang's Farm, all produce tilapia, milkfish, and Asian catfish. In the Marshall Islands Reimers Enterprises produces giant clams. There is also a commercial Macrobrachium (freshwater prawn) farm in the Solomon Islands.
In French Polynesia in 1986 there were 24 private companies and 91 cooperatives engaged in pearl culture in the Tuamotu-Gambier archipelago.
2.5 Organizations of producers
Most producers organize themselves into private fish farmer associations or cooperatives to avail themselves of certain benefits which are not accessible to individual farmers; for example, financial assistance from governments is often available to cooperatives but not to individuals. This is particularly true for government development projects which aim at socio-economic advancement of small-scale fish farmers in depressed rural communities. It is also more convenient for post-harvest and export market services if producers are organized into cooperatives because minimum quantities are usually required, especially for export shipments.
Although the levels of aquaculture production in the region are not large there are already a few organizations of producers. In Australia there is the Crayfish Farmers' Association, the Inland Fish Farmers of Australia, the Licensed Pearl Producers' Association, the Marron Growers' Association, and the Trout Farmers' Association. In New Zealand there is the Oyster Farmers' Association. In Guam there is the Guam Aquaculture Association.
In Tasmania (Australia) in 1987 there was the First Tasmanian Aquaculture Conference which attracted many producers as well as scientists.
2.6 Financial investment by public and private enterprises
Many of the large-scale aquaculture investments in the region are being funded by joint-ventures, involving both capital and technical expertise from outside the region. Funding for some projects comes from a combination of private funds and government development grants.
In Australia and New Zealand companies producing salmon and marine shrimp are increasing in number. In Australia, for example, Taiwan-Australia Prawns Pty. Ltd. has constructed a commercial hatchery and grow-out ponds for the production of the brown tiger prawn (Penaeus esculentus); another prawn venture has been started by Northern Aquaculture Research Pty. Ltd. with P. monodon. In Tasmania, salmon culture is being developed through a joint venture with private investors from Norway. Recently an Australia-China joint venture was signed for the development of an integrated farming system and for retailing the products.
In New Zealand the firm Trade Opportunities Ltd. recently purchased a 37.8 ha area at Kaipera Harbor for producing marine shrimp, and China-New Zealand joint venture (Kiwi-Sino Prawn Ltd.) is developing prawn farms.
Similar outside investments are financing aquaculture in the Pacific islands. In Palau, for example, a Hong Kong company is engaged in a project to hold groupers (Epinephalus spp.) alive in cages prior to shipment. Also in Palau, Japan is financing a pearl culture venture which is nearing commercial operation.
Of the two major commercial farms on Guam one is operated by a company from China and the other by a businessman from Taiwan.
In Fiji, French Polynesia, and New Caledonia, France's principal aquaculture agency Institut français de recherche pour l'exploitation de la mer (IFREMER) is involved in the commercial production of marine and freshwater shrimp. Investment in the SodaCal farm in New Caledonia (Noumea) is partially from IFREMER and the rest from several other sources. Similarly the Aquapac farm in French Polynesia (Tahiti) was established partially by funds invested by IFREMER. In Fiji, marine shrimp are produced through a joint venture between the Fiji Development Bank and France Aquaculture.
2.7 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
There have been a number of technical assistance projects for aquaculture production within the region in recent years.
In Papua New Guinea FAO provided aid in improving the subsistence culture of carp in a highlands hatchery. In Fiji volunteers from the US Peace Corps are assisting in the development of artisanal fish culture. They have distributed Nile tilapia (Oreochromis niloticus) to 23 villages in the island of Viti Levu.
In Western Samoa, CIDA and US Peace Corps volunteers are assisting in production trials for the cultivation of green mussels (Mytilus viridis). The International Foundation for Science (from Sweden) has provided funds for research on site selection and habitats for green mussel culture.
2.8 Capital assistance projects in the sub-sector
Funding for the construction of production facilities in Asia and the Pacific (which is considered as one region by the banking institutions) has been provided largely by multilateral organizations such as the Asian Development Bank (ADB), World Bank (WB), and the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD). Most of the projects provide credit facilities to either the respective government, or to the private sector through government banks and lending institutions. In most cases credit assistance is accompanied by components of training and extension and institutional strengthening, which ensures that the loans are ultimately repaid by the sub-borrowers. However, in all cases the capital assistance projects for aquaculture have gone to Asian countries, not those of the Pacific.
No capital assistance projects relevant to investment and construction of production farms and hatcheries have been identified in the countries of the region as described. The philanthropic Skaggs Foundation provided funds for the capital construction of a giant clam hatchery in the Solomon Islands.
<section>5</section>
3. LOCAL INFRASTRUCTURE
3.1 Extension services in the region
3.2 Training of extension agents
3.3 Seed production facilities in the region
3.4 Manufacture of feed and fertilizers in the region
3.5 Manufacturers of equipment for the industry
3.6 Other services for the industry
3.7 Local credit programmes
3.8 Trade publications for producers
3.9 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
3.1 Extension services in the region
In Australia a number of aquaculture extension services are operated by a number of the State Governments (for example, Queensland and Tasmania) and by leading technical institutes. In New Zealand they are operated by agencies of the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries.
In the smaller island nations of Oceania there are few if any available extension Services. Often the function of extension is carried out by the fisheries officers as part of their many responsibilities.
Programmes specifically addressing aquaculture and marine extension are few. The University of Guam has established Marine Advisory and Aquaculture Extension Services partially funded by the US National Sea Grant Program through the University of Hawaii and the Cooperative Extension Service of the US Department of Agriculture, respectively.
The College of Micronesia in Pohnpei has recently appointed a Marine Advisory Agent funded by the US National Sea Grant Program (University of Hawaii) and the College of Tropical Agriculture. The recently established Center for Tropical and Subtropical Aquaculture, serving Hawaii, Guam, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, the Republic of Palau, the Federated States of Micronesia, the Republic of the Marshall Islands, and American Samoa, is in the process of developing extension programmes in aquaculture within the region.
3.2 Training of extension agents
At the present time, most of the few aquaculture extension agents employed in the region are trained in biology, marine science, and possibly fisheries, at a graduate level. Most are graduates from the numerous universities in Australia and New Zealand which provide educational opportunities in these fields (see 4.1) with programmes open to Pacific islanders. Graduate education in biology and fisheries is also available at the University of Papua New Guinea, and the University of Technology in Papua New Guinea. The University of the South Pacific in Fiji and the University of Guam both serve students in the region and particularly those from the south Pacific (USP) and from the geographic area of Micronesia (UOG). Baccalaureate and graduate University programs are also available to regional students at the University of Hawaii. There is a two-year programme in biology at the Community College of Micronesia in Palau.
There are as yet no vocational colleges in the region training extension agents in aquaculture, although in Fiji there are vocational programmes operated by the Ministry of Primary Industries for both fisheries and aquaculture personnel. The other islands, notably Kiribati, New Caledonia, Solomon Islands, Western Samoa, and Vanuatu, all operate extension vocational courses in fisheries but not aquaculture.
Specialized training in aquaculture sub-disciplines is predominantly obtained from a number of training opportunities available throughout the region, but on an irregular basis.
In Australia short courses in aquaculture training are available at the Queensland Institute of Technology and the Tasmanian State Institute of Technology. The Ministry of Primary Industries (Fisheries Division), Fiji, and the University of Papua New Guinea have hosted individual short courses. Several training courses and workshops have been organized in Hawaii at the private Oceanic Institute and several departments of the University of Hawaii (the Mariculture Research and Training Centre of the Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology, the Department of Agricultural Engineering, etc.). Similarly the University of Guam and the College of Agriculture and Life Sciences are organizing a series of aquaculture workshops in support of the Cooperative Extension Service.
A number of organizations in the nearby Asia region provide opportunities in specialized aquaculture practices in which Pacific islanders can participate. The SEAFDEC Aquaculture Department (SEAFDEC-AQD) at Tigbauan in the Philippines trains national and international extension agents in various production methods and techniques, such as shrimp hatchery and culture operations, and freshwater fish farming, among others. SEAFDEC-AQD also offers trainers' training courses for extension workers. Since 1974 SEAFDEC-AQD has trained some 6 776 participants, of which over 1 000 have been international trainees, many from countries of the Pacific.
The Network of Aquaculture Centres in Asia (NACA) provides short-term international training for aquaculture extension workers. On return to their respective countries these trainees are expected to transfer the technologies through in-country programmes to other extension workers who, in turn, conduct on-site sessions for fish farmers.
Transfer of aquaculture technology and training of field workers in their own countries is also effected under the NACA programme of inter-country exchange of expertise. National experts assist other lead centres as well as other countries by visiting and training technicians and field workers on site. Since 1981 NACA has organized some 15 international training courses for specialized aquaculture practices with over 350 participants, of whom only 7 have been from Pacific countries.
A database for fisheries and aquaculture training opportunities has been established by the International Centre for Living Aquatic Resources Management (ICLARM) and FAO at the ICLARM offices in the Philippines. Currently the database lists 316 long- and short-term courses in fisheries and aquaculture worldwide. More than half of the 110 institutions are in Asia. Short courses are offered by 8 centres in the South Pacific, but all for fisheries with one exception (Fiji). The rest are Kiribati (1), New Caledonia (2 - including the South Pacific Commission), Solomon Islands (2 - including the South Pacific Forum Fisheries Agency), Western Samoa, and Vanuatu.
3.3 Seed production facilities in the region
The availability of seed for stocking aquaculture grow-out systems is a key element in any plan for the development of aquaculture. Within the region, a number of facilities have been established for the production of juvenile fish and invertebrates for stocking and reseeding.
There are several commercial and government-operated fish hatcheries operational in Australia (Tasmania) and New Zealand. These are primarily for the production of salmonids (brown and rainbow trout, and Pacific and Atlantic salmon) for restocking rivers for sports fishing, as well as for enhancement and grow-out on farms. A number of hatcheries in Australia are now producing Murray cod and golden perch.
In the islands a number of aquaculture research centres also produce stocks in hatcheries. In French Polynesia (Tahiti), for example, IFREMER produces a number of marine species such as groupers and shrimp, and the Guam Aquaculture Development and Training Center is producing rabbitfish.
Hatcheries for the production of post-larval and juvenile crustaceans, including marron and yabbies (Australia) freshwater prawns (Australia, Fiji, French Polynesia, Guam), and marine shrimp (Australia, Guam, New Caledonia) can be found within the region.
There is considerable interest in the region in the development of commercial production of giant tridachnid clams. A hatchery has been in operation for several years at the MMDC at Palau. Research on hatchery production of giant clams is on-going at the Orpheus Island research station of James Cook University in Australia, and a research facility and hatchery has been established at Honiara in the Solomon Islands.
Commercial and semi-commercial hatcheries in the region are the Aiyura Highlands Aquaculture Development Center in Papua New Guinea (for carp and tilapia); the Eastern Freshwater Fish Hatchery, New South Wales, Australia, and the New Zealand Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries field hatchery at Pukapuka, New Zealand (for oysters); the Mahanga Bay Shellfish Hatchery, New Zealand (for abalone); the Murray Cod Hatcheries and Fauna Park in Australia (for Murray cod); the New Zealand Salmon Co. (for Atlantic salmon); the France Aquaculture Hatchery in New Caledonia (for marine shrimp); the SodaCal Hatchery in New Caledonia (for marine shrimp); the Salmon Enterprises Pty. Ltd. hatchery in Tasmania (for Atlantic salmon); and the Sea Hatcheries, Ltd. hatchery in North Queensland, Australia (for barramundi).
3.4 Manufacture of feed and fertilizers in the region
Few companies in the region produce specialized fish feeds and fertilizers for the aquaculture industry. Both the New Zealand Salmon Company of Dunedin, and Janos Nutrition, of New South Wales, Australia, advertise in trade publications as feed producers. However, many other animal feed producers in the region have experimented with fish feeds or will produce formulated lots on order.
3.5 Manufacturers of equipment for the industry
At the present time manufacturers of specialized equipment for the aquaculture industry are few. Many manufacturers will fabricate equipment to order. A number of manufacturers advertise in the trade magazines and aquaculture publications, among which are Batescrew Sales of New South Wales, Australia (for pumps), and Dynex Extrusions of Auckland, New Zealand (for PVC tubes for oyster culture).
The First Tasmanian Aquaculture Conference (1987) had a number of exhibitors of equipment for the industry.
3.6 Other services for the industry
The majority of services available to the sector in the region (pre-investment advice, feasibility studies, engineering services, technical advice, water quality analysis, soil analysis, etc.) are mostly still provided through government departments.
In Australia the State fisheries agencies provide assistance services in a number of ways to aquaculture investors; in New Zealand it is the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries, which has departmental offices located throughout the country ready to provide help.
Within the Pacific islands miscellaneous services are sporadic and are often only available through individuals in various local government agencies and at local universities. For example, the Agriculture Experiment Station at the University of Guam provides soil analyses for pond construction, and the Water and Energy Research Institute provides water analyses for local producers. Similar services are available from appropriate university departments.
Some guidance is available from the Institutes of Natural Resources and Marine Resources of the University of the South Pacific, Fiji, from staff involved in the development and conservation of marine resources in the region. In French Polynesia and New Caledonia, l'Establissement de Valorisation des Activités Aquacoles et Maritimes (EVAAM) provides assistance in developing aquaculture ventures.
The majority of services for the sector in the region can he found in Hawaii, where there are professional consulting companies and individual consultants for all aspects of the industry, as well as private institutions (the Oceanic Institute) and University of Hawaii departmental staff. In addition, considerable expertise is available through France Aquaculture from IFREMER in French Polynesia and New Caledonia.
3.7 Local credit programmes
At the present time there is little credit going into the aquaculture industry in the region, although a considerable amount goes into small-scale fisheries. In Tonga, for example, the government expenditures for development are approximately Pa'A. 11 million per annum, and the Tonga Development Bank provides credit to fishermen on the average of Pa'A. 160 000 per year. The Guam Economic Development Authority has provided loans to aquaculturists and to the Guam Aquaculture Association.
3.8 Trade publications for producers
There is an increasing number of trade publications available in the region. This information is disseminated largely in the form of newsletters, but also some professional publications. The Pacific Aquaculture Association, based in the University of Hawaii (USA), publishes a quarterly newsletter called "PA'A". It is intended primarily for farmers, but includes information for non-producers.
The "Marron Growers' Bulletin" is produced by the Marron Growers' Association in Perth, Australia. In New Zealand there is the "Shellfish Newsletter" which provides information to growers of oysters, mussels, and abalone, and it is published by the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries at Wellington. The Department also produces "Catch" and "Freshwater Catch".
Information concerning the cultivation of giant clams is disseminated in the "MMDC Bulletin", the newsletter of the Micronesian Mariculture Demonstration Center in Palau.
"Austrasian Aquaculture" is a professional trade magazine published in Australia.
The sector has access to many trade publications produced outside the region, but which often have articles and items relevant to the needs of the region. Principal trade magazines are "Fish Farming International" and "Fish Farmer", both published in the UK; and "Aquaculture Magazine", published in the USA, which annually produces a Buyer's Guide supplement.
3.9 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
A number of small technical assistance projects provide support services to aquaculture producers within the region. These have primarily focused on the development of hatcheries for seed production. The US Department of the Interior funds the newsletter of the Pacific Aquaculture Association, which is intended for farmers.
FAO, through a technical cooperation project, sent experts to improve the fry production capabilities of the Highlands Aquaculture Development Center carp and tilapia hatchery in Papua New Guinea.
Two consultants from France Aquaculture, one biologist and one aquaculture engineer, were provided by the South Pacific Commission to make recommendations for the renovation of the Guam Aquaculture Development and Training Center in Guam.
In the Federated States of Micronesia a hatchery for giant clams, partially funded by the Pacific Fisheries Development Foundation, is being constructed on Langar island in Pohnpei.
CIDA and the US Peace Corps are providing technical assistance to the Fisheries Department of Western Samoa in culture trials for the production of green mussels.
The giant clam hatchery in the Solomon Islands is operated with funds from the Australian Center for International Agricultural Research (ACIAR) and ICLARM.
The regional South Pacific Aquaculture Development Project, funded by the Government of Japan and executed by FAO, based in Fiji, held a regional workshop on milkfish culture development in Kiribati in 1988. It was attended by participants from the Cook Islands (1), Federated States of Micronesia (6), Kiribati (16), Marshall Islands (1), Nauru (1), Palau (1), Solomon Islands (1), Tonga (2), and Tuvalu (1), with experts from the region and from Asia (Philippines).
<section>6</section>
4. NATIONAL INFRASTRUCTURE
4.1 Manpower training in aquaculture technologies
4.2 Manpower training in management
4.3 Aquaculture research in the region
4.4 Management of credit
4.5 Associations of professionals in the region
4.6 Information for professionals
4.7 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
4.8 Capital assistance projects in the sub-sector
4.1 Manpower training in aquaculture technologies
There are many institutions of higher learning in Australia and New Zealand which provide education (graduate and post-graduate levels) in disciplines relevant to the aquaculture sector, such as biology, agriculture, marine science, engineering, veterinary medicine, economics, etc. Australia has 21 universities and 47 colleges, and New Zealand has 7 universities and 9 technical institutes. Neither country has a university or college specifically for fisheries, although many have active fisheries and aquaculture components as parts of major courses.
In Australia, the James Cook University, the University of Queensland, and the Hawkesbury Agricultural College all have aquaculture courses as part of certain graduate programmes.
Few other educational institutions exist within the Pacific island countries and territories. In Papua New Guinea there is the University of Papua New Guinea, with approximately 1 500 students., and the University of Technology with just over 1 000 students. The University of Papua New Guinea has aquaculture courses in its degree programme for fisheries. Fiji is the organizational centre and main campus of the University of the South Pacific which has 2 200 students on campus and an enrollment of 2 894 in extension programmes. The University of Guam with an enrollment of approximately 2 000 offers undergraduate coursework in aquaculture and post-graduate degrees in marine biology which can include aquaculture; and educational research opportunities are available in aquaculture at the Marine Laboratory. The College of Micronesia, based in Pohnpei, in the Federated States of Micronesia, offers a two-year programme in biology which includes courses in aquaculture.
Many of the students of the Pacific Islands attend the University of Hawaii (USA) where more opportunities for graduate studies and for post-graduate research in aquaculture exist. The main departments are the Hawaii Institute of Marine Biology and the Department of Agricultural Engineering.
A database for opportunities in fisheries training, which includes aquaculture, is maintained by ICLARM/FAO in Manila, Philippines. The 1986 database lists only one institution In the South Pacific region with post-graduate education resources, but only in fisheries. This is the Office de la Recherche Scientifique et Technique Outre-Mer (ORSTOM) in New Caledonia. There are two institutions under the North America region (the Universities of Hawaii, and Guam) which offer considerable graduate and post-graduate education in aquaculture.
4.2 Manpower training in management
Several of the universities listed above offer programmes in business management and public administration. As yet none has developed a course in the management of aquaculture investments, or for administration in aquaculture.
The ADB, which has responsibilities for the Pacific region, runs short workshops on project management for managers of ADB country loan projects, including fisheries and aquaculture. Such workshops focus on ADB procedures, but also touch on fund management, disbursement, and related fiscal topics.
4.3 Aquaculture research in the region
Aquaculture research within the region is carried out on a limited scale by many of the local government agencies involved with fisheries. This is particularly true for the respective state agencies in Australia (for example, the Brackishwater Fish Culture Station in Queensland, where research is carried out on oyster culture and fish propagation, and in Tasmania for salmonids). There is also the Arthur Ryiah Institute for Environmental Research, at Heidelberg in Victoria, which is under the direction of the Fisheries and Wildlife Division, working on the breeding of Macquarie perch, trout cod, and Murray cod for stock, enhancement; the Curtin University of Technology working on the culture of marron and yabbies; the Eastern Freshwater Fish Research Hatchery at Grafton, working on the culture of native freshwater fish, as is the Inland Fisheries Research Station at Narrandera.
Research is carried out by the federal departments of fisheries in New Zealand. The Fisheries Research Centre in Wellington at Greta Point employs some 60 scientific and 69 technical staff. Its aquaculture interests include research on oysters and abalone.
There are a number of research organizations which have a specific focus on aquaculture. These include EVAAM, the national department of fisheries in French Polynesia (Tahiti) which is actively involved in, among other responsibilities, aquaculture development and research related to the culture of pearl oysters and baitfish.
In Guam the Department of Agriculture (Division of Fish and Wildlife) has a small laboratory, staffed by one biologist and a biological aid, to examine the culture of catfish. The Marine Laboratory at the University of Guam has a research unit with two faculties engaged in aquaculture research on rabbitfish and the culture of sea cucumbers; and the new Aquaculture Development and Training Center, administered by the Guam Department of Commerce is working on the hatchery production of freshwater prawns, rabbitfish, and marine shrimp.
In French Polynesia (Tahiti), the French Government research organization IFREMER has a large facility (with a staff of approximately 70) which has been conducting research on a variety of marine species for many years, and is the strongest research resource in the region. In New Caledonia IFREMER has two facilities, a commercial farm (SodaCal) where some applied research is carried out, and a hatchery and pond facility for research in rearing marine shrimp. Another French Government agency, the Institut Français de Recherche pour le Développement en Coopération (ORSTOM), maintains two research centres in Tahiti and Noumea (New Caledonia).
The MMDC at Malakal, Palau, has a small research and development centre primarily engaged in larval production and culture of giant clams; ICLARM and the James Cook University of Australia are conducting research on the giant clam at the Coastal Resources Centre in Honiara, Solomon Islands as well as in Australia at the Orpheus Island Field Station.
ICLARM conducts research on specific aquaculture problems relevant to the region through collaboration with other research and/or academic institutions in the Pacific and in Asia. It has no research facilities of its own other than resource information. Through multilateral and bilateral agencies it obtains grants and contracts for collaborative research and provides senior specialists for joint research teams. ICLARM now has a Coastal Aquaculture Centre in the Solomon Islands, and is planning to develop a Genetics Unit in the Philippines and an Integrated Farming Unit in Thailand. ICLARM is linked with SEAFDEC for the Asian Fisheries Social Science Research Network, which includes the Pacific. ICLARM publishes research results and findings in newsletters for circulation throughout the region, and in reports and books. Newest among these is the Asian Fisheries Society's Journal "Asian Fisheries Science", which includes aquaculture.
4.4 Management of credit
There is little information on the organization and use of credit by the aquaculture sector within the region. In addition to the commercial banks, most of the islands have development banks which make loans to small businesses, in which can be classified many aquaculture investments. Many small loans are made to the fisheries sector.
The following development banks exist in the islands; the Development Bank of American Samoa, Fiji Development Bank, Cook Islands Development Bank, Development Finance Institution (Kiribati), the Agriculture Bank of Papua New Guinea, the Development Bank of the Solomon Islands, the Tonga Development Bank, the National Development Bank of Palau, the Development Bank of Vanuatu, the Caisse Centrale de Coopération Economique (France), and the Development Bank of Western Samoa. There is also the Guam Economic Development Authority which provides credit for small businesses.
The Development Bank of Fiji helped finance a shrimp farm in Fiji. The Guam Economic Development Authority has provided assistance to aquaculture producers and to the Guam Aquaculture Association.
The Tasmanian Fisheries Development Association in Australia is providing grants and loans to the sector for salmon and oyster farming.
The Asian Development Bank, based in the Philippines, has geographic responsibility for the region and has been a substantial provider of development funds for aquaculture, but particularly in Asia. It has made at least one study of aquaculture development in the region, but has not made any loans.
4.5 Associations of professionals in the region
There are few professional organizations dealing specifically with aquaculture within the region. Those which do exist are more concerned with marine science, and consider aquaculture as one sub-component.
The newly formed Pacific Aquaculture Association encourages membership from anyone in the sector, not only farmers, but scientists, professionals, and administrators. The Association operates from its headquarters in Hawaii, USA, and holds meetings throughout the region.
The following professional societies are concerned with aquaculture or related areas, to some degree. In Australia there is the Australian Aquaculture Society, which is the only society specializing in the field, and the Australian Society for Fish Biology and the International Society for Reef Studies. In New Zealand there is the New Zealand Marine Sciences Society, and in Papua New Guinea there is the Papua New Guinea Scientific Society.
The Asian Fisheries Society which was organized in 1987 is based at the ICLARM offices in Manila. It is open to all fisheries professionals in Asia and the Pacific. The Society had its first large scientific meeting in Manila in 1987 which was attended by fisheries professionals, including a significant number of aquaculturists.
Many professionals in the Pacific region are members of the World Aquaculture Society (WAS). This society is based in the USA and disseminates scientific research information and arranges annual conferences. Two of these conferences have been held in Hawaii. An affiliate of WAS is the European Aquaculture Society (EAS), based in Belgium; this society also has members from the region and arranges conferences in which the development of aquaculture in the Pacific is often discussed. Membership is individual or commercial, and materials can also be obtained through library membership. Many of these professionals obtained their post-graduate education or training abroad and joined the aquaculture societies in the regions where they studied.
4.6 Information for professionals
The information resources for professionals produced within the Pacific region itself are limited for most areas of aquaculture and deal mostly with marine resource management and fisheries. These resources are predominantly institutional libraries and international databases.
A substantial library dealing with fisheries, and which includes aquaculture, is available in the South Pacific Commission headquarters in Noumea, New Caledonia. Aquaculture resources are also available at the Micronesian Area Research Center of the University of Guam, and the Pacific Information Center of the University of the South Pacific, Fiji.
In Hawaii, libraries with a heavy emphasis on aquaculture documentation are at the Oceanic Institute, and at the University of Hawaii (Hawaiian Institute of Marine Biology). Similarly, the IFREMER research centre in French Polynesia has probably the largest collection of reference materials relevant to aquaculture in the region, including the resources in French.
A database for aquaculture in the geographic area of Micronesia has been developed at Guam as part of the Micronesian Area Tropical Agriculture Database at the Micronesian Area Research Center of the University of Guam. Funding has recently been obtained to establish the Pacific Island Marine Resource Information Service (PIMRIS) which is to be based at the University of the South Pacific, and which will include aquaculture.
The UNDP/FAO Regional Fishery Support Project (see 6.4) produces fisheries bibliographies which include sections on aquaculture in the Pacific islands. To date bibliographies have been completed for Palau, the Solomon Islands, Vanuatu, and Western Samoa.
Aquaculture professionals in the Pacific region have access to a rich variety of information sources from Asia and North America. These are in the form of published material (technical/scientific, semi-technical journals, newsletters, magazines, agency annual and progress reports, hand-outs, brochures, among others); audio-visual aids (e.g. slides, film strips); data bases (e.g. Aquatic Sciences and Fisheries Information Service (ASFIS)); and even workshops, seminars, and various conferences.
Most of the technical and scientific journals published in Asia by SEAFDEC-AQD, ICLARM, International Development Research Centre (IDRC), UNDP/FAO, and the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP), to name a few, are available in the main libraries within each Asian country. These libraries also have the international journals like "Aquaculture" on their shelves and professionals can have their own copies through subscription.
SEAFDEC publications include those produced by the Secretariat in Thailand and those published by the three different departments. The former include a quarterly newsletter; Fishery Statistical Bulletins for the South China Sea Area (which include statistics on aquaculture production volumes and values); and a Directory of Scientists and Technologists in the fields of fisheries research, development, and management in the Southeast Asian region. The SEAFDEC-AQD in the Philippines produces research papers, technical reports, extension manuals, a newsletter, and "Aqua Farm News". The SEAFDEC-AQD library maintains a good collection of scientific literature as well as other published materials in the fields of aquaculture. The library maintains over 250 subscriptions to journals in fisheries and aquaculture, and has over 8 000 volumes. It also has audio-visual materials (film strips) on various aquaculture production methods and systems.
ICLARM has a well-developed Information Programme comprising a special library, publications unit, and research projects. ICLARM has 7 technical publications series: (i) Studies and Reviews, (ii) Conference Proceedings, (iii) Technical Reports, (iv) Bibliographies, (v) Translations, (vi) Education, (vii) Software, as well as six newsletters, and the quarterly magazine NAGA. A Selective Fisheries Information Service provides in-depth answers to enquiries from researchers. The ICLARM library maintains an up-to-date collection of material relating to fisheries and aquaculture in tropical countries. Its book and monograph holdings exceed 8 000 volumes; there are 650 serial titles and 3 400 reprints. A microfiche reader/printer is available. Databases from other organizations such as FAO, US National Agricultural Library, and Commonwealth Agricultural Bureau, can be searched online by the library's modern link. Two electronic mail services are used to facilitate overseas
retrieval. The CD-ROM version of the major aquaculture database, FAO's ASFA, is also available.
IDRC in Singapore publishes scientific monographs and technical reports as well as more general materials on aquaculture and aquaculture research. There are also printed and audio-visual materials, including films and slides, relating to IDRC projects in developing countries.
There are a number of smaller libraries in the Asia region to which professionals have access. For example, the FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, and the NACA office, both in Thailand, as well as the Southeast Asian Regional Center for Tropical Biology (BIOTROP) library in Bogor, Indonesia all provide fisheries scientists with information. The National Inland Fisheries Institute in Thailand has a collection of papers on aquaculture but many are written in Thai with abstracts in English.
The EAS based in Belgium publishes a regular newsletter for members which also contains the contents of some abstracts of the more important aquaculture journals. It also publishes special volumes on aquaculture technology available at reduced rates to members. The EAS is an affiliate of the WAS which is based in the USA, and members have reciprocal benefits. The WAS produces the Journal of the World Aquaculture Society which is free to members.
The other, specialist journals on aquaculture are obtained on subscription. These are Aquaculture (the Netherlands), Aquaculture and Fisheries management (UK), Aquaculture Engineering (UK), Bamidgeh/Journal of Aquaculture (Israel), Bulletin Français de la Pêche et de la Pisciculture (France), Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences (Canada), Diseases of Aquatic Organisms (Federal Republic of Germany), Journal of Fish Biology (UK), Journal of Fish Diseases (UK), Progressive Fish Culturist (USA), Transactions of the American Fisheries Society (USA), etc.
The largest resource of information for scientists and technical professionals in the sector is FAO in Rome, Italy. FAO produces a series of publications many of which are specific to aquaculture. These are FAO Fisheries Reports, FAO Fisheries Technical Papers, and FAO Fisheries Synopses. All titles are categorized and lists are regularly produced. Some documents are free and others are sold at cost. It maintains a large serial collection on all subjects related to fish and fisheries received from fisheries institutes, government departments, and commercial publishers throughout the world, together with a special collection of documents on a country basis, and subject files.
FAO maintains a database in which aquaculture information can be found. ASFA is an international bibliographic database providing comprehensive coverage of publications on the science, technology, and management of marine and freshwater environments. The database can be searched via terminals and personal computers to retrieval systems in Europe and North America; the database is also available on compact disc. Aquaculture Abstracts from ASFA are available in printed form through subscription.
ICLARM and SEAFDEC-AQD maintain ASFA-I (Aquatic Sciences and Fisheries Abstracts), BRAIS (Brackishwater Aquaculture Information System), and SEAFIS (Southeast-Asian Fisheries Information Service).
At ICLARM the DIALOG system of over 120 databases can be searched interactively through a teletype facility. The SEAFDEC Secretariat in Thailand has established a Fisheries Information Service which is a clearing house for extension materials for small-scale fishermen and fish farmers in Southeast Asia.
4.7 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
No current technical assistance projects directly relevant to supporting national infrastructure can be identified. Representatives from the region have been able to participate in activities on the periphery of the region, particularly in Asia and in North America. A number of trainees have participated in the international technical training and education courses provided by the Network of Aquaculture Centres in Asia (NACA), a UNDP/FAO project based in Bangkok, Thailand. For example, students from Fiji (1), Papua New Guinea (2), Palau (2), and Tonga (1) have attended the four-month course on integrated fish farming in Wuxi, China between 1980-1988. One student from Fiji attended the twelve months post-graduate course for M. Aqua. at the SEAFDEC-AQD centre in the Philippines.
4.8 Capital assistance projects in the sub-sector
No current capital assistance projects relevant to supporting national infrastructure, such as the construction of research and development or training centres, can be identified.
<section>7</section>
5. NATIONAL SECTOR MANAGEMENT
5.1 Government policy in the region
5.2 Government organization in the region
5.3 Aquaculture legislation
5.4 Trade and business associations
5.5 Information resources for management
5.6 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
5.1 Government policy in the region
In both Australia and New Zealand aquaculture development is closely tied to fisheries development. In New Zealand responsibility for aquaculture development is invested in the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries. The Ministry is in the process of drafting an aquaculture development plan with representatives from both government and industry. In Australia aquaculture is the responsibility of the respective states and territories all of which are preparing their own development plans and administrative procedures for the sector.
Within the Pacific island countries and territories specific plans for aquaculture development have been drawn up by Guam and by the Federated States of Micronesia. The major goal identified in the Guam aquaculture development plan is replacement of a significant portion of the US$ 7 million which is spent to import fish and seafood. In Micronesia the major goals are to generate income and increase employment.
In most of the other countries within the region plans for aquaculture development are included under the respective agencies responsible for fisheries development, and the goals of the two endeavors are therefore closely associated. For example, in Vanuatu, a Fisheries Service was established in 1978 with the major aim of establishing village-level fisheries to provide income and employment in rural areas. The Government of Vanuatu plans to set up a trochus hatchery for reseeding over-harvested areas of the surrounding reefs.
Similarly the common goals of fisheries and aquaculture development in the Solomon Islands are to increase cash incomes and to achieve self-sufficiency in terms of fish supply to the domestic market; the Solomon Islands imports over 670 000 kg of fish and fisheries products annually.
5.2 Government organization in the region
In Australia and New Zealand the government agencies responsible for aquaculture are those providing services to the fishing industry. In Australia the fisheries-service agencies fall within the Department of Primary Industry and Energy and include the branches of the Australian Fisheries Service, the Bureau of Rural Science, the Australian Bureau of Agricultural and Resource Economics, and the Australian Quarantine Inspection Service. A Pearling Industry Review Committee has also been established in Australia with the responsibility of assessing the development and management strategies for pearl culture.
In New Zealand fisheries services are under the umbrella of the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries. A list of agencies, associations, and service organizations have recently been compiled in a publication entitled "Contacts in Fishing".
For most of the countries within the region, the government programmes and activities in aquaculture fall within the purview of the divisions, departments, and offices of fisheries or marine resources. In the Solomon Islands, for example, aquaculture is included in the fishery development sector under the Fisheries Department of the Ministry of Natural Resources and the Provincial Fisheries Development Division. For Palau aquaculture development is within the purview of the Division of Marine Resources.
Similar arrangements exist for most of the other Pacific Islands with the exception of Guam, New Caledonia, and French Polynesia. On Guam the lead agency for aquaculture is the Department of Commerce. Aquaculture activities are coordinated through the Office of Economic Development, and plans have been submitted to establish an office specifically for aquaculture development. In New Caledonia and French Polynesia, aquaculture development activities are primarily carried out by IFREMER.
5.3 Aquaculture legislation
Licenses are required to operate all aquaculture ventures in New Zealand. Legislation dealing specifically with aquaculture has only recently been developed and is embodied in "The Marine Farming Act" and the "Freshwater Fish Farming Regulations" developed in 1983. New Zealand recently adopted policies for importing exotic species into the country for aquaculture. For many years New Zealand legislation prevented aquaculture development, particularly for the culture of salmonids, and there were strict regulations protecting the indigenous species and the inland fisheries for sports fishing.
In Australia (Tasmania) the Saltwater Salmonid Culture Act 1985 regulated the licensing of salmon farms.
On Guam the licenses and permits required for the establishment of commercial aquaculture operations are detailed in a pamphlet distributed by the Guam Department of Commerce. Both local and federal permits may be required depending on the location and nature of the aquaculture facilities proposed. Permits may be required from up to 10 government agencies.
Importation of exotic species for aquaculture or other purposes requires a permit from the Guam Department of Agriculture. In addition some species cannot be introduced as federal regulations prohibit the importation of particular organisms into the USA or its territories.
In some of the Pacific islands reef and lagoon areas are owned by villages or families. In these cases aquaculture operations must meet with the approval of the appropriate chief or family head. These traditional management systems are still operational in the Cook Islands, Palau, Federated States of Micronesia, Kiribati, and on many other islands.
5.4 Trade and business associations
In Australia, the Australian Aquaculture Association and the Australian Mariculture Association deal specifically with the developing aquaculture industry. The Australian Development Assistance Bureau (International Support Scheme) is involved in the promotion of regional seafood products.
In New Zealand information on the government agencies and service organizations in fisheries has been compiled by the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries in the publication "Contacts in Fishing". The New Zealand Fishing Industry Association (formerly the New Zealand Seafood Processors and Exporters Association) is active in promoting seafood products.
There are no trade or business associations dealing with aquaculture for the Pacific island countries and territories.
5.5 Information resources for management
Within the region, information useful for management can be found in various annual reports and fisheries and aquaculture statistics produced by government agencies dealing with trade and commerce. Many departments have a repository of information, such as Asian Development Bank sector studies, consultants' reports, national studies, etc., regarding technical feasibility or economic viability of various aquaculture activities in their respective countries; for example, major studies exist for the Cook Islands, Fiji, Western Samoa, etc. Similar information is available for Papua New Guinea.
Reviews of aquaculture work within a country or region are also of use in formulating development plans. A previous review has been made of aquaculture development in the Pacific region. Information concerning the development of aquaculture in the USA-affiliated islands was recently compiled in a report of the United States Congress, Office of Technology Assistance (1987) which examines opportunities for aquaculture and constraints to development in the region.
From outside the region, particularly from Asia and North America, sources of aquaculture information useful for administrators and managers are available in the form of published materials, and workshops and seminars.
Many of the publications available to aquaculture producers (see 3.8) and professionals (see 4.6) are also used by management. For example, ADB and the WB publish monthly information on the status of their projects which invariably includes something on aquaculture. ADB publishes its monthly Operational Information on Proposed Projects and regular newsletters and announcements on approved loans or technical assistance grants in the region. The latter give capsulized summaries of the scope of the approved projects, including the cost and the services to be required by either the Government agency, in the case of loans, or the Bank, in the case of technical assistance grants.
The WB publishes a monthly International Business Opportunities sheet, which summarizes information on the scope and status of approved projects as well as on contracts which have been awarded. These publications are available on a subscription basis only, except for the ADB circular announcements.
Other published material useful to aquaculture managers includes some FAO/ADCP publications (e.g. guideline documents for planning and development, and the newsletter "Aquaculture Minutes"), the INFOFISH "Trade News", and "INFOFISH International". These provide valuable information to aquaculture managers who need current information on supply and demand situations, prices, etc., for both export and import purposes.
There are a number of short-term courses and orientation workshops and seminars conducted specifically for managers. One example is the Aquaculture Project Development and Management course offered by SEAFDEC-AQD jointly with the Southeast Asian Regional Center for Agriculture in the Philippines. This is open only to professional managers with several years of experience in a managerial position. The course puts emphasis on the financial and management aspects of aquaculture enterprises. In the Philippines there are also short-term courses for managers which focus on the preparation and evaluation of feasibility studies, particularly on financial investment.
5.6 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
There are no major technical assistance projects which deal specifically with the sector at this level. The Government of Fiji received some assistance from a consultant provided by FAO to gather background information for drafting an aquaculture development plan.
<section>8</section>
6. REGIONAL SECTOR MANAGEMENT
6.1 United Nations organizations in the region
6.2 Other organizations in the region
6.3 Economic communities of the region
6.4 Regional and global aquaculture development projects
6.1 United Nations organizations in the region
The countries of the Pacific are active in a number of regional organizations in which aquaculture has been recognized as a sector, either individually or as a component of a larger sector such as fisheries or agriculture, and which has received support in some form.
The principal regional organizations are Chose of the United Nations in which some of the countries actively participate as members, specifically Australia, Fiji, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Western Samoa, Solomon Islands, and Vanuatu. Sovereign states not members of the UN are Kiribati, Nauru, Tonga, and Tuvalu.
Most of these same countries participate in the individual organizations of the UN system which are actively represented in the region. These include the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the World Bank (WB), etc. All these organizations have substantial records of providing technical and capital assistance to aquaculture development worldwide, and some in the region.
Other UN organizations represented in the region and active in the development of aquaculture (but predominantly outside the region) are the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) and the World Health Organization (WHO). Some specialized agencies of the UN which also work in the field are the UN Children's Fund (UNICEF), and the UN Environment Programme (UNEP). Not all these organizations or agencies have yet worked specifically in the Pacific region in aquaculture.
6.2 Other organizations in the region
A principal organization in the Pacific region is the South Pacific Commission (SPC) to which some 27 countries belong, including some from outside the region but which have territorial interests. Stated activities of the SPC include programmes in Marine Resources, aimed at increasing fish production in accordance with national planning objectives, and Rural Management and Technology, aimed at watershed management and maintaining the quality of island and coastal waters. The SPC, based in Noumea, New Caledonia, provides information and technical assistance in developing, surveying and regulating island fisheries. The involvement of the organization in aquaculture is primarily in the areas of overlap with fisheries management, particularly in species introductions and reseeding efforts.
The South Pacific Bureau for Economic Co-operation (SPEC) has 11 member countries. Members include all the independent countries within the region, including Australia and New Zealand, but French and American territories are excluded. One of its associated organizations is the South Pacific Forum Fisheries Agency (FFA) which facilitates, promotes, and coordinates cooperation and mutual assistance among coastal states in the region in the matter of fisheries. SPEC also operates the Forum Shipping Line. The FFA is concerned with monitoring fishing activity within the region and training fisheries personnel, but so far it has not been active in aquaculture (unlike the previous South Pacific Islands Fisheries Development Agency, SPIFDA).
There is an office of the Delegation of the Commission of the European Communities for the Pacific established in Suva, Fiji (see 6.3).
The newly established Center for Tropical and Subtropical Aquaculture is funded by the USA (Department of Agriculture) in Hawaii, jointly administered by the Oceanic Institute and the University of Hawaii, with the purpose of aiding development of aquaculture within the US-affiliated islands of the Pacific. These include Hawaii, American Samoa, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia (Kosrae, Pohnpei, and Yap districts), Palau, and the Republic of the Marshall Islands.
The Pacific Fisheries Development Council (PFDC) has funded small scale development projects in the region, but few aquaculture projects have received support. One project has been funded at MMDC in Palau for a number of years. Recently PFDC funds were granted to the University of Guam Marine Laboratory for research to assist the development of culture-based reef fisheries.
ICLARM, which is headquartered in the Philippines, is active in cooperative research in the region. It has established a Coastal Aquaculture Center at Honiara, Solomon Islands for joint research with staff of James Cook University, Australia, and funded by the Australian Center for International Research (ACIAR).
ACIAR, which is located in Canberra, Australia, has also been active in the support of other aquaculture research projects in the region. In addition to the work in the Solomon Islands it funds another project on Vanuatu.
From France, both IFREMER and its subsidiary France Aquaculture have been active in the development of aquaculture within the region. Hatcheries and research centres of IFREMER have been established at Tahiti, French Polynesia, and in New Caledonia. With the assistance of IFREMER and France Aquaculture, commercial farms for production of marine shrimp have been established in French Polynesia, New Caledonia, and Fiji. A commercial farm for freshwater prawns has been similarly assisted and established in Tahiti.
The East/West Center in Honolulu, Hawaii, promotes research and provides training and and technical assistance relevant to aquaculture development through the Environment and Policy Institute and the Pacific Islands Development Program. The Environmental and Policy Institute is involved in the development of resource planning and assessment, while the Pacific Islands Development Program is involved with island development.
The British Development Division in the Pacific (BDDP) has established an office staffed with a professional fisheries advisor in Suva, Fiji.
6.3 Economic communities of the region
One United Nations organization of particular importance to the region, including also Asia, is the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP). Ten sovereign states are members, specifically Australia, Fiji, Nauru, New Zealand, Papua New Guinea, Tonga, Tuvalu, Western Samoa, Solomon Islands, and Vanuatu. Associate members are Cook Islands, Guam, Kiribati, Niue, and the Trust Territories of the Pacific. ESCAP has a prime interest in agriculture to analyse and formulate regional and national policies that lead to increased agriculture production.
Eight Pacific states, Fiji, Kiribati, Papua New Guinea, Solomon Islands, Tonga, Tuvalu, Vanuatu, and Western Samoa adhere to the Third Lome Convention of the European Community. The Convention provides for Community funds to help finance projects in ACP (African, Caribbean, and Pacific) countries through the European Development Fund and the European Investment Bank. The European Community has been most active in its financial support to the aquaculture sector.
6.4 Regional and global aquaculture development projects
There are few regional development projects within the area. Three regional aquaculture development projects are listed in the Aquaculture Aid Profiles (ADCP, 1988). All are being implemented in Melanesia.
A regional project for Aquaculture Development in the Pacific was started in 1986 and based in Suva, Fiji. The office is headed by a professional aquaculturist. The objective of the project is to assist the development of aquaculture in the Pacific islands. The programme is funded by the Government of Japan and executed by FAO.
The UNDP/FAO South Pacific Regional Fishery Support Development Programme (SPRFSP) is also based in Suva, Fiji. This office is supporting the development of fisheries bibliographies, which include aquaculture, within the region.
Finally, UNDP created the Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (ADCP) in support of global initiatives in aquaculture. Its prime activities have extended into Africa, Asia, Latin America, and the Mediterranean regions. Advisory and guideline publications deal with both administration of the sector, such as technical assistance, economic development, planning, engineering, marketing, etc., and in technology. The Programme is executed by FAO and based in Rome, Italy.
The Direction Territoriale des Services Ruraux of New Caledonia administers a grant from the European Development Fund of Brussels, Belgium to develop freshwater aquaculture in Melanesian-inhabited areas.
<section>9</section>
7. REFERENCES
ADCP, 1988. Aquaculture aid profiles. Rome, UNDP/FAO, ADCP/AP/87/9, 44 p.
Anon., 1986. Coral Reef Newsletter, October 1986. Marine Laboratory, University of Guam.
Australian Department of Agriculture and Fisheries Division, 1975. The potential of aquaculture in Australia. Aust.Fish.Pap., No. 21, Canberra, 133 p.
AQUACOP, 1986. Aquaculture, Vol. 2. Technique et Documentation. Lavoisier.
Asian Development Bank, 1985. Western Samoa. Agriculture Sector Survey. Vol. II. Background and Sector Review.
Berg, K. and R. Cassidy, 1988. SPC library and fisheries information. South Pacific Commission. Workshop on Pacific Inshore Fishery Resources, SPC/Inshore Fish.Res./BP 85, 6 p.
Bureau of Agriculture Economics, 1986. Commodity statistical bulletin.
Bureau of Public Affairs, United States Department of State, 1983. Background Notes. Fiji. U.S. Dept. State, Washington, D.C., USA, 2 p.
Carleton, C.R.C., 1981. Solomon Islands fish marketing development. Rome, FAO, FI:DP/SI/75/006 Field Document 1, 30 p.
Carriveau, K.L., 1987. Quick bibliography. Aquaculture and related topics. Micronesian Area Tropical Agriculture Database. University of Guam, 62 p.
Cillaurren, E. and G. David, 1985. ORSTOM participation in the 3rd Workshop on the development of village fisheries in Vanuatu. Port Villa, 4-8 November 1985. Institut Français de Recherche Scientifique pour le Développement en Coopération (ORSTOM). Mission ORSTOM de Port Villa, 26 p.
Coates, D., 1987. Consideration of fish introductions into the Sepik River, Papua New Guinea. Aquaculture and Fisheries Management 18:231-41.
Coates, D., 1987a. Inland fisheries in Papua New Guinea. In: Indo-Pacific Fishery Commission. Reports and papers presented at the Indo-Pacific fishery commission expert consultation on inland fisheries of the larger Indo-Pacific islands. Rome, FAO, FAO Fish.Rep., No. 371 supplement (FIRI/R371), pp. 119-29
Colgan, K., 1988. What does the future hold for pearling in Torres Strait? Australian Fisheries, January 1988:12-16
Croft, R.A., 1987. Aquaculture potential for Micronesia. Unpublished report of the College of Micronesia, 34 p.
Crossland, J., 1984. Fish marketing in Vanuatu. INFOFISH Marketing Digest 6/84:22-4
Csavas, I., 1986. Back-to-office report. Rome, FAO, 9 June 1986, (mimeo).
Department of Resources and Development, 1986. Proceedings. Federated States of Micronesia Aquaculture Planning Workshop. Department of Resources and Development, Federated States of Micronesia National Government, Kolonia, Pohnpei, Eastern Caroline Islands, 58 p.
Diake, S., 1988. Country statement - Solomon Islands. South Pacific Commission Workshop on Pacific Inshore Fishery Resources, SPC/Inshore Fish.Res./BP 72, 7 p.
Dix, T., 1984. Is aquaculture an alternative? In: Australian Maritime College. Seminar. The Australian fishing industry - today and tomorrow, 10-12 July 1984, Australian Maritime College, Launceston, Tasmania, Australia, pp. 79-87
Doty, M.S., 1987. The production of Eucheuma. In: M.S. Doty, J.F. Caddy, and B. Santelices (eds.), Rome, Case studies of seven commercial seaweed resources. FAO Fish.Tech.Pap., 281, pp. 49-122
FAO, 1980. Fishery Country Profile. Australia. Rome, FAO, FID/CP/Aus Rev.2.
FAO, 1983. Tonga Inception Report. Apia, Samoa, FAO, 113 p.
FAO, 1984. Fishery Country Profile. Western Samoa. FID/CP/WES Rev.2. Rome, FAO, 4 p.
FAO, 1985. Fishery Country Profile. Cook Islands. Rome, FAO, FID/CP/CKI Rev.1.
FAO, 1985a. Fishery Country Profile. Tonga. Rome, FAO, FID/CP/TON Rev.2.
FAO, 1986. Fishery Statistics, Rome, FAO, Vol. 63.
FAO, 1986a. Fishery Country Profile. Kiribati. Rome, FAO, FID/CP/KRI. 5p.
FAO, 1986b. Vanuatu Inception Report. FAO, Apia, Samoa, April 1986.
FAO, 1987. Fiji Inception Report. FAO, Apia, Samoa, 155 p.
FAO, 1987a. Fishery Country Profile. Solomon Islands. Rome, FAO, FID/CP/SI.
FAO, 1988. Proceedings of a regional workshop on milkfish culture development. 21-25 November 1988, Tarawa, Kiribati, GCP/RAS/116/JAP.
FAO, 1989. Aquaculture Production (1984-1986), Rome, FAO, Fisheries Circular No. 815.
FAO, n.d. Fishery Country Profile. Fiji. Rome, FAO, (FID/CP/FIJ Rev 1.)
Fiji Fisheries Division, 1986. Annual Report. Ministry of Primary Industries, Suva.
Fiji Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries, 1983. Annual Report for the Year 1982. Parliament of Fiji. Parliamentary Paper No. 66 of 1983.
FitzGerald, W.J. Jr., n.d. An introduction to aquaculture on Guam: prospects, permits and assistance. Guam Department of Commerce, Agana, Guam, 17 p.
FitzGerald, W.J. Jr., 1982. Aquaculture development plan for the territory of Guam. Guam Department of Commerce, Agana. 182 p.
FitzGerald, W.J. Jr., and S.G. Nelson, 1979. Development of aquaculture in an island community-Guam, Mariana Islands. Proc.World Maric.Soc. 10:39-50.
Frielink, A.B., Jr. 1983. Discussion paper. Coastal Fisheries Development Policy. Fisheries Resources and Surveys Branch, Department of Primary Industries, Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea, 50 p.
Frielink, A.B., Jr., 1983. The rural coastal populations of Papua New Guinea. Department of Primary Industries, Port Moresby, Papua New Guinea, Fisheries Research and Surveys Branch Report 83-17.
Gibson, D.H., 1985. Solomon Islands' Fisheries Sector. Country profile. Malaysia, INFOFISH Marketing Digest 4/85:8-10
Gillett, R., 1987. Solomon Islands' Fisheries Bibliography. FAO/UNDP Regional Fishery Support Programme, Document 87/1, 60 p.
Gillett, R., and T. Sua, 1987. Western Samoa Fisheries Bibliography. FAO/UNDP Regional Fishery Support Programme, Document 87/6, 90 p.
Gillett, R. and D. Kenneth, 1987. Vanuatu Fisheries Bibliography. FAO/UNDP Regional Fishery Support Programme, Document 87/7, 67 p.
Gillett, R., S. Zirkel, and S. Langi, 1988. Tonga Fisheries Bibliography. FAO/UNDP Regional Fishery Support Programme, Document 88/1, 82 p.
Government of Solomon Islands, 1985. Fisheries Department Annual Report 1985. Ministry of Natural Resources, Honiara, Solomon Islands.
Guam Department of Commerce, 1987. Guam Aquaculture Development and Training Center as a regional support facility to private commercial aquaculture development, 26 p.
Heslinga, G.A., and W.K. Fitt, 1987. The domestication of reef-dwelling clams. Bioscience 37:332-9.
Heslinga, G.A., F.E. Perron, and O. Orak, 1984. Mass culture of giant clams (F. Tridachnidae) in Palau. Aquaculture 39:197-215.
Heslinga, G.A., T.C. Watson, and T. Isamu, 1988. Status of the MMDC giant clam hatchery - Republic of Palau. South Pacific Commission Workshop on Pacific Inshore Fisheries Resources, Noumea, New Caledonia, 14-25 March 1988. SPC/Inshore Fish.Res./BP 24, 2 p.
Hollyer, J., 1984. Pearls - jewels of the sea. Malaysia, INFOFISH Marketing Digest 5/84:32-4.
Intes, A., 1986. The pearl oyster in French Polynesia: the revival of an historic resource. Pies 2:41-7.
Izumi, M., (in press) Palau Fisheries Bibliography. FAO/UNDP Regional Fishery Support Programme, Document 87/8.
James, D., 1984. The future for fish in nutrition. Malaysia, INFOFISH Marketing Digest 4/84:41-4.
Josepuit, H., 1983. External assistance to the fisheries sector of developing countries in Asia and the Pacific - a short survey. Malaysia, INFOFISH Marketing Digest 3/83:10-12.
Kaczynski, V.M., A. Klein, and F. Hasegawa, 1984. Foreign investment in international fishery ventures of the Asia/Pacific. Malaysia, INFOFISH Marketing Digest 3/84:13-16.
Kearney, R.E., 1984. Fishery potentials in the tropical central and western Pacific. Malaysia, INFOFISH Marketing Digest 5/84:16-19.
Koloa, T., 1983. Developing fisheries in Tonga. Malaysia, INFOFISH Marketing Digest 1/83:9-13.
Kövári, J., 1986. Papua New Guinea. Investigations into the re-establishment of carp fishing in the highlands. Rome, FAO, Technical Cooperation Programme, (FI:TCP/PNG/4503 (A), Field Doc. 2:15 p.
Kwong, V., 1984. Fisheries - an important part of Fiji's economy. INFOFISH Marketing Digest 5/84:12-15.
Langi, V., 1988. Country paper - Kingdom of Tonga. Research, management and legislation. South Pacific Commission, Workshop on Pacific Inshore Fishery Resources, Noumea, New Caledonia, 14-25 March 1988. SPC/Inshore Fish.Res./BP 71, 12 p.
Lewis, A.D., 1986. A review of fisheries research activities and plans. Ministry of Marine Resources. Cook Islands, Tech.Bull. No. 1, 61 p.
Lewis, A.D., and C.K. Pring, 1987. Freshwater and brackishwater fish and fisheries of Fiji. In: Indo-Pacific Fishery Commission. Reports and papers presented at the Indo-Pacific fishery commission expert consultation on inland fisheries of the larger Indo-Pacific islands. Rome, FAO, FAO Fish.Rep. No. 371 supplement (FIRI/R371), pp. 38-59.
McCormack, G., 1986. Aquaculture in focus. In: P. Owen and J. Bowden (eds.) Freshwater aquaculture in Australia. Rural Press, Queensland, Australia, pp. 5-19.
McHugh, D., and P. Philipson, 1988. Post-harvest technology and marketing of cultured Eucheuma seaweeds. South Pacific Forum Fisheries Agency Report 88/2, 21 p.
Meyers, R., P. Callaghan, and W. FitzGerald, Jr., 1983. Market for fresh or frozen whole fish on Guam. Univ.Guam Mar.Lab.Tech.Rep. No. 84, 50 p.
Moss, J.R., and M.S. Doty, 1987. Establishing a seaweed industry in Hawaii: an initial assessment. Aquaculture Development Program of the Hawaii State Department of Land and Natural Resources, Honolulu, Hawaii, 73 p.
Nelson, S.G., 1987. A survey of existing fishponds on Yap proper with recommendations for the development of subsistence fish culture. Marine Resources Management Division, Yap State Department of Resources and Development, Colonia, Yap, Federated States of Micronesia, 14 p.
Nelson, S.G., 1988. Development of phycocolloid-related industries in Oceania. South Pacific Commission, Workshop on Pacific Inshore Fishery Resources, Noumea, New Caledonia, 14-25 March 1988.
Nelson, S.G., 1988a. Development of aquaculture in the U.S.-affiliated islands of Micronesia. In B. Smith (ed.) Topic reviews in marine resources. Univ.Guam Mar.Lab.Tech.Rep. No. 88, pp. 61-83
Newell, G., and G. Skurray, 1988. Increasing seafood consumption presents marketing challenges. Australian Fisheries (March 1988):56-7.
Northern Territory Department of Ports and Fisheries, 1986. Annual Report 1986. Department of Ports and Fisheries, Australia.
Parker, P., 1988. New Zealand Bounty. Seafood Business 7(1):98-109.
Parliament of Fiji, 1986. Ministry of Primary Industries annual report for the year 1985. Parliamentary Paper 79, 77 p.
Parliament of Tasmania, 1986. Inland Fisheries Commission Report for the year ended 30 June 1986, 30 p.
Pitt, M., 1986. Papua New Guinea. Carp cultivation and the Highlands Aquaculture Development Center, Aiyura. Rome, FAO, Technical Cooperation Programme, (FI:TCP/PNG/4503). Field Doc. 1:108 p.
Popper, D., 1982. Baitfish and prawn culture in Western Samoa. Rome, FAO, FI:DP/SAM/77/001, 21 p.
Pullan, S., 1986. Prawn farming - a new venture for New Zealand. Catch 13(10):12-13.
Rabanal, H.R., 1981. The development of aquaculture in Fiji. FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, Bangkok, Thailand.
Ratcliffe, C., A.J. Hopson, W.J. Sorrenson, and C.C. Ellison, 1981. Proposed Fisheries Development Programme for Development Plan IV (1980-1985). Kingdom of Tonga. Fisheries Working Paper No. 3. Fishery Division, Tonga.
Samson, E., 1986. The fisheries sector of Palau. Direction for Policy, Project Development and External Assistance. FAO. RAS/85/004. South Pacific Regional Development Programme, 57 p.
Seefried, M., 1983. The commercial fishing industry of Queensland. Queensland Department of Primary Industries, Brisbane (QL83017).
Stephenson, R.A., 1987. Mitiaro aquaculture development project field report. FAO/Government of Japan, South Pacific Aquaculture Development Programme, 13 p.
Tacon, A.G.J., 1986. Papua New Guinea. Development of carp feeds. Rome, FAO, Technical Cooperation Programme, (FI:TCP/PNG/4503), Field Doc. 3, 42 p.
Tanaka, H., 1987. Some notes on aquaculture development in the South Pacific. South Pacific Commission, Nineteenth Regional Technical Meeting on Fisheries, Noumea, New Caledonia, 3-7 August 1987. SPC/Fisheries 19/Information Paper 5, 9 p.
The World Bank Atlas, 1987.
UNDP, 1987. A report on the fisheries situation to the Government of Papua New Guinea with recommendations for development. UNDP/FAO, 189 p.
UNEP, 1985. Marine Environmental Centres: South Pacific. UNEP/FAO Rome.
United States Congress, Office of Technology Assessment, 1987. Integrated renewable resource management for U.S. insular areas. OTA-F-325. Washington, D.C.: U.S. Government Printing Office, June, 1987. Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 86-600595, 441 p.
Uwate, R., R. Kunatuba, B. Raobati, and C. Tenakanai, 1984. A review of aquaculture activities in the Pacific Islands Region. Pacific Islands Development Program, East-West Center, Honolulu, HI.
Uwate, K.R., 1988. Viable aquaculture technologies in the Pacific Islands region. IPFC WPA/WP 18, Bangkok, 1988.
Warwick, J.C., 1985. Handling and transport of live New Zealand green mussels. Malaysia, INFOFISH Marketing Digest 30/85:33-6
Why, S., 1985. Eucheuma seaweed farming in Kiribati. South Pacific Commission, Seventeenth Regional Technical Meeting on Fisheries, Noumea, New Caledonia, 5-9 August 1985. SPC/Fisheries 17/WP 19.
Wilson, G., and B. Hickman, 1986. Farmed mussel statistics for 1985. Shellfish Newsletter 32 (December 1986):8.
Yap State Marine Management Division and Department of Agriculture and Fisheries, 1986. Agriculture and marine resources survey of village households in Yap proper: 1986. Yap State Department of Resources and Development, Colonia, Yap, Federated States of Micronesia, Western Caroline Islands.
<section>a</section>
ANNEX I - Supporting data, figures, tables
Table 1: Fish and Fishery Products Provisional Food Balance Sheet, Average 1982/84
Catch
Non-Food
Imports
Exports
Food Supply
Population
Per caput supply
(t live wt)
(t live wt)
(t live wt)
(t live wt)
(t live wt)
(000s)
(kg/year)
American Samoa
Australia
Commonwealth North Marianas
Cook Islands
Federated States of Micronesia
Fiji
French Polynesia
Guam
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Nauru
New Caledonia
New Zealand
Niue
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Solomon Islands
Tokelau
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu
Wallis & Fortuna
Western Samoa
Source: FAO Yearbook of Fishery Statistics, Vol. 63.
Table 2: Gross National Product Statistics and Population Data
1985 GNP (US$ 000 000s)
1973-1985 GNP Growth Rate (%)
1985 Population (000s)
1973-1985 Population Growth Rate (%)
1985 GNP per caput (US$)
1973-1985 GNP Growth Rate (%)
American Samoa
Australia
Commonwealth North Marianas
Cook Islands
n.a.
Federated States of Micronesia
Fiji
French Polynesia
Guam
Kiribati
n.a.
n.a.
Marshall Islands
Nauru
New Caledonia
New Zealand
Niue
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Solomon Islands
n.a.
n.a.
Tokelau
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
n.a.
Wallis & Fortuna
Western Samoa
n.a.
n.a.
Source: World Bank Atlas, 1987 (except data in parentheses). (n.a. = data not available)
Table 3. Land Area of Region
Land Area Km^2
American Samoa
Australia
Commonwealth North Marianas
Cook Islands
Federated States of Micronesia
Fiji
French Polynesia
Guam
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Nauru
New Caledonia
New Zealand
Niue
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Solomon Islands
Tokelau
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu
Wallis & Fortuna
Western Samoa
Source: The Far East and Australasia, 1988. Europa
Table 4. Aquaculture Production Data, 1986
Production 1986 (mt)
Fish (mt)
Crustaceans (mt)
Molluscs (mt)
Algae (mt)
Others (mt)
American Samoa
Australia
Commonwealth North Marianas
Cook Islands
Federated States of Micronesia
Fiji
French Polynesia
Guam
Kiribati
Marshall Islands
Nauru
New Caledonia
New Zealand
Niue
Palau
Papua New Guinea
Solomon Islands
Tokelau
Tonga
Tuvalu
Vanuatu
Wallis & Fortuna
Western Samoa
Sources: Aquaculture Production, 1986. FIDI/C815, FAO, Rome (IPFC WPA/WP 18, 1988. Uwate, K.R.)
(· · · = production, but data not separately available)
Table 5. Species cultured commercially within the region
Species
Common Names
Countries
FINFISH
Anguilla sp.
river eel
Australia
Carassius auratus
goldfish
Australia
Chanos chanos
milkfish
Guam, Kiribati
Clarius batrachus
Asian catfish
Guam
Clarius macrocephalus
Asian catfish
Guam
Lates calcarifer
Asian seabass
Australia
Maccullochella peeli
Murray cod
Australia
Macquaria ambigua
golden perch
Australia
Oncorhynchus tshawytscha
chinook salmon
New Zealand
Oreochromis niloticus
tilapia
Fiji
Oreochromis hybrids
tilapia
Guam
Perca fluviatilis
European perch
Australia
Salmo gairdneri
rainbow trout
Australia
Salmo salar
Atlantic salmon
Australia
Salmo trutta
sea trout
Australia
CRUSTACEANS
Cherax destructor
yabbies
Australia
Cherax tenuimanus
marron
Australia
Macrobrachium rosenbergii
freshwater prawn
Guam, Solomon Islands, French Polynesia
Metapenaeus macleayi
school prawn
Australia
Penaeus esculentus
brown tiger prawn
Australia
Penaeus indicus
Indian white prawn
Australia
Penaeus monodon
giant tiger prawn
Australia, Fiji, New Caledonia
Penaeus orientalis
fleshy prawn
New Zealand
Penaeus plebejus
eastern king prawn
Australia
Penaeus stylirostris
blue shrimp
Fiji, New Caledonia
Penaeus vannamei
white prawn
F. Polynesia
MOLLUSCS
Crassostrea commercialis
cupped oyster
Australia
Crassostrea gigas
Pacific oyster
Australia, New Zealand
Crassostrea spp.
cupped oysters
Australia
Mytilus edulis
blue mussel
Australia
Mytilus planulatus
Australian mussel
Australia
Perna canaliculus
Green lipped mussel
Australia, New Zealand
Pinctada margaritifera
pearl oyster
Cook Islands
Pinctada sp.
pearl oyster
Australia, Federated States of Micronesia
SEAWEEDS
Eucheuma alvarezii
Kiribati, Fiji
Eucheuma striatum
Pohnpei
<section>b</section>
ANNEX II - List of abbreviations
ACIAR
Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research
ADB
Asian Development Bank
ADCP
Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme
ASEAN
Association of Southeast Asian Nations
CIDA
Canadian International Development Agency
EAS
European Aquaculture Society
ESCAP
Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific
EVAAM
L'Establissement de Valorisation des Activités Aquacoles et Maritimes (French Polynesia)
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
FFA
South Pacific Forum Fisheries Agency
ICLARM
International Centre for Living Aquatic Resources Management
IDRC
International Development Research Centre (Canada)
IFAD
International Fund for Agricultural Development
IFREMER
Institut français de recherche pour l'exploitation de la mer (France)
MMDC
Micronesian Mariculture Demonstration Center (Palau)
NACA
Network of Aquaculture Centres in Asia
NGO
Non-governmental Organizations
OECD
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development
ORSTOM
Institut Français de Recherche pour le Développement en Coopération (France)
PFDC
Pacific Fisheries Development Council
SEAFDEC
Southeast Asian Fisheries Development Center
SEAFDEC-AQD
SEAFDEC Aquaculture Department (The Philippines)
SPC
South Pacific Commission
SPEC
South Pacific Bureau for Economic Co-operation
UN
United Nations
UN DP
United Nations Development Programme
UNEP
United Nations Environment Programme
UNICEF
United Nations Children's Fund
WAS
World Aquaculture Society
WB
World Bank
<section>c</section>
ANNEX III - List of ADCP reports
ADCP/REP/75/1 (E/F)
Aquaculture Planning in Africa
ADCP/REP/76/2
Aquaculture Planning in Asia
ADCP/REP/76/3 (E/S)
Aquaculture Planning in Latin America
ADCP/REP/76/3A FI/R188 (E/F/S)
Kyoto Conference
ADCP/REP/78/4
Aid for Aquaculture Development
ADCP/REP/78/5 (E/S)
Outline of an Applied Research and Experimental Development Programme for the Latin American Regional Centre for Aquaculture
ADCP/REP/78/6 (E/S)
Curriculum for the Training of Aquaculturists in the Latin American Regional Centre for Aquaculture
ADCP/REP/79/7 (E/F)
Curriculum for the Training of Aquaculturists in the African Regional Centre for Aquaculture
ADCP/REP/79/8
Training in Fish Feed Technology. Report of the FAO/UNDP Training Course in Fish Feed Technology held in the University of Washington, Seattle, 9 October-15 December 1978
ADCP/REP/79/9
Aquaculture Information - Report of the Meeting of an Aquaculture Information Group held in Rome, 25-28 April 1979
ADCP/REP/79/10
Aquaculture Development in China - Report of a FAO/UNDP Aquaculture Study Tour to the People's Republic of China, 2 May-1 June 1978
ADCP/REP/80/11
Fish Feed Technology - Lectures presented at the FAO/UNDP Training Course in Fish Feed Technology, held at the College of Fisheries, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, 9 October-15 December 1978
ADCP/REP/80/12
Outline Research Programme for the African Regional Aquaculture Centre, Port Harcourt, Rivers State, Nigeria. Report of a Task Force sponsored by the FAO/UNDP Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme, 3-19 February 1980
ADCP/REP/80/13
Curriculum for the Training of Aquaculturists in the Asian Aquaculture Network
ADCP/REP/80/14
Outline Research Programmes for the Regional Aquaculture Lead Centres in Asia - Parts I and II
ADCP/REP/80/15
Outline Research Programmes for the Regional Aquaculture Lead Centres in Asia - Part III
ADCP/REP/81/16 (out of print)
Reproductive Physiology of Teleost Fishes - A Review of Present Knowledge and Needs for Future Research
ADCP/REP/82/17
Aid for Aquaculture Development in the Third World - Report of the FAO/NORAD Round Table on Aid for Aquaculture Development in the Third World. Svanøy, Norway, 2-6 August 1982
ADCP/REP/83/18
Fish Feeds and Feeding in Developing Countries - An Interim Report on the ADCP Feed Development Programme
ADCP/REP/83/19 Rev. 1
AQUIS Aquaculture Information System - Users' Manual
ADCP/REP/83/20
Planification del Desarrollo de la Acuicultura - Guía Preliminar (An Introductory Guide to Aquaculture Development)
ADCP/REP/84/21
Inland Aquaculture Engineering - Lectures presented at the ADCP Interregional Training Course in Inland Aquaculture Engineering, Budapest
ADCP/REP/85/22
Nutritional Fish Pathology - Morphological Signs of Nutrient Deficiency and Toxicity in Farmed Fish
ADCP/REP/86/23
Observations on International Technical Assistance to Aquaculture
ADCP/REP/86/24
Planning an Aquaculture Facility - Guidelines for Bioprogramming and Design
ADCP/REP/87/25
Future Economic Outlook for Aquaculture and Related Assistance Needs
ADCP/REP/87/26
Feed and Feeding of Fish and Shrimp - A Manual on the Preparation and Presentation of Compound Feeds for Shrimp and Fish in Aquaculture
ADCP/REP/87/27
Aquaculture Sector Development - A Guideline for the Preparation of a National Plan
ADCP/REP/87/28
Women in Aquaculture - Proceedings of the ADCP/NORAD Workshop on Women in Aquaculture. Rome, FAO, 13-16 April 1987
ADCP/REP/87/29
The Markets for the Prime Mediterranean Species - Sea Bass, Sea Bream, Mullets and Eel - and their links with investment
ADCP/REP/88/30
A Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in Eleven Middle East Countries
ADCP/REP/88/31
A Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in East Asia
ADCP/REP/88/32
A Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in the Pacific
M/T5816E/1/4.89/500
