<title>ADCP/REP/89/34 - A Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in the Mediterranean</title>
<section>1</section>
FOREWORD
Aquaculture continues to grow in economic importance. The main reason for this is the quantifiable contribution aquaculture is making in many countries to fill the growing gap between supply and demand for fisheries products. This gap continues to widen because of increasing human populations and the static growth rates of capture fisheries brought about by declines in stocks and the increasing cost of obtaining fish through conventional methods. Although this gap can (and in some cases is already) being met by alternatives, such as inexpensive poultry and white meats, aquaculture particularly provides consumers with a choice of fresh products.
Aquaculture is also evident in earning foreign exchange for many countries through the export of high-value products. It also creates employment, particularly in economically depressed coastal and remote regions, and contributes Co the household economy of rural farmers.
This fourth regional survey prepared by the Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (ADCP) covers the existing aquaculture sector in the countries of the Mediterranean region, namely Albania, Algeria, Cyprus, Egypt, France, Greece, Israel, Italy, Libya, Lebanon, Malta, Morocco, Portugal, Spain, Syria, Tunisia, Turkey, and Yugoslavia.
This present survey is not exhaustive. It has been prepared by Michel Girin in a relatively brief desk study. For some countries of this active aquaculture region detailed information is still difficult to obtain. The ADCP apologizes for any omissions and errors which may exist in the survey, and hopes that these can be corrected in an up-dated survey. New information and notification of changes and errors should be indicated to the ADCP in the Fisheries Department, FAO, Rome. The detailed Table of Contents illustrates the range of information which, hopefully, will be assembled in due course for all regions.
The survey is directed toward administrators, executives, and managers who require broad overviews, rather than for scientists and technologists who require detailed information about species and practices. It is the fourth of a series of regional surveys. To this end, the ADCP hopes that the reader will find the information described here useful.
Colin E. Nash
Craig B. Kensler
Rome, 1989
<section>2</section>
INTRODUCTION
In this survey the Mediterranean region is considered in its broadest sense. It includes all European and African countries with a Mediterranean coastline, and also Portugal because of its affinity to the region as a whole The countries described by the survey are:
Albania
Egypt
Israel
Lebanon
Portugal
Tunisia
Algeria
France
Italy
Malta
Spain
Turkey
Cyprus
Greece
Libya
Morocco
Syria
Yugoslavia
Of the 18 countries included:
- eight belong to the United Nations (UN) West and East Europe groups (namely Albania, France, Greece, Italy, Malta, Portugal, Spain, Yugoslavia), of which five are European Economic Community (EEC) member states (France, Greece, Italy, Portugal, and Spain);
- five belong to the UN North-West Asia group (namely Cyprus, Israel, Lebanon, Syria and Turkey); and
- five belong to the UN North-West and North-East Africa groups (Algeria, Egypt, Libya, Morocco, Tunisia).
This report is therefore linked and should be read in association with other sector surveys in the series, particularly those for Africa, West Asia, the Middle East, and Northwest Europe & USSR.
The Mediterranean region described by this survey has a total population of 363 831 000 (1985 World Bank data). The countries catch a combined total of 5 393 808 tonnes (t) of fishery products, most of them from outside the Mediterranean Sea. Of this total, 490 800 t are processed for non-food uses (1984 FAO data). The region consumes a total 5 141 252 t of fisheries products, exporting 880 412 t and importing 2 114 252 t. It therefore has a net deficit of 1 233 840 t, which is close to 3.4 kg per caput per year, within a combined regional consumption of 14.1 kg per caput per year.
Based on data from a variety of sources, the estimated regional production through aquaculture approximates to 496 000 t for the years 1984-86. Aquaculture therefore contributes a little below 1.4 kg per caput per year, equal to 40% of the net regional deficit in fisheries products.
Aquaculture in the region is primarily the culture of shellfish (65% of the 1986 total); the rest is practically all finfish culture in freshwater and slightly brackishwater (21%) and culture of salmonids (14%). The contribution of marine products, both fish and shrimps, is negligible, but important investments are now being made and their production in the future is promising. There is no existing algal production at present, nor is it apparently contemplated.
During the last 15 years aquaculture has been progressively recognized as an important economic and food-producing sector by a number of countries in the region, and consistent funding has been devoted to planning, and to research and development. Aquaculture legislation and financing have been greatly improved in the leading countries, and there is now a clear commitment at government level to obtain from aquaculture an increasing contribution in reducing the seafood deficit of the region.
<section>3</section>
1. CONSUMPTION OF FISH AND SHELLFISH AND THE REGIONAL MARKETS
1.1 Nutritional benefits of fish and shellfish
1.2. Characteristics of consumption in the region
1.3 Annual consumption of fish and shellfish
1.4 Gross market data
1.5 Specific market data
1.6 Information for the trade
1.7 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
1.1 Nutritional benefits of fish and shellfish
An increased per caput consumption of fish and shellfish in any region benefits health. Aquatic animals contain a high level of protein (17-20%), with an amino-acid profile similar to that of meat from land animals. The flesh of fish is therefore readily digestible and immediately utilizable by the human body. Compared with land animals (with some exceptions, such as shellfish), aquatic animals have a far higher percentage of edible flesh, and there is little wastage. Aquatic animals are a source of minerals, such as calcium, iron and phosphorus, as well as trace elements and vitamins. Marine species are particularly rich in iodine. The fatty-acid content is high in polyunsaturates, and particularly those which are attributed to reduce blood cholesterol.
In the Mediterranean region, the role of aquaculture as a regulator and a complement to fish and shellfish supply has been recognized for a long time. Primitive forms of aquaculture around the Mediterranean, such as storage ponds for oysters, and eels, date back to Roman times. Aquaculture practices and the range of species cultured have been diversified with time. Aquacultural products are currently a relatively well-known food source for increasing numbers of people in most countries of the region, but not yet to the point where they are so common and available to satisfy basic nutritional needs for any sector of the population. However, they are considered by most of the population as an option which offers variety and quality in protein supply rather than an essential commodity.
As the Mediterranean is one of the prime tourist regions in the world the present consumption of fish and shellfish products is highly tourist-related, particularly for the higher value species such as sea-bass, sea breams, and clams. Furthermore, as seafood is usually an important component of menus in restaurants specializing in high class business meals, its consumption in the region changes geographically with the seasons. The consumption of many high-value species is also strongly linked to the traditions of religious and social feasts in some countries, so that more than three-quarters of the yearly consumption is concentrated into a period of less than one month (particularly for oysters, and smoked salmon).
1.2. Characteristics of consumption in the region
The animal protein available in the region (the cumulated per caput consumption of meat and fish) varies among the different countries over a wide range. According to current food balance sheets published by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO, 1984 data), the cumulated meat plus fish per caput yearly consumption is:
- below 30 kg in Algeria, Egypt, Morocco, Syria, Tunisia, and Turkey,
- over 30 and below 60 kg in Albania, Libya, and Lebanon,
- over 60 and below 90 kg in Greece, Israel, Malta, and Portugal,
- over 90 kg in France, Italy, and Spain.
No statistical data are available for Cyprus. It might be noted that all five member countries of the European Economic Community (EEC) and all the developed countries of the region (as defined by the UN classification) fall into the last two groups.
The ratio of meat to fish in the per caput consumption of protein in the different countries shows a wide range, from a low 1.2 in Portugal to an extreme 76.4 in Lebanon. In the majority of countries the proportion is low, between 2 and 5; for example:
- below 2 in only one case, Portugal,
- 2-5, in Algeria, Egypt, France, Greece, Israel, Malta, Morocco, Spain, Tunisia, and Turkey,
- 5-10, in Albania, Italy, and Libya,
- 10-50, in Syria and Yugoslavia,
- over 50, in Lebanon.
No information is available for Cyprus. Therefore, with the exception of Portugal, the Mediterranean is a region where meat plays a consistently more important role than fish in the protein diet of the populations; and in three countries (Lebanon, Syria, and Yugoslavia), where fish accounts for less than 10% of the diet, the importance of fish is almost insignificant.
The reason for the lack of importance of fish is related to the relatively low fish productivity of the Mediterranean Sea, which provides no more than a quarter of the total fish catches of the countries considered by the survey. All those countries in the region which consume more than 100 000 t of fish and fisheries products per year (namely, Egypt, France, Greece, Italy, Portugal, Morocco, Spain, and Turkey) obtain supplies from their fleets in other seas, and/or import from regions other than the Mediterranean. In fact these eight countries are far from meeting their fish requirements either from their own catches in the Mediterranean or from outside. The FAO "food balance sheets (1984 data) record combined total imports of 2 114 252 t of fishery products and total exports of 880 412 t, a net import imbalance of 1 233 840 t (see Annex, Table 1).
1.3 Annual consumption of fish and shellfish
The consumption of fishery products in the region as described amounted to 5 141 514 t in 1984. The total capture by the fleets of the countries amounted to 4 393 808 t, of which 490 800 t were processed for non-food uses, and the imports and exports were as indicated in Section 1.2, above. The countries of the region consume 69% of what they catch, but satisfy only 59% of their total consumption.
The regional consumption is not distributed proportionately among the countries. For example, from 1984 data, two countries (France and Spain) account for 52% and with six other countries (Egypt, Greece, Italy, Morocco, Portugal, and Turkey), account for 94% of the total.
The average per caput consumption of fish and fishery products in the region is 11.8 kg. Within this average there are considerable variations between different countries, ranging from 0.5 kg (Lebanon) to 36.6 kg (Portugal). Consumption exceeds 10 kg in 8 countries:
- Cyprus, Greece, Israel, Italy, Malta. (10-19 kg),
- France (20-29 kg),
- Portugal and Spain (30 kg and above).
All countries of the region in the UN classification of developed countries are among those where per caput consumption exceeds 10 kg. In those countries, particularly France, Italy and Spain, improved technology and transport are progressively reducing the consumption of traditional forms of canned, smoked, and salted fisheries products, while all forms of prepared products, particularly frozen ones, are growing. In general, demand for seafood products in these countries is expected to grow as consumers' disposable income increases, and consumers realize the nutritional benefits of seafood.
A number of countries in the region (France, Greece, Italy, Portugal and Spain) are linked directly to the considerable EEC seafood market. In 1992 any product entering the borders of one of these EEC countries in the region will get unlimited access to all EEC countries. This is a market of more than 320 million consumers, with one of the highest income levels in the world, and with a yearly per caput consumption of fish products ranging from 9.3 kg (Federal Republic of Germany) to 36.6 kg (Portugal).
1.4 Gross market data
The total population of 18 countries of the region was 363.8 million in 1985 (see Table 2), with:
- below 1 million for Cyprus and Malta,
- 1 to 10 million for Albania, Greece, Israel, Libya, and Tunisia,
- 10 to 50 million for Algeria, Egypt, Morocco, Portugal, Spain, Syria, Turkey, and Yugoslavia,
- 50 to 100 million for France and Italy.
Lebanon had no data. The two most populated countries have 31% of the population of the region and, with the next eight, have 92%. The five EEC member countries represent 47% of the total population.
The accumulated Gross National Product (GNP) of the region in 1985 was US$ 1 404 460 thousand million, with:
- GNP below US$ 10 thousand million for Cyprus, Malta, and Tunisia,
- GNP of US$ 10 to 50 thousand million for Egypt, Greece, Israel, Libya, Morocco, Portugal, Syria, and Yugoslavia,
- GNP of US$ 50 to 100 thousand million for Algeria and Turkey,
- GNP over US$ 100 thousand million for France, Italy, and Spain.
Albania and Lebanon had no data.
Economic power in the region is consistently more concentrated than population. The three countries with GNP over US$ 100 thousand million accounted for 76% of the total GNP of the region, and the top five countries with GNP over US$ 50 thousand million accounted for 84%. The GNP of the five EEC member states was 80% of the total.
Population growth in the region is relatively low. The average national annual percentages between 1973-85 varied between 0.3% (Italy) and 4% (Libya), with a regional average of 1.8%. Annual rates of seven countries remained below 1% (Cyprus, France, Greece, Italy, Portugal, Spain, and Yugoslavia); only in three countries did they exceed 3% (Algeria, Libya, and Syria).
During the same period the average national real growth rate of GNP was generally moderate, with extremes between 1.4% (Spain) and 8.1% (Egypt). The average for the region was 3.9%. Values exceeded 5% in only three countries (Egypt, Malta, and Syria).
The average GNP increase during the period exceeded that of the population in all countries, except Libya where the GNP per caput decreased (-2.6%). Increases above the regional average of 5% per annum occurred only in Egypt (5.4%) and Malta (6.7%).
Together with the relatively small increases in regional GNP and population changes in 1984-85, the most recent data on national fish catches also show a modest growth (see Table 3). Therefore it can be assumed that the current general gross markets for fish products remain similar to what they were in 1984.
1.5 Specific market data
The distribution of the many aquaculture species produced and/or traded throughout the region, as defined by the genera/species groups used in the annual collection of fisheries statistics by FAO, is summarized as follows:
- Group B11, carps and other cyprinids (carps, barbels and other cyprinids),
- Group B12, tilapias (tilapias and other cichlids),
- Group B13, largemouth blackbass, northern pike, catfish and other freshwater fish (miscellaneous freshwater fishes),
- Group B22, European eel (river eels),
- Group B23, salmon and trout (salmon, trout, smelts),
- Group B31, sole and turbot (flounders, halibuts, soles),
- Group B33, European sea bass and gilthead sea bream (redfishes, basses, congers),
- Group B34, mullets (jacks, mullets, sauries),
- Group B41, giant freshwater prawn (freshwater crustaceans),
- Group B45, penaeid shrimps (shrimps, prawns),
- Group B53, flat and cupped oysters (oysters),
- Group B54, mussels (mussels),
- Group B56, clams (clams, cockles, arkshells).
The accumulated, world landings of these 13 statistical groups account for about one-third of the total annual global fisheries landings (33.5% in 1986). Within the region as described, these same groups accounted for a total catch of 1 575 113 t in 1986. This was 5.1% of their combined contribution to the total world fisheries landings, and 31% of the total catches of the fleets owned by the countries of the region.
The analysis of aspects of fish trade in the region, which follows, is confined to these groups which are of importance to aquaculture.
FAO fish trade statistics for countries in the Mediterranean region do not record any international exchange concerning species in groups B11 (the carps), B12 (tilapias), B13 (pike and catfishes), B34 (mullets), and B41 (Macrobrachium). However, there is known to be both inter- and intraregional exchange for some of these species; for example, carp producers in France export most of their production (about 1 000 t per year) to Germany. There is also a small trade in mullets between Spain and Italy, and of exports of mullets from Tunisia and Turkey to Italy, which may amount to several hundred tonnes each year. Frozen Macrobrachium tails from Bangladesh can be purchased in France, and trade magazines in Israel report exports of small tonnages of fresh Macrobrachium to Germany and Switzerland. All the volumes concerned are small compared with the overall regional fisheries trade for the region, which is over 1 million tonnes (see Section 1.2, above), but so far they have been
omitted by the international trade records.
For group B22, the European eels, the importation of fresh, chilled, and frozen eels by the region was 3 297 t in 1986, and exportation 1 572 t. The data for 1984 to 1986 inclusive, show net exports of eels, within the range 355 t (1985) and 1 572 t (1986). Countries involved in the trade are France, Greece, Italy, Morocco, Portugal, Spain, Tunisia and Turkey. Trade goes both ways for the first three countries, with Italy and Spain net importers, and France a net exporter. The other countries are exporters only. A consistent part of exports from France, Morocco, and Portugal are in the form of juveniles ("civelles") for consumption in Spain, and Italy imports some juveniles for cultivation and only adult fish for direct consumption.
In group B23, salmon and trout, the imports of fresh, chilled, and frozen salmon for the region were 39 993 t, and 4 776 t of canned salmon, and exports of 2 760 t and 366 t respectively. Imports of fresh, chilled, and frozen trout were 4 864 t, and exports were 8 744 t. The three years 1984-86 all show at the regional level a net import balance for salmon and a net export balance for trout, with the salmon imports widely exceeding exports for trout. Globally over the same period, there was a net import balance of salmonid fishes (all forms included) in the range 25 948 t (1985) to 39 839 t (1986).
The principal countries concerned with trade in salmon and trout in the region are France, Israel, Italy, and Spain. France is a net importer for both species, and Italy is a net importer of salmon and a net exporter of trout. Spain is a net importer of salmon, and seems to be moving from a situation of net importer of trout (1984-85) to that of a net exporter (1986). Israel is only a salmon importer.
France is the country most involved by far in the trade of salmon and trout. Alone, in 1986, it represented 86% of the salmon imports and 95% of the total accumulated trout plus salmon imports. It was also the largest salmon exporter (80% of the tonnage) in the Mediterranean, and the second main exporter of trout after Italy (45% compared with 51%, respectively).
In the north Mediterranean countries trout is generally regarded as a commonly available food, traded at prices which hardly exceed US$ 2/kg (whole fish). Although there is a trend toward the production of large trout (both in freshwater and seawater) for filleting and smoking, most of the trout trade still deals with live or fresh portion-size whole fish. On the other hand, salmon is recognized as a luxury food. Although some pan-size cultured fish are now available on the market, consumers generally demand salmon to be large fish (2 kg and over), mostly available in whole smoked sides or fillets, and often pre-sliced. This market form sustains its strong image as a luxury item. Trade prices are usually in excess of US$ 5/kg for the whole fish, and US$ 17/kg for smoked fillets.
In group B31, sole and turbot, the imports of fresh, chilled, and frozen flatfish were 28 136 t in 1986, and exports 6 676 t. The three years 1984-86 all showed net imports of flatfish, ranging from 15 075 t (1984) to 22 674 t (1985). The countries concerned are France, Greece, Italy, Morocco, Spain, Portugal, Tunisia, and Turkey. France, Italy, Spain, and Greece were all net importers. Portugal was a net exporter (1984 and 1986) but became a net importer (1985). Turkey, Tunisia and Morocco were exporters only. France, Italy and Spain are the main markets of the import trade (95% of the total). France and Italy dominate the export trade (66% of the total), followed by Portugal, Morocco and Turkey (32% of the total). Most of the flatfish trade concerns high or medium value species like sole, turbot, and lemon sole (among which turbot is considered to be commercially viable for culture), at prices generally over US$ 3-4/kg (whole fish).
In group B33, redfishes, basses, and congers, imports of fresh, chilled, and frozen fish were 12 495 t in 1986, and exports 5 490 t. In the three years 1984-86 the region changed from being a net importer (1984 and 1986, with a maximum of 7 005 t in 1986) to a net exporter (753 t in 1985). The countries concerned were France, Greece, Italy, Spain, Portugal, Tunisia, and Turkey. France and Italy were net importers. Spain changed from net exporter (1984-85) to net importer (1986). Greece was an importer only. Tunisia, Portugal, and Turkey are exporters only. In 1986, France was both the major importer and exporter, dominating the import trade with Spain (77% combined) and the export trade with Portugal (74% combined). The major species in this trade in terms of value are the European sea bass and the gilthead sea bream. These are two of the highest valued fish species in the region, usually traded at prices exceeding US$ 10/kg whole. Both species are cultured and have been the
priority for aquaculture research in the region for the last 15 years.
In group B45, shrimps and prawns, imports of fresh, chilled and frozen products were 69 511 t in 1986, and exports were 11 067 t. The three years 1984-86 all show net imports, ranging from 43 921 t in 1985 to 90 530 t in 1984. The countries involved were Cyprus, France, Italy, Portugal, Spain, Tunisia, and Turkey. France, Italy, and Spain were net importers. Portugal and Cyprus were importers only; Tunisia and Turkey were exporters only. France was the main importer and exporter (44% and 49% respectively, of the 1986 trade). France, Italy, and Spain alone represented 98% of the 1986 import trade, while France, Italy and Tunisia represented 91% of the export trade. Imports to the region originate world-wide because of the fluctuations in availability and price of international frozen products. Prices range from US$ 3 to 7/kg for whole frozen shrimps, and there is a progressively growing market for unpeeled shrimps. Preferential links to African exporters for high quality
shrimps can result at times in increases in prices of up to 30% above the normal international trade prices. Exports from Turkey and Tunisia are mainly directed toward EEC countries.
In group B53, flat and cupped oysters, the imports of fresh, chilled, and frozen oysters were 3 187 t in 1986, and exports were 5 333 t. In the three years 1984-86 the region changed from being a net importer in 1984 (1 446 t) to a net exporter in 1985-86 (with a maximum of 3 364 t in 1985). The countries involved were France, Greece, Italy, Morocco, Portugal, Spain, and Turkey. France and Italy were net exporters; Spain was a net importer. Morocco was an importer only, and Greece, Portugal, and Turkey were exporters only. The import trade was headed by Spain, closely followed by Italy and France, with a combined 99% of the total market in 1986. The export trade was dominated by France (54% of the 1986 total), followed by Italy and Greece (42% of the 1986 total). The trade is almost exclusively live shell-on animals, at prices around US$ 2/kg whole.
In group B54, mussels, the imports were 53 497 t in 1986 and exports were 24 141 t. The three years 1984-86 all showed net imports, with extremes from 27 382 t (1985) to 29 400 t (1984). The countries involved were France, Greece, Italy, Portugal, Spain, Turkey, and Morocco. During the three years France, Italy, Greece, and Portugal remained net importers, and Spain remained a net exporter. Turkey and Morocco were exporters only. France dominated the import trade (76% of the 1986 total), followed by Italy (24%). Spain made up most of the export trade (87%). The trade is almost exclusively live shell-on animals, at prices around US$ 0.4/kg.
In group B56, clams, imports in 1986 were 209 t, and exports were 560 t. The three years 1984-86 all showed net exports, within the range 351 t (1986) to 2 647 t (1985). The countries concerned were Italy, Spain, and Turkey. Italy was a net exporter, with Spain changing from a net exporter (1984) to net importer (1985-86). Turkey was an exporter only. The import trade in 1986 was dominated by Spain (64% of the total), and the export trade by Italy (62% of the total). However, there are some anomalies in the international statistics. For example, for the last few years in Tunisia there has been an increasing clam export business to France, Italy, and Spain, which totalled several hundred tonnes in 1986. If these exports are included in the data Italy remains the main exporter in the region but becomes also a net and the largest importer, and France appears as a transit country for Tunisian clams bound for Italy. The trade is almost exclusively live shell-on clams, at prices
generally exceeding US$ 4/kg.
As a whole, the region in 1986 imported a total of 220 055 t of different fishery products in the groups detailed above, and exported only 67 729 t for a net import balance of 152 332 t. During the three years 1984-86, 8 countries of the 18 did not participate at all in the trade, namely Albania, Algeria, Egypt, Libya, Lebanon, Malta, Syria, and Yugoslavia, or only participated at levels too low and in markets too unstructured to be recorded.
Participation by two countries was minimal, and exclusively as importers; these were Cyprus (for shrimps), and Israel (for salmon). Three countries participated exclusively as exporters (Tunisia and Turkey), or nearly exclusive exporters (Morocco). The five EEC countries (France, Italy, Spain, Greece, and Portugal) participated actively in the trade, both as regular importers and exporters.
In the regional trade, three countries (France, Italy, and Spain) were active with all the groups of products analysed here. France was by far the major importer (59% in 1986), followed by Italy (21%), and Spain (19%). Spain was the major exporter (37%), followed by France (26%), and Italy (17%). However, as 84% of the Spanish exports were mussels, a commodity of much lower price per kg than all others concerned here, the value of French and possibly Italian exports exceeded those of Spain.
With high value species, the international trade in the region was mostly based upon direct contracts between dealers for well-defined species, sizes, and qualities, at a fixed price and a fixed delivery date. Products traded in this way do not transit through national auction markets. For example, imported mussels, and an increasing amount of cultured salmon from Norway, transit through the national auction market at Rungis in France.
Countries, or groups of countries within the region, may impose tariffs on the importation of certain fish products, including those produced by aquaculture, to protect their own producers. In particular this applies to the EEC countries which impose the following tariffs on cultured products:
- salmon (fresh and frozen)
- smoked salmon and all trout
- all other freshwater fish except carp
- all molluscs except oysters below 40 g
This table illustrates that higher tariffs protect EEC producers of table-size molluscs, trout, and smoked salmon, and lower tariffs facilitate the importation of fresh and frozen salmon which are then processed and exported by the highly successful and active European salmon smoking industry.
1.6 Information for the trade
There is no information for the aquaculture products' trade specifically organized at the regional level for the Mediterranean countries. The FAO Yearbooks of Fisheries Statistics and Fisheries Trade Products provide records of national and international fisheries trade as a whole. Annual fisheries statistics are also stored on an FAO database, called FISHDAB. As yet, aquaculture statistics are not separated.
One international marketing information service available to the region is INFOFISH, although it does not differentiate aquaculture products as yet. INFOFISH assists the fishing industry and governments by establishing contacts between buyers and sellers of fish products, and providing technical information and advice on post-harvest aspects of fisheries, such as handling, processing, equipment selection, and quality assurance. INFOFISH is based in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, and its working language is English.
INFOFISH is one of four regional services, the others being in Africa (called INFOPECHE), the Arab Countries (INFOSAMAK), and Latin America (INFOPESCA). INFOSAMAK has information most relevant to the Mediterranean region. This network of services produces a fortnightly news bulletin called "Trade News", in English, French, Spanish and Arabic. This deals with prices, cold storage holdings, short-term market trends, and business opportunities. The network also publishes a two-monthly magazine called "INFOFISH International" (incorporating Marketing Digest) in English, which contains articles on market analysis, new products, processing, packaging, equipment, and other aspects of fisheries, including aquaculture, with summaries in the other three languages. Again, as yet, little information is relevant to aquaculture in the region.
A fifth member of the service is the FAO computerized system of fish marketing called GLOBEFISH. This database stores original information collected by INFOFISH and the other regional services on such things as production and trade statistics, price series, the supply and demand situation, information on aquaculture, investment, joint ventures, and general economic data relevant to fisheries. Specific searches are made on request. FAO also produces "Globefish Highlights", which is a quarterly analysis of medium trends. It is based on the information in the databank and is distributed as a supplement to the "Trade News" (above) in four languages.
Another valuable source of marketing information for the trade is the "Eurofish Report", published by Agra Europe. This is a fortnightly information newsletter on trade and production activities in Europe, and of interest to Europe in dealing commonly with fisheries and aquaculture products, and relevant EEC legislation.
Many national producers' associations (such as associations of trout farmers, oyster farmers, mussel farmers, etc.) provide some specific information for the trade, collected with a view to the particular interests of their members.
The public has access to information on national tonnages and price statistics from auction markets at most of the landing harbours and on the leading national markets (such as Rungis in France, and Milan in Italy) of all the EEC countries. Such information is not always available or readily accessible in the other countries. Also, periodically, the national trade commissions make reviews of importers, exporters, and fish trade in the other countries of major importance to the national trade.
Specific advertising of products through the media, and quality labelling and brochures for consumers, with presentation of products, recipes, etc., exist to a limited extent for trout, mussels, and oysters in France, for mussels in Italy and Spain, and for trout in Italy. They are usually published by producers' associations, often with financial assistance from government fisheries marketing authorities. All other products are marketed without any specific information effort.
Strict rules for hygiene and sanitary control are enforced by the fisheries authorities of the three principal countries involved in the trade of live fish products (France, Italy, and Spain), including sanitary labelling and compulsory depuration for all products imported from non-sanitary safe areas, and from all non-EEC countries.
At the local level there are several special bulletins and newsletters to be found in the major production centres, as well as articles in local and regional journals on a wide range of events in the aquaculture sector. For example, a private company in France, Stratege Telematique, began in 1986 to advertize for electronic information on product prices, buying and selling of farms, and seed collection. The information is available on the national telephone network through the widely distributed "MINITEL" terminals.
1.7 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
There are no international or bilateral technical assistance projects in the region regarding the trade of aquaculture-related fisheries products. The most important technical assistance projects in the sub-sector are INFOFISH and INFOSAMAK - the regional marketing information and advisory services specializing in fisheries, but in Asia and the Pacific, and in the Near East regions, respectively. INFOFISH was financed at its inception by the Government of Norway for a three year period. It is now partly financed by the Government of Norway, by income from its services and publications, and by contributions from its member countries. INFOSAMAK is financed by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP). Although aquaculture information is not separated as yet, these two services provide information to the sector in the Mediterranean directly, and their publications contain many useful articles on marketing aquaculture products.
There have been several international and bilateral aid projects for aquaculture in the region, particularly for assistance in the elaboration of national development planning, research, and training. At times consumption and marketing have been included as sub-components. For example, the Mediterranean Regional Aquaculture Project (MEDRAP), a regional aid project funded by the UNDP and the Government of Italy between 1980 and 1987 for transfer of technology and training in aquaculture concerning all Mediterranean countries, placed some emphasis on regional marketing. Two new and independent projects may be funded by these same donors for the region in 1989, both executed by FAO. Also a national project in Greece, funded by UNDP and executed by FAO, to assist in the elaboration of a technical plan for development of marine and inland aquaculture included a marketing study.
<section>4</section>
2. PRODUCTION OF FISH AND SHELLFISH IN THE REGION
2.1 Characteristics of production in the region
2.2 Regional production data
2.3 Production systems and practices in region
2.4 Producers in the region
2.5 Organizations of producers
2.6 Financial investment by public and private enterprises
2.7 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
2.8 Capital assistance projects in the sub-sector
2.1 Characteristics of production in the region
In the region different forms of aquaculture production developed along almost completely separate lines until the end of the seventies. This was probably due to the diversity of the countries in the region. Only in the 1970s was aquaculture recognized in the most advanced countries as an activity with its own identity, and subsequently attempts have been made to consider it as a separate economic and important sector.
Pond culture of freshwater fish, in the form of carp culture, was probably introduced to the Mediterranean region through the ties with Central Europe during the 19th century. It progressed slowly, remaining mostly a marginal activity for landowners involved in agriculture and animal husbandry. Carp and tilapia farming developed in the late 1940s as a specific venture by a number of kibbutz in Israel, and eel farming and later catfish farming appeared in Italy. Momentum was then increased in Egypt as a means to satisfy the ever growing protein needs of the country.
In addition to pond culture of warmwater fish, trout farming started commercially in Western Europe only in the second quarter of the 20th century, but it has since developed actively as an intensive and even superintensive industry in the most advanced EEC member countries of the region. However, the progressive development of techniques for the production of large fish above pan-size and toward sea-farming, which is presently very active in Northwest Europe (for sea trout and salmon), remain marginal throughout the Mediterranean region. This situation is expected to remain because of the high temperatures of seawater in the summer months for those fish.
In the late 19th and early 20th centuries, some lagoon fisheries in Northern Italy and the Southern Atlantic coast of France were improved through the introduction of elaborate water and fish management techniques. Such activities introduced a primitive form of aquaculture ("marais à poissons" in France, and "Vallicoltura" in Italy). In the late 1960s and early 70s, the introduction of artificial seed production techniques for sea bass and sea bream was expected to inaugurate a new phase of aquaculture development. The high investment costs and low survival in the extensive conditions resulted in the use of only a limited number of fry produced.
The extensive and semi-intensive farming of brackishwater fish in such conditions today is not expected to become an important component of further aquaculture development in the region. However, the hatchery production of high value marine fish, such as sea bass and sea bream, initiated for lagoon farming is now reaching the stage of a valuable economic venture in a more intensive approach. Much is expected from the present development of intensive marine fish farms in onshore tanks, and particularly in net-pens, along the Mediterranean coastline.
Shellfish culture began on the Atlantic Coast of France and Spain in the first quarter of the 20th century. It developed rapidly as a highly profitable venture and was introduced to the Mediterranean in the main French lagoon (Thau) and later to Italy. Mussel and oyster culture in France and Italy represent by far the main part of the aquaculture production of the region. The growth of the bivalve farming industry was severely hit at times through fears for spreading the risk of human diseases (such as cholera), and through outbreaks of natural diseases which caused massive mortalities in some production beds, and which eventually required introductions of substitute oyster species. However, shellfish culture has now expanded to Yugoslavia, Albania, and Greece, and it is expected to develop as a growing business in other countries in the region. New opportunities, particularly clam farming and offshore farming of mussels and oysters, should ensure that shellfish farming will
remain the dominating sub-sector of aquaculture.
Culture techniques for species of crustaceans (particularly marine shrimps) suitable for the region moved from the research and development phase in the laboratory in the 1970s. Some commercial production is being implemented in one or two countries, but the scale of operation is small.
Experimental culture of seaweed has been attempted on a limited scale, but no consistent commercial development is expected in the foreseeable future.
2.2 Regional production data
Detailed tables of regional aquaculture production, by country and by species or group of species, for the years 1984, 1985 and 1986, have been prepared (see Annex, Tables 4, 5, and 6). These tables were assembled from data provided by FAO on the basis of information sheets distributed to fisheries statistics departments of the countries concerned. Even then all the information was not exactly in the same form, and did not deal with the same species. Therefore corrections and adjustments have been made to the data using factual information published in mission and field reports, data published in national professional journals, where available, and information provided by individuals knowledgeable of the countries concerned.
The data in the survey discount, as much as possible, all production regarding:
- bivalve fisheries on beaches and estuaries (particularly for mussel catches for Italy, and clam and cockle catches for Portugal and Tunisia),
- brackishwater fish catches in coastal lagoons and salt-pans where no specific human management is taking place, other than the installation of traps in the lagoon outlets to the sea (this particularly concerns catches in lagoons in Albania, Egypt, Greece, Italy, Portugal, Tunisia, and Turkey), and
- fisheries in inland lakes, water barrages, and reservoirs where not culture-based, that is, supported by regular restocking of fingerlings (this particularly concerns barrage fisheries in Algeria, and lake fisheries in Albania and Egypt).
All data have been included to the nearest metric tonne when precise values were available, and rounded to the closest ten or hundred tonnes when only one estimate was available for two or three different years.
With these qualifications, the total aquaculture production for the 18 countries of the region was calculated to be:
- 1984: 484 194 t
- 1985: 474 291 t (2% decrease from 1984)
- 1986: 530 755 t (11.9% increase from 1985, and 9.6% from 1984).
The annual average production (rounded up) is 496 000 t. By comparison, the data for the region estimated in the world aquaculture production statistics by country made by the UNDP/FAO Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (ADCP) in 1987 (ADCP/REP/87/25) give:
- 534 355 t for combined 1984 and 1985 estimates,
- 504 596 t for 1986 estimates.
The lower values of the survey, given for 1984 and 1985, are due mainly to the elimination of production corresponding to the capture of fish from lagoon fisheries, and the shore fishing of bivalves. The higher value for 1986 is due to the under-estimation by ADCP of bivalve production in France. However, all these values remain only estimates, and the survey includes some data which are probably excessively low values, and some which are probably high for the production of certain species in some countries.
For small amounts of production, such as marine fish, the effect of wrong estimates on the total is marginal; for example, the sea bass and sea bream production in Italy, which represents most of the marine fish production in the region, did not remain exactly at 250 t for each of the three years, but to separate the precise tonnage of the lagoon fisheries in Italy from that of actual aquaculture production for these two species is practically impossible.
For large production volumes, errors are highly significant for the credibility of the totals; for example, the drop of 12 859 t recorded for mussel production for Spain alone accounts for more than the drop in the total regional production between 1984 and 1985: and the accumulated increase of 40 506 t of bivalve production in France and the mussel production in Spain accounts for almost 75% of the increase in the total regional production between 1985 and 1986.
The two greatest possible sources of error in that respect are the production of mussels in Spain, and the production of freshwater fishes in Egypt. The estimates of aquaculture production in Egypt by the national agency responsible are in excess of 70 000 t, while other sources report only 30 000 t. The value used in the survey is the average of data reported for 1985 by an FAO mission which estimated 31 299 t from private farms, 5 300 t from government farms, 30 t from cage farming practices, and 12 500 t from rice-cum-fish culture. For production in Spain the survey used the data of the national institute of statistics, but other sources cited in "Eurofish Report" quote figures of 182 398 t in 1985, and 187 870 t in 1986. If these data include about 40 000 t from fishing (if these amounts are correct), then the aquaculture production of mussels in Spain might be under-estimated by some 39 000 t in 1985, and by 33 000 t in 1986. Consequently there is a possible average
error in the statistical totals of between -30 000 t and +20 000 t during 1984-86.
In conclusion, rounding off the annual aquaculture production in the 18 Mediterranean countries to about 500 000 t during the period 1984-86 is reasonable at this level of precision. However, there has undoubtedly been an increase in production throughout the period in question. Compared with the FAO figures of 7 841 921 t for global aquaculture production in 1983, excluding marine algae, and 10 240 703 t including marine algae (see FAO/COFI/87/Inf.6) the Mediterranean region is only a minor contributor of aquaculture production with little more than 6% of the world total, algae excluded, and less than 5%, algae included.
Compared to the economic power and trade of fisheries products in the region (see Sections 1.2 and 1.3) the distribution of aquaculture production between the different countries is also highly uneven (see Annex, Table 7). During the 3 years considered by this review:
- Malta and Libya had no aquaculture production at all,
- Algeria, Cyprus, Lebanon, Morocco, and Tunisia had yearly aquaculture production below 1 000 t,
- Albania, Greece, Portugal, Syria, and Turkey had yearly aquaculture productions over 1 000 t and below 10 000 t,
- Egypt, Israel, Italy, and Yugoslavia had yearly aquaculture production over 10 000 t and below 100 000 t, among which only Italy exceeded 50 000 t,
- France and Spain had yearly aquaculture production over 100 000 t.
This distribution pattern within countries has remained remarkably stable with time. During the three years considered here, the order of all countries remained the same, with the exception of Turkey, which moved above Syria in 1985, and then above Albania in 1986. Furthermore, there is no indication toward any change in the order among the dominating position of the major producers. The largest producer, France, contributed 41% of the total aquaculture production of the region in 1984, 42% in 1985, and 44% in 1986. The three largest producers, France, Spain, and Italy, contributed 81% of the total in 1984, 80% in 1985, and 82% in 1986. These three countries are the same as noted earlier, with 76% of the total GNP of the region, 99% of the import trade and 80% of the export trade (both inter- and intraregional) of fisheries groups, including aquaculture species.
Concerning the individual species and groups of species, the bivalves represented by far the major aquaculture commodities in the region. The figures of:
- 1984: 310 751 t (64% of total),
- 1985: 300 424 t (63% of total),
- 1986: 342 354 t (65% of total),
illustrate their domination.
The single most important bivalve product was mussels (Mytilus edulis and Mytilus galloprovincialis), with 63% of the total bivalve production in 1984, 59% in 1985, and 60% in 1986. The second was oysters (Crassostrea gigas and Ostrea edulis), which accounted for the rest of the bivalve production with the exception of a few hundred tonnes of clams (Ruditapes philippinarum). Although the production of O. edulis increased by almost one-third during the period, C. gigas production always outweighed by about 40 to 1.
Nine countries of the region are bivalve producers. The major mussel producers are Spain, France, and Italy (56% of the total 1986 mussel production for Spain alone, 97% for the three countries together). France is by far the major oyster producer (99% of the total 1986 production).
There are new developments in bivalve production in the region but, from one year to another, there are no clear increases or decreases in production trends of one particular bivalve which would indicate a major change in the respective positions of either a species or a producer. Variations in production from one year to another in the major countries are due more to abundance of seed, growth performance, and efficiency of marketing than to any identifiable trend in production performance. But throughout the region there is a continuing trend in increased production.
Countries recently involved in bivalve production (such as Greece and Yugoslavia), as well as the new species being cultured (such as the clams, Ruditapes semidecussata and R. philippinarum), do not yet appear to have the potential to change the current position of the bivalve industry in the immediate future. Clam production, which has increased from 156 t in 1984 to 480 t in 1986 shows greater growth than any other aquaculture species in the region (+208% in 2 years). But, with that exception, short-term variations in production patterns can be attributed to seasonal factors, mentioned above, and mortality due to natural shellfish diseases on mussel and oyster cultivation beds.
From recent technical information new practices in bivalve culture appear to be developing with the offshore farming of bivalves on long-lines. Small operations tested so far appear to be an economic success, but the practice requires the support of adequate legislation, incentives for producers, and collective marketing efforts.
The second most important aquaculture group in the region, after the bivalves, is the pond fishes. These include the carps, tilapias, mullets, eels, catfish, and several other freshwater and brackishwater species. Although all different species in many ways, they can be considered collectively as they are usually grown in earthen ponds using comparable techniques, and often together in polyculture. This group contributed:
- 106 311 t in 1984 (22% of the regional total)
- 108 826 t in 1985 (23%)
- 110 148 t in 1986 (21%).
Pond fish culture is better distributed throughout the region than bivalve culture, with fifteen countries active in the sub-sector. However, an accurate estimate of pond culture production in the three years considered is restricted by the fact chat the data include the standard estimate of 50 000 t for both pond culture and fish-cum-rice culture with mullets, carps, and tilapias in Egypt.
Egypt is the main producer of these freshwater and brackishwater species. The other important producers, each exceeding 10 000 t per year, are Israel, Italy, and Yugoslavia. With the exception of Egypt, where much government attention is given to the development of these species, and the specific case of catfish farming in Italy, this sub-sector of regional aquaculture production does not receive much public or private attention, and it is not expected to influence or greatly increase aquaculture developments in the short term.
The uncertainty of the production statistics, and the lack of a breakdown between species for Egypt, make it difficult to compare species. On the whole the carps remain the main pond fishes produced in the region, but there appears to have been a decline in the late 1970s and early 1980s in favour of tilapias, which now exceed 20% of the total production in Israel and are increasing in importance in Egypt. If the 20 new tilapia hatcheries scheduled in the 1984-87 plan for Egypt become operational, tilapia production should increase greatly.
The third group of important species is the salmonids. Whether grown extensively, through the restocking of reservoirs, or semi-intensively in ponds, or intensively in tanks and cages, salmonids production contributed:
- 66 552 t in 1984 (15% of the regional total)
- 64 386 t in 1985 (14%)
- 77 456 t in 1986 (15%).
Thirteen countries in the region record salmonid production. The three major producers, each above 10 000 t in 1986, are France, Italy, and Spain, with 40% of the 1986 salmonid production for France alone, and 93% for the three countries together. All production is freshwater aquaculture, with the exception of a few hundred tonnes (slightly more than 1 000 t in 1986), produced in seawater, and mostly for pan-size rainbow trout (Salmo gairdneri). Annual production for the three years is similar, but the positive increase in production in 1986 is due to increased production in the two main countries, France and Italy. This is partly due to a real increase in production development in Southwest France, and partly to a greater accuracy of the data.
There is undoubtedly an increasing trend in salmonid production in the region, not only for the production of the traditional pan-size fish but also for larger fish with pink flesh (both trout and salmon) for both direct consumption, and filleting and smoking. However, the high summer temperatures of coastal waters in the Mediterranean region are not favourable to a great development in salmonid culture in saltwater and, with the remarkable development of salmon and sea trout culture in northern Europe, the prices of large fish are less attractive than they were a few years ago.
The fourth group, of marine fish and marine and freshwater shrimps, is currently a minor component of aquaculture in the region. Altogether they contributed:
- 580 t in 1984
- 655 t in 1985
- 797 t in 1986
Although there is a positive 37% increase in production in the two years, total production remains below 0.2% of the regional total. However, economic analysis of operations at farm level show that marine fish culture in cages, together with the culture of clams, can provide the fastest return on investment among all candidate species for aquaculture in the region. As the technology is rapidly approaching a higher level of reliability, greater emphasis is being placed on this sub-sector at both governmental and private levels in several countries of the region, particularly in Cyprus, France, Greece, Italy, Morocco, Spain, and Tunisia. Many projects are presently under study or implementation, and there is a growing belief in the industry that the economic miracle of salmon culture in northern Europe might be reproduced with sea bass and sea bream in the Mediterranean region.
The distribution of aquaculture production per caput between countries of the region is given in the Annex, Table 8. In 1985 the per caput distribution exceeded 1 kg in France, Israel, Spain, Albania, Egypt and Italy, and exceeded 3 kg in the first three. As there is little indication of exports of aquaculture commodities from the region above a few thousand tonnes (for example, Spanish mussels, Italian eels, French oysters, and salmon and carps to Northern Europe; Israeli freshwater prawns to Northern Europe and Switzerland), it must be assumed that the bulk of aquaculture products is consumed in the region. From the data available for food consumption (1984), it appears that the contribution of aquaculture to the national consumption of fish and fisheries products exceeds 10% in Albania, Israel, Egypt, France, Syria, and Yugoslavia, and exceeds 20% in only the first two.
A key to the future development of aquaculture is the availability of 'seed'. Seed production facilities are discussed in detail in section 3.3, but it is appropriate to mention here that the contribution of hatcheries to shellfish production at present is minimal, and hatchery technology is not a limiting factor for further development of the sector as a whole. The recent increase in clam production, for example, is based on hatchery-reared spat.
With regard to pond fishes and salmonids, hatcheries are a normal component of the production cycle; only wild fry are still used for eel and mullet culture. Once again, hatchery technology is not limiting the further development of freshwater fish and salmonid production, but at present cost-effective hatchery production constrains further production of eels and mullets. For marine fish and shrimps, hatcheries are essential components for further production increases, and considerable investment effort is presently being made in the region in such facilities.
2.3 Production systems and practices in region
Present day aquaculture methods can be broadly categorized into three basic systems based on the intensity of production (see ADCP/REP/1986/23):
- extensive aquaculture, for organisms cultured in low density, dependent on natural productivity for food, but possibly assisted by fertilization of the substrate,
- semi-intensive aquaculture, for cultured organisms at higher densities than would be the case in extensive aquaculture, and dependent on both increased productivity, using fertilizers or other waste resources, and receiving supplementary artificial feed,
- intensive aquaculture, for cultured organisms in high densities, dependent on artificial feed for their nutritional requirements, and/or an artificial cultivation container or substratum.
Within these three systems various cultivation practices can be employed. These may be common- to one or more of the systems (for example, culture in ponds or enclosures using either extensive or semi-intensive systems), or specific to one system (for example, suspended culture, or cage and tank culture, which are intensive; or fry restocking which is extensive).
The major production of aquaculture in the region comes from practices which adopt the intensive culture system. The intensive culture of mussels is the largest contributor in terms of tonnage, in particular the raft culture of mussels in estuaries and sheltered bays along the Atlantic coast of Spain, and partly in coastal lagoons on the Mediterranean coast of France. The practice in these two countries accounts for 110 000-120 000 t per year, with individual annual productivities in the order of 50 t/ha equivalent, and more.
The "bouchot" culture practice along the Atlantic coast of France, usually in open bays, produces about 40 000-50 000 t annually, with productivities in the order of 10 to 20 t/ha/year. In recent years there has been an increase in the use of suspended rope culture. This is practised in Albania, in the bays of the Adriatic Sea in Italy and Yugoslavia, and offshore both along the Mediterranean coast of France and the Adriatic coast of Italy. The practice accounts for some 40 000-50 000 t annually, with annual productivities in the order of 10 to 30 t/ha equivalent.
There are a number of other practices in the region which use the intensive system. In order of decreasing importance these are, firstly, the culture of trout and salmon in earthen ponds and raceways. These are practised in freshwater, in practically all cases gravity-fed sources from streams or rivers. The overall production is in the order of 60 000-70 000 t annually, with annual productivities of 20 to 150 t/ha.
This is followed by the intensive cage culture of carps and some trout in freshwater reservoirs, and of salmonids and marine fishes in sheltered bays. The total annual production is below 5 000 t, but annual productivities are of the order of 50 to over 100 t/ha equivalent.
Finally, there is the intensive tank culture in raceways and circular tanks using pumped water (fresh, brackish, or marine) for salmonids, eels, and marine fish. The total production is below 1 000 t per year, with annual productivities in the order of 50 to 100 t/ha equivalent.
In summary, during the period 1984-86, all practices in the region which adopted the intensive system of culture accounted for a total production of some 270 000-280 000 t. This is more than half the total regional production. Of this total some 200 000-210 000 t were bivalves, which require no artificially prepared feed; the remaining 65 000-75 000 t were freshwater and marine fishes, which require the preparation and distribution of a fully balanced diet.
After the intensive system, the extensive system is the next important in terms of its contribution to regional aquaculture production. The major practice which adopts this system is 'on-bottom' farming of oysters, mostly utilizing the natural substrate of the sea in the tidal zone and below, but also in tidal ponds and coastal lagoons. On-bottom farming includes the main part of oyster production in France, and accounts annually for 100 000 to 120 000 t, with annual productivities in the range of 5 to 10 t/ha.
Another practice is rice-cum-fish culture, or the production of a secondary crop of fish in rice fields, which is common to the Nile Delta in Egypt. It contributes annually a little more than 10 000 t of freshwater cyprinids, with annual productivities in the order of 200 kg/ha.
There is also the practice of restocking freshwater ponds and reservoirs each year with hatchery-reared juveniles of trouts or cyprinids (particular to northern Italy, central France, Albania, and Yugoslavia), and restocking coastal lagoons with fry and juveniles of mullets, sea bass, and sea bream (in Egypt and Italy). These are mostly natural or wild resources, supplemented with a small number of hatchery-reared sea bass and sea bream in the 'Valli' of continental Italy. The purpose is for subsequent grow-out. It represents an annual total not exceeding 10 000 t, with annual productivities not exceeding 100 to 300 kg/ha.
Finally there is the practice of on-bottom farming of clams on the substrate of tidal ponds and in the tidal zones of the Atlantic coasts of France and Spain. This represents less than 500 t annually, with annual productivities from 5 to 10 t/ha.
In summary, the contribution of the practices which use the extensive system in the region amounts to some 120 000-140 000 t per year. This excludes many simple practices which use traps and barriers in coastal lagoons, which can account for some 25 000 to 30 000 t each year in the accumulated catches from all Mediterranean lagoons (mainly in France, Greece, Italy, Spain, Tunisia, and Turkey).
Practices which apply the semi-intensive system contribute the least to total regional production at present. The main practice is pond farming of fish in freshwater or slightly brackishwater, mostly using pumped water from drainage and irrigation canals and, to a limited extent, from tidal flows. This practice includes most of the pond fish production in Egypt and Israel, for the polyculture of carps, mullets, and tilapias. It accounts for some 40 000-50 000 t annually, with annual productivities of 2 to 10 t/ha.
Other practices which use the semi-intensive system are minor, and most activities are still experimental in the region. They contribute only a nominal amount to total regional production. In particular they include the culture of marine fish and shrimps in enclosures in coastal lagoons, with the use of fertilizers and/or unbalanced supplementary feed.
The three main geographic areas of production in the eighteen countries described by this region, where the systems and most productive practices are applied, have in fact no physical relationship with the Mediterranean basin. These areas are (i) Galicia in Spain and Normandy in France, where mussels are cultured, contributing together about 140 000 t of yearly regional production, (ii) the Atlantic coast of France (Marennes-Oleron, Arcachon and Brittany) where oysters are cultured, contributing about 110 000 t, and (iii) in the interior of France, in Brittany and Aquitaine for salmonids, and in Dombes for cyprinids, and in western Spain for trout, which together contribute about 50 000 t of yearly production. In summary, just as the countries of the Mediterranean basin import most of their fish requirements from outside the region, they also produce most of their aquaculture products from areas outside the immediate basin.
Within the Mediterranean basin, the main geographic areas of aquaculture production are:
- inland areas of northwest Italy and Yugoslavia, with trout and cyprinids farming, and coastal areas of the northern Adriatic Sea for mussel culture, contributing together some 70 000 t, and
- the flatlands adjacent to the Mediterranean in Egypt and Israel, with semi-intensive farming of fish in polyculture in ponds, contributing some 40 000 to 50 000 t of yearly production.
Outside these areas additional production comes from carp farming in Syria and Turkey, trout farming in Ipiros in Greece, and oyster farming in the Oualidia Lagoon in Morocco. Each contributes less than 5 000 t.
2.4 Producers in the region
Precise information on the number of aquaculture producers in the region is extremely difficult to obtain for those countries which are the largest contributors to regional production, with many producers and practices. It is less difficult for countries with only small production as there are few producers for only one or two practices. For example, in Algeria the only producer is the Government, through the "Office National de l'Aquaculture"; in Cyprus and Lebanon there are a few small-scale private farmers; Cyprus has four private farms with a combined annual production of 50 t of trout, and three farms producing marine fish; in Morocco production is shared between a few small-scale farmers who practise oyster culture on the Atlantic coast, and a development/production project in Nador Lagoon funded directly by the Royal Treasury; in Tunisia where production is shared between one corporation (Aquaculture du Sud Tunisien) in the Sea of Bougrara, several small-scale
entrepreneurs, and the Goverment through the General Commissariat for Fisheries; and in Yugoslavia where all production is shared between a number (unspecified) of cooperatives.
In Turkey all production is shared between some 200 small-scale farmers and independent entrepreneurs, together with 3 or 4 corporations belonging to large agro-industrial holdings. These companies handle a number of commercial food production operations and are now becoming directly involved in aquaculture production; for example, Pinar Deniz, of Pinar Holdings, with the first large marine fish farm at Cesme.
In Israel practically all production (about 99%) is in the hands of 60 collective settlements, or kibbutzim. The rest are with private individuals. All are members of the Fish Breeders' Association or the Tiberias Fishermen's, Organization.
In Greece production is shared between cooperatives and independant farmers, all small- to medium-scale enterprises. In 1986 there were some 181 establishments with 312 permanent workers (according to an FAO study in 1988), and presently 233 establishments with 1 216 permanent and part-time workers, according to government data provided to the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) in 1988.
In Egypt the uncertainty of overall national production data is matched by an equal uncertainty of the disposition of producers. It is possible that about 45 000 t could be produced by the 1 368 private fish farms, which are mostly small-scale; there are also some large commercial farms which exceed 50 ha in area, and large numbers of artisanal rice farmers who produce a secondary crop of fish. About 5 000 t could be produced by the 11 large governmental fish farms. Most private farmers and all government farms obtain hatchery-reared seed at subsidized prices from government hatcheries, and the collection and farm distribution of wild mullet fry is also controlled by the government.
In the three countries which are the major aquaculture producers (France, Italy, and Spain), there are several holding companies in partnership with governmental and regional bodies, as well as agencies, either as majority or minority partners, and there are many private corporations (particularly in trout farming and processing, and in Spain with new ventures in marine aquaculture, for example, in Andalucia). However, most of the production is in the hands of small family enterprises and small cooperatives in all three countries.
Statistics provided to OECD by France listed 9 698 production units, which employed 15 000 people on a full-time basis, with certainly no less than the same number of part-time workers. The part-time workers are particularly important in oyster farms. As 80 to 90% of oyster production is sold in December a considerable quantity of part-time labour is required for sorting, cleaning, and packaging during the period.
In Spain mussel culture in Galicia employs 2 700 full-time workers for the 3 242 rafts or floating platforms, which average about 4 000 m^2 in size.
In Italy freshwater production involved about 600 listed farms in 1987, concentrated in Friuli, Veneto and Lombardy.
In Albania 85 people work in the trout industry producing 350 t. There are 9 units producing carps (400 t) and two new large units under construction. A total of twelve hatcheries produce 17 million carp fingerlings for stocking lakes and reservoirs, and large numbers of people work on the cultivation of black mussels.
There are about 60 private freshwater enterprises in Portugal producing mostly salmonids, but there are new ventures with eel and crayfish in the rice areas, and many small marine farms.
It is important to collect accurate data on employment generated by aquaculture. A study made in 1987 for the French Ministry of the Sea about the aquaculture sector in the region of Languedoc Roussillon reported that in 1985 aquaculture represented some 637 ventures, of which 622 were in shellfish culture and 15 in fish and shrimp culture; these ventures produced 27 115 t of table products (43 t/venture/year), for a total added value of F.F. 211.4 million); they created 1 347 direct jobs (about 1 job for every 10 t produced), of which 64% were at the production level, 9% in support and management of the sector (research, training, administration, demonstration, extension), 14% in supplies to the activity, and 13% were in processing and marketing of the products; and 151 indirect jobs (mainly in transport, services, and communications).
If this employment pattern in the French region of Languedoc Roussillon is applied to the Mediterranean region as a whole, with its present production of 500 000 t, the aquaculture sector in the region would represent about 12 000 ventures, 25 000 direct jobs, and 3 000 indirect jobs.
2.5 Organizations of producers
There is only one international organization of producers active in the region. This is the European Federation of Salmonid Culturists (FES), and it includes all the national salmonid culturists' federations. It assists members in dealing with differences in national legislation, and in regional trade of salmonids (in which the trade in live fish is an essential component).
There are many various national organizations of producers in France, Israel, Italy, and Spain. For example, in Spain there is the Mussel Farmers' Association and the Association of Trout Farmers (which is also a member of FES). In France there is the Comité Interprofessionel de la Conchyliculture (an association of bivalve farmers, particularly oyster farmers), and the Federation Nationale des Pisciculteurs et Salmoniculteurs de France (an association of fish culture farmers, particularly trout farmers, which is also a member of FES). In Italy there is a federation of "vallicoltori" (lagoon farmers), the Federazione Cooperative Pesca, which includes fish and shellfish farming cooperatives, and the Federazione Piscicoltori Italiani, which is also a member of FES. In Israel the Fish Breeders' Association and the local Tiberias Fishermen's Organization includes all fish farmers, and some belong to the National Fishermen's Union. Fish are marketed through a central marketing
board (Tnuva), and the price of carp is government controlled.
In addition there are local associations in the main areas of production. These include a number of producers with common marketing interests; for example, the Oyster Producers' Association of the Arcachon basin in France, which organizes for its members advertising campaigns at national level for the products of the area, and quality labelling for the products. Another similar association is the Organizazzione Produttori Acquacoltori Maremmani, a marketing association of the aquaculturists around Orbetello in Italy.
Local associations are often formed by newly established producers in new industries to strengthen their dealings with government administrative and financial development problems. Examples of this are the Association of Aquaculture Farmers of the Bay of Cadiz, in Spain, and the Syndicate of Marine Aquaculturists in France.
Finally, at the local level, and particularly among the shellfish producers, many small-scale producers are members of production and/or marketing cooperatives. Some of them, as in the case in France, also join particular types of agricultural companies (SICA) which operate with rules and regulations similar to those of cooperatives.
2.6 Financial investment by public and private enterprises
Due to the wide range of social organizations and legal systems in the countries of the region, a considerable range of approaches to financial investment can be identified.
Public involvement is evident in Algeria, Egypt, Morocco, and Syria, with production projects entirely financed by public funds and operated within a public institution. Although they represent an important component of their national production, their combined contribution to total regional production remains minimal. Their total contribution annually is less than 10 000 t in terms of direct production, and not more than 50 000 t when combined with the production of farms within the private or cooperative sectors which use fry and fingerlings provided by government hatcheries.
Public involvement through the semi-public sector plays a consistently more important role. Usually it takes the form of facilities built and operated by companies with a part of their equity in the hands of governmental agencies. This is common practice for ventures in the region producing new aquaculture species, such as sea bass, sea bream, and marine shrimps, or new aquaculture techniques, such as modern valliculture, and bivalve farming offshore. Public involvement may also take the form of projects built and operated by cooperatives, the existence, organization, and financing of which are entirely controlled by governments; for example, the cooperatives in Yugoslavia, and some small-holder farms in Egypt. These activities of the semi-public sector account for about 50 000 t of total aquaculture production in the region.
Governmental and international subsidies in one form or another, either non-reimbursable investment grants, or soft loans for both investment and operating capital, appear to be an ever-present element of aquaculture investment in this region. There are two essential and logical reasons for this: firstly, aquaculture is seen by many national and regional authorities as a sector to which small-scale fishermen and, in general, family-size entrepreneurs should have a privileged access; secondly, aquaculture appears to be one of the few possible ways to create employment and activity in areas with little or no industry at present, and without potential for an industry such as tourism. Small entrepreneurs in such areas do not have the capital or capacity to invest alone, particularly in risky new ventures, and therefore financial aid is needed to help them create business and employment on site.
Such subsidies are arranged both at the international and national levels. One particular example is that of EEC countries, where investors have to apply first for a national subsidy before they have access (in a second step) to direct EEC subsidies. Amounts vary according to the country and region. In areas where aquaculture is already doing well, the accumulated effects of grants, soft loans, and premiums for job creation can remain less than 20% of the structural investment of plant; in high priority areas, and projects of particular interest, such as hatcheries, it can be as high as 70%.
In the region there is little involvement of large national and international holdings at the production level. In fact most governments have more or less taken steps to prevent 'big capital' entering into aquaculture production; for example, in France, between 1981 and 1986, there was a law making it extremely difficult for a corporation to have access to a site for marine aquaculture.
2.7 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
The main single source of technical assistance projects in the region is UNDP, with projects executed by FAO. However, few of these projects operate at the level of producers. For the last ten years the majority of projects have concentrated on assistance services in planning, education, training, and technical and economic studies, usually through visits by international experts, and often repeatedly (see subsequent Sections 3.9, 4.7, and 5.6).
One regional programme, the Mediterranean Regional Aquaculture Project (MEDRAP), was begun in 1980 to assist member countries in the region in technical applications and manpower training. It was funded until 1986 by UNDP. The Government of Italy contributed financially to the project in 1984 and continued until 1987. Although one component of the project was to demonstrate production at three or four sites, this was never achieved. The project had its headquarters in Tunisia.
Expert services have also been provided to some countries through other international bodies, such as United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (Unesco), and OECD, particularly with regard to the management of coastal lagoons for aquaculture.
There are a number of inter- and intraregional bilateral cooperation projects, but only for activities peripheral to the interests of producers. For example, technical assistance for aquaculture development and planning has been provided by France, Italy, and the USA to Egypt; by France to Algeria, and by Italy to Tunisia.
International and bilateral cooperation by non-governmental organizations is practically non-existent, except for Peace Corps volunteers assigned to Egypt.
2.8 Capital assistance projects in the sub-sector
Direct international capital assistance projects for production are almost solely limited to Egypt. Construction of semi-intensive fish farms has been carried out with capital assistance from UNDP for the government farm at El Zawya; and the US Agency for International Development (USAID) provided financing for a model homestead farm, as well as the National Aquaculture Centre, at El Abassa. The World Bank, through one component of a large national loan programme, financed the construction of a large multi-unit farm at Lake Maryut.
Indirect international capital assistance also exists in the form of participation of bilateral development banks in the equity of commercial projects (such as in Tunisia with the Project "Aquaculture du Sud Tunisien" at Bougrara), or soft foreign loans to national development banks for participation in the equity of aquaculture projects (such as the Tunisian Banque Nationale de Développement Agricole).
Although it remains an essential factor for further development of aquaculture in the southern Mediterranean countries, capital assistance for production projects has played a minor role compared with national involvement in the combined financial and capital assistance as described in Section 2.6 particularly the equity investment by government and regional agencies.
<section>5</section>
3. LOCAL INFRASTRUCTURE
3.1 Extension services in the region
3.2 Training of extension agents
3.3 Seed production facilities in the region
3.4 Manufacturers of feed and fertilizers in the region
3.5 Manufacturers of equipment for the industry
3.6 Other services for the industry
3.7 Local credit programmes
3.8 Trade publications for producers
3.9 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
3.1 Extension services in the region
Within the eighteen countries of the region as described the importance and use of extension services varies with the level of public involvement in aquaculture development, and with the centralized organization of assistance to the sector. In general, extension services are not considered by the three main aquaculture producing countries in the region as vital, full-time activities which require nation-wide organization. Neither France, Italy, nor Spain, have any public institution in charge of aquaculture extension services at national level. In part this is due to the fact that different aspects of the aquaculture sector fall under the responsibility of different ministries, each organized in a different way, but it is also due to the fact that at this time capabilities in extension are far from being centralized and therefore possible to make the responsibility of one governmental body.
In most of these countries, technical skills are spread throughout various public agencies dealing with research and development, many universities, and in the private sector. These groups are continuously building up new aquaculture knowledge which they disseminate themselves to farmers. For example, in France more or less professionally organized extension services can be obtained by aquaculturists from six sources: (i) from the Applied Research and Extension Service of the Ministry of Agriculture (CEMAGREF) from its bases in Bordeaux and Montpellier, and from the Technical Institute for Husbandry of Small Animals, which is also under the Ministry of Agriculture, relevant to aquaculture in freshwater and brackishwater; (ii) from the Marine Research and Development Institute under the Ministries of the Sea, of Research and of Industry (IFREMER) from its research centres and field stations in Brittany, Pays de Loire, and Languedoc, and in all French overseas departments and
territories, relevant to aquaculture in marine and brackishwater; (iii) from the National Agronomic Research Institute, under the Ministries of Agriculture and Research (INRA) from its research laboratories and stations in Brittany and Pays Basque; (iv) from various university laboratories and field stations all around the country; (v) from a number of regional bodies, non-profit regional associations, regional development syndicates, and semi-public service firms, usually working in close association with local laboratories and field facilities of universities and research and development institutions mentioned above (such as CEPRALMAR in Languedoc Roussillon); and (vi) from manufacturers, most specifically feed manufacturers, who are particularly active in disseminating information related to improvements in feeding practices and sanitary management.
Each of these bodies operates some form of extension service with farmers associations and local authorities, producing extension material (leaflets, booklets, slide shows, films, technical sheets), organizing regular technical meetings and sessions for producers, and providing organized on-site services to farmers, with regular visits or visits on request. Such services may be provided free of charge, at a nominal cost, or at full cost.
Therefore extension 'agents' in France are usually, at the same time, researchers, planners, technicians, salesmen, or technical consultants. There are probably no more than a hundred full-time extension service agents in the country (who are known as regional aquaculture advisors). Most of them have a university degree, or an engineering degree in agronomy, and have been hired straight from university or after a few years of professional experience. They have highly diversified administrative status, resources and career advancement. In 1986 a group of them created a National Association of Aquaculture Advisors.
The situation in Italy and Spain is similar to that in France, with the same extreme diversity of agencies, institutions, and associations having some involvement in extension services for aquaculture. There are similarities in the organization and objectives of institutions, such as those of CEPRALMAR in Languedoc Roussillon with those of Plan de Explotación Marisqueros (PEMARES) in Andalucia in Spain. Both are regional, both channel public funds to the applied research sector to provide technical support to aquaculture development and arrange regional planning studies and surveys, and both have, with time, recognized the need to extend their involvement to small-scale aquaculturists in the region.
A different situation is found in countries like Greece and Egypt, which have highly centralized aquaculture extension services.
In Greece almost all the extension activity is in the hands of civil servants from the Ministry of Agriculture. A recent report notes that the recruitment of extension officers tends to over-emphasize graduate qualification in biology, and that excessive administrative burden hampers their practical fieldwork. However, in some areas (Louros/Ioaninna, Kavala), extension officers involved in services to relatively traditional aspects of Greek aquaculture (freshwater fish farming, lagoon management, and bivalve production) have a good working relationship with producers and a positive long-term programme for action.
In Egypt all extension services are now provided by the Department of Extension and Training of the General Authority for Fisheries Resources Development (GAFRD) within the Ministry of Agriculture. As the quality of extension services in a previous organizational structure was recognized to be poor, a training programme for extension workers was established at the new El Abassa National Aquaculture Centre in 1980-84. A total of 340 selected individuals underwent technical training on national aquaculture activities, and 90 received further specialized education abroad in various important aspects of aquaculture. Also 9 extension pamphlets were printed in Arabic, and 50 000 brochures were distributed to farmers. However, the service remains ineffective as yet, mainly due to a socio-cultural gap between the extension workers and farmers.
A similar central organization exists in Israel. The Fish Farming Extension Service is part of the Ministry of Agriculture's national Extension Service, and is responsible for economics, marketing, training, and advice.
3.2 Training of extension agents
There is little information on the existence of any specific national courses or training sessions for extension agents of countries in the region, except in the case of Egypt, as mentioned in Section 3.1.
A number of individuals who have become extension agents had opportunities before they were hired to attend one or more of the lectures or the few training courses in aquaculture at the regional level (see 4.1), and some extension agents had opportunities to attend such courses when needed. For example, MEDRAP organized and offered a six-month training course on Mediterranean aquaculture practices at its training centre at Ittica Valdagri, a large commercial farm at Policoro in Southern Italy. Between 1984 and 1987, 67 individuals were trained from twelve countries, Albania (2), Algeria (10), Cyprus (4), Egypt (9), Greece (8), Malta (2), Morocco (6), Portugal (2), Syria (1), Tunisia (11), Turkey (7), and Yugoslavia (5). This was a practical course on an operating farm, and almost all the trainees were government employees operating at the extension level.
3.3 Seed production facilities in the region
Most of the aquaculture production in the region is dependent on the collection of wild seed. This also applies to all production of bivalves; naturally-occurring mussel spat are collected on ropes at the site of cultivation by the farmers themselves, and naturally-occurring oyster spat are collected on special substrate (such as shells, prepared tiles, and plastic structures) hanging from floats or suspended over the sea bed. Because of the unreliability of spat collection in some years, a few oyster hatcheries have been built in the last 10 years in France (Brittany), in Spain (Galicia), and in Morocco (the Mediterranean coast). Although farmers in the beginning showed some reluctance to adapt themselves to the handling of the smaller, individual hatchery-produced spat, they have now become used to them. However, there are still only five oyster hatcheries operating in the region, two in France, two in Spain, and one in Morocco, all producing less than 200 million spat per
year. This is only a nominal contribution to a yearly consumption of oysters in the region which is excess of 10 thousand million.
Spat collection is highly organized in France, the major producing country, and in good spat collection years "it is difficult for hatcheries to operate as profitable ventures. During the spawning season larval density in the major collection areas is monitored by IFREMER by its research institutions. Information of interest to spat collectors is published in local journals. Some farmers specialize in spat collection, and spat is traded intensely from one culture region to another, according to the results of each season.
Mullet and eel production in the region rely entirely on the collection of wild fry. Trout and carp production, on the other hand, rely entirely on a well established network of hatcheries. In France, Italy, and Spain there are private hatcheries operating within growing farms. Most of them serve the owner's farm and sell only limited quantities within the immediate neighbourhood, but some hatchery owners specialize in the production of juveniles or have a business in the production of eyed eggs. Some of them advertize in professional journals for seasonal or year-round sales.
In Egypt, Greece, and Syria, most of the hatcheries are state-built and state-operated, which is a logical approach from the point of view of state controlled development and planning but not for cost-effectiveness. A recent study of aquaculture in Greece commented on the poor production from the public hatcheries and recommended that their operation should be transferred to the private sector. A study on aquaculture in Egypt in 1987 noted for the 9 existing carp hatcheries a nominal total capacity of 115 million fry per year but an actual production of 5 to 55 million fry per year. Government data reports 5 carp hatcheries (for 230 million fry) and 10 fry collection centres in operation (for 200 million fry annually) and 11 large-scale government farms. Albania has twelve carp hatcheries with an annual production of 17 million fry, and trout hatcheries. In Cyprus the Kalopanayiotis Freshwater Experimental Fish Culture Station provides 0.5 million young trout annually to the
private sector.
The newly developing culture of sea bass and sea bream, which is still mainly dependent on the capture of wild fry, is now rapidly moving to hatchery production. At present there are 27 hatcheries in operation, with nominal capacities ranging from 100 000 to 2 million fry per year. These are in Italy (8), France (6), Spain (4), Cyprus (3), Yugoslavia (2), Tunisia (2), Greece (1), and Morocco (1). Total production in 1986 was around 6 million fry, with about 5 million being sea bass. Many of these hatcheries are also farms.
In Greece and Tunisia, where both governments strongly support the development of aquaculture, more than 10 new hatchery projects can be listed, either as being approved or having requested approval. Among them are three public hatcheries with a total planned production of more than 15 million fry per year. In other parts of the region, more than 20 hatchery projects have been approved, are under approval, or are being studied; projected production is in excess of 25 million fry per year. If they are all implemented this could result in an additional 4 000 to 5 000 t of these fish on the market within the next 3 to 5 years.
Shrimp culture in the region also requires hatcheries. Only 5 hatcheries are now in operation. These are in France (2), Italy (1), Morocco (1) and Spain (1). In 1986 total production did not exceed 30 million post-larvae, but two hatcheries only started production in 1987.
With regard to new species, there was a general tendency which began in the 1970s for greater public involvement in the construction and operation of hatcheries. This policy went with the social approach to aquaculture development, which favoured small-scale entrepreneurs in the coastal fisheries communities, and with the general belief that fry would be distributed to the farmers at a subsidized price, if not free of charge. This policy now seems to have been abandoned in the most advanced countries of the region, with a reduction of government investment in pilot and regional demonstration hatcheries and providing the private sector with easier access to subsidies and administrative agreements for hatchery construction. For example, IFREMER in France is now committed to reserve the fry of sea bass and sea bream and shrimp post-larvae from its Mediterranean demonstration hatchery for research and development, and demonstrations, and to sell surplus production only if no
private hatchery can deliver juveniles, and only then at the same fixed price.
A particular example of the trend toward more involvement of the private sector in hatchery investment and production is the case of clam production. Clam culture is mostly based on seed produced in hatcheries and on-grown intensively in specialized nurseries. Both hatcheries and nurseries can be small units requiring limited investment.
An effective start to the rapidly growing activity of clam production took place only in the early 1980s, when the policy toward public hatcheries changed. Therefore, no public clam hatchery was built in any of the three major producing countries (France, Italy, and Spain) but more than 10 private hatcheries began operating. The national clam development project in France arranged to provide the first farmers with spat purchased from a private hatchery at nominal cost. However, the only existing clam hatchery in a non-EEC country in the region is in Morocco, and it was integrated into a large state-run project (Marost).
3.4 Manufacturers of feed and fertilizers in the region
Semi-intensive practices account for only a minimal part of aquaculture production in the region (see Section 2.3, above), and thus only small amounts of supplementary feed and fertilizers are required. These are used mainly in freshwater fish farming, and particularly in Egypt.
There is no specific regional trade in fertilizers for fish farming purposes, and no specific advertizing in the aquaculture related journals. The small quantities of fertilizers and feeds required and used are readily available from resources used for agriculture and animal husbandry. One exception is Egypt where the country is reported to have large quantities of feedstuff reserves but the resources are insufficiently available to aquaculture because of competition with livestock needs.
Specialized fish feed manufacturers are well established in France, Italy, and Spain. The manufacturers are either national subsidiaries of external international holdings (such as Trouw of the Netherlands in the British-Dutch Hendricks Group, which operates under the name Trouvit in France, and Trouw Italia in Italy); or national subsidiaries of internal international holdings within the region (such as the Grand Moulins de Paris group in France, with controlling animal husbandry and fish feed companies in France (Aqualim) and Spain); or either specialized fish feed subsidiaries, or fish feed brands in the hands of national or local animal husbandry feed manufacturers, and which include fish feeds in their product lines (such as Chezzi, Farmix, and Veronesi in Italy; or Sofrada, Gheerbrant, and Ucab (Torrent) in France.
A few of these companies, namely Trouw (in France and Italy), Aqualim (France and Spain), and Dievet (France) now produce feeds for shrimp in their product lines.
Some countries in the region have no fish feed manufacturers at all. These countries import pelleted feed from countries noted above. Albania imports feedstuffs from France; Greece imports from France and Italy; and Morocco imports from France.
Turkey, which has quantities of low cost trash fish available from the Black Sea as well as all vegetable feedstuffs required, only imports small quantities of marine fish feed and feed concentrates from France which are then combined with local meals to prepare moist pellets. There is no technical difficulty for Turkey to manufacture good quality fish feed as required by national producers from the raw materials available in the country. However, feed compound manufacturers do not wish to produce fish feeds as demand is not yet continuous or large enough to make it profitable. Thus the only existing small production available to trout farmers in Turkey comes from public feed factories.
In general, with the exception of one company (Trouw) which alone may market more than a quarter of the fish feed used in the region, feed manufacturers from outside the region, particularly from the active North-Western European countries, have no or little involvement in the regional fish feed trade.
3.5 Manufacturers of equipment for the industry
Equipment manufacturers in the region are heavily concentrated in the three major producing countries, namely France, Italy, and Spain. In addition, there is a considerable presence of equipment manufacturers from outside the region, mainly from North-Western Europe, with particular emphasis on mechanical equipment for water-recycling and treatment (Denmark and Germany), nets and rafts (Norway, United Kingdom), and feeders and graders (again all four countries, as above).
A large number of manufacturers advertizing and selling in the aquaculture sector are companies, branches, or agencies of large national or European industrial manufacturers which produce and sell a wide range of industrial products and depend for only a minor part of their turnover on the aquaculture industry. For example, this is the case of pump manufacturers, many of which are national branches of external international holding companies but which manufacture components or assemble in the region (such as Flygt, which partially manufactures pumps in national companies in France, Italy, and Spain, but which is based in Sweden; or Guinard in France; or Rotos in Italy). This is also the case of most suppliers of aluminium and stainless steel grids, geo-textiles, and plastic netting.
In the region there are many small companies, many of which are family businesses, which manufacture and fabricate equipment and advertize and sell in the aquaculture sector, but only for a part of their sales. This is in particular the case of many fabricators of nets and tanks, or manufacturers of specialized boats and vehicles (such as Poncin in France).
A number of manufacturers do most of their business in the aquaculture sector, and some all of it. These are generally small- to medium-sized enterprises which began to meet the need of a specific activity; for example, equipment for oyster culture (such as Norlac in France), equipment for pond fish culture (such as Giovanni Milanese and Promet Ravagnan in Italy, or Faivre in France), or fibreglass cultivation tanks and transport containers (such as Vitrocontenitori and Poloplast in Italy, and Polywest in France). Some of these manufacturers are small and highly specialized firms, selling a technology and the related equipment together (such as Aquinove for hyper-intensive fish cultivation).
Some aquaculture equipment is exhibited at large international fairs in the region (such as the Agricultural Fair in Paris), but most displays are at specialized aquaculture trade shows. Among those which have a reputed national audience, and which are attempting to gain a more international audience each year, are the Salon des Cultures Marines, of La Tremblade in France (a biennial show specializing in shellfish culture held in the centre of the main oyster culture area of the country, and mostly for oyster culture equipment) and the International Aquaculture Fair of Verona, Italy (a biennial trade show since 1982, held in the centre of the main fish and shellfish culture region of Italy, which aims at an all-aquaculture international scope but which is still much stronger in Italian equipment for fresh and brackishwater aquaculture than in other equipment).
New international aquaculture fairs have appeared recently in Greece at Thessaloniki, in Tunisia at Sfax (within international fisheries fairs) and in Turkey at Istanbul. There is also a growing tendency among the organizers of scientific meetings, either at national level (such as the 1987 National Aquaculture Conferences in Portugal, at Porto, and Spain, in Cadiz), or at international level (as in the 1987 Aquaculture Europe conference in The Netherlands, at Amsterdam), to include trade shows of aquaculture equipment, supplies, and services.
In 1989 the European Aquaculture Society will publish a European Trade Directory of equipment manufacturers and suppliers, services, and other commercial contributors to the sector.
3.6 Other services for the industry
Aquaculturists in the major producing countries have access locally or at national level to a wide range of possible services. Various aquaculture consultancy firms and individuals offer assistance in the preparation of applications for new projects, in design and construction of facilities, in environmental impact studies and water chemistry, in legal expertise for accidental water pollution or feed toxicity, and in the provision of technicians, field veterinarians, and management advisers.
Many of these individuals and service firms, often in competition with others from outside the region, offer their services to countries of the region where aquaculture is still too new or undeveloped for such individuals and Firms to have been established at national level. Such individuals and services are used mostly through international cooperation (such as the development of semi-intensive fish culture in Egypt, and particularly for hatcheries) or through private contracts (such as the development of marine fish hatcheries in Greece).
More than 50 registered service firms and independent specialists with aquaculture references can be found in countries of the region, most of them in France and Italy. However, many of these firms which operate at national or international levels consist of only one individual, or a few associated individuals, who became consultants because of the high unemployment of (marine) biologists in EEC countries. Only a few larger companies which employ staff work consistently both in their own country and throughout the region with full capability to provide biological, technical, engineering, legal and financial services for a large project (such as the three main French service firms, France-Aquaculture, Sepia International, and Aquaservice). The largest of these professional consulting firms, France-Aquaculture, in 1986-87 implemented the first full international turnkey and products-in-hands contract in the region, a sea bass hatchery for the National Aquaculture Centre at
Monastir.
Active in the region are many service firms based outside it. Most are from North-West Europe (such as Clearwater Fish Farming and Fisheries Development Ltd. from the United Kingdom, or the Aquaculture Institute from Denmark, or Sea Farms from Norway), some of which now offer equity financing and project management. There are also firms from USA, such as KCM International Inc. and James Montgomery Inc., which have at times worked in the region, particularly in Egypt, on projects funded by the World Bank (WB) or the USAID.
There are no multipurpose supply firms for aquaculture operating regularly in the region. Some firms in the region, and from outside, offer specific supplies, like Midisel of France (for Artemia and plankton collected in the salt pens of the Compagnie des Salins du Midi), France-Aquaculture (for larval feeds and chemicals), Artemia Systems from Belgium (for larval feeds and Artemia), or from the Federal Republic of Germany (Dohse Aquaristik, for Artemia). Israel, in association with its international programme of technical assistance, provides quasi-government consulting services.
Livestock insurance is available for farmers, predominantly through services from U.K. (such as The Aquacultural Insurance Service); and business services, for investment advice, tax and financial planning, such as Ernst and Whinney.
3.7 Local credit programmes
There are local credit programmes available to aquaculture entrepreneurs in most of the countries of the region but they mostly offer credit for investment. There are few organized credit programmes available for farm operational costs, particularly in those countries where aquaculture is not yet an important national economic activity.
There is no advertizing of available credit programmes, no documentation is distributed, and little information is readily available. The availability and use of credit invariably appears accidentally in statements made in government reports. For example, France reported to the OECD total credit to the sector of some US$ 12 million in 1986, and Italy reported some US$ 40 million.
Credit to aquaculture is considered a high risk activity. It is usually channelled through specialized banks within the public sector; for example, in France credit is handled by Credit Agricole (mainly for freshwater farming investment) and the Credit Maritime Mutuel (mainly for shellfish culture); in Greece it is the Agricultural Bank of Greece, and in Tunisia, the Banque Nationale de Developpement Agricole.
3.8 Trade publications for producers
There are no known trade publications published in the region specifically devoted to aquaculture producers, either for the region or any one country or area. All producers have access to publications concerning the trade of fisheries products (see Section 1.6, above) and to information about the sector as a whole published in professional journals of the region (see Section 4.6), or international ones from outside of the region (such as Fish Farming International and Fish Farmer published in the United Kingdom.
Producers selling on national auction markets (as is mainly the case for mussels) obtain information from the record sheets of those markets, and from the analyses regarding seasonal trends published in periodicals produced by their associations (see Section 4.6). Producers selling on direct contracts usually rely on personal information networks.
One interesting trade source in France is the "Annuaire de la Marée et de l'Aquaculture" (Yearbook of Fisheries Products and Aquaculture), in which any producer can find a full list of all seafood dealers in the surrounding area and around the country.
3.9 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
There are no current technical assistance projects in the surrounding area funded by the international agencies or through bilateral cooperation which are directed at supplying inputs to the producers. MEDRAP, which was initially funded by UNDP and finally by the Government of Italy, terminated in 1987. It provided technical training for potential government extension workers (see Section 3.2, above), and published technical information. Its intentions for a series of demonstration projects were not fulfilled. The provision of extension services at the regional level could have been a major objective of MEDRAP, within its purview of disseminating around the Mediterranean countries the technology and procedures applied in the most advanced countries. However, its action in this field could not be developed because of lack of adequate national counterparts.
Two new but separate regional projects are planned to start in 1989: one is again to be called MEDRAP, to be funded by UNDP, and the other, Aquaculture Development for the Mediterraneran (AQUAMED), to be funded by the Government of Italy.
At the national level there are some specific technical assistance projects involving a small number of producers in highly specialized fields. For example, the IFREMER regional demonstration marine fish hatchery at Palavas-les-Flot (Languedoc Roussillon) samples larvae and fry in all private hatcheries in France and provides in confidence to the owners comparative technical information on the quality of their fry (particularly with regard to spinal column and swimbladder deformities).
<section>6</section>
4. NATIONAL INFRASTRUCTURE
4.1 Manpower training in aquaculture technologies
4.2 Manpower training in management
4.3 Aquaculture research in the region
4.4 Management of credit
4.5 Associations of professionals in the region
4.6 Information for professionals
4.7 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
4.8 Capital assistance projects in the sub-sector
4.1 Manpower training in aquaculture technologies
General education and training in aquaculture is at rather a high level in the countries of the region, particularly those on the north side of the Mediterranean Sea. But as a result of the differences in levels of development of the sector, students in the separate countries have very different opportunities with regard to both education and specialized training in aquaculture technologies.
Technical training and higher-level education (for post-graduates) is practically non-existent in those countries where there is little or no aquaculture. Among these countries is listed Algeria, Cyprus, Lebanon, Libya, Malta, Morocco, Portugal, and Tunisia.
In the other countries, technical training opportunities are well distributed. Many agricultural colleges and vocational schools in the major aquaculture areas of France, Italy, and Spain, as well as in Egypt, Israel, and Yugoslavia, offer courses and technical training in the sector of aquaculture most popular in the area. Often it is no more than basic training with emphasis on fish and shellfish rearing and handling.
In some cases, for example in the main oyster and trout production centres in France (Arcachon, Marennes-Oleron, Southern and Northern Brittany), the schools include more general training in exploitation management for the new, independent aquaculturists; or they concentrate on practical training to prepare specialized aquaculture technicians (bivalve farming, trout farming, etc.). In addition the Association pour la Gérance des Ecoles de Formation Maritime et Aquacole (AGEMA) in La Tremblade, a major oyster farming town where the biennial trade show takes place (see Section 3.5) organizes short-term training courses for workers in aquaculture farms on such topics as long-line bivalve farming, introduction to clam farming, prefattening and fattening clams in earthen ponds, specialization in clam farming, introduction to shrimp farming.
Undergraduate education in aquaculture alone is not usually offered at any of the national universities, university institutes of technology, or the various types of agricultural colleges. General education in aquaculture is often included in an associated field, such as animal husbandry, fisheries, agriculture, food science, with special coursework and practical sessions in one or more disciplines of aquaculture. These courses are usually open to students in the biological fields, such as animal biology, marine biology, ecology, animal husbandry, veterinary and agricultural science, rather than to other fields also relevant to the sector, such as finance, management, and particularly engineering. This point was noted in a recent study of the sector in Greece, where there was a general tendency to associate aquaculture with biological studies, as it was a promising field of employment for graduates in biological sciences, and to under-value the importance of other fields in
the multidisciplinary requirements of aquaculture.
Most post-graduate education which includes coursework is not directed totally toward aquaculture but to aquaculture in combination with another major subject, such as fisheries, marine biology, or animal husbandry. For example, in France all post-graduate studies which offer specific courses in aquaculture are, in reality, in the biological sciences, with the exception of a new programme of agricultural economics at the National Institute of Agronomy in Paris. Currently there are no institutions in any of the countries of the region which offer post-graduate programmes in aquaculture engineering or aquaculture economics which have produced specialists now employed in the region.
As with the sector in the other regions of the world, there has been the tendency to involve aquaculturists with a biological background in aspects of economics, management, administration, planning, engineering or construction, and for which they had no training. Consequently, this has resulted in numerous project failures, with under-production and cost over-runs. Also, the administration and management of the sector either at regional or national levels has, for the same reason, been staffed with officers who have either no training in aquaculture at all, or mainly a biological background.
Awareness of these problems began in the early 1980s, and attempts have been now made to overcome them. For example, the University of Montpellier has established specific post-graduate education in Aquaculture Projects Management to provide the essential basic education and training in aquacultural biology to non-biologists, and essential management and aquacultural engineering to biologists.
Students from countries in the region with no undergraduate, graduate or post-graduation courses in aquaculture, have access to aquaculture education and training in other countries where it exists. For example, between 1984-87 the MEDRAP project, funded by UNDP and the Government of Italy, offered aquaculture training abroad to 10 students from Algeria, 4 from Cyprus, 9 from Egypt, 6 from Morocco, 1 from Syria, 11 from Tunisia, and 7 from Turkey. MEDRAP also organized a number of short-term courses, for example, a two-week session on shellfish culture in Spain was held for 12 Spanish trainees and 12 trainees from six other Mediterranean countries. The training included lectures and farm visits in Galicia, 14 lectures by Spanish, French, Italian, and Yugoslavian specialists, and a follow-up visit to other aquaculture facilities in Andalucia.
In France between one-third and one-half of the students in post-graduate education in French universities are foreigners, most of them coming on fellowships provided either by bilateral or international funding agreements. More than a quarter of them remain in France to work on doctorate degrees in research laboratories or at pilot stations. Also; since 1984 more than 20 students from Spain have received medium- to long-term practical training in French aquaculture laboratories and field stations through a bilateral agreement between the major French and Spanish institutions concerned with aquaculture development. Ten French specialists lectured in aquaculture training sessions in Spain as a part of the agreement.
4.2 Manpower training in management
Manpower training in management is weak and virtually non-existent in the region. As described in Section 4.1, only recently have opportunities been introduced for such training in France, at the National Institute of Agronomy of Paris (in agricultural economics, with courses in aquaculture economics) and at the University of Montpellier, with a course in Aquaculture Project Management.
4.3 Aquaculture research in the region
There is no complete list of aquaculture institutes and agencies currently carrying out research in the region. A partial list was made by the Netherlands Universities Foundation for International Cooperation (NUFFIC) in 1986 in a report to the EEC on expertise in aquaculture and related fields within the member states of the EEC, and therefore it only contained information for those countries of the Mediterranean which were members of the EEC.
The report noted seven research institutes in France, but three in fact have no involvement with aquaculture and three others are institutes of IFREMER; thus there is only one central institution for aquaculture research in the country. There were three institutes in Greece, of which one was a production farm, thus leaving only the National Centre for Oceanography and Marine Research at Agios Kosmas, and the University of Thessaloniki as the main research centres in the country. There were five institutes in Italy, of which one is FAO in Rome (which does not undertake any research in fisheries or aquaculture, other than collate information), two only deal with fisheries research, thus leaving only the Universitá degli Studi di Pisa and the Istituto di Biologia del Mare at Venice as active centres. There were five institutes in Portugal (excluding the Acores) among which one has no involvement with aquaculture, thus leaving the Institute Nacional de Investigaçao das Pescas
(INIP) and the Aquario Vasco de Gama, both at Lisbon, the Universidad de Algarve, and the fish station at Vila do Conde, although all have little research activity. Finally, there were five institutes in Spain, which are all facilities of either the Institute de Investigaçiones Pesqueras or the Institute Español de Oceanografia.
Two countries of the region currently have no aquaculture research base at all; these are Libya and Malta. Three others, namely Albania, Lebanon, and Syria, have no information available about established research but some limited work may exist.
In Algeria, Cyprus, and Morocco, aquaculture research is carried out within one government institution. In Algeria this is undertaken by the Centre d'Etudes et de Recherche pour la Pêche et l'Aquaculture (CERP) at the production and experimental facilities of the Mellah lake marine farm and the Mazafran experimental freshwater farm of the Office National de l'Aquaculture; in Cyprus at a single experimental facility, the Kalopanayiotis Freshwater Experimental Fish Culture Station, belonging to the Fisheries Department of Cyprus, which is planning to build a new marine facility at Meneov; and in Morocco at a facility designed for production at the Nador-based Marost project under direct control of the Royal Palace, with participation of the Institute of Fisheries. The work in all three countries is predominantly empirical involving practical production trials rather than organized basic or applied research.
In Egypt, Greece, Portugal and Turkey, several groups work in teams on research projects in university laboratories, faculties of agronomy, and within the relevant state departments of agriculture and/or fisheries. However, most of them have only outdated and under-equipped aquaculture facilites, if any at all. In general the groups consider aquaculture research from a purely academic and only biological point of view. Their contributions to the production of aquaculture research results, although of interest to their respective countries as they mostly apply or test techniques developed elsewhere, are minimal at the regional level. As they have no proper organization to transfer good results to the industry, private entrepreneurs do not give them much consideration.
In Tunisia and Yugoslavia there is good applied research work carried out at a number of well-equipped and properly staffed aquaculture research laboratories and/or field stations. In Tunisia the main laboratory is the Centre National d'Aquaculture of Monastir, under the General Commissariat for Fisheries, which is established on a small coastal lagoon. The Centre has fattening facilities (for extensive production in the lagoon, semi-intensive in ponds, and intensive in cages and raceways), and a modern marine fish hatchery which started operation in January 1987. Other smaller facilities, of lower quality, exist at Ghar El Melh and Oued El Akarit. In Yugoslavia the major research is performed in the Republic of Croatia, with the Institute for Oceanography and Fisheries in Split as the main investigation centre. Other stations/institutions are located in Rovinj, Dubrovnik, and Zagreb. Other Republics (Slovenia at Portoroz, and Montenegro at Kotor) have their own research
facilities. However, both countries when beginning new aspects of mariculture (marine fish hatcheries) imported engineering and technical knowledge from abroad for their pilot and commercial facilities.
In Israel and, to a greater extent because of their size, France, Italy and Spain, research is adequate not only to fulfil practically all the national requirements but also to export technologies abroad. However, these countries also at times import new aquaculture technologies from abroad for new projects.
It is not useful here to list all the governmental institutions, university laboratories, quasi-governmental and non-profit private laboratories, and field station facilities in these four countries which are active in aquaculture research. Several institutions often overlap through their work, and some join forces and use laboratories and field facilities operated in common or under the management of one or other of the partners.
In Israel the main aquaculture research institutions are under the Ministry of Agriculture. There are the Israeli Oceanographic and Limnological Research (IOLR) laboratories at Haifa and at Kinneret, the Fish and Aquaculture Station at Dor, an Intensive Fish Culture Unit at Ginossar, and a Fish Diseases Laboratory at Nir David. There is also a field laboratory, the National Centre for Mariculture, at Eilat. Research is also carried out at the Hebrew University of Jerusalem, Tel Aviv University, Bar Ilan University, and Technion (Israel Institute of Technology).
In Italy the main institutions are the Universities of Rome, Parma, and Padova, the National Research Centre, the Ente Sviluppo Agricolo del Veneto, and the Ente Nazionale Energia Electrica. The main field laboratories are those of Lesina and Orbetello (lagoon mariculture), Civitavecchia and Milan (aquaculture in warmwater effluents and pathology), Udine (pathology), Padova (trout culture), the Centro Ittiologico Valli Veneto (CIVV) at Comacchio (Valliculture), formerly called Societá Italiana Reproduzione Artificiale Pesci (SIRAP) at Chioggia (marine fish propagation).
In Malta the national university has supported a number of pilot projects with studies on marine fish and shellfish at the Marine Biology Station; and there has been some work on introduced freshwater species.
In Spain the main institutions are the Institute Nacional de Oceanografia, the Institute de Investigaçiones Pesqueras, and the Universities of Cadiz and Malaga. The main field laboratories are those of Vigo, Santiago de Compostela, Santander (mussel culture), Cadiz (aquaculture in salt pans), Mar Menor (aquaculture in salt pans), and Tarragona (fish and shrimp propagation).
In France, excluding its overseas territories where research is also carried out, the main institutions are the Institut Français pour l'Exploitation de la Mer (IFREMER), the Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique (INRA), the Universities of Marseilles, Montpellier, Bordeaux, Caen, and Brest. Field facilities include (i) the IFREMER multidisciplinary centre (nutrition, pathology, reproduction, and engineering) at Brest; the La Tremblade laboratory (oyster pathology and genetics); and the mariculture field stations in Noirmoutier (fish and shrimps), Bouin (bivalves), and Palavas-les-Flots (fish and shrimp propagation): (ii) the INRA research laboratory at Jouy-en-Josas (fish physiology), and the stations at Paimpont and St Pee-sur-Nivelle (freshwater fish culture): (iii) the IFREMER/INRA salmon culture complex in Brittany; and (iv) the University of Languedoc laboratory at Sète (marine fish propagation).
Aquaculture research objectives in each country vary with the main aquaculture products and new priorities. Israel concentrates on warmwater culture of freshwater and marine fishes. Italy is also particularly active in warmwater aquaculture of freshwater fishes, and doing much in all aspects of lagoon-related aquaculture. Spain recently started an important programme in fry propagation of marine species of both shellfish and fish, as well as the rehabilitation of salt pans for aquaculture. France has active research on both coldwater and warmwater fish species, marine shrimp, and all aspects of bivalve culture.
Research in aquaculture engineering and aquaculture economics is still very limited. However, both are now acknowledged as research topics of interest and IFREMER in France, for example, has developed a specific aquaculture engineering research team in its centre at Brest, and is building up specific aquaculture economics expertise in its centre at Nantes.
4.4 Management of credit
Management of credit in the region is usually either a component of agricultural credit management (always for inland fish culture, frequently for coastal fish culture, and infrequently for shellfish culture), or of fisheries credit management (frequently for shellfish culture, and infrequently for coastal fish culture). Most of the credit required is provided by the national development banks, and invariably strongly oriented toward the cooperative sectors of agriculture and fisheries. For example, in Turkey fish farmers can obtain operating credits to meet 100% of the cost of fry, eggs, feed, and chemicals required through soft loans from the Agricultural Bank of Turkey.
For traditional forms of aquaculture in the major production countries, such as oyster culture in France, or trout culture in France, Spain, and Italy, or valliculture in Italy, or warmwater fish culture in Israel, the banks have long-established specific tables and standards to evaluate aquaculture enterprises, and staff experienced in the financial management of such businesses. But this is not the case for new forms of aquaculture, particularly clam culture, intensive marine fish culture, and shrimp culture.
This is not the case for all forms of aquaculture in countries where the sector is just beginning to play an important economic role and is reliable. In such cases banks have to recruit new personnel and establish specific standards, or seek advice from external consultants, including foreign consultants, for the newly developing aquaculture countries in the region. As pointed out in Sections 3.1 and 3.6, most of these recruits and consultants have little training and experience in non-biological aspects of aquaculture.
The Agricultural Bank of Greece, faced with the establishment of many new mariculture farms, set up a programme to train 50 employees in technical assessment of aquaculture enterprises and 25 staff in financial assessment. The background of these employees and details of their training are not known.
4.5 Associations of professionals in the region
At the level of research and pre-development, and to a lesser extent in new fields of aquaculture production, the only international association of professionals of importance in the region is the former European Mariculture Society, which recently changed its name to the European Aquaculture Society (EAS). Membership of EAS is open to both company and individual membership from the sector of any country. EAS organizes scientific meetings, produces collected reprints of publications presented in such meetings and on specific topics, and informs its members of new reviews and technical papers, scientific meetings, job opportunities, and general information of interest for researchers and extension workers. The EAS has its headquarters in Belgium, and is an affiliate of the World Aquaculture Society (WAS) based in the USA.
For aquaculturists in the minor producing countries of the region the EAS is practically the only existing professional link.
Also regional, but at the production level and with membership restricted to national federations of salmon and trout growers, is the European Federation of Salmon Growers, or Fédération Européenne des Salmoniculteurs (FES). FES takes care of the legislation and business interests of its members (see Section 2.5).
In the major producing countries there are several professional associations. All are very active, both at national and local levels, and members join to receive information and services.
In Israel the Fish Breeder's Association controls production and assists the farmers in many ways; for example, membership includes management of a processing and packaging plant through which about one-fifth of the production is processed and in large part exported. The Association also supervises export of Israeli fish culture technology, and maintains the national production statistics.
In Italy, the "Consorzi" (associations) of valliculture owners and operators, the Federazione Cooperative Pesca, and the Trout Culturists Association are active organizations which professionals join for information.
In France the main association at the research/pre-development level is the Association pour le Développement de l'Aquaculture (ADA), and its regional affiliates (ADACO, ADAM). It produces a liaison letter, undertakes occasional studies of general interest for aquaculture development, and publishes the journal "Aquarevue" (see Section 4.6). It also represents France in the European Aquaculture Society. At the production level, there are organizations such as the Federation Nationale des Pisciculteurs Salmoniculteurs, and the Comité Interprofessionnel de la Conchyliculture (CIC). Both of them publish a journal for members (see Section 4.6). The CIC also maintains its own production statistics, and is the partner of governmental agencies for the implementation of advertizing campaigns. A particular feature of the Federation Nationale is that it operates a purchasing cooperative for its members. Both provide administrative information services and legal advice.
Information on associations in Spain is more difficult to obtain. The Asociaçion Española de Acuicultura is a national affiliate of the EAS.
4.6 Information for professionals
At the regional level there are two main sources of general aquaculture information for professionals, one in English, one in French.
The one in English comes from outside the region through a number of trade magazines which are directed at professionals as well as producers. One is the monthly trade paper "Fish Farming International", which is published in the UK. The paper aims at a world-wide aquaculture audience, but still focuses on Western European aquaculture, and more particularly North Western Europe salmonid culture. It has recently published a number of issues with articles on events in Mediterranean fish culture, but it is limited in information about bivalve culture and warmwater pond fish culture, two essential aquaculture items for the region. Similarly from the UK is "Fish Farmer", which is also directed at producers but has technical articles of interest to professionals, and recently introduced an international section. From the USA there is "Aquaculture Magazine". This is mostly directed toward the sector in the USA, but also has articles of wider interest.
The source in French is the bi-monthly "Aquarevue", published in France for distribution throughout the French-speaking countries world-wide. Although devoting most of its attention to aquaculture in mainland France and French overseas territories, it has recently published a number of papers on events in the Mediterranean. However, it is poor in information about warmwater aquaculture.
With regard to scientific information, in addition to that disseminated in seminars, symposia, and congresses, professionals in the region can consult a number of publications obtained on subscription. These are Aquaculture (the Netherlands), Aquaculture and Fisheries Management (UK), Aquaculture Engineering (UK), Bamidgeh/Journal of Aquaculture (Israel), Bulletin Français de la Pêche et de la Pisciculture (France), Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences (Canada), Diseases of Aquatic Organisms (Federal Republic of Germany), Journal of Fish Biology (UK), Journal of Fish Diseases (UK), Progressive Fish Culturist (USA), Transactions of the American Fisheries Society (USA), etc.
Information about the different activities of aquaculture can be found in various periodicals published in the languages of the region. For example, in Italian there is the "Rivista Italiana de Piscicoltura e Ittiopatologia", the journal of the Freshwater Fish Culture Association, with technical and review papers on fish culture in Italy and abroad; and the "Corriere della Pesca e dell'Acquacoltura", the bi-monthly of the Federation of Fishermen's Cooperatives, with articles of general interest on small-scale fisheries and aquaculture, and items regarding administrative and financial aspects of concern to Italian farmers. There is also "II Pesce", a tri-monthly high-quality publication by Pubblicitá Italia, with internationally oriented papers on fisheries, aquaculture, and fish products processing and marketing.
In English there is "The Israeli Journal of Aquaculture" ("Bamidgeh"), the quarterly on aquaculture in Israel, published by the Fish Breeder's Association, with scientific and review papers on the sector. In French there is "Cultures Marines" published by the Editions du Cabestan, the bi-monthly of the interprofessional committee of French shellfish culturists, with papers and news regarding new opportunities, legal and administrative problems, and reports on the activities of the committee; also "La Pisciculture Française", the tri-monthly bulletin of the National Federation of Fish Culturists, with technical papers and information on salmonid culture in France and foreign countries; and "Equinoxe", published by IFREMER as a magazine on the living resources of the seas, with technical and general papers on fisheries and aquaculture in France and overseas. Finally, in Croatian there is "Ribarstovo Jugoslavije", a bi-monthly with scientific reports and review papers on
aquaculture in Yugoslavia, including some papers on freshwater fish culture in other countries; and in Hebrew there is "Dayig Umidge" published in Israel.
Scientific publications in aquaculture are produced by the journals and collected reprints of the major aquaculture institutions and professional societies listed in 4.3. For example, the EAS based in Belgium publishes a regular newsletter for members which also contains the contents of some abstracts of the more important aquaculture journals. It also publishes special volumes on aquaculture technology available at reduced rates to members. The WAS produces the Journal of the World Aquaculture Society which is free to members.
The largest resource of information for scientists and technical professionals in the sector is FAO in Rome, Italy. FAO produces a series of publications many of which are specific to aquaculture. These are FAO Fisheries Reports, FAO Fisheries Technical Papers, and FAO Fisheries Synopses. All titles are categorized and lists are regularly produced. Some documents are free and others are sold at cost. It maintains a large serial collection on all subjects related to fish and fisheries received from fisheries institutes, government departments, and commercial publishers throughout the world, together with a special collection of documents on a country basis, and subject files.
FAO maintains a database in which aquaculture information can be found. ASFA is an international bibliographic database providing comprehensive coverage of publications on the science, technology, and management of marine and freshwater environments. The database can be searched via terminals and personal computers to retrieval systems in Europe and North America; the database is also available on compact disc. Aquaculture Abstracts from ASFA are available in printed form through subscription.
4.7 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
Technical assistance projects with objectives relevant to the national infrastructure are not common in the region. One project funded at an interregional level was MEDRAP, the FAO/UNDP 1980-86 project noted above which had components of research and training.
A number of technical assistance projects have taken place through bilateral cooperation; for example in Egypt (from technical support from Italy, Norway, and the USA), Tunisia (from Italy), and Algeria (from France). Most of these projects had components of education, through scholarships and fellowships abroad; for example, USAID provided support for 34 individuals from Egypt to study for post-graduate and graduate degrees in aquaculture overseas. At present there is no major bilateral technical assistance project under implementation.
Three projects in Egypt have been funded by cooperation from the Netherlands (Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries). These were concerned with grass carp research, management assistance to the Delta barrage breeding station (rural development and training), and aquaculture research and extension (nutrition, integrated farming, extension and training).
A project in Tunisia has been concerned with research on the physiology of fish reproduction and is funded by the International Foundation for Science (Sweden).
A project in Greece provided technical assistance for the preparation of a national plan for the development of marine and inland aquaculture, and in Yugoslavia a project provided technical assistance for the development of salmonid culture at Sibenik. Both these projects were funded by UNDP.
4.8 Capital assistance projects in the sub-sector
Only one capital assistance project (recently completed) is known in the region. This is the National Aquaculture Centre at El Abassa in Egypt which was built with funds provided by USAID to develop national research as well as to contribute to production and training.
Some capital assistance for the purchase of aquaculture equipment was provided by the Government of Italy for Algeria, Tunisia, and Egypt through the MEDRAP regional project; by the Government of France for Turkey; and by USA through USAID for Syria.
<section>7</section>
5. NATIONAL SECTOR MANAGEMENT
5.1 Government policy in the region
5.2 Government organizations in the region
5.3 Aquaculture legislation
5.4 Trade and business associations
5.5 Information resources for management
5.6 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
5.1 Government policy in the region
Government policy statements regarding the interest and importance of national aquaculture were rare in the sixties, but increased throughout the seventies. At the present time all countries in the region include statements on aquaculture development in their National Development Plans. Today aquaculture is considered an important national economic sector by most countries of the region, but it is still far from being a key political issue, with the exception of the three main production areas of France, Italy, and Spain.
The two main themes regarding aquaculture which are highlighted in public statements are (1) at the national level, the potential of the sector to contribute to the national demand for fisheries products, and to generate income from the exports of high value products; and (2) at the local level, the potential of the sector to generate year-round employment in depressed coastal areas where there is little or no industrial activity, limited agricultural potential, and in some cases an economy too exclusively oriented toward seasonal tourism.
With the exceptions of Albania, Libya, and Yugoslavia, all countries in the region have aquaculture objectives and priorities stated in their current National Development Plans. For example, Albania has objectives for increasing fish production as a whole in its current Eighth Five Year Plan for Economic Development. The Plan for Yugoslavia has projected 5 000 t by 1991 through the expansion of hatchery production and cage farming, whilst the Fifth National Plan for Turkey (1984-1989) envisages a 7.7% annual increase in fisheries production and a 20.7% annual increase in fisheries products exports. Aquaculture is expected to rise from its 1986 total of 3 075 t to 15 000 t in 1989, 20 000 t in 1993, and 40 000 t in 2000.
The five EEC countries of the region include aquaculture in plans for internal use, and in 1987 they had to prepare and provide to the Community a 1987-91 Pluriannual Orientation Programme for Aquaculture, to be used as a reference by the EEC Commission in the allocation of subsidies to aquaculture projects. Each national programme established priorities between species, geographic areas for development, and techniques, with general development guidelines and quantified production objectives. For example, the national programme of France highlighted two main objectives, namely (1) adaptation of present aquaculture structures to new production areas (species and products) in response to market requirements, and (2) development of new species with known techniques and where markets exist.
In Portugal the main objectives of the national programme are to utilize fully the natural potential and to increase coastal and inland aquaculture production with the following strategies, namely, to develop and consolidate the sector, to construct productive units, to conduct research on artificial reproduction of some species, to produce trout feed, to increase the national production of trout fry, and to improve fry collection.
In Greece the programme aims at the assimilation of internationally applied cultivation techniques and their adaptation to the specific characteristics of Greece with a simultaneous development of domestic technology; encouragement of private sector and other agencies to take initiatives in investment; simplify the procedures for granting or leasing areas necessary for the construction of aquaculture units by amending the fisheries legislation in force; promotion of State infrastructure projects, of investments in the sector, and of research into cultivation possibilities of species of economic importance other than those already cultivated; and to carrying out reclamation projects in the coastal lagoons for their gradual development through modern semi-intensive or extensive culture.
In the non-EEC countries the timing and general organization of existing national programmes varies with those of the national development plans, as aquaculture is generally considered as a component of fisheries development.
In Turkey the Five Year Plan (1984-89) emphasizes not only aquaculture as an export-oriented activity, but also considerations to be taken in its development (particularly environmental ones).
In Morocco the current National Plan for the period 1986-90 has priorities for aquaculture development favouring investments from the private and public sectors in the general lines of an export-oriented activity.
In Tunisia the recently concluded Sixth Five Year Plan (1982-86) gave an important role to the fishing industry (planned investments of US$ 207 million) with little concern for aquaculture, and then mostly at lagoon exploitation level. Whereas the current Seventh Five Year Plan (1987-91) gives aquaculture more importance and includes the construction of two regional aquaculture centres in the Bizerte and Medenine Governorates, aimed at supporting the development of a strong export-oriented private sector (production of bass, bream, clams, and shrimps).
In Egypt, where the 1984-1987 plan has recently been completed, investments of L.E. 693 million were authorized to the GAFRD to strengthen the aquaculture sector, particularly with regard to small-scale private farmers. In particular, L.E. 25 million were earmarked for the establishment of 20 new tilapia hatcheries.
In Malta the Ministry of Productive Development has given a high priority to fisheries and aquaculture and has established a new Division of Aquaculture.
5.2 Government organizations in the region
The situation with regard to aquaculture in freshwater and marine coastal water in many countries is often different with regard to governmental organization. All countries of the Mediterranean region have a Ministry of Agriculture, or of Agriculture and agriculture-related activities. The inclusion of these agriculture-related activities vary from one country to another; for example, in Turkey there is the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Rural Affairs, and in Cyprus there is the Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources. Within this wide range of government responsibility, two "basic formulae can be found, namely, either the responsibilities of the Ministry of Agriculture exclude fisheries (as in France, where there is a Ministry of the Sea), or they include them (as in Greece, where there is a Department of Fisheries in the Ministry of Agriculture).
When responsibilities for fisheries are included within agriculture, freshwater aquaculture and marine aquaculture fall under the same central administration, even if they have some different regulations. When fisheries are not included within agriculture, inland and marine coastal aquaculture in the country are invariably separated between two very different ministerial departments with widely different regulations, usually leaving marine coastal aquaculture in a complicated and sometimes confused situation in association with traditional capture fisheries.
Even then such a separation does not always result in responsibilities for all freshwater aquaculture being under a single administration. It may happen, as is the case in Cyprus, that the Department of Fisheries within the Ministry of Agriculture and National Resources has responsibility for research and development for both freshwater and marine aquaculture. But the situation is most usually more complicated. For example, in Egypt all aquaculture, except aquaculture research, is under the GAFRD, established within the Ministry of Agriculture in 1983. GAFRD has responsibility for development and conservation of all fisheries resources, including aquaculture, and developing regulations for fish farming. GAFRD participates in a National Commission for the establishment of technical parameters for aquaculture, together with the Institute of Oceanography and Fisheries (Academy of Science) and other bodies in the Ministry of Irrigation and in the Ministry of the Interior. But
the Ministry of Irrigation, and not GAFRD, is responsible for (i) the control of irrigation and drainage waters, which are the main sources of fresh water for pond farms; (ii) for the use of grass carp in irrigation and drainage canals to control aquatic weeds, and (iii) for the production of carp fingerlings to be stocked in rice fields. Also, the policing of water bodies comes under the authority of the Ministry of the Interior. Furthermore, both the Fish Marketing Company (Ministry of Supply) and the separate Governorates have control over pricing and marketing regulations imposed on the farmers.
In Greece all forms of aquaculture are the general responsibility of the Department of Fisheries in the Ministry of Agriculture, but the Ministry of National Economy is responsible for the operation of the main national grant scheme providing investment subsidies to new farms, under Law 1262/82. The Ministries of Culture, Defence, Environment, and Regional Planning and Public Welfare, also play roles in the administrative agreement procedures for new aquaculture projects. At the same time, the local governments (3rd tier) have powers of authority on the exploitation of freshwater springs for both domestic and agricultural uses. Aquaculture research is partly under the Ministry of National Education (for university laboratories) and the Ministry of Industry, Energy and Technology. Finally, marine aquaculture also comes under some rules of the Ministry of National Defence.
In France freshwater aquaculture is the responsibility of the Ministry of Agriculture, and concerns not only administration and development but also applied research (through the National Institute of Agronomic Research, INRA), demonstration and extension (through the Institute of Small Animal Husbandry, ITAVI, and the Technical Center of Rural Engineering, CEMAGREF). Marine aquaculture, and more precisely traditional oyster and mussel farming in sheltered bays and coastal lagoons, is under the Ministry of the Sea; the responsibilities of which include administration and development, and applied research through the Institute for the Exploitation of the Sea (IFREMER). But there is no clear demarcation in the responsibilities of the two Ministries for some aspects of land-based coastal mariculture or brackishwater aquaculture. Furthermore, other Ministries and regional or local bodies have responsibility for some aspects of project implementation and financing, and must be
involved.
After a number of attempts to clarify and simplify responsibility for aquaculture in the 1970s, the Government of France decided in the early 1980s to create in the Ministry of the Sea a National Delegation for Aquaculture. The Delegation would have regional delegates based in regional offices of either Agriculture or Sea, depending on the structure of aquaculture in the region. These delegates are now the basic contact points of aquaculturists and candidate aquaculturists. Their responsiblities are: (i) to hand over any information needed to any administration concerned, (ii) to channel all applications for subsidies and soft loans to the right destinations, and (iii) to convene commissions of representatives of all administrations and institutions concerned to advise them of decisions.
In Israel, both marine and inland fisheries are the responsibility of the Ministry of Agriculture, through the Department of Fisheries. The Department has four sub-divisions, the Marine Fishery Division, the Fisheries Technology Division, the Inland Fishery Division, and the Fish Culture Division. However, the responsibilities for environmental protection of the national aquatic resources by the Ministry of the Interior also involve this organization in the sector.
In the Mediterranean region at the present time, there is no indication that any one country might, in the foreseeable future, recognize the aquaculture sector as important enough to merit a separate Ministry or State Secretary. Furthermore, there is no indication from the several types of government organization for aquaculture in the region that there is a common approach to staffing. Most of the civil servants in their respective organizations enter through normal channels to positions in the civil service, without any specific education or training in aquaculture. In cases where a decision has been made to select a candidate with an aquaculture-related education, it has been predominantly for a candidate with a biology or marine biology degree (see section 4.1).
There are some recent indications that government organizations, and public banks and agencies, are providing or arranging training in aquaculture for their personnel after they have been assigned to positions dealing with aquaculture projects: for example, as already indicated in 4.4 above, the Agricultural Bank of Greece is training 50 employees for technical assessment of aquaculture projects, and 25 for financial assessment.
5.3 Aquaculture legislation
Three main categories of national legislation, regulations, and policy instruments regarding aquaculture can be identified for countries in the region. These are:
- countries without aquaculture-related legislation at all
- countries with lagoon fisheries and inland aquaculture legislation
- countries with a complete range of aquaculture legislation.
Countries typical of the first category are Libya and Malta, and to a lesser extent Algeria and Morocco where there is an absence of any traditional lagoon fisheries of importance, no substantive aquaculture sector, and a lack of governmental commitment or private involvement in the development of aquaculture. Hence, there has been no pressure from any side to establish legislation to support and control aquaculture, and no policy instruments, such as licenses, permits, taxes, subsidies, and other incentives or controls.
Algeria and Morocco are at the point of leaving this first category. Fifteen years ago both countries had no aquaculture development projects of importance, and were leasing to foreigners the exploitation rights to fisheries in their Mediterranean brackishwater lagoons (Nador in Morocco, and Mellah Lake in Algeria) without thought for establishing laws and regulations for these activities. Morocco then became involved in trout and oyster culture, and now, through the ambitious Marost project in Nador under direct control of the Royal Palace, it is caking the first steps toward marine aquaculture. Other private investors are also reviewing ways to participate in aquaculture and this has compelled a need for controlling legislation, both to support investment and to avoid abuse. In Algeria, the Office National de l'Aquaculture, established in 1986, is now operational and there are statements at governmental level to offer aquaculture opportunities to private investment. Thus,
also, there is the need to enact legislation for the same purposes as Morocco.
Countries in the second category, with important coastal lagoon fisheries and/or an established inland aquaculture industry (although not yet an established marine industry) are Greece, Portugal, Tunisia, and Turkey. In these countries the presence of coastal lagoons and estuaries with important small-scale fishing activities, using fences and traps Co control the movement of the fish between semi-closed water bodies and the sea, has led to specific legislation for practices which can be considered as primitive forms of aquaculture. Such practices were strictly the preserve of long-established populations of small-scale fishermen operating either under a governmental body (Tunisia), or grouped in cooperatives (Greece, Portugal, and Turkey). Subsequently, when it was realized that marine aquaculture could be much more than these simple practices, the Governments considered that these same small-scale lagoon fishermen groups should naturally take over the development of the
more technical practices of aquaculture, but without anything more than simple demonstrations and assistance from extension services. This approach was also reinforced in some cases, for example, in Greece and Portugal, by the parallel development of small-scale freshwater fish farming, and consequently little or no new legislation was required.
In Greece, and many other countries world-wide, the basic legislation regarding aquaculture development is now 20 years old. Such outdated legislation does not Cake into account essential aspects of modern fish farming, such as the importance of long-term leases for aquaculture (as long-term investments may be needed which cannot be recuperated in the few years of the traditional lagoon exploitation leases) and the importance of adequate legislation regarding concessions on public coastal areas (as investments in mariculture may require that facilities built on leased public land can be mortgaged).
In some countries, such as Portugal, access within a regional economic community (the EEC) has provided automatically a full range of subsidies and incentives (grants). However, existing legislation is sometimes so mixed that many conflicting regulations can be applied by the different administrations which result in prolonged project agreement. At a national conference on aquaculture in Porto in 1987 it was unanimously agreed that legislation was the main factor limiting development in the country.
Finally, countries in the third category are those where aquaculture has already reached the stage of an important and highly diversified activity, and where relevant new legislation was enacted in coordination with development of techniques and increasing production. Countries in this category are France and Italy, and, to a lesser extent, Spain. For example, France began with elaborate legislation for marine and coastal aquaculture but adjusted it in 1983 toward stronger protection of small-scale entrepreneurs, and made it extremely difficult for corporations to have access to aquaculture sites. In 1986 the legislation was revised to facilitate the transfer of aquaculture enterprises from one owner to another, and gave access to corporations for investment.
In Italy the cooperatives are privileged with preferential policy instruments. For example, shellfish cooperatives in the Trieste region were charged only Lit. 5 000 per year (about US$ 3) for a concession in 1986, irrespective of size, but private farmers were charged Lit. 500 per m^2. A typical concession may be 1 000 to 15 000 m^2 in area. As a result the system was abused frequently, often by cooperatives which built just for show or by entrepreneurs with illegal settlement.
In summary, throughout all the countries of the region aquaculture legislation is a priority which needs considerable attention in order to offer equal opportunities for national investors in different areas within each country, and for international investors within the different countries. At present there does not appear to be much equal opportunity in the region. The larger aquaculture producers (France, Italy, and Spain) continue to improve their national legislation to assist farmers to become more competitive at both national and international levels by improving administrative procedures, and extensively exploiting the EEC subsidies system for aquaculture. Two other countries, Greece and Tunisia, are trying to attract foreign technology and some foreign capital, but in such a way that local capital will not lose control of the sector. This is being done through legislation and incentives which encourage foreign assistance but which also favour national investors.
Other countries are maintaining strong nationalistic approaches for sectoral development (such as Israel and Yugoslavia), while others (such as Cyprus and Portugal) appear to be more prepared to follow the approaches of Greece and Tunisia.
Consequently it can be anticipated that aquaculture legislation in the region as a whole will change more rapidly than it has in the past, which will provide opportunities for excellent investment potential. For example, Greece is one country at present which has two different subsidy channels, namely one through the Ministry of Agriculture and the EEC, and the other through the Ministry of National Economy and the national law 1262/82, which can provide non-reimbursable investment grants in a range from 40 to 60% of the physical investment. Furthermore it has a system of preferential investment and operational capital assistance loans established through the Agricultural Bank of Greece, and it has no restrictions on the introduction of technologies and new species. However, it still has a complex legal, social, and administrative structure constraining access to aquaculture sites and aquaculture agreements which is difficult to tackle, even by experienced national
investors.
Finally, in some countries, such as France and Italy, there are many environmental regulations which regulate introductions and/or the transfer of species for aquaculture. Even in those countries where there are no such legal restrictions, such as Morocco and Tunisia, government officials and scientists have expressed an interest in producing only native species. However, in many countries the introduction of exotic or non-native species has taken place, and often continues both officially or unofficially. It can be anticipated that for some time to come development of aquaculture in the region will continue to use all species of interest, as it has in the past, and that pathogenic organisms will also be introduced together with the exotic species.
5.4 Trade and business associations
There are no known national trade associations for aquaculture and aquaculture products which operate internationally or regionally in any of the Mediterranean countries. There are several at the local level which have been discussed previously in Section 4.5, such as the association of oyster producers of the Arcachon basin in France, and the controlled label of origin "Pasquina" established for mussels produced by a cooperative of Mattinata in Italy.
There are a few business associations in the region, most of which operate at the local level; for example, the Syndicat Mixte pour le Développement de l'Aquaculture en Pays de Loire (SMIDAP), and the Association pour le Développement de l'Aquaculture en Charente Quest (ADACO), both in France. These are non-profit associations where private entrepreneurs and public agencies at the level of Department or Region can meet, discuss development priorities, and raise public funds Co finance studies, field experiments, technical publications, and provide extension services.
In France the Association pour le Développement de l'Aquaculture (ADA), might be considered a business association at the national level. It is a non-profit association which was started by a few researchers and farmers mostly involved in non-traditional forms of aquaculture. It has progressively expanded to the traditional sector, and now provides its members with services close to those of an established business association.
Producers' associations may at times act as trade and business associations; for example, the two producers' associations in France noted above (the semi-professional committee of oyster culturists, and the syndicate of fish culturists), organize joint advertizing campaigns on television, or in national and regional journals.
5.5 Information resources for management
Most of the information resources provided for management have dealt with site selection and appropriate technology. Either through national financing and expertise, or through bilateral and international assistance, most areas of the region with aquaculture potential have been surveyed (often repeatedly) to identify sites and to evaluate production potential using established technology.
In France, during the 1979s and early 1980s, IFREMER and other national laboratories and agencies undertook highly detailed surveys of aquaculture sites. They worked at the level of national Departments, using maps with scales of 1:25 000, and at times 1:10 000. All sites with potential were listed so that government administrations in charge of land planning and development could reserve those areas for aquaculture development. Also, in a few places of particular interest, such as the Bay of Brest, detailed environmental and socio-economic zoning studies were performed. This assisted local planners to distribute areas between conflicting industrial sectors and to possible sources of pollution. Competing sectors were typically urban development, tourism, merchant marine, military (navy), heavy and light industry, fisheries, aquaculture, and agriculture.
Besides information on site selection, there has been considerable literature relevant to the countries of the region published about species, production techniques, and economic aspects of aquaculture development in national and international journals, often as reprints of conferences, seminars, and symposia on aquaculture. Also the book, 'Vallicoltura Moderna', is relevant to Mediterranean aquaculture as a whole.
There also exist documents, reports, and reviews which have been written on practically any aquaculture site and any aspect of aquaculture in the Mediterranean-related countries. Many of these published works are available in the library of the Fisheries Department of FAO in Rome. Others are less easily accessible; for example, individual reports which are the property of government agencies responsible for national planning interests, or included with applications for project funding. When prepared for private individuals or companies, these are confidential documents of the parties concerned and the consulting firms. Nonetheless, such information often circulates among a limited number of professionals with regional experience even if not widely distributed, but it is also often too detailed and technical for management officers not highly specialized in aquaculture to make the best use of; and neither aquaculture product traders nor newly established producers always make
the effort required to clarify for planners important points regarding project economy or privileged markets for high-value species.
Civil servants, investment bankers, and politicians concerned with aquaculture development still lack general information and a view of aquaculture realities in the region. This situation results at times either in excessive hesitation about a logical and viable project, or in excessive confidence in a project of more doubtful interest. An example is the environmental impact of aquaculture on other activities, particularly the risk of water pollution by aquaculture discharge which may at times be completely forgotten or excessively emphasized.
The ADCP now produces an information newsletter called "Aquaculture Minutes" for decision-makers which responds to some of the needs for executives and administrators, but there is still a great need at the resources management level for the production of more continuously updated information on species and techniques, sites and zoning of activities, prices and markets of aquaculture items, legislation, farm economy, and the socio-economic impact of aquaculture development. Regional reviews are needed to constitute a proper base for solid resources management (such as the ADCP report of 1987 on "The markets for the prime Mediterranean species - sea bass, sea bream, mullets and eel - and their links with investment"). Such activities should be a prime responsibility of the Mediterranean regional aquaculture projects, such as MEDRAP.
The private sector produces a number of leaflets of its own. For example, in U.K., the Aquacultural Insurance Service produces information on risk management and insurance; and Ernst and Whinney produce bulletins on financial investment, planning, taxation, and many other aspects of financial management.
5.6 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
Some assistance to national sector management at the regional level was provided by the UNDP/Government of Italy/FAO MEDRAP project from 1980 to 1987. This was in the form of aquaculture site surveys and recommendations on aquaculture at the national level of the participating countries.
However, most technical assistance projects in the region have taken the form of specific aid to one particular country, either through bilateral or international financing; for example, in Algeria, with assistance from the Government of France, national aquaculture potential (sites, species, techniques, economic aspects) was evaluated to prepare the frame of a National Aquaculture Development Plan; in Egypt assistance from France and USA has been given Co assess the status and potential of aquaculture in the Delta, Sinai, and Red Sea regions, and to prepare Regional Aquaculture Development plans (technical, social, and economic aspects); and in Greece the UNDP/FAO project for the Development of Marine and Inland Aquaculture provided consultancies on aspects of legislation, planning, government organization, education and training, feed production, marketing, product development, economics, engineering, and culture techniques for the main species. FAO has provided technical
cooperation assistance to Malta to analyse its aquaculture potential and identify activities.
<section>8</section>
6. REGIONAL SECTOR MANAGEMENT
6.1 United Nations organizations in the region
6.2 Other organizations in the region
6.3 Economic communities of the region
6.4 Regional and global aquaculture development projects
6.1 United Nations organizations in the region
The countries of the region are active in a number of regional organizations in which aquaculture has been recognized as a sector, either individually or as a component of a larger sector such as fisheries or agriculture, and which has received support in some form. The principal regional organizations are those of the United Nations (UN) in which all the countries actively participate as members.
These same countries participate in the individual organizations of the UN system which are actively represented in the region. These include the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations;(FAO) and, with the exception of Albania, the World Bank (WB). All these organizations have substantial records of providing technical and capital assistance to aquaculture development world-wide, and some in the region.
Other UN organizations represented in the region and having some participation in the development of aquaculture (but predominantly outside the region) are the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), the World Health Organization (WHO), and the UN Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (Unesco). Some specialized agencies of the UN which also work in the field are the UN Children's Fund (UNICEF), and the UN Environment Programme (UNEP). Not all these organizations or agencies have yet worked specifically in this region in aquaculture, but one of the action programmes of UNEP is concerned with the Mediterranean Sea and includes a project component for aquaculture within lagoon management.
FAO is by far the main agency in the UN with regard to aquaculture activites in the region. These activities have been executed to some extent through the General Fisheries Council for the Mediterranean (GFCM), particularly national surveys for the fisheries-cum-aquaculture sector, and organization of specialized aquaculture sessions at annual GFCM regional meetings. Many of FAO's activities were coordinated through the ADCP, in particular the management from 1985 to 1987 of MEDRAP.
6.2 Other organizations in the region
With the exception of Israel, all countries in the region are members of one or several of the Economic Commissions in the UN. For example,
- Albania, Cyprus, France, Greece, Italy, Malta, Portugal, Spain, Turkey, and Yugoslavia are members of the Economic Commission for Europe (ECE);
- Algeria, Egypt, Libya, Morocco, and Tunisia are members of the Economic Commission for Africa (ECA);
- France, Italy, and Spain are members of the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Carribean (ECLAC).
- Lebanon and Syria are members of the Economic and Social Commission for Western Africa (ESCWA); and
- France is a member of the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP).
Although ECE, ECA, and ESCWA have had only limited involvement in aquaculture development, their interest is now growing. For example, the Natural Resources Division of ECA undertook in 1986 a study entitled "The Fishery and Aquaculture Sector in North Africa: Harmonization of Development Policies". This was done within the framework of a multidisciplinary project on cooperation and trade in food and agriculture production in North Africa, implemented jointly by ECA/FAO. Follow-up of this work will include an analysis of the present state of aquaculture in the North African countries, with particular interest centred on potential aquaculture exports.
Other non-technical international organizations of importance in the region and with possible involvement in aquaculture development are:
- the Council of Europe, in which Cyprus, France, Greece, Italy, Malta, Portugal, Spain, and Turkey are members;
- the Council of Arab Economic Community, of which Egypt and Libya are members; and
- the Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), of which France, Greece, Italy, Portugal, Spain, and Turkey are members.
The OECD funded in 1979 a consultancy on aquaculture development in the lagoon of Messolonghi in Greece and is now preparing a study on aquaculture based on questionnaires sent to member countries. The provisional document was distributed for information at the 61st Session of the Committee for Fisheries in February 1988 and used at an extended meeting on aquaculture held in Paris in June 1988.
The European Community, through the European Development Fund, is presently involved in the financing of a development project for fisheries and aquaculture in Bardawill lagoon (Egypt).
The International Commission for the Scientific Exploration of the Mediterranean Sea (ICSEM) has expressed some interest in aquaculture at meetings and conferences, particularly with regard to lagoon exploitation and extensive farming.
Institutions within bilateral cooperation structures have expressed some interest in aquaculture in the region. For example, with cooperation from Italy through financial participation in MEDRAP there has been funding for the International Aquaculture Training Centre at Policoro, Southern Italy; and from France through the Agence de Cooperation Technique Internationale (ACTIM) there have been planning studies involving aquaculture and fisheries in Egypt (Red Sea and Sinai), and through the Association de Cooperation Culturelle et Technique (ACCT) for fellowships in France to Egyptian marine biologists.
In addition to institutions for bilateral cooperation from countries in the region, institutions from countries outside the region also had strong involvement in aquaculture in the Mediterranean. For example, USAID has financed studies, engineering, technical assistance, training, construction, and equipment of a number of aquaculture projects in Egypt.
Many research laboratories in the countries have some involvement in international cooperation, but there is no research institution with an outstanding international orientation in aquaculture activity in the region.
6.3 Economic communities of the region
The major economic community in the region is the European Economic Community (EEC) which is represented by five members, namely France, Greece, Italy, Portugal, and Spain. The EEC is the major consumer of the aquaculture production of the region, and is practically the only buyer of aquaculture items exported by non-EEC countries of the region. It is the major supplier of technology, equipment, and products to the aquaculture sector in the region, and it is also the major supplier of capital and financial assistance Co producers in the region through FEOGA grants, national grants, and national public bank financing to its members.
Four countries in the region, namely Algeria, Egypt, Libya, and Tunisia, are members of the Organization of African Unity (OAU). There is no information on any involvement of this economic community in aquaculture development.
6.4 Regional and global aquaculture development projects
There are few regional development projects within the area. Seven aquaculture development projects are listed in the Aquaculture Aid Profiles (ADCP, 1988). One is regional, three are being implemented in Egypt and the others in Greece, Tunisia, and Yugoslavia.
The regional project, MEDRAP, was defined in 1978. It started operating in 1980 from its headquarters in Tunisia under joint financing by UNDP, the Government of Italy, and the participating countries (Algeria, Cyprus, Egypt, Greece, Malta, Morocco, Portugal, Syria, Tunisia, Turkey, and Yugoslavia). The primary objective of MEDRAP was to facilitate the transfer of aquaculture technologies and know-how from the more advanced countries to the lesser advanced ones. This was achieved through specialized technical consultancies, training sessions at the project training centre at Policoro, and the organization of seminars in different countries of the region. A second phase of MEDRAP (to be called AQUAMED) is presently being finalized with Italian funding. It is to have headquarters in a place with good communications, strong public relations, and an improved library archive component.
Finally, the ADCP was created to support global initiatives and cooperation in aquaculture. Its prime activities have extended into Africa, Asia, Latin America, and the Mediterranean regions. Advisory and guideline publications produced by it deal with both administration of the sector, such as technical assistance, economic development, planning, engineering. marketing, etc., and in technology. The Programme is executed by FAO and is based in Rome, Italy.
<section>9</section>
ANNEXES
I - Supporting data, figures, tables
II - References
III - Abbreviations
IV - List of ADCP reports
I - Supporting data, figures, tables
Table 1: Fish Products and Meat Supply (FAO Food Balance Sheets, 1984)
Table 2: Gross National Products and Population (World Bank Atlas, 1987)
Table 3: Latest Fish Catches Data available for the Region (FAO Yearbook of Fisheries Statistics, 1986 Edition)
Albania
Algeria
Cyprus
Egypt
France
Greece
Israel
Italy
Libya
Lebanon
Malta
Morocco
Portugal
Spain
Syria
Tunisia
Turkey
Yugoslavia
Total
Increase from previous year
Table 4: 1984 Aquaculture Production in the Extended Mediterranean Region (t)
Table 5: 1985 Aquaculture Production in the Extended Mediterranean Region (t)
Table 6: 1986 Aquaculture Production in the Extended Mediterranean Region (t)
Table 7: Distribution (in order) of Aquaculture Production between the Countries of the Extended Mediterranean Region (t)
France
France
France
Spain
Spain
Spain
Italy
Italy
Italy
Egypt
Egypt
Egypt
Yugoslavia
Yugoslavia
Yugoslavia
Israel
Israel
Israel
Greece
Greece
Greece
Albania
Albania
Turkey
Syria
Turkey
Albania
Turkey
Syria
Syria
Portugal
Portugal
Portugal
Lebanon
Lebanon
Lebanon
Tunisia
Tunisia
Tunisia
Morocco
Morocco
Morocco
Cyprus
Cyprus
Cyprus
Algeria
Algeria
Algeria
Libya and Malta
Libya and Malta
Libya and Malta
Total
Table 8: Distribution of countries of per caput aquaculture production (population taken from Table 2), and comparison with the fisheries products supply (data from Table 1)
1985 Aquaculture Production per caput (kg)
1984 Fisheries Products Consumption per caput (kg)
Contribution of Aquaculture in fisheries Consumption (%)
France
Israel
Spain
Italy
Egypt
Albania
Yugoslavia
Greece
Syria
Portugal
Tunisia
Morocco
Cyprus
Algeria
Turkey
Libya
Malta
Lebanon
II - References
ADCP, 1987. Aquaculture sector development. A guideline for the preparation of a National Plan. Rome, FAO, ADCP/REP/87/27, 27 pp.
ADCP, 1987a. The markets for the prime mediterranean species - sea bass, sea bream, mullets and eel - and their links with investment. Rome, FAO, ADCP/REP/87/29, 46 pp.
ADCP, 1987b. Feed and feeding of fish and shrimps. A manual on the preparation and presentation of compound feeds for shrimp and fish in aquaculture. Rome, FAO, ADCP/REP/87/26, 275 pp.
ADCP, 1988. Aquaculture Aid Profiles, February 1988. Rome, FAO, ADCP/AP/87/9, 44 pp.
ADCP, 1988a. Women in Aquaculture. Proceedings of the ADCP/NORAD workshop on women in aquaculture, Rome, 13-16 April 1987. Rome, FAO, ADCP/REP/87/28, 123 pp.
Antona M., Lebrun E., and H. Rey, 1986. Etude économique des filières d'élevage aquacole en Méditerranée française. Contrat IFREMER CEP n. 86-1-590906, 191 pp.
Antona M., Lebrun E., and H. Rey, 1987. Les effets induits par l'exploitation des ressources marines vivantes: le cas du Languedoc-Roussillon / la filière aquaculture marine / synthèse des résultats. Contrat Secrétariat d'Etat à la Mer n.94.09.06, 133 pp.
Balarin, J.D., 1986. National reviews for aquaculture development in Africa. 8-Egypt. Rome, FAO, FIRI/C770.8, 129 pp.
Bruno, A., 1988. Situation of aquaculture in the MEDRAP countries. FAO, GCP/REM/049/ITA, 73 pp.
Dill, W.A. and A. Ben-Tuvia, 1988. The Inland Fisheries of Israel. The Israeli Journal of Aquaculture - Bamidgeh, 40(3), 75-104.
Edwards, D, 1987. Freshwater fish culture in Greece. A report prepared for the project "Development of Marine and Inland Aquaculture in Greece. Rome, FAO, FI:DP/GRE/85/002, field doc. 4, 36 pp.
EEC, 1986. Inventory of expertise on aquaculture and related fields within the member states of the European community. NUFFIC (Netherlands Universities Foundation For International Cooperation) report to EEC, ref. 1446P, 15 pp.
FAO, 1986. Development of Aquaculture in Europe. Fifteenth FAO Regional Conference for Europe, Istanbul, Turkey, 26 April-2 May 1986. Rome, FAO, ERC/86/4.
FAO, 1987. Aquaculture Development. Item 4 of the provisional agenda, FAO Committee on Fisheries, 17th session. Rome, FAO, COFI/87/Inf.6, 10 pp.
FAO, 1987a. Rapport d'une mission sur le développement des pêches en Albanie, 17-24 Juin 1987. FAO unreferenced doc., 19 pp.
FAO, 1988. Yearbook of Fisheries Statistics, 1986. Catches and landings. FAO Fisheries series, vol. 62, 477 pp
France-Aquaculture, 1986. Le marche du Bar et de la Daurade en Europe et dans le bassin Méditerranéen. Report to a private client, 71 pp. (restricted).
Freddi, A., 1986. Session de formation, culture des mollusques en Méditerranée, Espagne, 13-29 Octobre 1985. FAO Doc. (MEDRAP), 89 pp.
IFREMER, 1987. Shellfish culture development and management. International Seminar in La Rochelle, 4-9 March 1985. 401 pp.,
Jones, A., 1987. Historical background, present status and future perspectives of the aquaculture industry on a worldwide basis. Paper presented to the European Aquaculture Society, Amsterdam.
Lebrun, E., and H. Rey, 1987. Etude économique des filières aquacoles en Italie, contrat IFREMER n.86-1-520305, 135 pp.
MacPherson, N.J., 1987. Aquaculture Development Planning in Greece. A report prepared for the project "Development of Marine and Inland Aquaculture in Greece". FAO doc. FI:DP/GRE/85/002, field doc. 9, 46 pp.
MacPherson, N.J. and J. Arrundale, 1988. Marketing and product development for aquaculture in Greece. A report prepared for the project "Development of Marine and Inland Aquaculture in Greece", FAO doc. FI/GRE/85/002, field doc 11, 19 pp.
Matty, A.J., 1987. Fish feed technology and fish nutrition. A report prepared for the project "Development of Marine and Inland Aquaculture in Greece". FAO doc. FI:DP/GRE/85/002, field doc. 3, 17 pp.
OECD, 1988. Study on Aquaculture, Committee for Fisheries. OECD doc. FI/276 (restricted).
Sadek, S., 1987. Aquaculture Development in Egypt. Mimeo, 89 pp.
Sarig, S., 1985. Fisheries and Fish culture in Israel in 1984. Bamidgeh 38 (3):63-67.
Sarig, S., 1986. The fish culture industry in Israel in 1985. Bamidgeh 39 (1):3-12.
World Bank, 1987. The World Bank Atlas 1987.
Articles and reports after 1983 available in FAO Fisheries Library, and journals cited in Section 4.6. Also national statements presented at the MEDRAP II Regional Workshop in Nicosia, Cyprus in December 1988.
III - Abbreviations
LIST OF ABBREVIATIONS
ACCT
Association de Cooperation Culturelle et Technique (France)
ACTIM
Agence de Cooperation Technique Internationale (France)
ADA
Association pour le Développement de l'Aquaculture (France)
ADACO
Association pour le Développement de l'Aquaculture en Charente-Ouest (France)
ADAM
Association pour le Développement de l'Aquaculture en Martinique (France)
ADCP
Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (FAO)
AGEMA
Association pour la Gérance des Ecoles de Formation Maritime et Aquacole (France)
AQUAMED
Aquaculture Development Project for the Mediterranean
CEMAGREF
Centre d'Etudes du Machinisme du Genie Rural des Eaux et Forets (France)
CEPRALMAR
Centre d'Etudes et de Promotion des Activités Littorales Maritimes (France)
CERP
Centre d'Etudes et de Recherche pour la Pêche et l'Aquaculture (Algeria)
CIC
Comité Interprofessionel de la Conchyliculture (France)
CIEM (ICES)
International Council for the Exploration of the Sea
COFI
Committee on Fisheries (FAO)
EAS
European Aquaculture Society
ECA
Economic Commission for Africa
ECE
Economic Commission for Europe
ECLAC
Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean
EEC
European Economic Community
ESCAP
Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific
ESCWA
Economic and Social Commission for Western Africa
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
FES
Fédération Européenne des Salmoniculteurs
GAFRD
General Authority for Fisheries Resources Development (Egypt)
GFCM
General Fisheries Council for the Mediterranean
ICSEM
International Commission for the Scientific Exploration of the Mediterranean Sea
IFAD
International Fund for Agricultural Development (UN)
IFREMER
Institut français de recherche pour l'exploitation de la mer (France)
INIP
Instituto Nacional de Investigasçao das Pescas (Portugal)
INRA
Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique (France)
IOLR
Israeli Oceanographic and Limnological Research
MEDRAP
Mediterranean Regional Aquaculture Project (FAO)
NUFFIC
Netherlands Universities Foundation for International Cooperation
OAU
Organization of African Unity
OECD
Organization for Economic Co-operation and Development
PEMARES
Plan de Explotación Marisqueros (Spain)
SMIDAP
Syndicat Mixte pour le Développement de l'Aquaculture en Pays de Loire (France)
UN
United Nations
UNDP
United Nations Development Programme
UNEP
United Nations Environmental Programme
Unesco
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
UNICEF
United Nations Children's Fund
USAID
United States Agency for International Development
WAS
World Aquaculture Society
WB
World Bank
WHO
World Health Organization (UN)
CIVV
Centro Ittiologico Valli Veneto
SIRAP
Societá Italiana Reproduzione Artificiale Pesci
GLOBEFISH
FAO Computerized System of Fish Marketing Information
FISHDAB
FAO Yearly Statistics
IV - List of ADCP reports
ADCP/REP/75/1 (E/F)
Aquaculture Planning in Africa
ADCP/REP/76/2
Aquaculture Planning in Asia
ADCP/REP/76/3 (E/S)
Aquaculture Planning in Latin America
ADCP/REP/76/3A FI/R188 (E/F/S)
Kyoto Conference
ADCP/REP/78/4
Aid for Aquaculture Development
ADCP/REP/78/5 (E/S)
Outline of an Applied Research and Experimental Development Programme for the Latin American Regional Centre for Aquaculture
ADCP/REP/78/6 (E/S)
Curriculum for the Training of Aquaculturists in the Latin American Regional Centre for Aquaculture
ADCP/REP/79/7 (E/F)
Curriculum for the Training of Aquaculturists in the African Regional Centre for Aquaculture
ADCP/REP/79/8
Training in Fish Feed Technology. Report of the FAO/UNDP Training Course in Fish Feed Technology held in the University of Washington, Seattle, 9 October-15 December 1978
ADCP/REP/79/9
Aquaculture Information - Report of the Meeting of an Aquaculture Information Group held in Rome, 25-28 April 1979
ADCP/REP/79/10
Aquaculture Development in China - Report of a FAO/UNDP Aquaculture Study Tour to the People's Republic of China, 2 May-1 June 1978
ADCP/REP/80/11
Fish Feed Technology - Lectures presented at the FAO/UNDP Training Course in Fish Feed Technology, held at the College of Fisheries, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, 9 October-15 December 1978
ADCP/REP/80/12
Outline Research Programme for the African Regional Aquaculture Centre, Port Harcourt, Rivers State, Nigeria. Report of a Task Force sponsored by the FAO/UNDP Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme, 3-19 February 1980
ADCP/REP/80/13
Curriculum for the Training of Aquaculturists in the Asian Aquaculture Network
ADCP/REP/80/14
Outline Research Programmes for the Regional Aquaculture Lead Centres in Asia - Parts I and II
ADCP/REP/80/15
Outline Research Programmes for the Regional Aquaculture Lead Centres in Asia - Part III
ADCP/REP/81/16 (out of print)
Reproductive Physiology of Teleost Fishes - A Review of Present Knowledge and Needs for Future Research
ADCP/REP/82/17
Aid for Aquaculture Development in the Third World - Report of the FAO/NORAD Round Table on Aid for Aquaculture Development in the Third World. Svan^y, Norway, 2-6 August 1982
ADCP/REP/83/18
Fish Feeds and Feeding in Developing Countries - An Interim Report on the ADCP Feed Development Programme
ADCP/REP/83/19 Rev. 1
AQUIS Aquaculture Information System - Users' Manual
ADCP/REP/83/20
Planification del Desarrollo de la Acuicultura - Guía Preliminar (An Introductory Guide to Aquaculture Development)
ADCP/REP/84/21
Inland Aquaculture Engineering - Lectures presented at the ADCP Interregional Training Course in Inland Aquaculture Engineering, Budapest
ADCP/REP/85/22
Nutritional Fish Pathology - Morphological Signs of Nutrient Deficiency and Toxicity in Farmed Fish
ADCP/REP/86/23
Observations on International Technical Assistance to Aquaculture
ADCP/REP/86/24
Planning an Aquaculture Facility - Guidelines for Bioprogramming and Design
ADCP/REP/87/25
Future Economic Outlook for Aquaculture and Related Assistance Needs
ADCP/REP/87/26
Feed and Feeding of Fish and Shrimp - A Manual on the Preparation and Presentation of Compound Feeds for Shrimp and Fish in Aquaculture
ADCP/REP/87/27
Aquaculture Sector Development - A Guideline for the Preparation of a National Plan
ADCP/REP/87/28
Women in Aquaculture - Proceedings of the ADCP/NORAD Workshop on Women in Aquaculture. Rome, FAO, 13-16 April 1987
ADCP/REP/87/29
The Markets for the Prime Mediterranean Species - Sea Bass, Sea Bream, Mullets and Eel - and their links with investment
ADCP/REP/88/30
A Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in Eleven Middle East Countries
ADCP/REP/88/31
A Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in East Asia
ADCP/REP/88/32
A Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in the Pacific
ADCP/REP/89/33
Planning for Aquaculture Development - Report of an Expert Consultation held in Policoro, Italy, 26 July-2 August 1988
ADCP/REP/89/34
A Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in the Mediterranean Region
