<title>CF Note 4: Community Forestry: Herders' Decision-Making in Natural Resources Management in Arid and Semi-arid Africa</title>
<section>1</section>
PREFACE
In 1986, within its Forestry for Community Development Programme, the FAO Forestry Department published a Forestry Paper entitled Tree Growing by Rural People. It presented various facets of the state of knowledge about tree-growing as it relates to community forestry i.e. forestry designed to benefit the rural tree growers/managers. However, although some of the most interesting future opportunities for community forestry lie in improving management of existing trees rather than in creating new resources, this document covered only partially the topic of tree and woodland management by rural people. It did not fully explore how rural people manage single trees or communal woodlands and how they manage their other resources in relation to trees and woodlands. Further effort was necessary to broaden and deepen the knowledge base on local management issues. In order to improve the success of management projects, more complete data and analysis was also needed on what knowledge
rural people have already developed and the dynamics of their tree resource management strategies in response to changing policies, pressures and opportunities. Finally, more thorough understanding was to be developed of the results and impacts of various attempts to support rural people in the efforts to manage these resources.
Dr. Maryam Niamir, a range management specialist, has undertaken the first step in the process of filling this information gap as it relates to arid and semi-arid areas of Africa. She has reviewed an extremely wide range of literature, established contacts with researchers and analyzed the information from a perspective enriched by her own research among herders of Senegal. In this document Dr. Niamir has ably provided descriptions of a range of (but certainly not all) knowledge and management systems used mainly by African herders. The development of this study was supported by the Community Forestry Unit, and by an interdepartmental working group and a number of outside reviewers. It has been suggested by this group of experts that this study be further enriched through selected case studies to update and enlarge the information base. It would also provide the basis for training materials which will assist development practitioners in recognizing the importance of local
technical knowledge and management systems for the design and implementation of successful community forestry activities.
This study is to be followed by similar research on decision making in resource management of peoples with other economic strategies. Similar documents are forthcoming on shifting cultivation, on private tree management looking at spatial arrangements (including indigenous agroforestry) as well as management of single trees for production of various products and communal management of woodlands. It is hoped that this series of studies will prove useful in pointing out the importance of local knowledge and resource management strategies as one step to more effective support to rural people in their effort to improve their current and future wellbeing through better tree and woodland management.
M.R. de Montalembert
Chief, Policy and Planning Service
Forestry Department
<section>2</section>
1. INTRODUCTION
1.1 LKMS in the development process
1.2 Some definitions
Endnotes
This report fits into an overall objective of helping the FAO analyze the role that local knowledge and management systems (LKMS) of natural resources can play in FAO's development projects and programmes. The approach of this report centers on a literature review of existing information on arid and semi-arid Africa. This includes North Africa, the Sahara, the Sahel, the semi-arid parts of the Sudan zone, and the arid zones of southern Africa. A few pertinent examples from other areas are also provided.
The main emphasis is placed on the use and management of natural resources, primarily vegetation, but also water and wildlife. The majority of production systems in these arid zones in one way or another rely on livestock (ranging from settled agropastoralists to continuously mobile nomads). Thus, pastoral systems, defined as any production system that relies for more than 10% of its output on livestock, is the main focus of the report, but other production systems that rely on resources in their natural state, such as hunting, gathering, fishing, and wood collecting, will also be considered.
Most of the research done on LKMS has been on systems of cultivation (e.g. see Hans Carlier's recent bibliography "Understanding traditional agriculture"^1). The studies on pastoral systems were often meant not as studies of LKMS per se, but answered the needs of the disciplines that engaged in the study. Nevertheless, such studies have been instrumental in debunking many myths about these systems. However, no study has ever tried to pull them all together into a structure suitable for analysis. This literature review is intended to fill this gap. It is also intended as a necessary precursor to further work by FAO on LKMS, such as case studies, analytical studies, and training programmes.
This report was initiated by the Community Forestry Unit of the Policy and Planning Service of the Forestry Department of FAO. It is one of a series of studies designed to clarify local decision making, priorities, and knowledge in the management of tree and forest related resources. This report has benefited from a collaborative approach between technical experts from several divisions and services of FAO; namely, Community Forestry Unit, Forest Resources Division, Grassland and Pasture Crops, Land Tenure, Farming Systems, and Environment Groups. Much of the literature on which this report is based, are unpublished papers and otherwise obscure documents, that were collected over an 8 month period as a result of assistance and collaboration from a large network of development workers, academicians, and students. Their contribution is greatly acknowledged.
1.1 LKMS in the development process
After almost half a century of development activities in the arid and semi-arid lands of Africa, we are no closer to finding solutions to pressing problems such as economic stagnation and environmental degradation. The many reasons for the failure of development in these areas has been amply documented elsewhere². Some of the salient points are inappropriate technologies, inappropriate or incomplete research, and lack of or inappropriate management. These problems have led some development workers to propose a closer linkage between traditional agricultural systems and knowledge, and modern, scientific technologies. Although LKMS has been the subject of academic concern ever since anthropologist started their studies in Third World countries, it is only recently that its potential role in development has come under consideration.
Contrary to what the term may imply, "traditional" or "local" knowledge is not necessarily simple, does not occur in a vacuum, is ever changing, and very often borrows from the outside^3. Although systems and knowledge may appear constant in the short run, it is rare to find systems that have remained unchanged for centuries. Even the Dina land use code of the Macina Fulani (see section 2.3.3) is now different from when it was originally established in the mid 1800's^4.
An understanding of LKMS reflects a greater need and willingness to consider particular problems and potentials at the local level. LKMS is not well suited to developing scientific universals that are generalizable across a wide range of situations, but it allows a greater understanding of the heterogeneity (or "ecological particularism")^5 of local conditions.
Much (but not necessarily all) of LKMS is based on accurate, detailed, and thoughtful observations collected and passed on over many generations. "Farmers are well-informed decision makers" who combine information and techniques to maximize production and minimize risk^6. Much can be learnt from the local people which may prove useful for development efforts. Modern technology usually comes in bits and pieces, and in order to fit it effectively into and build upon the local system, we need to have a thorough understanding of the LKMS^7.
In the past 10-15 years, efforts at helping the small producer have had little positive impact because of the failure to seriously incorporate popular participation into the process - either inappropriate innovations were put forward, or the project or programme ended up supporting the least appropriate groups in the community^8. The study of LKMS followed by incorporation of LKMS into developing adaptable technologies, can be effective means to increase the extension agent's and development worker's sensitivity to local needs, and stimulate meaningful dialogue between all participants in the development process^9.
But perhaps, one of the most important advantages of using traditional systems is that they contain mechanisms (if still viable) "which promote relatively equitable access to the resources by the weaker and poorer members of society"^10, thus furthering our goal of reaching the poor rural populations.
It is important not to romanticize LKMS. We need to redress the balance, but not to end up in the opposite extreme. The increasing call for studying LKMS is not a "sterile collectors' mania for bits and pieces of local lore"^11, but a genuine attempt to see what role LKMS can play in the development process. "A sentimental belief in 'traditional values' and a gut feeling that the 'people know best' without knowing why and under what circumstances, will be... unhelpful and damaging to the prospects of rural development in the long run"^12.
A combination of formal science and LKMS, or "technology sharing" between the two^13 may prove to be an effective development approach. Paul Richards expressed it quite well when he said "... an idea borrowed from the people, developed by the agronomist [or ranger or forester] and returned to the people again is much more likely to be adopted than something totally alien to the culture"^14. A combination of LKMS and formal science can draw on the strengths of both. Traditional decision making is flexible and fluid (both in time and in its objectives) because it depends on changing circumstances, but it lacks planning powers. Modern planning has fixed goals, objectives and techniques, but needs periodic feedback mechanisms to provide it with flexibility.
But not all LKMS remains intact. There are those that are still successfully in use, but often only very locally; those that are still in use but no longer meet the increased pressure of changing land use and other socio-economic changes; and those relatively recently abandoned for various reasons^15. Whether traditional systems should be revived or modified, and the optimum mix between formal science and LKMS needs to be worked out in the field because it depends on the aspect being studied, the social conditions, the phase of R & D^16, the logistical means, and above all, the viability of the LKMS. Viability, in this context, is meant to include both the degree of survival of the LKMS, and its appropriateness to the present-day constraints and development needs.
In combining traditional and modern systems, several advantages can emerge. The development worker concerned with natural resource management, gains an additional constituency, recruits personnel with profound knowledge of local areas who can provide lessons on long term adapted resource strategies. The local people gain the legal recognition of their ecologically-sound traditional land use practices, see appropriate utilization of their traditional lands, and gain new advocates at the national and international level^17.
Just as development workers in the area of cultivation systems are turning to LKMS for help, there is an increasing call for pastoral development projects and programmes to set aside old myths and to consider the value of pastoral LKMS for development.
1.2 Some definitions
In this paper, LKMS will refer to the local, folk repository of technical knowledge and management systems, and is differentiated from "formal science" which refers to western style science. The definition of the related term "ethnoscience" appears to differ among researchers. Some authors equate it with LKMS ^18, whereas others define it as the study of LKMS^19. In this report, the term "ethnoscience" will be avoided.
Much has been written and said about pastoral production systems, and yet, we are still far from agreeing upon a uniform set of terms to describe them all. In part, this problem stems from the great heterogeneity and overlap between different systems, so that it is hard to categorize them under standardized definitions.
Pastoral systems, hunting-gathering (including fishing), and "sylvo-transhumance" are the main production systems within arid and semi-arid lands. Many production systems can be classed as "transition" systems (in a classificatory sense, not necessarily evolutionary). Pastoral systems can be grouped under two main types: transhumant, and agropastoral. Transhumant systems involve migration between regular seasonal areas. They include "nomadic" systems, but this term often falsely connotes "anarchic" movements, whereas most if not all migratory systems involve some kind of regular movement, at least between dry and wet season areas, or between pastures and salt licks, etc. These can be divided into short and long transhumance, which are distinguished by the distances travelled, length of stay in one place, and amount of herd splitting (see BOX 1.1).
Agropastoral systems are defined as those that, in addition to livestock production, involve some form of crop cultivation. These range from the transhumants who are opportunistic farmers (they plant a crop on their way north to wet season pastures, and harvest it on their way south), to sedentary farmers who raise only a few livestock, and do not transhume. And in between are many different degrees of transhumance, number of livestock raised, type of crops planted, etc. (see BOX 1.1).
BOX 1.1
The groups that practice long transhumance will generally spend only a small part of the year at their permanent homestead (where there is usually a permanent well), and/or will leave only a small part of their livestock there. Otherwise they move between wet and dry season pastures that may be more than 100 km apart. In general, pastoralists of north Africa, who have to escape both the snow and cold weather of the mountains and the heat of the plains, will go from the Sahara foothills and mountains in the summer to the lower, mediterranean plains in the winter^23. In East and Southern Africa, the transhumance pattern is generally between highlands and lowlands, for example among the Basotho of Lesotho^24, the Borana of southern Ethiopia^25, and in Madagascar^26, or between the plateaux and floodplains, as with the Maasai of Amboseli^27, Lozi of Northwest Zimbabwe^28, and the Twich, Ghol and Nyarraweng Dinka of Kongor (Sudan)^29. Transhumance in West Africa and the more arid
parts of the Sahel is generally north to south following the rains, such as the majority of the Fulani, but in parts of Benin and Cameroon, pastoralists transhume between highlands and lowlands^30.
Short transhumance is usually a feature of agropastoral groups who have large number of livestock, but in a few cases fully pastoral peoples can be classified as such. For example the Somali living in Ethiopia live along the river for most of the year, but will transhume a short distance to salt licks and calcareous savannas^31.
Transhumants who are "opportunistic" farmers usually live in the more arid parts of Africa. They plant millet on their way north with the rains, and leaving it to the vagaries of nature and other men, will return only in time to harvest whatever has successfully ripened. Some examples are the Baggara of northern Sudan^32 and the Moors of Mauritania^33.
Agropastoralists who practice some form of transhumance will usually split their herd, leaving the "milk" herd permanently at the homestead, and sending the rest on short transhumance. Some examples are the Ngok Dinka of Abyei^34, the Tonga of southern Zambia^35, and the Twareg and Fulani of northern Burkina Faso^36. But many other agropastoralists have only a few livestock, and do not send them on transhumance. They generally do not consider meat as important as cereals, and milk is drunk only by women, children and the herd boys. Examples are the Lowiili of southern Burkina Faso^37, and the Kikuyu of Kenya^38.
There are still a few hunter-gatherer groups in Africa, such as the Bushmen of Kalahari, the Pygmies of the former Belgian Congo and French Equatorial Africa, and the Dorobo of northern Tanzania^20. Their mobility pattern is shaped both by the availability of water and that of wild foods, although at least among the Bushmen the latter tends to be more important^21. Some consider hunting and gathering to be "an anachronism from the days of sparse population and endless territory"^22 implying that they will gradually disappear, but recent trends (see section 4.2) suggest that these groups tend to retain much of their traditional production system while diversifying into livestock or crop production.
Another form of pastoral production can be called "sylvo-transhumance". Although the example comes from Iran, it is worth mentioning, if only to raise the question of its existence in Africa. The Lutfi of southern Iran herd shoats between highlands and lowlands, but will also cultivate semi-wild, non-irrigated orchards of almonds, figs, grapes, walnuts, and rose bushes, which they tend, and harvest the products for sale in urban centers, during their annual transhumance^39.
Endnotes
1. Carlier 1987.
2. For example, Sandford 1983.
3. McCorkle 1986; Warren 1986, p. 1.
4. Sandford 1984, p. 1.
5. Richards 1985, p. 10.
6. Brokensha & Riley 1980b, p. 265.
7. Brokensha & Riley 1980b, pp. 264-265.
8. Richards 1985, p. 17.
9. Warren & Meehan 1980, p. 318.
10. Odell 1982, p. 6.
11. Chambers.
12. Richards 1980, p. 192.
13. Guggenheim & Fanale 1976, cited in Howes 1980, p. 347.
14. Richards 1975, p. 110.
15. Stigter 1987, p. 5.
16. Howes 1980, p. 328.
17. Brownrigg 1981 cited in Clad 1985, p. 47.
18. Knight 1974b, p. 61; Knight 1980, p. 215; Richards 1980, p. 192.
19. Warren & Meehan 1980; Leff 1985, p. 265; McCorkle 1986, p. 129.
20. Allan 1965, p. 260.
21. Campbell 1971, p. 109.
22. Biesele 1971, p. 66.
23. Despois 1961, p. 225.
24. S.D. Turner, Maseru, Lesotho, pers. comm. 1988.
25. Helland 1982, p. 246.
26. Ba 1982, p. 19.
27. Western & Dunne, 1979, p. 76.
28. Gluckman 1951, p. 9.
29. McDermott & Ngor 1983, p. 3.
30. Ba 1982, p. 19.
31. Guillaumet 1972, p. 76.
32. Adams 1982, p. 263.
33. Wilson 1986, p. 25.
34. Niamir 1982.
35. Allan et al. 1948, p. 117.
36. Barral 1977, p. 58.
37. Goody 1956, p. 29.
38. Middleton & Kershaw 1972, p. 18.
39. Amanolahi 1986, p. 359.
<section>3</section>
2. LOCAL KNOWLEDGE AND SYSTEMS OF NATURAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT
2.1 Descriptive and predictive knowledge
Endnotes
2.2 Management practices
Endnotes
2.3 Organization of management
2.4 Analysis
Endnotes
This chapter attempts to provide as wide a cross section as possible of the different types of LKMS among the peoples of arid and semi-arid lands of Africa. It first discusses the descriptive knowledge: how they use their natural resources, how they name and classify them, and how they understand the inter-relationships between the resources.
In a second section, the discussion focuses on how the local people manage (harvest, process, store, etc.) their natural resources on a daily basis, and what impact these practices have on the natural resources. It touches on traditional herd and range management practices, management of trees and shrubs, water, hay and fodder, and other resources including wildlife and wild plant gathering.
In the final section, the social, economic, and political organization and control over natural resources is discussed. It covers a brief view of production systems and strategies, natural resource tenure, the occurrence of reserves and protected areas, and the means by which these rules are enforced.
2.1 Descriptive and predictive knowledge
2.1.1 Forms of utilization of natural resources
2.1.2 Descriptive knowledge
2.1.3 Ecology and biogeography
2.1.4 Analysis
The study of descriptive knowledge, the way people describe their physical environment, can provide insights into how local peoples categorize and perceive their environment. It shows what the people consider important and practical. We can gain an understanding of how much control they perceive as having over the elements, and what they base their future expectations and predictions on. In this section, a brief review of what they use natural resources for, is followed by how they name, classify, and describe physical elements, and how they perceive ecological interrelationships.
2.1.1 Forms of utilization of natural resources
All natural resources in pastoral areas are used for both productive and non-productive uses. Water, perhaps the most important item in an arid environment, is used for both human and animal consumption, cleanliness, coolness, fishing, and certain rituals. Soil is used for pottery, for making adobe bricks (in the case of settled or partially settled agropastoralists), for extracting iron and copper by specialized guilds, and as salt licks for livestock. But by far the most diverse use is made of plant, and to a lesser extent wildlife, resources.
Plants provide food, fuel, fodder, timber and fibre for tools and construction of houses and fences, crafts, dyes, musical instruments, weapons, utensils, medicine, and other ritual products. In addition, they are used for shade, as landmarks for orientation in space, for salt and oil, to build smoke fires to keep insects at bay, to extract poisons, as a source of drinking water, as sugar, to make alcoholic beverages, etc. (see BOX 2.1).
BOX 2.1
Of the many studies on the uses of plants among pastoralists, a few can be mentioned as examples. Among the Mossi and Basi agropastoralists of southeast Burkina Faso, young boys gather hay for calves, medicinal plants which their father tells them to gather when necessary, and smoke producing plants to ward off insects at the corral^6. The Lugbara of northwest Uganda collect a certain plant, from whose ash they obtain salt^7. The Tonga of Zambia harvest Dactyloctenium aegyptium, Brachiaria spp, Panicum spp, Echinochloa spp, Rottboellia spp, Urochloa spp, and wild sorghum as cereals during famines, and supplement food with leaf relishes. These provide them with sources of vitamins, minerals, proteins and fats. They also use plants for tools, building material, fibre, salt, medicine, poisons, etc.^8 During the drought of 1972, the Twareg of Niger ate wild seeds and leaves, and searched for seeds in ant and termite hills^9. The seeds of waterlilies are used by the Dinka of
southern Sudan to make beer^10.
The Bushmen of Kalahari eat mangetti nut which has 5 times the calories and 10 times the protein of most cereals. This nut makes up two thirds of the vegetable diet of theakung bushmen. The /Gwi bushmen do not have access to drinking water for long stretches of the dry season and get it from the tsama melon and rumen of animals^11. The Zaghawa of Chad and Sudan harvest many annual grasses for food and beer (D. aegyptium, Echinochloa colona, Panicum laetum, Eragrostis pilosa, and Oryza breviligulata). Cenchrus biflorus and Tribulus terrestris seeds (and leaves of latter) are used only during famine. Herders eat wild fruits on the job. Plants are also used for sugar, flour, nuts, and medicine^12.
Many studies have been done on the form of utilization of plants among pastoralists^1. They show that plant gathering occurs from the northern Sahara to the more humid zones^2. Hunter-gatherer groups are more dependent on wild plant resources as permanent source of food than pastoralists^3. The latter often will use it as a food supplement, relish or snack in normal times, and as emergency famine food during droughts, but other non-food uses are essential features of their daily life, for example among the Tonga of Zambia^4, and the Mbeere of Kenya^5.
Although use of wild plants by pastoralists is usually for self-consumption, some families in each group will specialize in collecting and selling them. For example, one Wodaabe Fulani family from Niger specializes in collecting medicinal plants and selling them in the early dry season on their transhumant route into Mali, Cote d'Ivoire and Guinea^13.
Almost all plant species are used for something, making it difficult to write some plants off as "unimportant" or "undesirable", as is usually done in most reseeding and revegetation programmes. For example, among the Tonga of Zambia, of 222 species studied, 93% had a use^14. The diversity of plants used for food and medicine alone can be high. For example, among the Pokot of Kenya, out of 307 plant species identified by botanist, 20% were used for food, and 39% for medicine^15.
Animals and insects are used for food, tools, and indicators of ecological dynamics. However, their consumption as food among pastoralists is often accompanied by taboos that restrict the consumption or killing of certain species to certain groups of people. For example, among the Turkana some animals are not eaten because of supernatural powers or because of ancestral taboos^16. Among the Zaghawa, although insects, locusts, caterpillars, eggs, and honey are eaten by all, only non-circumcised children and members of the blacksmith caste can eat rabbits, and small birds^17 (see section 2.2.5 for more on taboos).
The diversity in the use of animals is usually less than in plants, and can vary even among neighboring groups. For example, among the Turkana, 103 out of 148 mammals and birds are eaten, whereas the Rendille only eat 6 species, all ungulates^18.
2.1.2 Descriptive knowledge
2.1.2.1 Climate
2.1.2.2 Soils and geomorphology
2.1.2.3 Plants and vegetation types
2.1.2.4 Water
2.1.2.5 Livestock
2.1.2.6 Wildlife
2.1.2.7 Traditional veterinary and human medicine
2.1.2.8 Measurement systems
2.1.2.1 Climate
The local knowledge of climatic patterns, their variability in space and time, and the ways in which it is predicted, forms an indispensible part of the information the pastoralist and farmer need to survive. Our study of the detailed "weather lore" of local people is important because it reflects the great spatial variation in tropical rainfall^19, as well as how they have organized their daily agricultural (farming and herding) tasks to fit the climatic patterns. The local calendar is more flexible than the western calendar (i.e. does not necessarily have a set number of days per season) because it is linked to both climatic variability and agricultural activities^20.
The classification of climatic events into seasons and sub-seasons ranges from very detailed categories to a simple system of a few classes. No matter what the actual climatic pattern (and in arid and semi-arid Africa it can vary from one rainy season to two separate rainy seasons), the minimum number of categories appears to be three seasons (e.g. the Fulani of Yatenga, northern Burkina Faso^21), and the maximum 8 (e.g. the Wodaabe Fulani, whose eight categories are related to both climatic patterns, and forage phenology and value^22). The majority of the Sahelo-sudanian pastoralists recognize 4 or 5 seasons (e.g. the Twareg of Niger^23, Fulani of the Niger River Delta^24, Fulani of south central Mauritania^25, the people of western Chad^26, and the Zaghawa of Chad and Sudan^27).
Local knowledge can vary within the same ethnic group, especially if it is a large group dispersed over a large area, such as the Fulani. For example, the Fulani of Yatenga recognize only 3 seasons^28, but the Fulani of the Niger River delta distinguish 4 seasons based on rainfall patterns, not flood patterns^29, and the Wodaabe Fulani of Niger recognize 8 seasons^30. Given that the climatic pattern in these three areas are not dissimilar, the variation could be due to either different information eliciting techniques among the researchers, or due to cultural influences (or both).
The etiology of the traditional calendar can provide useful hints on how agricultural activities are organized. The names of the climatic categories usually refer to a prominent climatic characteristic (e.g. rains vs. dry), specific agricultural activities (e.g. dispersion of herds during mid rains) or social events that are conducted at that time (e.g. marriages). A good example in point is the Turkana of northern Kenya^31.
Prominent drought years are well remembered. For example, the Moors and Fulani of Mauritania still remember the 1913 drought, the former calling it after Boscia senegalensis (because they had to eat its fruit) the latter calling it rice, because they got famine aid from the French^32. The Turkana remember drought patterns well, maintaining that only about one year in four or five has a 'good wet season'^33.
Climatic predictions are based on countless years of accumulated observations. In some cases, they may be accurate, in others not. For example, the Rendille of northern Kenya base their predictions on the constellations of stars, lunar phases, cloud patterns, but also the viscera of animals^34.
There are predictors (indicators) for the onset of rains, the quality of rains, the end of rains, droughts, etc. These indicators can range from the movement of birds, frogs, ants, and other fauna, to changes in plant phenology and meteorological conditions such as changes in air temperature, lightening patterns, etc. (see BOX 2.2).
BOX 2.2
The Turkana of Kenya say that several birds (ground hornbill, green wood hoopoe, spotted eagle owl, and night jar) and frogs are prophets of rain^35. In western Kenya people use indicators of frogs, birds, white ants, lightening and rise in swamp waters to forecast rainfall^36. In Zaria, Nigeria, certain birds indicate a drought^37. In northeast Tanzania, the indicators of beginning of rains are (in order of frequency of response): increase in temperature, lightening, change in patterns and behavior of birds, insects and mammals, and three different types of plant changes (flowering, new leaves, grass wilting). In the same area, forecasts of end of rains depends mostly on meteorological factors (ie. drizzling or steady rainfall, wind strength, temp change, etc.), but also fauna (e.g. bee swarms, birds changing color) and flora (ripening of seeds, decline in bamboo fluid, etc.)^38.
The Fulani of Mauritania predict seasons by the position of the stars; for example, when the big dipper "jungo niiwi" is directly above (ie. August) then it is time for the most abundant rains, and when its tail is pointing to the top then it is the end of the rainy season^39. In western Nigeria, farmers start planting when the new leaves of the baobab tree (Adansonia digitata) and Chlorophora excelsa appear, and when the "konkoto" bird stops singing^40.
The quality of the rainfall (i.e. its quantity and distribution overtime and space) is usually evaluated after the end of the season, based primarily on meteorological factors. For example in northeastern Tanzania, some factors are the distribution of rains, fogs, sunshine periods, etc.^41. Only one record was found of the prediction of the quality of rainfall; namely, the Kamba farmers of Kenya believe that a rainbow means no or little rain will follow^42.
The knowledge of weather patterns can vary among different people in the same community. Not everyone will know the same level of detail. For example, among the Somali, the "cilmi curraaf" are the ones who have vast knowledge of both local weather lore and traditional medicine^43.
In order to effectively use the LKMS on climate, we need more information on how far in advance the local people make forecasts, and the standard deviation of accuracy of forecasts compared to actual events^44.
2.1.2.2 Soils and geomorphology
All records indicate that the knowledge of soil types and their quality and potential for agricultural use is quite high among pastoralists. In many cases, the soil classification system is very similar to the one used by formal science (e.g. see BOX 2.3), but it often tends to be detailed only if a particular use is made of the soil type^45. Thus it is very closely linked to land use potentials (whether pastures or farmland). For example, the Somali distinguish 4 types of soils based on their suitability for grazing different livestock^46.
BOX 2.3
The Bambara agropastoralists of Mali have one of the most complete soil classification systems. They distinguish 7 major soil types, which very regularly correspond to western soil texture types. The level of classification is not equally detailed for all soil groups. The most detailed division is for the sandy soil, due to the fact that these are used for cultivation. They also distinguish soil color - not just hue but also greyness/brightness and darkness/lightness (similar to formal science). They also classify soils according to their inundation potential, ease of cultivation and potential for certain crops^47.
Local soil classification is also based on visual characters, as recorded among the Fulani of northern Senegal^48, although soil textural differences, presumably based on the "feel method" (as in formal science) are also recognized. In addition, soils may be further differentiate according to whether they are covered by gravel, or whether it is the dry or wet season, as among the Zaghawa of Chad and Sudan^49, according to their moisture characteristics, as among the Mbozi of Southern Tanzania^50, their geomorphological characteristics, as among the Wodaabe^51, or their value as salt licks for livestock, as among the Twareg of Niger, where the "taferkast" is the best salt lick^52. Finally, soil types may be used to differentiate other natural resources. For example, the Somali of Bay region differentiate their natural ponds and depressions based on soil types^53.
The names of soil types and categories are seldom duplicated, as in vegetation nomenclature, but tend to be less detailed than the latter^54 (see below). Soil names are very particular to each ethnic group. However, in some cases, the same word may mean different things for different groups. For example, the Twareg and Gaobe Fulani who live in the same area (northern Burkina Faso) have different meanings for the word "seno": for the former it refers to a distinct topographical feature (ancient dunes), while for the latter, it connotes its use and potential for agriculture^55.
Compared to LKMS on climate and plants, the LKMS of soils among pastoralists has not been covered well. More research is needed on their classification system, their knowledge of the relations between soils and pasture types, and how they evaluate soil differences.
2.1.2.3 Plants and vegetation types
The knowledge of plants is perhaps the most refined aspect of LKMS among pastoralists. The simplest classification of plants corresponds to the specific epithet level in the western Linnean classification system, but some groups distinguish higher categories of classification, such as genus and families (see BOX 2.4).
BOX 2.4
The Somali living in Ethiopia have names for every single plant species^56, and the Zaghawa of Chad/Sudan have a classification system very similar to the botanical one^57. The Suiei Dorobo hunter/gatherers of northern Kenya, have several higher categories: the highest three divisions are 1) grasses and Cyperaceae, 2) parasites and cryptogams, 3) all other plants. The latter is divided into herbs, vines, trees and shrubs. Some plants have a binomial nomenclature (like the Linnean system)^58. The Gabra of northern Kenya recognize not only species, but also three Families: Graminae, Capparaceae, and Burseraceae^59.
In almost all cases, classification and nomenclature of plants are based on plant morphology, phenology and use. In many cases, the same name may be given to different plants (a "generic" name), usually because there is no practical reason for differentiating the plants, although the people do know the differences. Finally, the same plant may be classified and named according to different criteria, resulting in several names for the same plant (see BOX 2.5).
BOX 2.5
Plant nomenclature and classification is usually based on its morphology and phenology. Some examples were found among the Somali^60, nomads of Wabe Shebelle valley in Ethiopia^61, Wodaabe Fulani of Niger^62, and the Turkana of Kenya^63. In Sudan, Heliotropium spp. (a member of the Borraginaceae family with scorpioid inflorescence) are called "tail of scorpion"^64. The Turkana of Kenya have more generic names among herbs than trees and shrubs^65, reflecting, perhaps, the greater diversity of use of the latter for both human and animal food.
Among the Suiei Dorobo, the same plant will be called differently depending on the attribute that one wishes to emphasize, such as "medicinal", "toxic", etc.^66. In addition, the plants that have common characters have another generic name on top of their specific one^67. The Dogon of Mali too, will name plants according to their therapeutic value for human diseases^68. The Mbeere of Kenya have utilitarian categories for plants, such as shade, perfume, and bedding^69. The Arab pastoralists of the Sahel have special names for barks of those trees that are used for tannin^70. Phenological changes in plants are often reflected in several names for the same plant corresponding to the early vegetative stages, flowering, senescence, etc. For example, the Wodaabe Fulanidifferentiate mature vs. young green grass^71, and the Dinka give different name to different phenological stages of Hyparrhenia rufa depending mainly on its forage value for roofing thatch^72.
Usually the local people's names, knowledge and classification of plants is more pragmatic and immediately utilitarian than the formal scientist's. For example, in Sudan, all plants that are not useful or good forage are given the names of useless or less respected animals (e.g. rat, ass, etc.)^73. Some author's speculate that where a plant has a name but no recorded use, then the traditional knowledge on how to use the plant must be lost^74. However, it is also quite likely that some plants are named not for their utilitarian value, but because they are considered as beautiful, unusual, or prominent.
Knowledge of the botany of plants can be quite detailed. All groups have different names for plant parts, such as roots, stems, bark, flowers, etc. For example, the Twareg distinguish leaves that are simple, from pennate ones^75.
The local people also have an intimate knowledge of the characteristics and values of different plants. For example, their value in stimulating milk and meat production in livestock, their toxicity, saltiness, and medicinal value, their ability to indicate the agricultural potential of a soil, and their prominent characteristics (such as prolific fruiters, fast rate of growth, etc.) (see BOX 2.6).
BOX 2.6
The Pokot and Turkana of Kenya recognize the seasonal availability of different plants and their role in stimulating greater milk and meat yields^76. The Wodaabe of Niger know that Zornia glochidiata is toxic to livestock only in its beginning, vegetative stages. They also know that certain plants are salty, e.g. Ipomoea acanthocarpa, and will deliberately take their livestock to graze on them during the rainy season^77. The Mbozi of southern Tanzania use plants to indicate the agricultural potential of an area^78. Among the Samburu of Kenya, blessings refer to trees. For example, to bear as many children as the "enparuei" tree, to live as long as the "nkusuman" tree, to be as sweet as the "seiye" tree, and to have peace as the "lokorosio" tree^79.
Some plant species may be considered good by some groups, but bad by others. For example, Cenchrus biflorus is considered bad by the Zaghawa, but in the northern Sahel it is considered a good early wet season pasture, and seeds are collected for food. Similarly, Calotropis procera which invades degraded areas and is considered as noxious by most people, is used for house-post by the Daza of Bourkou^80. Therefore, the value of plants is a relative one that varies with the environment, time and cultural background.
Vegetation communities are usually classed according to broad divisions, within which further sub-divisions are made. The classification and nomenclature of vegetation types and communities is usually defined by a combination of integrated factors, such as the dominant plant species, the soil type, and the shape of the landscape (see BOX 2.7).
BOX 2.7
The Maasai of Kenya differentiate between pastures and the "wilderness" (the former used for grazing, the latter for hunting), and divide pastures into lowland (wet season) and highland (dry season) areas^81. The Fulani of northern Burkina Faso recognize 4 major vegetation communities, each divided into different range types^82. The Zaghawa distinguish many different range types, depending on their forage value (coarse, tender, salty, poisonous, etc.) and effect on livestock (constipating, irritating, nutritious, etc.)^83. The Mbozi of Southern Tanzania have several broad vegetation types, but in the same type will have different names according to the density of vegetation^84. The Wodaabe categorize plants according to the type of soil they grow on and in which they are best suited to^85. The Twareg distinguish many different woodlands, e.g. "efei" is a large area with big trees, "afara" is an area with a mixture of trees, bushes and herbs, "taferfera" is a dense thicket,
"agoras" is a line of riparian trees, "abatol" is a small, isolated wooded area, "amesekni" is an isolated, remarkable tree in the middle of grassland/desert, or an isolated tree of one species in the middle of a forest which is used as a point of reference^86.
Not all people will have an equal amount of knowledge about their local vegetation. For example, among the Mbeere of Kenya, older women know annual herbs best, herd boys know wild edible fruits best, and honey collectors know most about the phenology of flowering. Even within a group, an individual may stand out because of "keen powers of observation, prodigious memory, curiosity and intellect."^87
Most studies on plant LKMS are restricted to presenting an alphabetical list of plant species and their equivalent local names and etiology of the names. More work needs to be done on systems of plant classification, botanical names and divisions, and plant identification.
2.1.2.4 Water
The study of local water systems, although fairly well developed for rainfed and irrigated cropping systems, is less easily found among pastoralists. Most pastoralists will have different names for different types of water points, such as wells (large, small, etc.) and natural ponds^88. For example, the Twareg of Niger differentiate a chain of ponds from a single pond^89. The Fulani of Senegal also differentiate water points for human use (that are cleaner) from those for livestock use^90. In addition, many groups have a fine-tuned art of detecting the location and quantity/quality of ground water, detailed knowledge of geological strata, and elaborate systems for evaluating the quality and duration of natural ponds (see BOX 2.8). Much of this knowledge, if tested against formal science, may prove to be accurate and useful in helping to design new water points. For example, the Zaghawa of Chad and Sudan consider Acacia albida to be an indicator of good ground water for
permanent wells. Botanists agree because of the tree's long tap root^91.
BOX 2.8
The treatise of A.S. Ba (1982) provides a rare but detailed look into the "water lore" of the Fulani of Mauritania. They have a detailed art of detecting ground water. Their indicators are based on topography (e.g. shallow aquifers can be found near natural ponds or in depressions of mountains), on plant species (especially tap-rooted trees such as Bauhinia rufescens, Tamaris senegalensis, Capparis decidua, and Acacia albida, but also perennial grasses, such as Vetivera nigritana, and Panicum anababtismum), and the health or vigor of the plants, such as the greenness of leaves during the year. Other indicators are based on fauna (e.g. wild boars only live where they can dig and find moist soil; other animals that prefer to stay around moist places are caimans, amphibious lizards, tortoise, band of butterflies, some bird species, and many termite hills). The Fulani also are familiar with the geological strata in their area, and that they must dig through the whole layer of
red or grey clayey soil and arrive at the sandy layer before finding ground water. A good quality ground water that is clear, sweet, and has a good mineral content, is indicated by the presence of Guiera senegalensis, B. rufescens, termite hills, and the depth of wells (the deeper, the better quality).
The best quality natural ponds are indicated by the presence of water lilies, followed by Acacia nilotica, and Mitragyna inermis. Bad, diseased water, is indicated by the presence of the grass Echinochloa pyramidalis. Water quality is also tested by immersing a leather container in it. The best water does nothing to the leather, and as the quality of water deteriorates, the intensity and duration of the color of the leather will change to white, black, red or finally yellow/orange. Water quality is also evaluated by its effect on livestock, especially their behavior after drinking (whether they are content or not) and the yield of milk^92.
Similar information needs to be gathered on other pastoral groups. In addition, the pastoralists' knowledge of watershed hydrology, such as rates of runoff and silting of natural ponds, need to be considered.
2.1.2.5 Livestock
The pastoralist's knowledge of his livestock will be touched upon only briefly. Besides knowing what types of forage are preferred by his different animals, and how often they need water, the pastoralist also knows a lot about their behavior and other needs (see BOX 2.9).
BOX 2.9
The Rendille of northern Kenya say that camels prefer silty, chalky soil, cattle prefer lateritic and montmorillonitic soils, and shoats (sheep and goats) prefer lateritic and hard stony ground^93. The Fulani believe that cattle are more intelligent than shoats, because they can "remember" the location of water, salt, good pasture, etc., after being shown only once, and are able to detect predators better^94. The Wodaabe of Niger say that dew is good for cattle but not camels^95. The Twareg of Niger, and many other pastoralists, know that livestock have to use salt licks to purge parasites. The Twareg also know that their livestock have to graze on Ipomoea acanthocarpa each year; this herb has been shown to contain significant amounts of vitamin A^96.
The pastoralist knows his livestock in a very intimate way, much as a westerner would, for example, know his show-jumping horse. Each individual animal has its own name, based on its age/sex, physical characteristics (color, horn shape, etc.), salient behavior and personality, and ownership brand, as among the Fulani of Mauritania^97, and the Turkana of Kenya^98.
Knowledge of his livestock defines how the pastoralist uses the natural resources. For example, they define whether he will herd them continuously or not, or whether he will use certain pastures at specific times of the year.
Livestock management, including the LKMS on livestock behavior and needs, is one topic that is amply touched upon by most researchers. However, rarely is an attempt made to show how this information helps the herder to make decisions concerning the use of natural resources.
2.1.2.6 Wildlife
In most cases, wild animals are classified and named at the species level, although generic names for non-important species can also be found (for example, among Turkana of Kenya^99). Differentiation into sub-divisions usually occurs if the fauna are also eaten, used, or are important pests in the production cycle. For example, the Hausa agropastoralists of Niger aggregate all locusts and grasshoppers in three levels, but ants and termites are classed only at the species level^100.
In addition, wildlife can be classified according to their value. The Turkana divide all wildlife into good ("themselves") and bad ("enemies")^101. In most cases, wildlife nomenclature is distinct for each ethnic group. However, variation in names can occur even among sub-tribes. For example, the Kel Tamachek (Twareg) of Air call the cheetah what the Kel Tamachek of Ouadalan call the serval^102.
The pastoralists' knowledge of the behavior of wildlife may not be as detailed as the hunter/gatherers (see BOX 2.10), but nevertheless it is high. For example, the Zaghawa of Chad and Sudan have a sophisticated knowledge of animal tracks^103. The people of southern Chad also know of a certain bird that indicates the presence of a bee colony, and the value of different trees for attracting bee colonies; e.g. Khaya senegalensis is thought to be bad for bees, which may be due to its bitter resin and nectar^104.
BOX 2.10
The !kung San of northwest Botswana and northeast Namibia are described by Blurton Jones & Konner (1987). Their knowledge of wildlife behavior includes much attention to details of behavior and ecology of practically every animal. They make a distinction between data (actual observations) and hearsay, and generally avoid making inferences unless they have strong observational links. Their knowledge is also dependent on what they find necessary or common sensical to observe. For example, they do not know whether the lion's cub's eyes are open at birth or not, because they say it is foolish to approach the lioness so close at that time. In addition, they have a rich mythology of animal behavior that may appear "non-rational" (e.g. being possessed by birds). However, some of their observations have helped western scientists. For example, their observation that quelea, a major crop-damaging bird, will strip leaves off the end of branches a few days before coming to rest there,
has helped scientists in their quelea population surveys^105.
2.1.2.7 Traditional veterinary and human medicine
The knowledge of diseases and their cure is quite high among all rural populations, who have had to depend on local means to mitigate the effects of diseases. The study of veterinary and human medicinal LKMS has gained quite a momentum^106. One aspect that directly or indirectly affects natural resources is the knowledge of epidemiology, i.e. the presence of diseases, contagious or otherwise^107, which then determines the pastoralists' use and avoidance of certain areas until all signs of the disease have disappeared. The Fulani of Yatenga (northern Burkina Faso) may not make the connection between tse tse flies and trypanosomiasis^108, but they do know that they have to avoid tse tse infested areas, otherwise their animals will get "sick".
The knowledge of traditional cures, especially of traditional vaccination techniques against some of the diseases (see BOX 2.11), allows the pastoralist greater freedom in selecting infected pastures.
BOX 2.11
The pastoralists of Mali [unfortunately unspecified by author] have traditional vaccination techniques^109. The Wodaabe Fulani of Niger have a traditional method of vaccinating against Contagious Bovine Pleuropneumonia and smallpox^110. The Fulani of west central Burkina Faso vaccinate their cattle against rinderpest by inserting a part of the diseased lung of a dead animal, or injecting the solution in which the lung tissue has been soaked, into an incision of the nose of a healthy one, and leaving it there until the wound festers. The Fulani of Senegal and Mauritania also have a similar technique for bovine pneumonias^111. The fact that several Fulani groups, so geographically dispersed, have similar vaccination techniques, suggests that the original LKMS, before the groups separated, has remained intact through the centuries.
2.1.2.8 Measurement systems
Measurement systems - how people measure time, distance, volume, weight, etc. - are important components of LKMS in that they define how people evaluate productivity and yields, determine what is needed to get from one place to another, and communicate the information to others. No study was found of measurement systems among pastoralists. Two studies among farmers, one in southern and central Ghana^112, and the other in southern Nigeria^113 may help to stimulate research among pastoralists (see BOX 2.12).
BOX 2.12
LKMS measurements may be different from formal science in the standards that are used, but they are similar in that predetermined units form the basis of measurements of time, volume, weight, and length. These units are usually based on parts of the body, or other common objects. People have a very strong memory of the unit, and a strong ability to reproduce it with a non-significant margin of error^114. Another major difference is that geographical distances are measured not by a linear measurement (such as kilometers), but by the amount of time that is necessary to traverse it, a more realistic assessment where straight roads are rarely found. In addition, measurements related to agricultural tasks are based on output per unit of labour, rather than output per unit of land^115.
It is important to understand how farmers, and herders, measure yield, and what the standard deviations of their estimates are, since subsequent innovations must increase yield higher than this standard deviation before they will be adopted by the people^116.
2.1.3 Ecology and biogeography
Most groups have precise systems of classifying and naming each ecological zone, can cite landmarks that form the boundaries of these zones, and are familiar with the spatial location of each feature, be it a plant or a hill. Knowledge of the spatial location and variation of natural resources is an essential and necessary part of the production system, and spatial terms can be described in more complex ways than in western languages (see BOX 2.13).
BOX 2.13
The Somali of Bay region^117 and the Gabra of northern Kenya^118 can locate landmarks that form the boundaries of pastures. Among the latter, every location in the landscape has a story and a significance attached to it^119. The Tallensi of southwest Burkina Faso and northeast Ghana name places based on prominent topographical or geographical features. For example, "nayaberaabo'og" means "cattle poison grass valley" referring to a particular grass that grows there. Each Tallensi individual "knows every rock and tree, and almost every tuft of grass, the quality of soil, and the ownership of farm plots in his or neighboring settlements"^120.
The bushmen of Kalahari can locate plants based on their knowledge of the association between plants and soil types^121. Spatial terms can refer to several related spaces. For example, among the Fulani, Wolof, and Lela the word for "house" can also mean wall around the compound, and an extended family^122. The Tonga and Senegalese Diola names for spatial types have several parameters, including soil, vegetation, topography, geomorphology, agricultural potential, land use, and action needed to use the land (build a fence, dig a ditch, etc.)^123. Among the Konkomba of northwest Togo and northeast Ghana, space has both a geographical and social dimension, so that if two adjacent lands are owned by different social group or lineage, then they are said to be "far" away^124.
Geographical names, especially the cardinal points (north, south etc.), are not necessarily the same as in west. For example, among the Moors and Twareg, the words used for cardinal points are 1) names of certain regions, so north to someone living south of Sahara is "sahel" while "sahel" means south to someone living in the Sahara; 2) among Muslims may be in reference to Mecca, ie. the "right side" is south, and "toward Mecca" is east, etc.; 3) refer to movements of the sun. Among these people constellations are used to define routes and movements, but not necessarily to define cardinal points^125.
Almost all pastoral and fanning groups are familiar with ecological associations, and the relations between climate, soil, vegetation, wildlife, topography, and human occupation. Gaps in knowledge are often filled by religion and mysticism. For example, Yoruba farmers could trace the hydrological cycle from rain to soil to plant to runoff to ocean, but not ocean to cloud and rain, which they then explained by divine providence^126. Unfortunately, similar types of information do not appear to have been collected among pastoralists.
Knowledge of the evolution of a plant community can be very high, especially since it is based on long term, accumulated observations. For example, the Fulani of northwest Burkina Faso^127, the Wodaabe Fulani^128, and the Twareg Illabakan of Niger^129, know how rainfall variations and droughts affect the plant community, and how the morphological and phenological characteristics of plants can help them resist and even take advantage of stress. The Mbozi of southern Tanzania can describe the progress of plant succession in fallow fields^130.
Knowledge of wildlife ecology can be quite high. For example, the Zaghawa of Chad and Sudan are keen observers of wildlife habits, calling their Sahara pastures as the "grazing grounds of the oryx and the soemmering's gazelle"^131. The Maasai and Turkana know movements of wildlife very well, and will try to get to good rangelands before the latter get there. In Amboseli, Maasai enter the swamps after the elephants and buffalo have "improved the structure for cattle"^132.
The process of environmental degradation is another ecological feature that is known in detail. For example, the Fulani of northern Burkina Faso perceive degradation by changes in plant composition^133 and decrease in soil cover, and have names for all the same types of soil degradation that formal science recognizes^134. Both the Fulani and Twareg believe certain rangelands are "dirty" or polluted due to overgrazing, and certain forages are "weak" due to excessive animal pressure^135. The Dinka of Sudan look at the quantity of manure left by livestock in order to detect overuse of the range^136.
The cause of degradation may be overgrazing or other factors. For example, the Fulani of Yatenga recognize that retrogression of perennial grasses is due to overgrazing as well as drought, bush fires, and insufficient time for fallow^137. However, "degradation" may mean different things to different people. Most commonly, as among the Rendille, it is taken to refer to the loss of forage rather than the loss of soil potential^138.
The pastoralists are often accused of not knowing much about ecological dynamism of their environment, and thus causing environmental problems. However, the reason is most certainly due to the fact that researchers have neglected to study it, and not that it does not exist. It is an area that needs to be given immediate priority in research if only because of the grave and pressing problems of environmental degradation in the arid and semi-arid areas of Africa.
2.1.4 Analysis
Local knowledge of natural resources is made up of three types of information: 1) accumulated cultural knowledge, 2) knowledge modified through contact with other cultures, and 3) progressive learning of the environment^139. Descriptive LKMS depends on what they can see and remember without the aid of microscopes, journals and historical records. But their strong memory and incorporation of the knowledge into songs, stories, and daily proverbs allows the information to be passed down generations. For example, the Kel Dinnik Twareg have a game where all the movements, positions, pieces and strategies are named after range and herd management activities and objects^140. These games and stories can be used to gain an understanding of local management strategies.
Most of the descriptive knowledge has an utilitarian character, since it is detailed only if there is a use of a particular resource. However, other types of knowledge do not have an immediate use and yet are part of the local lore. Thus, labeling LKMS as "utilitarian" is just as bad as "irrational" because it assumes that there is no intellectual or abstract dimension, and therefore it is not capable of change and growth from within^141.
LKMS depends on what the people consider to be necessary or common sensical to know. They may see correlations but not understand causality, and won't necessarily pick up on regional trends (such as macro-economics), geologic cycles, etc.^142. Their knowledge of the local ecology may be very fine tuned, but once outside their territory they will know less^143.
In almost all cases discussed in the previous sections, the knowledge of natural resources, whether climate, plants, water or disease, is accurate and sometimes similar to formal science. But the advantage that LKMS has is its ecological particularism. For example, local people can have information that is hard for scientist to obtain, such as the spread of grasshoppers through different villages over several years in Nigeria^144. And even in some cases, the local people can identify more species and varieties of plants than formal science, perhaps because they have had more time to search and find all the plants in their area. Some examples were found among the aKo bushmen of Botswana, and farmers in Nigeria^145. LKMS also reflects information that the formal scientist may find unnecessary to obtain. For example, that pest damage may not change total yield of cassava much, but will make the tuber harder and unusable as flour^146. In many cases, LKMS has much to gain from
formal science, but also vice-versa.
The classification and nomenclature of soils, geomorphology, and vegetation shows detailed knowledge of micro-variation in resources, and sources of environmental risk^147. The classification systems depend on the complexity and diversity of the local environment, but will also indicate patterns and priorities of use. The same resource may have different names, and conversely, different things may have same name because they share an underlying concept. For example, the Ikale of southwest Nigeria have the same name for fertilizer, pesticide, and witchcraft because all three connote power and control over the environment^148. In addition, vernacular names are often of restricted local use, even from one village to the next^149. Classification systems, at least for plants, also appear to be more detailed among pastoralists than farmers living in the same area, although more comparative studies are needed before this point can be generalized. For example, the Amhara farmers of
Ethiopia lump more plants together into generic names than the Somali pastoralists who use the same area^150.
The value and use of natural resources is relative to what is available and what tradition dictates. Good examples are plants that are noxious and abundant in one area, but rare and desirable in another, and taboos on eating certain wildlife.
One important aspect that has emerged recently is that one cannot assume that all LKMS is known and shared equally by everyone in the local community. Variation in knowledge is due to age and sex differences, aptitude, economic and social class, etc.^151 Older people usually know more. Variation due to individual skill can be substantial, and may be due to different levels of informal experimentation^152. Sexual and social differences are usually due to divisions of labour. Women may know more about gathering wild cereals, while men may know more about the best wood for house-poles. However, this relationship may not necessarily hold true where the production system is totally dependent on wild resources, such as hunter/gatherers. For example, among aKo bushmen, women do all of the plant gathering, so one would expect them to know more about plants, but a survey found that men know just as much^153. Finally, there are specialists or "interest groups" such as marabouts,
blacksmiths, local doctors, who are the repository of specialized knowledge.
This diversity in the level of knowledge suggests that it is not enough to just talk to a small of group informants or only the group's leader^154. In addition, one cannot assume that the information will be given freely, whether to researchers, or to other villagers^155; this is especially true of the "specialists", who may either stand in the way of change, or may provide a basis for collaboration^156, depending on what the local socio-political context is, and how they are approached.
In conclusion, the descriptive knowledge of natural resources among pastoralists has been shown to be quite thorough. This knowledge enables them to make full use of the resources around them for their daily work and survival. The study of the descriptive knowledge not only shows what the building blocks of the production system are, but also may provide interesting hypotheses or even guidelines for conducting formal scientific research and experimentation in the locality.
Endnotes
1. Bernus 1979, pp. 122-124; Gillet 1987.
2. Capot-Rey 1962, p. 303.
3. Biesele 1971, p. 65.
4. Allan 1965, pp. 255-256.
5. Brokensha & Riley 1980a, p. 123.
6. Delgado 1979, p. 126.
7. Baxter & Butt 1953, p. 121.
8. Allan 1965, pp. 255-256.
9. Bernus 1977, p. 211.
10. Alfredo Guillet 1989, pers. comm.
11. Biesele 1971, p. 65.
12. Tubiana 1969, pp. 58-70.
13. Maliki et al 1984, p. 324.
14. Morgan 1980, p. 2.
15. Tanaka 1981 cited in Barrow 1988, p. 7.
16. Itani n.d., p. 41.
17. Tubiana 1969, p. 71.
18. Itani n.d., p. 41.
19. Jackson 1982, p. 168.
20. Knight 1974a, p. 64.
21. Benoit 1979, p. 49.
22. Maliki et al 1984, pp. 257-266.
23. Winter 1984, pp. 552-556.
24. Wilson 1986, p. 33.
25. Ba 1982, p. 10.
26. Clanet 1977, p. 250.
27. Tubiana & Tubiana 1977, p. 33.
28. Benoit 1979, p. 49.
29. Wilson 1986, p,33.
30. Maliki et al 1984, pp. 257-266.
31. Dyson-Hudson & Dyson-Hudson 1982, p. 220.
32. Hervouet 1977, p. 77.
33. Gulliver 1970, p. 23.
34. Oba 1985.
35. Itani n.d., p. 47.
36. Tyrell 1973 cited in Jackson 1982, p. 171.
37. Fry 1973 cited in Jackson 1982, p. 171.
38. Jackson 1982, pp. 171-174.
39. Ba 1982, pp. 10-12.
40. Richards 1985, p. 47.
41. Jackson 1982, p. 175.
42. Silberfein 1984, p. 104.
43. Cassanelli 1984, p. 484.
44. Jackson 1982, p. 175.
45. Knight 1974a, pp. 69-71.
46. Hjort 1976b, p. 78.
47. Aubert & Newsky 1949, pp. 107-109.
48. Diop 1987, p. 26.
49. Tubiana & Tubiana 1977, p. 34.
50. Knight 1974a, pp. 69-71.
51. Maliki et al 1984, p. 464.
52. Winter 1984, p. 552.
53. Behnke & Kerven 1984, p. 19.
54. Baumer 1975a, p. 11.
55. Barral 1977, p. 7.
56. Guillaumet 1972, p. 76.
57. Tubiana 1969, p. 62.
58. Ichikawa 1987, p. 3.
59. Stiles & Kassam 1986, p. 4.
60. Guillaumet 1972, pp. 77-78.
61. Guillaumet 1972, p. 77.
62. Maliki et al 1984.
63. Morgan 1980.
64. Baumer 1975a, p. 11.
65. Itani n.d., p. 40.
66. Ichikawa 1987, p. 4.
67. Ichikawa 1987, p. 3.
68. Dieterlen 1952 cited in Carrington 1983, p. 149.
69. Brokensha & Riley 1980a, p. 119.
70. Bernus 1979, p. 104.
71. Maliki et al 1984, p. 257.
72. A. Guillet 1989, pers. comm.
73. Baumer 1975a, p. 11.
74. For example Le Mouel 1969, p. 481, writing among the Eskimo of the western shore of Greenland.
75. Bernus 1979, p. 104.
76. Barrow 1988, p. 7.
77. Maliki et al 1984, pp. 257 & 280.
78. Knight 1974a, p. 76.
79. Spencer 1965, p. 178.
80. Monod 1975, p. 70.
81. Galaty 191, p. 4.
82. Marchal 1983, p. 555.
83. Tubiana & Tubiana 1977, pp. 35 & 84.
84. Knight 1974a, p. 76.
85. Maliki et al 1984, p. 290.
86. Bernus 1979, p. 123.
87. Brokensha & Riley 1980a, p. 119.
88. Tubiana & Tubiana 1977, p. 9.
89. Barral 1977, p. 18.
90. Diop 1987, p. 41.
91. Tubiana & Tubiana 1977, p. 35.
92. Ba 1982, pp. 29-31.
93. Oba 1985.
94. Riesman 1984, p. 181.
95. Maliki et al 1984, p. 259.
96. Bernus 1977, p. 207.
97. Ba 1982, p. 23.
98. Ohta 1987, p. 1.
99. Itani n.d., p. 26.
100. Levy-luxereau 1980, p. 265.
101. Itani n.d., p. 41.
102. Barral 1977, p. 21.
103. Tubiana & Tubiana 1977, p. 9.
104. Gadbin 1976, p. 107.
105. Blurton Jones & Konner 1987, pp. 8-17.
106. For example, see McCorkle 1986; Ohta 1984; Maliki et al 1984.
107. Ba 1982; Maliki et al 1984, p. 291.
108. Benoit 1979, p. 51.
109. Woillet 1979, p. 208.
110. Maliki et al 1984, pp. 291 & 455.
111. McCorkle 1986, p. 135.
112. Fink 1980.
113. Richards 1980.
114. Fink 1980, p. 251.
115. Richards 1980, p. 186.
116. Richards 1980, p. 187.
117. Behnke & Kerven 1984, p. 10.
118. Stiles & Kassam 1986, p. 3.
119. Schlee 1987, p. 5.
120. Fortes 1945, p. 158.
121. Howes 1980, p. 337.
122. Langley 1975, p. 92.
123. Langley 1975, p. 94.
124. Langley 1975, p. 97.
125. Bernus 1981b, pp. 102-105.
126. Knight 1980, p. 223.
127. Benoit 1978, p. 41.
128. Maliki et al 1984, p. 290.
129. Bernus 1979, p. 120.
130. Knight 1974a, p. 76.
131. Tubiana & Tubiana 1977, p. 72.
132. Western 1982, pp. 193-195.
133. Benoit 1978, p. 41.
134. Marchal 1983, p. 608.
135. Clyburn 1978, p. 108.
136. Niamir 1982.
137. Benoit 1979, p. 170.
138. Oba 1985.
139. Knight 1974a, p. 61.
140. Bernus 1975a, p. 174.
141. Howes 1980, p. 346.
142. Richards 1980, pp. 184-186.
143. Biesele 1971, p. 63.
144. Richards 1975, p. 110.
145. Howes 1980, p. 337.
146. Richards 1975, p. 110.
147. Knight 1974a, p. 63.
148. Richards 1975, p. 106.
149. Richards 1975, p. 111; Howes 1980, p. 341.
150. Guillaumet 1972, p. 77.
151. Warren & Meehan 1980, p. 328.
152. Howes 1980, pp. 341-344.
153. Howes 1980, p. 341.
154. Brokensha & Riley 1980b, p. 266.
155. Johnson 1980, p. 64.
156. Warren & Meehan 1980, p. 328.
2.2 Management practices
2.2.1 Herd management
2.2.2 Range management
2.2.3 Tree and shrub management
2.2.4 Hay and fodder production
2.2.5 Water management
2.2.6 Natural resources for food and medicine
2.2.7 Analysis
The term "management practices" refers to the myriad, small and large, decisions taken on a daily basis by pastoralists in their use of natural resources. It goes beyond descriptive knowledge to what the pastoralist does with his store of accumulated knowledge - not just what he uses natural resources for, but also how. We are interested principally in his system of harvesting natural resources and how this affects the long term sustainability of the resources. By manipulating his livestock (such as changing herd sizes and structures, herding into one pasture and not another, etc.), by his mobility, monitoring, and in some instances manipulation of natural resources, and by respecting (or not) both formal social controls and common sense rules on the harvesting of herbs, trees, shrubs, water, hay, wild cereals, wildlife, and other resources, the pastoralist is showing his knowledge and experience of natural resource management.
2.2.1 Herd management
The topic of livestock management, ranging from livestock breeding to daily milking techniques is wider than can be covered here. The discussion will be confined to those practices that directly or indirectly affect natural resources. These include certain production and herding techniques, the organization of herds, and labour requirements for livestock and range management.
The main objectives of pastoralists are not just increasing herd size, but also increasing milk yield, maintaining an appropriate herd structure, and ensuring disease resistance by breeding^1. In addition, the priorities given to each goal is not a static one, and will change depending on the particular circumstances each household faces. For example, among the Somali, a young family with young children will try to maximize milk, while an older family with older children will try to maximize marketable slaughter animals². This can result in differential use of pastures, since a milk herd is often not allowed to graze far from the main camp, while a "meat" herd is taken to distant pastures.
In addition, the types of livestock raised by each household will depend on labour availability. For example, the Somali families of Bay region, who entrust small children with herding shoats, will probably not maintain shoats (even selling them if received as gifts or inheritance) if they do not have small children³.
Finally, production strategies such as seasonal calving for fattening and marketing, and calf-killing, can affect the population fluctuation in herds, and thus change stocking rates at any one point in time. For example, the Muslim practice of fattening rams for Tabaski, Eid al Kabir and Hajj, can increase the seasonal pressure on rangelands in the immediate vicinity of villages and settlements without any relation to ecological patterns since the Muslim calendar follows the lunar cycle. Some authors believe that these practices are detrimental to the range, and say, somewhat shortsightedly, that they should be stopped^4. A better alternative is to find appropriate technical solutions to increase forage production during the fattening months.
The Somali sometimes practice "pre-weaning slaughter" of mostly male calves in order to save the life of the cow during drought or disease, or as a way to increase milk for human consumption^5. Although the frequency of such a practice among the Somali and perhaps other groups is not known, it may result in higher offtake rates during times of stress and therefore, lower pressure on rangelands.
The organization of livestock into herds that graze together (a "herding unit") can vary according to whether they belong to one household or several, and whether they are composed of the same types and ages of livestock or not. Each particular system is a function of the seasonal variation in pasture resources, as well as the size and type of herds. Individual or communal herding determines the concentration or dispersion of animals vis-a-vis natural resources, as well as the lowest institutional level in which basic resource management decisions are taken (see BOX 2.14).
BOX 2.14
Among the Zaghawa of Chad/Sudan, the livestock in a herd belong to only one household, but herds tend to come together when they trek to seasonal grazing areas, dispersing again once they arrive at the pasture^6, and the Tonga of Zambia herd their cattle either as individual households, or a group of related households^7. Most groups with large numbers of livestock practice some form of communal herding, because the tasks require at least 2-3 adults. Even groups with small numbers of animals, especially most settled agropastoralists, such as the Wolof on the Senegal River^8, tend to prefer communal grazing (either by a hired or local herder) so as to free labour for other agricultural tasks. The communal herds can belong to a group of households in the same extended family, such as among the Karamajong of Kenya^9 and the Nyakyusa of southwestern Tanzania^10, or of the same clan, such as the Nuer of Sudan^11 and Rendille of Kenya^12, or based on membership in age-sets, such
as the Kikuyu of Kenya^13. In some cases, the communal herds will come together at certain times of the year, especially for ceremonies. The Rendille and Ariaal of Kenya have one of the most concentrated herding units, since they are composed of 2-5 herding groups, each group made up of several related households^14.
Herd splitting, the practice of dividing the livestock into separate herds depending on their age, sex, type, productivity, etc., is widely practiced among pastoralists. It generally results in "niche specialization" of livestock, where each type is taken to the pasture that suits it best, in little competition among livestock for the same vegetation, and in further dispersion of the stocking pressure (see BOX 2.15).
BOX 2.15
Most groups will split their herd according to the type of livestock because of both forage and water requirements. The most common pattern is for cattle and/or camels to graze separately, while sheep and goats (shoats) are herded together, such as among the Somali in the dry season^15, and the Rendille^16, and Ariaal^17 of Kenya. In most cases, the cattle and camels will be taken to distant pastures, while the shoats remain around the homestead, although exceptions do occur, such as among the Pokot who herd their shoats and camels near the homestead all year, but take their cattle on long distance transhumance^18, or the Toucouleur agropastoralists of Senegal, who will allow both the cattle and shoat herds to graze separately around the homestead^19.
Another form of herd splitting according to type of livestock is practiced among the Twareg of Niger in the dry season^20, and the Zaghawa of Chad/Sudan Kall year round^21. These groups split the herd so that camels and sheep graze together and cattle and goats are together. This forms a well-fitted complementarity since there is little dietary overlap between camels and sheep, and between cattle and goats.
The herd can also be split according to the productivity of the animals, ie. between the "milk" herd and the "main herd". The former refers usually to the majority of the milking cows, camels, ewes and does, and their suckling young, and/or pregnant animals nearing the end of their gestation, who are kept close to the homestead. The "main" herd is composed of the remainder of the livestock and is usually the larger of the two, and is taken to distant pastures. Many pastoral groups practice this form of splitting, such as the Fulani of northern Senegal^22, the Somali^23, and the Dinka of Sudan^24, although some agropastoralists, such as the Fulani of northern Burkina Faso^25, also do so.
In some cases, the livestock are split into more than two herds according to several criteria: type, productivity, and age. Examples are the Turkana^26, the Samburu^27, the Macina, and the Diafaradji Fulani of the Niger River delta. The latter two may have up to 6 herds: 1) "beydi", or new nursing/pregnant cows and old/weak sheep, kept at the village and herded by children; 2) "tarancaradji", or the younger males and older females for sale or slaughter that are kept at the village but not necessarily herded; 3) "njarniri", or the males of all animals for fattening and slaughter that are kept tied at stakes in the village; 4) "bucal", or the rest of nursing cows and goats, herded in a reserved communal pasture; 5) "bendi", same as bucal but includes only the hairy sheep, and 6) "horey", or the surplus or main herd that goes on transhumance^28.
Finally, the Turkana may also split the herds even further, this time among wives living in different areas, each wife having some of all types of livestock^29. In general, those who do not split herds often do not have enough livestock, or herders, or both. For example, the Wodaabe of Niger will split their herd only if they have enough labour to do so^30.
The task of herding can be arduous or easy depending on the type of animal, and the degree to which it is practiced. Whether livestock are herded or not in turn determines how strictly range use can be controlled (see BOX 2.16). Herding can be divided into "guarding" and "conducting". Among the Fulani of Mauritania/Senegal, the herder guards livestock with bonfires around the camp at night, and continual surveillance during day. He will always go against the wind so livestock can smell predators, and will always walk in front of the herd. The art of conducting, taught during the initiation of boys, includes night grazing, never allowing livestock to drink at noon especially in the dry season, always drinking before eating salt, and learning all the signs, cries, and songs needed to "talk" with livestock^31. The herder may allow the animals to lead the herd on their 8 to 10 hour grazing period each day, but he will usually control the main direction of their movement, how
fast they move, which pastures they frequent, etc. Examples of such a strategy can be found among the Dinka of Kongor^32, and the Fulani^33. The main reasons for herding livestock are to protect crops from stray animals, or livestock from predators, and to take the animals to good pasture and water.
BOX 2.16
Most agropastoralists will herd their livestock at least in the wet season to protect their crops, for example the Fort Jameson Ngoni of southeast Zambia^34, but others, such as the Toucouleur of Senegal^35, do not herd their livestock at all except at the end of the dry season when browse has to be cut down for them. They protect their crops with fences and vigilant boys. Most non-cultivating transhumants herd their livestock full time, although exceptions do occur. For example, among the Zaghawa of Chad/Sudan, cattle are not herded except in the wet season (to avoid crop damage to farmers) and if there are many predators, but shoats are always herded for fear of predators and thiefs^36. Because of labour shortages, the Twareg of Niger, do not herd cattle in the dry season, not even to water (they come to water every two days by themselves), and camels are taken to pasture and left there for a week, then rounded up for watering, but sheep are herded all the time^37.
The actual ratio of man to livestock, and the particular aptitude of each individual in the skills of herding, determine the degree to which control can be exerted over the animals (see BOX 2.17). For example, among the Samburu, the more distant pastures are underutilized because only the more energetic and better managers go there^38. The rules of herd management, whether formal or informal, are not necessarily followed by all, since each man will herd his livestock as he sees best. Not all people have the same skill and experience in husbandry. Some may be more lazy or make more errors of judgement than others. Among the Samburu, a good manager is valued while a poor one is avoided, and "the success or failure of certain men in stock keeping is widely known"^39.
BOX 2.17
The ratio of herder to livestock varies considerably among pastoralists, since it depends on whether the animals are communally or individually herded, how large they are, and what the local conditions (especially predators, or competition from crops or other herds) are. However, some norms tend to be expressed and followed. For example, the Somali say that a camel herd requires less labour for watering, but more labour for trekking/herding, since it goes longer distances and moves more frequently than cattle. They believe that one man can herd 20-30 camels, or 50 cattle, or one child can manage 20 shoats^40. Among the Fulani of central Nigeria, a single herder is said to be able to manage 150 head, but it is preferable that herd size be kept at 75-100^41. In the Sudan, the Ingessana agropastoralists have one herder to 25-30 cattle, the Fulani (relatively newcomers to area) have 1 to 50-60, and the Rufa'a al-Hoi 1 to 100 cattle^42.
In theory, herders from the same social unit are free to use any part of their territory, but in practice people confine themselves to the range they know best, and prefer to stay with same group of people, especially relatives, thus ensuring some continuity in range use by the same managers. But herding strategies will change when someone arrives in a new area. For example, among the Fulani of northern Senegal, newcomers will keep livestock in enclosures for fear of loss, but will free them as soon as they feel that they and their livestock know the area^43. Some authors believe that agropastoralists, who derive the bulk of their subsistence from cultivation, will pay less attention to the quality and composition of their herds than pastoralists. For example, the Gogo and Sukuma agropastoralists of Kenya have less castrated livestock than the pastoral Sebei and Karamajong^44. It is not clear whether this difference in quality of livestock management applies as well to range
management. Differences in management can also be found between different groups. For example, the Twareg and Fulani of northern Burkina Faso have different herding styles when they are in new, unknown pastures. The Twareg take the cattle to pasture once, to "show them", and then leave them to graze by themselves, but are often faced with many losses because the animals try to go back or cannot find proper feed. The Fulani usually do not have any losses because they stay with the cattle and force them to stay in the same pasture until they are used to it^45.
The patterns of labour allocation for herding and divisions of labour by age and sex determine who are the basic decision makers - the actual managers - and thus, who controls the daily use of natural resources. In the majority of cases, men and/or boys are responsible for herding and caring for cattle or camels, while women and young girls are responsible for herding shoats, and milking all animals. Some examples are the Kikuyu agropastoralists^46, Rendille pastoralists^47, the Pokot^48, and the Tonga of Zambia^49. However, in some cases, women have more, or less, responsibility than this norm, and young boys may have full or partial responsibilities (see BOX 2.18).
BOX 2.18
In some cases, women are not allowed any contact with animals except for milking, such as the Fulani of Nigeria^50. In contrast, among the Somali of Bay region, women are responsible for managing the shoats and cattle because they and the children need and work with the milk; the actual herding is done by girls and young boys, but the women take the major decisions. Although Somali women are not assigned to herd camels, they will often herd small camel groups without male assistance, or may travel with the men and help them in herding and watering the camels^51. Among many groups young boys are often put in charge of smaller animals (such as shoats and calves) while the men take care of the mature animals. Among the Samburu only older men water animals because boys must preserve their energy for herding, and older men can better control the animals that get excited^52. In most cases, men water livestock, but among the Turkana, the task is given to young girls^53. Some
researchers state that young boys, (and presumably girls), take less care in managing both the herd and the range^54. Not enough research has been done on the comparative success of management by men vs. boys, and indeed women vs. men, to make a generalization at this time.
Very little is known about the organization of labour in herding groups, and how tasks are assigned. Among the Dinka of Kongor Rural Council (Sudan), the men herding the "main" herd organize into groups of 4-6 and take turns herding the communal cattle^55. In a study of the Nyakyusa of southwest Tanzania, cattle are herded by 6-10 year old boys around the village. These boys are a community in themselves, with their own laws, customs, and leaders. The leaders are elected by a fight, and are responsible for settling disputes and dividing jobs among boys (fetching firewood, searching for lost cattle, etc.)^56. More work needs to be done on understanding this important aspect of internal herding organization.
The role of women in herding livestock is an aspect that has long been neglected, mainly because of the assumption that men were responsible for livestock and women for cultivation. This dichotomy does not necessarily hold everywhere (as BOX 2.18 shows). The fact that Somali women prefer herding to farming, because they say it is less harsh on the body^57, suggests that women may start to have a more important role in herding as men leave the pastoral economies for urban wages and other attractions. More studies need to be aimed in this direction. In particular, where women do have responsibility for herding, how independently do they act from the men, how do they secure grazing rights, and is their LKMS different from men's.
2.2.2 Range management
2.2.2.1 Range use: mobility, rotation and deferment
2.2.2.2 Range evaluation and monitoring
2.2.2.3 Range improvement
2.2.2.4 Social controls on range use
Most western educated range managers are under the mistaken impression that African pastoralists are not "range managers" - that they do not manage but simply use natural resources. This section will show that the African pastoralist, through his knowledge and manipulation of the resources at his disposal, is as much a range manager as the American and Australian rancher.
2.2.2.1 Range use: mobility, rotation and deferment
Pastoralists can be divided between those who's livestock have full or partial mobility, such as transhumants and settled agropastoralists who send their livestock on transhumance in the dry season, and those whose livestock graze all year round around the village. The latter either return to the village every night, or may camp on the periphery of the village pastures for short periods. The former differ in that they generally will move to more distant pastures, often traversing other peoples' territories to get there.
Almost all mobile groups practice some form of "transhumance", ie. seasonal movement to regular pastures. Some, but not others, may have regular routes between the pastures, but almost all will have regular areas that they pasture in every normal year. The exact location used in an area will probably change from year to year, but not so much the wider land area. This also applies to "nomads", who previously were thought of as being entirely opportunistic with no regular timing or location of movement patterns or pastures^58.
The strategy of mobility is one of the most adapted and deliberate means of obtaining what livestock need in an ever-variable environment. It necessitates large areas of rangelands, which most groups obtain by a combination of territorial rights and alliances with neighbours (see section 2.3.2). There are many different types of mobility, and the particular strategy used by each stock owner at any point in time may differ from the norm for his own group, depending on labour availability, types and numbers of livestock, and environmental and social conditions (see BOX 2.19).
BOX 2.19
The mobility of pastoralists can be as varied as the environment demands. The Wodaabe of Nigeria differentiate between many types of mobility: spending the wet or dry season, going to dry or wet season areas, returning from wet or dry season areas, moving about in a limited area, out-migration proper, and migratory drift^59. The latter refers to the movement pattern where the territorial boundaries used by a group will gradually shift over many generations (expanding, contracting, or moving laterally) in response to ecological and political pressures. A good example is the Fulani who have gradually moved across the Sahel over many centuries. The Somali of Bay region use several different types of mobility: 1) the "laal" refers to cases where the household has no extra labour and a small herd, in which case it will keep calves at the village, allowing cows to graze unherded. The disadvantages of such a strategy, such as losses due to straying, predation, and theft, and less
nutrition due to overgrazing around the household, are well understood, and it is a technique that is frowned upon by those who have large herds; 2) short transhumance during the rains and early dry season, returning to the village to eat harvest residue; 3) long transhumance between different ecological zones, where the herd and/or household is split up to meet the needs of livestock and children's milk^60.
Most studies of pastoral movements are confined to a general description of broad seasonal movements (often characterized by maps with complicated arrows)^61. Recently, more studies are looking at the criteria used to move from one pasture to the next on a daily basis^62. Although the quantity and quality of water and forage and how it meets the needs of their animals is the paramount concern of the pastoralist, other factors also determine his movement patterns, such as salt licks, soil conditions, other environmental factors (such as dew, excessive heat or lack of shade), avoiding pests and diseased areas, avoiding damage to crops, being close to markets, labour availability, cultural gatherings, territorial boundaries, and social relations with neighbours (especially alliances and enmities). Some factors are specific to certain regions, such as the ebb and flow of floods in large depressions of the delta of Niger River or the Sudd of Sudan, competition and predation from
wildlife in east and southern Africa, and raids and warfare among neighbouring groups that are still prevalent in east Africa. In addition to the above, the movement of agropastoralists is also conditioned by the location and timing of their cultivation (see BOX 2.20). Our understanding of the rationale behind pastoral movements has advanced tremendously since the days when nomads were thought to wander aimlessly on the rangelands. The many different types of criteria behind such decisions vary from year to year and household to household, according to changing social and environmental circumstances, giving the pastoralists a flexibility that allows them to meet environmental challenges and subsistence needs. This very flexibility is, however, often interpreted as random, inconsistent and irrational by development workers and governments. More studies on these management criteria are needed to dispel these myths.
BOX 2.20
The decisions taken daily by herders and stockowners continuously balance information and needs. Preferences for certain pastures are clearly expressed, e.g., the Wodaabe of Niger prefer areas where standing hay is leafy not stemmy and abundant, and choose water that is "bitter" not muddy^63. However, ideal conditions are rarely found, and trade offs continuously have to be made:^64 between pastures with good forage but bad water, and those with good water and bad forage; between using a heavily grazed but disease-free area or one that is rarely used but is infested with tse tse flies; between staying with others (for protection against predators) or striking out alone for fresh pastures; between reaching cropped fields in time for harvest or staying longer on good distant pastures.
The pastoralist "acts at each point so as to make optimum use of what exists and what is expected."^65 For example, among the Samburu, the problem of choosing between proximity salt licks or to good pasture in the dry season is resolved by considering herd size and type: shoats need more salt, so for a large flock camp is established at the salt lick, but if for a large herd of cattle camp is set up in the good pastures^66.
The spatial organization of herds is based on two conflicting tendencies: the desire to be together for social, political and protection purposes, and the necessity to be apart for ecological reasons^67. For example, the Wodaabe Fulani used to camp and pasture together all the time for common defence, but since Colonial pacification they have been able to disperse^68 and use pastures never used before^69. Among the Somali, certain sociopolitical factors can be important, e.g. managerial ability, character, reputation, wealthy, etc. of cooperating households and age-set rules, stock-friendships, and social obligations or vendettas^70. The movements of people and livestock among the Turkana may depend on the advice of soothsayers predicting local disasters such as enemy raids or disease^71.
In East Africa, the Maasai and Turkana will try to get to a range before wildlife arrive^72. The Maasai avoid camping where the vegetation cover is greater than 10% because of predators and damage by large mammals to korals and settlements. They also avoid camping on white soils because they say that the temperature is colder and results in more stress for livestock, decreasing milk production (formal scientists studying this phenomenon agree, given the high reflectivity of white soils^73).
In the more arid zones of Africa, the availability of water is a greater constraint in the dry season, whereas the availability of forage is more important in the wet season, for example among the Wodaabe of Niger/Nigeria^74. In the semi-arid and semi-humid zones the availability of forage may become more important in both seasons because of the relative abundance of water. Some examples can be found among the Fulani of Tenkodogo (southeast Burkina Faso)^75, and among the Turkana of Kenya who are well endowed with a good groundwater table^76. Among the Dinka of Kongor forage is an important limiting factor only at the end of the rains (when the highlands become crowded) and early-mid dry season (when the perennial grass' fresh regrowth is finished)^77.
Because of socio-political factors, movements will sometimes have to be made that do not benefit livestock or range resources (e.g. as recorded among the Somali^78), but these movements tend to be temporary and not repeated from year to year, unless the underlying causes persist. Pastoralists are increasingly being forced to follow this latter strategy because of recent external changes in their social and environmental milieu (see section 4.0).
Mobility patterns, such as routes vs. pastures, concentration vs. dispersion, adjusting livestock pressure, deferment and rotation, frequency of movements, and drought vs. normal strategies, differ among groups depending on the criteria discussed above. Most transhumant groups performing long distance movements will distinguish "sojourn pastures" from "access or transit pastures"^79, and will have specific rules on how to use both of them. For example, the Twareg of Niger follow regular routes, called "tawshit", toward their salt licks^80. The Zaghawa move their sheep and camels in the wet season north to Sahara pastures in separate parallel paths, leaving ungrazed a portion of the range for their way back south^81. The Macina Fulani have transhumant routes for each sub-tribe, "burti", which can be 100-200 miles long^82. For those conducting livestock only short distances, the distinction between access and sojourn pastures may become blurred.
The pattern of concentration and dispersion of herds and camps varies. In some cases, there is concentration of herds in the dry season around a few permanent wells, and dispersion in the wet season, as among the Somali^83 and the Maasai of Amboseli National Park^84, while other groups will disperse in the dry season because of the lack of adequate forage, but concentrate in the wet season because of abundant grass and water, as among the Arab pastoralists of Central Chad^85, and the Turkana^86. Concentration and dispersion can also be determined by socio-political factors. For example, the Turkana, Fulani, Kababish, and Maasai have higher individual dispersion of herds compared to the Somali or North African Bedouins who are more restricted by communal lineage decisions^87.
Some groups adjust the number of their livestock to the capacity of the land. In most cases, they will do so by sending the surplus livestock to neighbouring territories where they have alliances, such as among the Fulani of Nigeria, and split their herds even further, such as among the Twareg of the Gourma (Mali)^88, rather than through deliberate slaughter and culling of livestock^89. In the case of range overcrowding among the Tswana of Botswana, the traditional range overseers would appeal to the Kgotla (or communal gathering) to allocate more range land or to move some herds out of the area^90.
Transhumance or movement between dry season and wet season pastures is a traditional form of pasture rotation and deferment^91. The rotational strategies of pastoralists can be more efficient and complex than anything a rancher can do with his fences^92. Such movements result in several simultaneous benefits: 1) dry season pastures are allowed a period of rest and growth during the wet season which maintains, and sometimes increases, the vegetation biomass, and wet season pastures if ungrazed during the dry season retain a good ground cover that protect the soil from the erosive first rains - both of these benefits maintain and may increase the carrying capacity; 2) wet season pastures often have abundant natural ponds, thus reducing the need for labour to water animals at least for part of the year; 3) in xeric zones, pastures allocated as wet season areas usually have higher quality and quantity forage in the wet season than the dry season, thus allowing livestock to take
advantage of a resource at its highest potential (in mesic zones, the same is true for dry season pastures); and 4) a period of rest breaks the cycle of disease and parasites that tend to build up around dry season wells (see BOX 2.21).
BOX 2.21
Work done among the Kababish^93, the Rendille^94, the Pokot and Turkana^95, the Fulani of northern Senegal^96, and the pastoralists of the Algerian steppes^97, have highlighted complex rotational strategies. The Maasai have elaborate grazing sequences (rotation and alternation), and will widen the radius of pasturage and delay going into the dry season area by using donkeys to transport water^98. In Amboseli National Park, such a strategy has been shown to increases the total carrying capacity by 50%^99. Except during a drought, the Pokot have wet season communal deferment of areas with termite-resistant grass to allow good fodder for the dry season^100. The Fulani of northern Sierra Leone practice "shifting pasturage", where they over-graze one area with high stocking rates for 2-3 years then move elsewhere and rest the first area for 15-20 years^101. A similar phenomenon occurs among the Sukuma, who live south of Lake victoria, and who allow a rest period of 30-50
years^102.
Rotational strategies are not confined only to a dry vs. wet season one. In any season, formal and informal rules on the frequency of movements and how often one returns to the same pasture result in rotational use (see BOX 2.22). Not enough work has been done on documenting these detailed daily movements, nor the effect of these rotational strategies on the condition and productivity of rangelands.
BOX 2.22
Most rules about frequency of movements are informal rather than institutionalized. For example, during the wet season the Maasai's strategy of following the quality of forage (i.e. wherever forage is fresh-green, which also means high crude protein content) results in rotational use similar to that of wildlife^103. The Somali don't stay more than "a few weeks" in the same pasture unless it is very good grass or hostility prevents movement^104. But a few groups have more formal rules. For example, the Wodaabe use lunar cycles to move to new pastures, which in effect results in moving camp every 2-3 days, and moving out of an area every week. This system is common to all Fulani but the Wodaabe observe it more strictly^105. However, such formal rules are also tempered by local circumstances. The herders closely monitor their environment and livestock for signs that indicate a need to move. For example, the Fulani say that if cattle begin to stampede, then the time to move on
has already passed^106.
The frequency of movements depends on the regions' level of resources, the season, and whether the herder is at the sojourn pastures or on the transit pastures. For example, the Wodaabe will be more mobile in the wet than in the dry season because of the need to vary the kind of forage eaten so as to avoid bloat and other nutritional problems^107. With the beginning of the rains, the Twareg do not move long distances nor fast, but move frequently, because their animals have not regained their strength yet^108. Such a strategy ensures even and light grazing at a time when the new grass needs all the time it can have to grow. The Rufa'a al-Hoi of the Sudan have two types of grazing: "light" grazing which is done when they are on transit pastures, and which leaves plenty of green matter behind for the return, and "heavy" grazing at the sojourn pastures^109.
The frequency of movements can vary a lot between groups. For example, the norm among the Fulani of Niger is to change campsite every 204 days^110, the Fulani of northern Nigeria say that they must move at least 4 times in a season so as to prevent over-use^111, the main herd of the Samburu stays in one place a maximum of 2-3 weeks before moving on^112, and the Jie and Turkana herds will make 5-10 major moves, and many smaller moves around the major camps^113. The particular system is often determined by individual circumstances based on the monitoring of environmental indicators and usually results in a rotational pattern of use and rest which is fine-tuned to the needs of both animals and plants.
The net effect of most of these rotational strategies is to cancel out grazing effects in the long run. A study among Afghani pastoralists who have a similar system to most african long distance transhumants found no correlation between the condition (health) of the range and distance to water^114. However, agropastoral systems that have considerably less mobility than these fully transhumant systems, have fewer rotational strategies, and are more likely to degrade the areas around their permanent wells^115.
Are these deferment and rotation strategies deliberate attempts at conserving natural resources, or is conservation a beneficial, but unintended result? There is much to indicate that pastoralists are aware of the full gamut of benefits, and consider it as a deliberate strategy aimed not only at one goal - production - but also conservation. For example, the wet season perennial-grass pastures of the Turkana can probably provide forage during the dry season, but the Turkana vacate these areas in the dry season for annual-grass areas, not only to rest the former, but also to take advantage of the more palatable annual-grass hay^116. In other cases where both dry and wet season areas are composed of annual grasses, pastoralists will still move out of dry season pastures during the rains even though these are areas with permanent water, thus taking advantage of natural ponds and allowing the dry season areas, which very often are also areas around settlements, to rest. The
existence of elaborate systems for reserving rangelands and forests among many groups also shows the deliberate attempts at protecting natural resources (see section 2.3.3). These dry-wet season rotation strategies are attempts to best use a finite resource and to maintain or sustain it in the long term. However, they (unlike other traditional range improvement strategies, discussed in section 2.2.2.3) cannot be said to be deliberate attempts to increase or improve the rangelands^117.
Many of these mobility strategies, designed for normal years, are not appropriate during drought years. Some drought strategies are designed to mitigate long term fluctuations, while others are "crisis" oriented solutions. For example, having large herds and high ratios of females in the herds help to ensure a minimum number of animals for survival during the drought, and fast reconstitution of the herd after the drought (see section 2.3.1). Crisis strategies include increased mobility and dispersion, using pastures that are normally reserved or communally protected, as among the Pokot^118, using pastures that normally are not used due to disease, predators, and low nutritive value, changing the diet from predominantly milk to shoat meat^119, going to neighbouring territories (in case of local, small scale droughts), by using tribal alliances, entering the urban or farming labour force, as among the Fulani of northern Senegal^120, and the Moors and Fulani of Mauritania^121,
and sending family members to live temporarily with kinfolk in good places, as recorded among the Somali^122. The choice of strategy depends on the remaining herd size, the rate at which the drought came and passed and its duration, alliances upon which the individual herder can call upon, proximity to urban centers, etc. etc. Drought strategies are meant to ensure the survival of the household unit. They may in some cases, such as increased mobility and dispersion, help to reduce stress on the already weakened plants, but usually the normal year strategies for protecting natural resources seem to break down during drought years. However, so little is known of the full range of resource sustaining traditional strategies, that it is unwise to conclude that there are no deliberate resource saving strategies during drought years.
2.2.2.2 Range evaluation and monitoring
All pastoralists have devised systems to help them evaluate the productivity of rangelands, from which they can calculate an approximate carrying capacity. The systems are based on monitoring detailed signs and indices of environmental health, stress, and change. These indicators can be individual plant species, soil types, tree cover, or the overall quantity and quality of the forage. The behavior of wildlife and their own domestic animals also help them judge the value of the lands they use. The evaluation of degraded pastures, and knowledge of the process of degradation, can also be quite detailed. Some indicators of degradation are milk yields, grass and browse availability, and presence of particular plant and wildlife species (see BOX 2.23).
BOX 2.23
Systematic monitoring of environmental changes in climate, and quality and quantity of forage helps the herders take advantage of green flushes of forage, or to avoid overcrowded areas^123. Even from a distance the Wodaabe herder can judge the intensity and significance of greenness of a pasture. He will also monitor the feces of livestock, milk yield, animal weight, and the number of cows in heat, to tell him about how well animals eat, and therefore the quality and quantity of forage^124. A very thorough study of traditional environmental indicators has been done among the Fulani of Mauritania. They evaluate the quantity of forage by looking at the density and height of grasses and herbs, the portion of land covered by each pasture type, and the tree cover, and compare all of this with the need of livestock on the pasture. They evaluate the quality of range through 1) soil type and capability for each type of pasture; 2) presence or absence of individual forage species,
and their palatability to different livestock; 3) degree of greenness of forage; 4) presence or absence of wildlife, for example good pastures also support gazelles, hyenas, lions, wild boars, etc., while the ones that have elephants, giraffe, ostrich, are good only in the dry season because of excessive humidity and disease; and 5) behavior of domestic animals, e.g. a good pasture is indicated by cattle who eat with good appetites, are not restless at night, sleep on their right side (full stomach not pressed), breathe slow but deeply, have beautiful skin and hair, are not rushing to pasture in the morning, do not need to be forcefully restrained during the morning milking, increased number of females in heat, and feces are wet, not friable, and have little undigested matter. When going into a new, unknown pasture, the Fulani herder will take the animals to pasture for 7 consecutive days in each of four major directions, and will compare the pastures by evaluating the
effect on the animals^125. The Fulani know that vegetation changes can be caused by overgrazing, drought, bush fires, etc., but say that droughts cause the greatest change^126. There are also many indicators for monitoring the degradation of pastures. The Maasai and Wodaabe look at milk yields^127, and the Samburu observe grass and browse availability^128. Among the Fulani of Mauritania, degraded pastures are indicated by Cassia occidentalis and Calotropis procera, and the presence of vividly coloured lizards^129.
Most of these indicators are also used by formal science. In addition, many African pastoralist also judge a pasture according to its suitability to different livestock types. This suitability goes beyond the presence of adequate forage and water, to more "subjective" qualities such as shade, topography (e.g. goats like hills and cliffs), as well as disease. These qualities are often grouped into a single concept broadly translated as "fertility", such as the "finna" among the Gabra of northern Kenya^130, and the "fuur" among the Rendille^131.
The success of a monitoring system relies not only on careful tracking by each herder, but also the constant exchange of the information between herders. Among the Saudi Arabian Bedouins, there is continuous communication among section chiefs about grazing and water conditions, especially the type of plants, biomass, water availability and presence of other people. This information is obtained from travellers, scouts, couriers from other chiefs, etc.^132 Similarly, among the Fulani information is collected from fellow herders and other local people, the literate, the elders and notables, outsiders who visit, traders, etc.^133.
Without range evaluation and monitoring, the pastoralist is not able to adjust his strategies to the short and long term availability of natural resources. Much more work is needed on what indicators pastoralists use to evaluate the present status or condition of rangelands, and also their expectations of what the future trends will be.
2.2.2.3 Range improvement
Range improvement, as taught in formal science, includes such interventions as range reseeding, bush clearing, fertilizing, water development, etc. Except for a few techniques, such as bush fires, shrub clearing, and water development, most pastoralists do not improve the range deliberately, but sustain it in the long run by having a diverse portfolio of livestock, appropriate breeds, and mobility strategies.
In general very little study has been done on traditional range improvement techniques. It may be that such techniques, apart from the ones discussed below, do not exist because the need for range improvement has only recently come up, and pastoralists have not had the time, nor the opportunity, to experiment with new techniques on a trial and error basis^134.
Bush fires are usually set deliberately to obtain green regrowth from perennial grasses, to clear the dead biomass (in order to reduce the chances of more serious fires, to obtain higher production next season, and to make it easier for people and livestock to walk through and to detect predators and raiders), to eradicate disease vectors, and to stop bush encroachment. Pastoralists will also take advantage of fires that are accidental or set by hunters and bee gatherers, and some groups have systems for preventing undesirable fires (see BOX 2.24).
BOX 2.24
By far the greatest use of bush fires is to obtain green regrowth from perennial grasses. The Dinka of Kongor Rural Council burn at least 80% of the "toich" or temporary swamp lands every year to get regrowth, to make it easy to walk through area, and to be secure against predators and raids by Murle pastoralists. These fires are deliberately set early in the dry season only. The Dinka will wait 15 days before grazing the burned areas, even though regrowth appears after a few days^135. By contrast the neighbouring Nuer, who also burn the Sudd swamps in the early-mid dry season, will graze it only 3 days later^136. The Fulani of Burkina Faso know that fire is only good for perennial grasses, and that it keeps trees in check^137. Some other groups who have been recorded to set fires to obtain regrowth are the Pokot^138, and the Fulani who herd the livestock of the Bambara^139. The Fulani of southern Burkina Faso say that they no longer practice bush burning, because the advent
of the drought has reduced the quality of regrowth^140.
The Wodaabe of Nigeria set fires only at the beginning of the dry season, and only after having grazed the pasture, to reduce the potential fuel and to enhance the quantity and quality of biomass in the following year^141. Whether fires actually do increase herbaceous biomass productivity is a matter of considerable debate within formal science, but there are increasing number of studies that support it. The Boran and Gabra^142, and the Maasai^143 of northern Kenya burn pastures to prevent encroachment of non-palatable bushes.
Some groups have systems for controlling the use of fires. The Fulani of Mali monitor the area for unwanted bush fires, and after bringing it under control, will punish the person who set it by forcing him to feed everyone^144. The Fulani of northern Senegal use a system of small preventive fires to create a grid of fire breaks to protect camps from wild fires^145.
Apart from using bush fires to control unwanted shrubs, some groups, such as the Maasai^146, also deliberately use their goats to over-browse and control less desirable shrub species, while others deliberately cut the unwanted shrubs by hand^147, for example when making fences. Water point development, management, and location is another important technique for improving the carrying capacity of rangelands. This point is discussed later in section 2.2.5.
Some traditional practices have implications for introducing modern range improvement techniques. For example, the Lozi King of present-day Zambia can call together his subjects for public works, such as building canals, an action that could theoretically extend to other communal improvements^148. The Maasai see grass as a gift of God via the mediation of rain, and they often use grasses in pastoral rituals. Cultivators are especially hated because they plough up the grass^149, so would the Maasai be adverse to range reseeding, which often involves ploughing and seed broadcasting?
2.2.2.4 Social controls on range use
At a general level, most if not all pastoral societies regulate their movements according to seasonal use^150. The previous sections showed that at the particular level, pastoral strategies can be complex and involve formal and informal rules. Formal rules generally tend to be enshrined in communal codes and "traditions", and recognized by all members of the group. These rights and regulations are often created and enforced by fairly complex internal organizations at several levels. These are: the herding unit, a group of herding units or the entire tribe, and the inter-tribal level. Many herding units have clear cut internal organizations for assigning chores and making communal decisions. These include scouts to patrol and monitor the rangelands for pasture quality and quantity, a headman and a council of elders, and regular daily or weekly meetings among all household heads (see BOX 2.25).
BOX 2.25
Almost all pastoral groups have scouts who go ahead of the herd to monitor the range and to evaluate its quality, quantity and suitability for livestock. They will also report on disease, presence of other herds, and other information necessary for communal decisions. Some examples are the Rufa'a al-Hoi of eastern Sudan^151, the Somali nomads^152, and the Wodaabe of Nigeria, where the scouts are on horseback^153.
Communal decisions are usually taken by a council of elders headed by a chief or elder statesman. The chief is often elected on the basis of his success in herd management, which is evident in the large number of livestock that he has. For example, the "chief shepherd" of the Macina Fulani is usually the largest owner elected from among the villagers^154. But the chief has to have other important qualities. For example, the Dinka say that their elected headman ("bany de wut") has to be an arbiter, chairman, planner and enforcer of decisions. He is assisted by the "bany de biok" who manages daily affairs, such as assigning communal chores, including herding^155. The Wodaabe have a council ("kinnal") twice a day which is led by a leader ("ardo"), and which discusses the information supplied by scouts and makes decisions on communal movements. Although the elders are respected and listened to, it is the opinion of young adults - the actual herders - which carries the most
weight^156. In the Maasai herding unit, "enkang", there is no leader but a council of elders that decides on range management strategies every day, and assigns duties to herders and supervisors of herders^157. Among the Tswana of Botswana, the chief appoints several "modisa" or overseers of common land, who are responsible for reporting on whether decisions were being respected by members of the community and if the range was being overused^158.
Even though there is communal organization and coordination in decision making, each individual household is basically free to disagree with the decisions and leave the herding unit for other units. Such fluidity has been observed for example among the Dinka of Kongor Rural Council^159. Among the Turkana the detailed strategic decisions are made by each household, which allows them to make immediate responses to ecological and social change, but they follow the overall communal strategies agreed upon by the herding group^160. This fluidity at the level of the herding unit implies that membership in herder's associations and group ranches may have to be kept fluid.
Herding units will at times join together into larger cooperating groups. This usually occurs in favourable seasons, and for socio-cultural reasons. During these times, usually a coordinating council made up of the elders of each herding unit will form to make communal decisions. In other cases, herding units will not necessarily join together but will follow the communal decisions laid down by a main chief either on a year-round basis, or at specific times and places (see BOX 2.26).
BOX 2.26
Cooperation among herding units is often assured by a committee formed when the units come together on a seasonal basis, or all year round by a main council or chief. For example, among the Somali, social events are subordinate to ecological considerations, since large ceremonies are held only when and where there is enough pasture and water to support all attendants for the days required^161. The same phenomena has been reported among the Wodaabe^162 and the Maasai^163.
Year round coordination among herding units is often ensured by a higher level authority and set of rules. It can be a set of general controls over rangeland use or specific rules for using certain pastures or transit routes. For example, sets of laws and procedures have been recorded among the Twareg of Gourma, the Berti of Sudan^164, and the Somali nomads who call theirs the "gariyo xeer"^165. The II Chamus of Kenya have a council of elders that enforces the grazing controls ("olokeri") and coordinates movements of herding units through the members of the "II Murran" age set (i.e. the 18-30 year old males)^166. The Saudi Arabian camel Bedouins have a well defined order in which each tribal section can use an area, with enough time in between the passage of each section to allow the growth of annual forage plants. The selection of grazing area within a section is done in the chief's tent among leading men of the section^167. The Berbers of Morocco have a chief of grass,
"amghar n'tuga", who is an elder selected by the council of elders, and who makes final decisions concerning common grazing, such as the timing and location of movements, deferring grazing, and granting permission to outsiders^168. Among the Tswana major decisions affecting a village and its several herding units, including allocation of grazing land, were made at the kgotla^169, and an overseer ("modisa"), was responsible for checking conditions of the rangeland assigned to each section, conferred with chiefs to move livestock if an area became overstocked, and allocated well digging sites and cattle posts according to a set of rules designed to avoid overgrazing^170.
Apart from general all-year regulations, some social controls also were placed on certain times and places. The most renowned example is probably that of the Dina Code of the Macina Fulani. This Code regulated the movements of the Fulani and Twareg tribes into and out of the delta zone of the Niger River. Before all herds and flocks could re-enter the delta in the early dry season, they would have to congregate at the border of the delta, waiting for the leader to permit them to cross^171. Other less well-known regulations also exist. For example, among the Tallensi of northeastern Ghana/southwestern Burkina Faso, only the chief has the right to set fire to bushland because of the danger of accidents^172. Among the Rufa'a al-Hoi of Sudan, the tribal chief, "nazir", with his deputy, "wakil", confer with the sheikhs of the herding camps in order to coordinate the movement south at the end of rains. The coordinated movement is designed to avoid conflicts with the sedentary
population and allow the farmers to finish harvesting the crops^173. Finally, the Lozi king of northwestern Zimbabwe would decide the date when cattle and people would have to leave the flooded area for higher ground^174.
Coordination among herding units does not occur in all cases. For example, the basic cooperating unit among Arab pastoralists of central Chad is the herding group ("ferik") which is about 20 families, whose composition changes from year to year depending on marriages, alliances, etc. But even when the feriks group together in the rainy season, there is no higher level cooperation in range management other than the ferik^175.
Passive coordination, or "choreography" of movements, where no formal agreements are made between tribes but where coordinated movements result from the wish to avoid other tribes, or seasonal niche specialization due to differences in breeds and types of animals, occurs in almost all cases. Good examples are the Messeriya, Dinka, and Nuer of the Sudan^176, the Moors and Fulani of western Africa, and the Fulani and Rufa'a al-Hoi of the Sudan^177. It is rare to find active coordination, based on formal or informal agreements, among different tribes. One example is the pastoralists in the delta of the Niger River (there are 15 Fulani and 3 Twareg clans that follow the Dina Code)^178.
Informal rules, or principles of common sense, can be found among all pastoralists. Some rules tend to be common to all groups, for example, "first come first serve", which applies to the use of particular pastures or camp sites. Pastoralists tend to avoid areas already in use, and will keep at a certain distance of others, although studies tend to be vague about what this minimum distance is, and how it varies with resource stress. In addition, they will avoid areas just recently vacated by others, but the time allowed to elapse before a campsite or pasture is reoccupied again varies among the groups. Other informal rules concern the timing and intensity of use of pastures, concentration and dispersion following the availability of resources, and what to do about outsiders who use one's pastures (see BOX 2.27).
BOX 2.27
The "Fulani way" is the overriding value that ensures good husbandry among the Fulani so that rangeland productivity can be sustained for the next generations. To violate these norms is to bring disease and misfortune to the herd and family^179. The Twareg and Fulani prefer areas that have no signs of trampling^180, which tends to represent a longer rest period for the range than the Dinka of Abyei, who avoid areas with moderate to high amounts of cattle feces^181. The Saudi Bedouins leave the pastures before they have been eaten out or completely trampled down^182. The Turkana say that less persistent pastures should be utilized first, and more persistent pastures should be reserved until the worse times of the year when the pastures are more or less exhausted^183. The Twareg follow an informal rule that those with large herds must go further from the water point than those with small herds^184. Most pastoralists will follow the rule to disperse if resources are scarce^185.
The Fulani say that to better feed your livestock, you must isolate yourself^186. The Fulani will also disperse in the wet season so as to use up the fresh growth better and to reduce the effects of trampling^187. Most pastoralists will not deny outsiders access to both water and pastures (see section 2.3.2). But many, including the Turkana, will deny them access only in times of extreme pasture stress, although it is considered bad form to do so^188.
These formal and informal rules are important in determining the principles that govern every-day decisions made by the herders. Unfortunately not enough studies have been done on this aspect, and its neglect has enhanced the myth of irrationality and irregularity among pastoralists.
2.2.3 Tree and shrub management
2.2.3.1 Harvesting trees and shrubs
2.2.3.2 Regeneration of trees and shrubs
2.2.3.3 Protection of trees and shrubs
Our knowledge of what trees and shrubs are used for among pastoralists, is much greater than our understanding of when, how, and to what degree they are harvested, regenerated and protected. Conventional knowledge has it that pastoralists are either careless or deliberately destroy trees and shrubs, but in many cases some recent and not so recent studies show the contrary.
2.2.3.1 Harvesting trees and shrubs
Woody species are used by pastoralists for browse, fuelwood, constructing houses, corals and fences, and other "minor" uses, such as food, medicine, shade, etc. In some cases, harvesting for browse has been shown to be destructive to the plants, but there are many other instances of the existence of formal and informal rules for protecting the plants against abuse (see BOX 2.28).
BOX 2.28
Many studies report on what trees and shrubs are used for, but not how they are harvested. The few studies that record harvesting techniques show that, with a few exceptions, most groups tend to harvest in such a way as to avoid destroying the plants. One of the exceptions is Fulani pastoralists, some of whom have been known to coppice trees for browse, tannin, tools and medicine, by cutting half way through the branch, then pulling down, which results in the bark being pulled off and reduces chances of bud regeneration from the affected area^189. Deliberate or careless misuse of trees and shrubs seems to occur more frequently when one is outside one's own territory. For example, in central Mali, the Fulani hired herders of the Bambara will coppice trees for the livestock, but it is the nomadic Fulani and the Moors that do most of the damage^190.
Instances where formal and informal rules exist to enhance the productivity or protect trees and shrubs against abusive browsing have been recorded among a few groups. The Pokot and Turkana of Kenya are selective in how they coppice trees. Rarely will they deliberately cut a valuable tree down, and only less useful bushes will be cut back in order to make fences and to reduce bush encroachment on the range^191. The Lahawin of eastern Sudan shake down the leaves for their small stock with special sticks rather than cutting down branches, but recently outsiders and merchants are cutting down the trees^192. The Kel Adrar Twareg of Kidal (Mali) have traditional prohibitions against cutting trees (although the author provides no more details)^193. After coppicing Parinaria curatellifolia, the Mbeere of Kenya leave it to rest for a season or two to regenerate^194. The Dina Code of the Macina Fulani had provisions for policing the bush for unauthorized coppicing of trees for
browse^195. Finally, the people of northern Burkina Faso, will periodically prune the Acacia albida in their fields to enhance its productivity^196.
Harvest of trees and shrubs for fuelwood and construction wood usually entails the cutting down of entire trees. However, in most cases, and when not faced by shortages, pastoralists prefer to collect dry and dead wood for fuel, although they will generally use live wood for house and fence poles (see BOX 2.29). The manner in which wood is harvested for these two uses appears to be more damaging to the plants than coppicing for fodder. However, in times of resource shortage the need for both wood and fodder will override any knowledge and consideration of conservation practices, for example as recorded among the Mbeere of Kenya^197.
BOX 2.29
Among the Pokot and Turkana only dry and dead wood is collected for fuel. Trees have important roles in their culture. For example, people are named after trees, trees are used in almost all rituals, and meetings are held under them, thus they think twice about cutting them down^198. In Gopeshwar (in the Himalayan region of Uttar Pradesh, India) only one member of each household is allowed to collect fuelwood once a week in order to conserve the communal supply^199, however, such a formal organization has not yet been recorded among pastoralists in Africa.
According to the Gabra tradition ("aada"), Salvadora persica, which is used for many other products, should not be used for fuelwood, and live wood should not be cut for fuel. The Gabra are conservative in their use of fuelwood, and will not let a fire burn needlessly, saving unburned logs for another time. Only live wood is used for making huts and corals, but some special buildings can only be made out of certain species, and wood for poles of houses can only be collected at certain ritually prescribed times of the year^200, although it is not clear whether these times have any correlation with the phenological stage of the trees.
Among the southern Turkana of northern Kenya fuelwood use has been estimated at 1.14 kg/capita/day, entirely made up of dead wood, but wood for constructing houses and corrals which is done every time they go to a new camp, is 2.76 kg/capita/day of wood. Construction wood is live wood but usually the small trees of abundant species are used and although some trees are only pruned, others are completely used and killed. This area is sparsely populated and the main pastoral strategy of dispersion and frequent movement of camps is still possible. Thus, the use of fuelwood and construction wood use is brief and localised with long rests in any given area, and it does not appear to have reduced regional wood supplies^201.
The manner in which trees and shrubs are harvested for other uses is barely covered by existing studies. In some cases the harvesting technique can be damaging to the plants, for example, among the Fulani of northern Senegal, who often use fire to stimulate gum arabic trees to release their gum and to make it easier to harvest it^202. In other cases, the harvesting technique does not appear to affect the vegetation community either way, such as the harvesting of karite (Butyrospermum parkii) fruit for oil among the women of the village of Basome in Burkina Faso. On average the women collect 130 kg of karite fruit per year/woman, and there is no regulation, either formal or informal, of collection of the fruit, although a vague village territory is recognized. However, it is estimated that 25-50% of the fruit are not collected because they are inaccessible under thorn bushes, in cracks, and invisible under litter, thus it is doubtful whether fruit collection adversely affects
regeneration of the stand^203.
2.2.3.2 Regeneration of trees and shrubs
The regeneration of shrubs, either through seed germination or cuttings, is very rarely discussed by research studies among pastoralists, and there are more reports that speak of pastoralists lacking than having some form of regeneration practice. Where they have been recorded, regeneration techniques can be either passive protection of seedlings, or active germination and/or propagation (see BOX 2.30).
BOX 2.30
Some groups, such as the Turkana, do not seem to see a connection between tree planting and tree use, and do not traditionally plant trees, nor even protect seedlings^204, although it is not clear whether this conclusion is due to the interview technique or not. The practice of frequent movement of camps among pastoralists often results in higher tree germination on the campsites since the seeds scarified by passage through the digestive system of livestock, and taking advantage of the high organic fertilizer on the sites, seem to germinate better^205, and once mature, are often protected by the next camp who use it for shade and as foundations for their huts. Many groups, especially agropastoralists, are known to protect spontaneously germinated seedlings in their fields, for example, the protection of Acacia albida among many West Africans, such as the people of northern Burkina Faso^206, and protection of Melia volkensii by the Mbeere of Kenya^207. However, such passive
regeneration techniques are often the first to disappear once a shortage of natural resources begins.
Most groups have a clear knowledge of the germination requirements of different species, and know how to germinate them if need be^208, but records of actual tree and shrub regeneration through seeds have not been found among pastoralists. Regeneration by cuttings or transplanting naturally germinated seedlings, however, have been recorded. The former occurs among the Gabra and Boran of northern Kenya. They build live fences, with a 50% survival rate, by putting wet dung in the hole where a tree or shrub cutting is placed^209. The latter has been recorded among the Lozi of Zimbabwe who mark the graves of their kings and other royal people (sacred groves) with trees collected and transplanted from the surrounding bushland^210.
2.2.3.3 Protection of trees and shrubs
The protection of trees and shrubs in particular, rather than all natural resources in an area, seems to take two forms among pastoralists: prohibition and restriction on the use of some highly valued individual species, and the protection of all trees and shrubs in sacred groves. In West Africa, over forty species of trees are preserved on farmland, in densities less than 40 trees/ha, by both agropastoralists and farmers. Four species dominate the list: baobab (Adansonia digitata), karite, Parkia biglobosa, and Acacia albida^211. In East Africa, the Gabra and Boran ritually protect trees in sacred groves and shrines, and prohibit cutting of valuable mature species, such as Acacia tortilis^212. The Turkana protect important trees, such as A. tortilis, Hyphaena coriaca, Cordia sinensis, Ziziphus mauritiana, Dobera glabra, and A. albida^213. The trees, shrubs and herbs in sacred groves are in all recorded cases protected from being harvested (see section 2.3.3.). The Kikuyu of
southern Mount Kenya, however, will allow cuttings to be taken from sacred trees to propagate other sacred trees^214.
The protection of trees and shrubs among pastoralists should not be seen as equivalent to the "conservation" ethic of western environmentalists - pastoralists usually do not have much use for the "climax" stage of vegetation succession - but as protecting a resources for future use, and sustaining its maximum long term productivity.
2.2.4 Hay and fodder production
Fodder production, ie. cultivating plants specifically and only for forage, has not been found among pastoralists. Our discussion does not include the residue of many cultivated crops that are given to livestock. There are two main constraints to planting forage crops: 1) it is hard to find suitable species that give high yields enough to support all or an economically significant proportion of livestock in arid zones, and 2) the work must be done in the wet season when there usually is a labour shortage^215. Thus pastoralists often find that the forage available on rangelands, even the low quality biomass in the dry season, is on the balance better than cultivating fodder.
On the other hand, there are many recorded cases of hay and browse collection, ie. cutting standing herbaceous biomass and leaves and fruits from trees and shrubs. But the scale of such operations is often quite small, since labour shortages and the relatively low density of plants, oblige the gatherers to cover a large area to collect adequate amounts. Usually enough is collected to feed the calves that are left at the homestead, the draft oxen, special cows, horses, and animals intended for fattening and slaughter. Hay collection is either done at the end of the rainy season, or anytime during the dry season, and the hay is either collected daily in small quantities and fed daily, or collected in large quantities and stored for later use. In most cases the hay is cut in communal rangelands, but in a few cases, private or communal enclosures are set up and the hay collected at prescribed times of the year (see BOX 2.31).
BOX 2.31
Hay and browse collection is usually done on a small scale for special livestock, especially newly delivered cows, draft oxen, and calves. Some examples are the Fulani of Nigeria^216, and the Wodaabe Fulani^217. The children of agropastoralists, such as the people of southeast Burkina Faso, usually are given the role of gathering hay for calves^218. Some Zaghawa villagers collect hay and store it in trees^219. In northern Nigeria, the Hausa cut hay from small swamps and depressions in the wet season for feeding to tethered animals^220. The Somali will collect the fruit of a tree (Dobera spp.) and hand feed it to their special animals^221.
The fruits and leaves of trees and shrubs are considered as high value fodder, and are usually collected only for animals intended for slaughter. For example, the Toucouleur women of Bakel area harvest Pterocarpus lucens to feed to rams intended for the Tabaski feast^222. The Macina Fulani women fatten the "njarniri", or male animals intended for slaughter by individually tying them to stakes and feeding supplements made up of the leaves of Ipomoea spp, Khaya senegalensis, P. lucens and 9 other species, plus salt and crop residues and by-products^223.
Hay collection seems to be more widespread in north Africa than elsewhere in Africa. For example, the Jeffara herders of southern Tunisia (bordering on the Sahara), will cut hay (more in drought than in normal years) from special pastures "khortan" for their shoats^224. In the same area people harvest herbaceous fodder in the spring to supplement the diet of shoats in the late summer^225. Recently in some cases hay and browse are collected on privately enclosed rangelands. Some Fulani agropastoralists living on the fringe of the Niger River delta in Mali create private enclosures on the "bourgou" grasses, and cut the hay at regular intervals for their draft oxen and other special animals^226. Some of the settled Baggara pastoralists of south Darfur will make small, private (illegal) enclosures on the rangeland and cut the hay for special animals, milking cows, donkeys and horses. Usually an extended family will have the right to the hay^227. Another form of enclosed hay has
been recorded among the Somali of Bay region, where small herd owners hand feed a few of their livestock with a grass weed that grows in cropland (scientific name unknown); by hoeing morning and afternoon, a single adult can harvest enough of this grass to keep about 4 adult cattle alive^228.
Since the scale of hay collection is usually small, the impact of such practices on the rangelands is probably negligible compared to grazing by livestock. However, with increasing resource shortages it is expected that hay collection, and the enclosure of common rangelands will be a growing trend, as has happened in Kenya, and is slowly gathering momentum in Sudan, Nigeria and Somalia.
2.2.5 Water management
2.2.5.1 Management of natural ponds
2.2.5.2 Water harvesting techniques
2.2.5.3 Well management
2.2.5.4 Other water resources
The availability of water for both human and livestock use is a continual preoccupation among pastoralists the world over. In general, African pastoralists use natural ponds in the wet season, gradually switching over to shallow wells as the ponds dry up, and then going to permanent deep wells towards the end of the dry season. The management of water resources, whether ground or surface, includes using and excavating natural ponds, creating dams, digging wells, tapping natural springs, timely consumption of water-bearing plants, and developing means for storing water. These are often the first improvements made on rangelands by pastoralists.
The distribution of water points, and the timing of their use, have direct impact on the condition and productivity of range plants. In many parts of Africa, vast areas of rangelands are underutilized because of the lack of adequate water, while the areas around water points can be heavily grazed. There is no record yet of a formal pastoral system where a minimum distance between water points (especially in terms of digging new wells) is formally imposed by the society. However, among the Somali, each clan or lineage will try to distribute the wells it owns over the entire range, to cover as large a range area, and as diverse a resource base, as possible^229.
The timing of use of water points is a function of the season and the needs of each type of livestock. Some watering techniques of livestock do not affect range resources, for example, the Wodaabe always water calves first^230, and the Zaghawa do not allow sick animals close to wells^231. However, other techniques can have an impact on rangelands. For example, in the dry season, the Zaghawa will water their camels once a week, sheep every 3 days, and cattle every other day^232, which, compared to daily watering, increases the diameter of rangeland that can be used, and reduces overgrazing around water points. The Maasai deliberately water cattle every other day in the wet season so as to accustom them to the every other day watering that is necessary in the dry season^233. This practice helps to increase mobility and dispersion during the wet season, which usually is beneficial to range plants.
2.2.5.1 Management of natural ponds
Water collecting in small or large depressions can vary according to size, siltation characteristics, imperviousness of the bed, water quality, degree of tree cover which affects water evaporation, and watershed characteristics that affect runoff rates and quantities. Except for very large depressions, such as the Sudd and parts of Lake Chad, and rivers that dry progressively into a chain of ponds, most natural ponds in arid and semi-arid zones do not outlast the dry season. However, some pastoral groups improve the pond's capacity by excavating the silt. For example, the Borana of Ethiopia, clean out the silt, and place a thorn fence around the pond to protect its slopes^234. The Dinka of Kongor excavate natural ponds along river beds which are then fenced off and if small covered by a reed mat^235.
Natural ponds can loose their quality fast toward the end of their life and especially when livestock have trampled in them. Some groups will reserve certain ponds, especially smaller and nearby ones, for human use, for example the Fulani of northern Senegal^236. Pastoralists also have water cleaning techniques. For example, the Twareg dig small holes in natural ponds and place the soil of termite mounds in them to precipitate most impurities^237. The Fulani of northern Senegal add the bark of Boscia senegalensis mixed with termite mound soil, acidified curdled milk, and salt to pond water for human use^238.
2.2.5.2 Water harvesting techniques
The building of small barrages and dams has been observed among a few pastoral groups. "Hafirs" or small stone walled barrages are common in northern Sudan, Somalia, and among the Zaghawa of Chad^239. Unfortunately not much has been written on their management (organization of the construction and management tasks, design and location, etc.). The use of surface catchment basins appears to be more widespread in North Africa and elsewhere than Sub-Saharan Africa. For example, in Tunisia many different types of water harvesting systems are used to irrigate crops and forage, to recharge aquifers, and create stock ponds and reservoirs^240. The Bedouins of the Arabian peninsula traditionally built horse-shoe shaped and low stone barrages in such a way as to maximize water storage, and minimize evaporation and muddiness^241. In Pakistan a water spreading technique for irrigating crops involved a series of low dams built on a zigzag pattern, and barrages with stone-masonry cisterns
were made in 800 A.D. on the road between Mecca and Baghdad for pilgrims, but the design appears to be too expensive to replicate now^242.
2.2.5.3 Well management
Wells vary according to the depth of the aquifer, and the geological strata. Shallow wells are dug in sandy river beds and are deepened as the dry season progresses. These wells are destroyed every year by the river water, and have to be redug at the beginning of the dry season. The knowledge of where to locate wells, already discussed in section 2.1.2, is used to find good quantities and qualities of ground water. For example, the Turkana only dig river wells in those areas where the drainage line has a sandy stretch that is water-bearing, and differentiate between small drainage lines and large ones that have small or long stretches of sand^243. The Boran of Kenya dig wells usually right next to a deep tap-rooted tree, without damaging the tree; thus the roots of the tree help to stabilize the well wall, the tree provides shade for workers, and the people help the tree by irrigating it (inadvertently) with spilt water^244.
A few groups have formal organizations to control and manage communal wells. These usually consist of a committee or overseeing council and a head manager who appoints deputies, allocates tasks (guarding, maintaining, digging, etc.) among the users of wells, and determines the conditions under which outsiders can use them (see BOX 2.32).
BOX 2.32
Among the Wodaabe of Niger, wells are owned by lineage segments, but others are allowed to use them according to strict rules ("buto"). In addition, the dry season camps are dispersed and as tar away as 70 km, and are moved every 20-30 days around the well, to avoid overgrazing^245. The northern Somali manage communal wells through an elected committee of 3-20 people, called "guddiya warta". The members of the committee are the water managers, "sagaale", who allocate water to the community and guests, guard the well, enforce and devise rules of use, charge fees if any, and maintain the well^246. The Borana of southern Ethiopia have an elected elder of the clan, "abba ela", who supervises the well according to Borana laws. A council of elders supervises the Abba ela, and appoints a caretaker if the Abba ela is temporarily absent. The users of the well also form a council, "Cora ela" who have ultimate authority over the Abba ela and the council of elders. A "father of the
watering order" appointed by the Cora ela regulates daily use of the well by appointing two men to supervise the livestock, a man to sweep and clean out the dung, a man to coordinate the action of the line of men and women (also chosen by the father of order) who draw water with containers and pass it along to a basin. This line can be 15-20 persons long. The basins are plastered with clay every morning, and the well maintained after every rainy season^247.
Some groups also have rules on how often to use the same wells. For example, in the Kitui district of Kenya, women, who are responsible for collecting water, use different wells during alternative dry seasons to allow wells to replenish^248.
With the advent of deep, mechanized boreholes, the traditional systems for well management have been disrupted, but not in all cases. Some groups actually prefer to return to their traditional wide-diameter wells, for example, the Rendille of Kenya prefer large diameter wells because they do not break down and have more minerals than boreholes^249. A survey by the "Service de l'Animation" of Niger in 1972 among the Twareg, Fulani and Arabs showed that they prefer cemented wide-diameter wells to boreholes, because the former limit overstocking, are easier to learn about and maintain, and cause less weight loss in animals (since the rangelands are not overgrazed)^250.
2.2.5.4 Other water resources
The pastoralists and hunter-gatherers have other means of manipulating their water resources. The storage or transport of water allows them to go further away from water points, thus dispersing grazing pressure and allowing the use of distant pastures. For example, the Hamar of western Sudan store water in the hollowed trunks of the baobab during the dry season^251. As already mentioned, the Turkana transport water on donkeys to their camps, both for human and animal use. Recently the Somali have started to truck water to distant pastures from boreholes or hafirs, so as to extend the grazing area^252.
Hunters and gatherers tend to rely more on water-bearing plants than pastoralists. For example, the Ghana foragers of central Kalahari use a local melon as water for themselves and their livestock. If the melons run out before the end of the dry season, they subsist on other water-rooted species or travel 115 km north to a major river^253.
Natural springs are rarely modified by pastoralists. However, in one case, that of the Fulani of northern Cameroon, the herders will improve their access to the high quality, mineral water, by digging a shallow well, called "lahore", where ever they see bubbles, and lift the water into wooden troughs. Since the area is inundated by floods each year, the location of the best springs tends to vary from year to year. The government recently has tried to put in permanent wells and cemented troughs but the pastoralists don't like them because they can't be moved each year to the best source, and animals can't swim or wallow in the water which, the Fulani say, is good for them^254.
2.2.6 Natural resources for food and medicine
Plants, wildlife, and fish resources are also used for purposes other than for livestock, fuel, and construction material by pastoralists. These include food and medicine. Very little is written about the management of resources for these uses. Most ethnobotanical studies tend to report on what the plants are used for, or in some rare cases^255, on what impact the plant collection has on the plants, but not on how they are harvested, when, where, by whom, how often, etc. etc.^256.
The collection of plants for food is usually not as important a component of pastoral diets as milk and meat. Some groups, such as the Gabra of northern Kenya, who collect only 17 wild plant species for food, do not consider wild foods to be important^257. But it does provide them with a supplement, a relish, and an emergency resource during times of drought or economic stress. In these cases it is of a temporary nature and rarely accompanied by formal organizational structures. On the other hand, some pastoral groups rely more heavily on wild plants, collecting them regularly either for home consumption or for sale. In these cases, the collection is often communal and involves strict rules for protecting the wild grasses. These rules cover the frequency of collection, territorial boundaries, and prohibition of livestock and other users into the area. The collection of wild fruits from trees and shrubs has already been discussed. Wild cereal collecting is often the domain of
women, either collectively or individually, especially as an economic activity. The techniques for harvesting the grains will vary according to the group and the phenological stage of the plant. Some other groups actually cultivate wild plants for their grain or other products (see BOX 2.33).
BOX 2.33
The Kel Adrar Twareg Kidal (Mali) have traditional provisions for protecting wild grasses used for human food (although details are not available)^258. One factor determining pastoral movements, at least among the Twareg of northern Burkina Faso, is the location of wild plants for human use. They regularly use the In Daki area to gather the lotus bulb for human consumption so that they can save their millet store for later in the dry season^259.
The Twareg of Niger regularly harvest wild cereals on their way from the wet to the dry season pastures^260. The grains, given the generic name of "ishiban", include Panicum laetum and Echinochloa colona. The women do most of the gathering, and will often go together in groups of 5 or 6 and stay a week in the bush, harvesting grains and other products, such as fruits, gum arabic, and special branches for beds. They have three techniques for harvesting the grains: 1) when the seed is still on the inflorescence but ready to fall, they harvest early in the morning so that the dew on the seed prevents it from being dispersed and scattered. A deep, cone-shaped, recipient is used to harvest the grain. 2) Before seed fall, the grass is cut, like domesticated cereals, and left to dry, then threshed and winnowed. 3) After the seed has fallen the standing biomass is cut or burned so that the seeds can be swept off the ground. Burning the biomass means a worse taste to the grain, but
is easier work, therefore it is a matter of choice. The swept grains, mixed with soil and pebbles, is less desirable and fetches a lower price in the market. 4) The Twareg slaves will also take seeds from termite mounds: from the central storehouse in normal years, but down to the subterranean storehouses during droughts. The Twareg will usually harvest just what they need for that day or week, thus they rarely use fires, unless they are collecting a whole season's store, or a large amount for sale^261. It is not clear what the impacts of these harvesting techniques among the Twareg are on the long term sustainability of the wild cereals.
The Wodaabe of Niger also gather wild cereals, but will usually buy from the Twareg in exchange for tobacco (which they buy from southern farmers, but do not consume themselves)^262. The Dirong and Guruf tribes of Chad break open ant hills to take the grain during droughts. They can collect as much as 130 kg of seeds (a camel load) during a day^263.
The Zaghawa women, like the Turkana women^264, gather wild cereals mostly for food, and some for sale. The Zaghawa spend 1-2 months where the cereals grow, and return with 3-4 camel loads of grains. Harvest are either individual or collective, and are started in August and gathered at intervals of 15-30 days. The subsequent harvests are usually smaller than the first. The women will mentally mark off their individual areas, and cut and leave the grains to dry. They cover the harvest with thorn against goats, and a symbolic stone that represents each woman's clan, against theft. Herders are not allowed to lead livestock into these cereal-growing areas until after the grain harvest, and are fined if they do. It appears that the gathering actually helps maintain a good stand of wild cereals, because non-useful plants (especially Cenchrus biflorus) are taking over the areas where gathering is no longer practiced^265.
Among the Teda Tibetsi, a guard watches over the maturing wild cereals. As soon as they are ripe, religious rituals are performed and the clans go out to harvest. Once they have started, outsiders can also join in^266. Thus priority is given to local people.
In Sierra Leone, Guinea and Nigeria, people cultivate a wild grass, Digitalis exilis, for food^267. The Oubangui women of the Central African Republic, apart from collecting wild plants for food, have also learned to cultivate a salty plant (Hygrophila longifolia) from which they extract salt. It is planted around the homestead by sticking a flowering stem into the soil, and allowing the rain and sun to ripen and naturally scatter the seed on the ground, where it grows the following year^268.
Animals, large or small, can make up a sizeable portion of pastoral diets, depending on the region and seasonal availability of fauna. Most large game are hunted communally, while smaller animals, including birds and insects are hunted individually, especially by young boys. Honey collection can be abusive or sustained. Some groups have prohibitions and restrictions designed to protect animals, including fish, from overuse. The existence of taboos, associated with animal totems, although not necessarily a deliberate means to protect animals, may inadvertently contribute to their protection (see BOX 2.34).
BOX 2.34
Bushmen, like other hunter-gatherers, never kill more than they can immediately eat^269, thus their impact on wildlife resources is spread over time. In eastern and southern Africa, where there are still substantial wildlife resources, pastoralists, such as the Tswana^270, often turn to hunting and trading wildlife products when they loose their livestock to rinderpest and other epidemics.
The Tswana have regimented cooperative hunts, where once a year they will hunt a large number of animals and share the products. They also can organize hunts, called "letsholo", for special ceremonial purposes^271. The Ngoni of southeastern Zambia have communal and inter-village hunts, mostly in the dry season but also whenever a predator is sighted. These hunts are organized by a leader who appoints two men as coordinators of the hunt^272. The chief of the Nyakyusa of southwest Tanzania also organizes the communal hunting and fishing parties^273.
The Guahibo of the Llanos of west central Venezuela and eastern Colombia are hunter-gatherers who deliberately use fire as a tool to produce a good grass cover for deer^274. This form of deliberate plant management for wildlife has not yet been recorded in Africa.
Bee keeping and honey collecting usually involves placing wooden or thatched containers in trees, and harvesting the honey after smoking the bees out. However, some groups have devised special containers that can be used several times without destroying the bees, for example the Arabs of southern Chad^275. The Kamba of Machakos District (Kenya) hang their beehives on trees on common land, but the owner of the hive has all rights to the tree and the land surrounding it^276.
Many groups, both pastoral and hunter-gatherer, have traditional totems associated with each clan or lineage, that prohibits the members of that lineage to directly or indirectly eat or harm the totem. Some examples are the Shona of Zimbabwe^277, the Tallensi^278, and the Bushmen^279 In some groups, such as the Rendille, only special sub-clans, such as those claiming descent from priestly ones, have prohibitions against eating all game meat^280. Most totems are animals or parts of animals, although the Shona also have totems of pools of water, from which the people can drink, but must respect and not abuse, and are prohibited from eating certain fish^281. Wildlife are also protected in and sometimes in the vicinity of sacred groves and other ritual shrines, for example among the Tallensi^282. There does not appear to be a consistent factor for selecting totems, ie. neither utilitarian, medicinal, nor zoological. Thus the totemic and taboo systems inevitably end up protecting
all types of animals, and by extension the forest or rangelands they thrive in^283.
The Lozi of Zimbabwe have two dozen ways to catch fish, depending on the season, flood level of the Zambezi river, and whether it is communal or individual work^284. The people of northern Burkina Faso use the fruit, bark and roots of Balanites aegyptiaca to stupefy and catch fish^285. In the central Niger River delta, the fishermen prohibit access to certain parts of the river at fixed times, and prohibit the use of fishing nets with too fine a mesh so as to reduce over-fishing^286.
Plants and animal parts are also used for medicines. These can make up either the bulk of the medicine, or are used for their symbolic value, for example in Senegalese traditional medicine^287. The practitioners are usually healers, marabouts, priests, and certain craftsmen, such as the blacksmiths among the Hausa of Ader Region of Niger who cure burns^288. No study has as yet reported on how much material an average medicine man will collect in a year, but it is probably minor compared to food gathering or grazing. In addition, certain informal rules seem to mitigate potential over-use, for example, those plants with the greatest medicinal use usually are also the most common species in the area, as among the Hausa^289. In most cases medicinal plants are collected when dry^290, thus having minimal effect on the vegetation community. The Somali traditional herbal healers say they respect the plants by not allowing their shadow to fall on it while cutting, but more
practically, by never eradicating the whole plant, even when they are after the roots^291.
2.2.7 Analysis
Pastoral management systems range from simple to complex strategies. On one end of the continuum, simple management systems often rely on the low population pressure, high dispersion and mobility characteristic of pastoral societies to keep a long term ecological balance and to check over-use. On the other end, complex systems are often accompanied by elaborate social controls that regulate and coordinate the action of individual managers. Although there are examples for each of these extreme cases, the majority of pastoral groups fall somewhere in between.
A constant theme that emerges from all the studies reviewed is that the pastoral population is a very heterogeneous one in its objectives, strategies, needs, and management styles. This heterogeneity is evident not only between tribes, but also between individual managers. Management strategies also vary with time even for the same manager. Most if not all groups have informal and formal rules that regulate their use of natural resources. However, these rules are idealized norms, and the day-to-day decisions taken by each manager usually deviate from these norms according to local physical and social circumstances. Beliefs about the ideal rules and customs may be voiced in interviews and discussions, but they are not necessarily followed every time^292. The degree to which pastoralists will manage an area depends on whether they have formal rights to the land (see section 2.3.2), and how frequently they use it. They can afford to have a relaxed attitude and not necessarily
worry about killing a tree in an area that they rarely frequent, because they know that their cumulative pressure on the area's resources is small and dispersed. But they usually will have strict rules governing the use of high-density areas, such as permanent water points. This heterogeneity in management styles and strategies is often not taken into account by development workers and planners, but is an important basis for the success or failure of each individual manager.
Pastoral systems, like farming systems, rely heavily on detailed monitoring of their natural environment. They do not have sophisticated technologies for monitoring, but they have a holistic set of indicators, each tuned to one or a few aspects of the productivity and health of the natural environment, and lots of time and patience to follow-up on the changes in the indicators. Some formal scientists have criticized the accuracy of individual indicators, for example, that milk yield can be insensitive to changes in body weight and environmental stress, and has the ability to dampen seasonal fluctuations^293. However, they tend to forget that the pastoralist does not rely solely on milk yield, but puts together pieces of information from a set of indicators on the performance of his animals and the state of the pastures. The long term perspective afforded by continuous, and holistic, monitoring is a valuable feature of LKMS which development workers would do well to take into
account.
Does the pastoralist have a long term strategy? Some believe that he does not because he can move on to new pastures when the old is depleted^294. But isn't this mobility a long term strategy? Most of the pastoralist's strategies are aimed at sustaining the potential natural productivity of natural resources in the long term. These include pasture rotation (both seasonal and otherwise), deferment, dispersion, and protection and regeneration of trees and shrubs. Other strategies are aimed at improving the productivity of the rangelands, such as water development, bush clearing, and the use of fire to check the growth of undesirable shrubs and disease vectors.
Is conservation a goal of the pastoralist? If by conservation we mean the western environmentalist's view of protecting natural resources from any use so that the climax stage can be reached, then probably no. But if we mean protection and reservation for future productive use, then probably yes. The African pastoralist, like many American ranchers, has no use for the climax stage of plant succession, which often has less productivity for livestock than lower stages of succession or improved ranges. He is more concerned with maintaining the productivity of the area at a level high enough to meet his needs, and is prepared to either temporarily forego using an area to allow regeneration (if he has other viable pastures to go to), or conversely to deliberately overstock for a short period those pastures that are stimulated by short-intensive grazing.
But sustaining the long term productivity of an area is not the only goal of pastoralists. He is continually balancing several goals: reducing risk, efficiently using the labour available to him, meeting socio-cultural needs, functioning within his local political framework, etc. Sometimes the short term needs of the environment are subordinated to his other needs, but, at least in the traditional system, this is usually a temporary strategy soon abandoned when prevailing constraints are lifted.
Some researchers believe that full pastoralists are better at keeping the ecological balance than agropastoralists, because the former are totally dependent on one set of resources (livestock and pasture), but the latter can also rely on crop cultivation. If it is true that agropastoralists tend to damage their environment more than full pastoralists, and there is some evidence to indicate it, the causes are probably not inherent in the systems but due to external factors, and the challenge is to identify those conditions that make the agropastoralist "loose control" over the environment^295.
"Nomadic pastoralism is inherently self-destructive since systems of management are based on the short-term objective of keeping as many animals as possible alive, without regard to the long-term conservation of land resources."^296 This commonly held belief is negated by the many different management objectives and strategies described in this section. These show that, within the traditional system, pastoralists had ways to mitigate negative consequences on the environment. This is not to say that environmental degradation did not occur, rather that many mechanisms were in place to avoid degradation, and to allow regeneration if and when it occurred. It is the gradual atrophy of these management, and land tenure, systems that is making this fallacy come true.
Endnotes
1. Monod 1975, p.75.
2. Behnke & Kerven 1984, p.65.
3. Behnke & Kerven 1984, p.54.
4. Stewart 1978, p.119; Stubbendieck 1978, p.141.
5. Behnke & Kerven 1984, p.67.
6. Tubiana & Tubiana 1977, p.77.
7. Colson 1951, p.125.
8. Santoir 1977, p.24.
9. Brandstrom et al 1979, p.15.
10. Wilson 1951, p.270.
11. Evans-Pritchard 1940, p.274.
12. Brandstrom et al 1979, p.15.
13. Middleton & Kershaw 1972, p.36.
14. Fratkin 1986, pp. 276-282.
15. Lewis 1961, p.32.
16. Fratkin 1986, p.276.
17. Fratkin 1986, p.282.
18. Barrow 1988, p.2.
19. Niamir 1985.
20. Winter 1984, p.554.
21. Tubiana & Tubiana 1977, p.10.
22. Diop 1987, p.99.
23. Swift 1977, p.280.
24. Niamir 1982.
25. Marchal 1983, p.565.
26. Gulliver 1970, p.28; McCabe 1983, p.117; Barrow 1988, p.3.
27. Spencer 1965, p.7; Hjort 1976a, p.46.
28. Wagenaar et al 1986, pp. 3-4; Wilson 1986, p.34.
29. Fratkin 1986, p.282.
30. Maliki et al 1984, pp. 465 & 495.
31. Ba 1982, p.37.
32. McDermott & Ngor, p.20.
33. Bourgeot 1981, p.170.
34. Barnes 1951, p.214.
35. Niamir 1985.
36. Tubiana & Tubiana 1977, p.75.
37. Winter 1984, p.556.
38. Spencer 1965, p.8.
39. Spencer 1965, p.25.
40. Behnke & Kerven 1984, p.52.
41. Blench 1985, p.8.
42. Ahmed n.d., p.51.
43. Diop 1987, p.99.
44. Brandstrom et al 1979, p.17.
45. Barral & Benoit 1977, p.109.
46. Middleton & Kershaw 1972, p.21.
47. Fratkin 1986, p.276.
48. Conant n.d., p.115; Barrow 1988, p.1.
49. Colson 1951, p.125.
50. Ngur 1988, p.8.
51. Behnke & Kerven 1984, pp.37-59.
52. Spencer 1965, p.10.
53. Dyson-Hudson & Dyson-Hudson 1982, p.220.
54. Kjenstad 1987.
55. El Sammani 1978, p.22.
56. Wilson 1951, p.270.
57. Putman 1984, p.174.
58. Bremaud & Pagot 1962, p.318; Allanson 1981 cited in Behnke & Kerven 1984, p.9.
59. Stenning 1959, p.207.
60. Behnke & Kerven 1984, p.36.
61. For example, see for the Fulani of northern Burkina Faso, Marchal 1983, pp. 565-572; for the Twareg of Air, Niger, Bernus 1977; the pastoralists of western Chad, Clanet 1977; the Twareg and Fulani of northern Burkina Faso Barral 1977.
62. For example, writing about the Wodaabe, Maliki et al 1984, p.464 and Barral 1967; about the Fulani of northern Nigeria, Adegboye 1978, p.63; about the Turkana of Kenya, Dyson-Hudson & McCabe 1983, p.44; about the Somali of Bay Region, Putman 1984, p.177 and Lewis 1961, p.46 and Behnke & Kerven 1984, p.11; about the Samburu, Hjort 1976a, p.46; and about the Zaghawa of Chad/Sudan Tubiana & Tubiana 1977, p.55.
63. Maliki et al 1984, p.278.
64. Gulliver 1975, p.372.
65. Spencer 1965, p.9.
66. Spencer 1965, p.8.
67. Benoit 1979, p.184.
68. Stenning 1959, p.41.
69. Scott & Gormley 1980, p.97.
70. Gulliver 1975, pp. 374-375.
71. McCabe 1983, p.118.
72. Western 1982, p.192.
73. Western & Dunne 1979, p.92.
74. Stenning 1959, p.216.
75. Delgado 1979, pp. 127-128.
76. Gulliver 1970, p.26.
77. McDermott & Ngor, p.11.
78. Gulliver 1975, p.378.
79. Bourgeot 1981, p.168.
80. Winter 1984, p.552.
81. Tubiana & Tubiana 1977, p.53.
82. Imperato 1972, p.63.
83. Behnke & Kerven 1984, p.47.
84. Western & Dunne 1979, p.77.
85. Gilg 1963, p.502.
86. Barrow 1988, p.5.
87. Gulliver 1975, p.373.
88. Bourgeot 1981, p.167.
89. Sandford 1984, p.13.
90. Odell 1982, p.8.
91. Novikoff 1976, p.61.
92. Western 1982, p.207.
93. El-Arifi 1979, p.36.
94. Fratkin 1986, p.279.
95. Barrow 1988, pp. 2-3.
96. Sutter 1978, p.21.
97. Bourezg 1984, p.217.
98. Jacobs 1980, p.287.
99. Western 1982,p. 191.
100. Ostberg 1987, p.48.
101. Allan 1965, p.301.
102. Brandstrom et al 1979, p.35.
103. Western 1982, p.191.
104. Behnke & Kerven 1984, p.74.
105. Stenning 1959, pp. 56 & 212.
106. Adegboye 1978, pp. 64-65.
107. Stenning 1959, p.219; Maliki et al 1984, p.278.
108. Gallais 1975, p.56.
109. Ahmed n.d., p.53.
110. Clyburn 1978, p.109.
111. Adegboye 1978, pp. 64-65.
112. Hjort 1976a, p.46.
113. Gulliver 1970, pp.44-45.
114. McArthur & Harrington 1978, p.597.
115. Niamir 1987.
116. Gulliver 1975, p.371.
117. Sandford 1984, p.13.
118. Ostberg 1987, p.48.
119. Western 1982, p.202.
120. Santoir 1977, p.43.
121. Hervouet 1977, p.82.
122. Cassanelli 1984, p.484.
123. For example, see a study among the Fulani of northern Burkina Faso, Marchal 1983, p.560; among East African herders, Dyson-Hudson & Dyson-Hudson 1982, p.235; and among the Maasai, Jacobs 1980, p.287.
124. Maliki et al 1984, p.260.
125. Ba 1982, pp. 26-28.
126. Ba 1982, p.28.
127. Western 1982, p.191; Homewood & Rodgers 1984, p.436.
128. Spencer 1965, p.17.
129. Ba 1982, pp. 24-28.
130. Stiles & Kassam 1986, p.4.
131. Oba 1985.
132. Sweet 1965a, p.140.
133. Clyburn 1978, p.109.
134. Sandford 1984, p.15.
135. McDermott & Ngor 1983, pp. 21-23.
136. Hjort 1976a, p.48.
137. Benoit 1979, p.44.
138. Conant n.d., p.115.
139. C. Toulmin, International Institute for Environment and Development (IIED), London, pers. comm. 1988.
140. F. Bohlin, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Uppsala, pers. comm. 1989.
141. Stenning 1959, p.215.
142. Legesse 1984, p.482.
143. Sandford 1984, p.12.
144. Riesman 1984, p.186.
145. Mottin 1977, p.49.
146. Jacobs 1980, p.287.
147. Sandford 1984, p.11.
148. Gluckman 1951, p.63.
149. Galaty 1981, p.4.
150. Gilles 1988, p.1164.
151. Ahmed n.d., p.47.
152. Behnke & Kerven 1984, p.39.
153. Stenning 1959, p.217.
154. Wilson 1986, p.33.
155. McDermott & Ngor 1983, pp. 11-13.
156. Maliki et al 1984, pp. 258, 293, 308.
157. Jacobs 1980, p.286.
158. Peters 1984, p.31.
159. McDermott & Ngor 1983, p.13.
160. Gulliver 1975, p.372; McCabe 1983, p.121.
161. Behnke & Kerven 1984, p.199.
162. Stenning 1959, p.53; Maliki et al 1984, p.302.
163. Jacobs 1980, p.286.
164. Sandford 1984, p.9.
165. Rabeh 1984, p.59.
166. Little & Brokensha 1987, p.200.
167. Sweet 1965a, pp. 139-140.
168. Artz et al 1986.
169. Schapera 1940, p.72.
170. Devitt 1982, p.18.
171. Wagenaar et al 1986, p.4.
172. Fortes 1940, p.259.
173. Ahmed n.d., p.49.
174. Gluckman 1951, p.11.
175. Gilg 1963, p.504.
176. Niamir 1982.
177. Ahmed n.d., p.54.
178. Imperato 1972, p.63.
179. Stenning 1959, p.55.
180. Bourgeot 1981, p.171.
181. Niamir 1982.
182. Sweet 1965a, p.150.
183. Gulliver 1970, p.29.
184. Gallais 1975, p.75.
185. Sandford 1984, p.8.
186. Ba 1982, p.12.
187. Riesman 1984, p.175.
188. Gulliver 1970, p.35.
189. Bernus 1979, p.125.
190. C. Toulmin, IIED, pers. comm. 1988.
191. Barrow 1988, p.7.
192. Morton 1988, p.10.
193. Swift 1988a, p.9.
194. Brokensha & Riley 1980a, p.122.
195. Riesman 1984, p.186.
196. Marchal 1983, p.171.
197. Brokensha & Riley 1980a.
198. Barrow 1988, p.16.
199. Gadgil 1985, p.141.
200. Stiles & Kassam 1986, p.16.
201. Ellis et al 1984, pp. 174-180.
202. Mottin 1977, p.48.
203. de Beij 1986, pp. 68-70.
204. Barrow 1988, p.12.
205. Ellis et al 1984, p.170.
206. Marchal 1983, p.174.
207. Brokensha & Riley 1980a.
208. Brokensha & Riley 1980a, p.121.
209. Legesse 1984, p.481.
210. Gluckman 1951, p.30.
211. Pullan 1974 cited in Wiersum 1985, p.108.
212. Legesse 1984, p.481.
213. Barrow 1988, p.8.
214. Brokensha & Castro 1987, p.20.
215. Delgado 1979, p.127.
216. Ogunsiji et al 1988, p.11.
217. Wylie et al 1984, p.758.
218. Delgado 1979, p.125.
219. Tubiana & Tubiana 1975, p.470.
220. Turner 1984, p.157.
221. Behnke & Kerven 1984, p.50.
222. Personal observation, 1983.
223. Wilson 1986, pp.32-34.
224. Novikoff 1976, p.58.
225. Bedoian 1978, p.71.
226. Personal observation, 1986.
227. Mackay 1988, p.20.
228. Behnke & Kerven 1984, p.31.
229. Lewis 1961, p.89.
230. Maliki et al 1984, p.267.
231. Tubiana & Tubiana 1977, p.46.
232. Tubiana & Tubiana 1977, p.55.
233. Jacobs 1980, p.278.
234. Helland 1982, p.249.
235. McDermott & Ngor 1983, p.24.
236. Diop 1987, p.41.
237. Barral 1977, p.64.
238. Diop 1987, p.41.
239. Tubiana & Tubiana 1975, p.477.
240. El Amami 1983.
241. Vidal 1978, p.115.
242. Vidal 1978, pp.114 & 120.
243. Dyson-Hudson & McCabe n.d., p.41.
244. Legesse 1984, p.482.
245. Maliki et al 1984, p.266.
246. Putman 1984, p.169.
247. Helland 1982, pp. 251-252.
248. Ostberg 1987, p.15.
249. Oba 1985.
250. Monod 1975, p.77.
251. El-Arifi 1979, p.36.
252. Lewis 1961, p.35.
253. Cashdan 1984, p.446.
254. Boutrais 1974, p.162.
255. For example, Baumer 1975b.
256. For example, Lemordant 1971; Adam et al 1972; Gast 1972.
257. Stiles & Kassam 1986, p.17.
258. Swift 1988a, p.9.
259. Barral 1977, p.62.
260. Winter 1984, p.553.
261. Bernus 1967, pp. 33-43.
262. Scott & Gormley 1980, p.101.
263. Tubiana & Tubiana 1977, p.17.
264. Morgan 1980, p.7.
265. Tubiana 1969, pp. 57-74; Tubiana & Tubiana 1977, p.14.
266. Tubiana & Tubiana 1977, p.18.
267. Allan 1965, p.255.
268. Guillemin 1956, p.147.
269. Campbell 1971, p.109.
270. Campbell 1971, p.112.
271. Campbell 1971, p.111.
272. Barnes 1951, p.215.
273. Wilson 1951, p.286.
274. Morey & Morey 1978, p.118.
275. Gadbin 1976, p.101.
276. Middleton & Kershaw 1972, p.78.
277. Tobayiwa & Jackson 1985, p.233.
278. Fortes 1945, p.142.
279. Campbell 1971, p.109.
280. Schlee 1985, p.27.
281. Tobayiwa & Jackson 1985, p.232.
282. Fortes 1945, p.142.
283. Tobayiwa & Jackson 1985, p.233.
284. Gluckman 1951, p.10.
285. Marchal 1983, p.171.
286. MAB 1978, p.81.
287. Kerharo 1968, p.468.
288. Adam et al 1972, p.260.
289. Adam et al 1972, p.274.
290. Adam et al 1972, p.272.
291. Elmi, Ahmed & Abdi 1984, p.192.
292. Gladwin 1980, p.13; Knight 1980, p.222.
293. Western 1982, p.200.
294. Oba 1985.
295. Brandstrom et al 1979, p.35.
296. Allan 1965, p.321.
2.3 Organization of management
2.3.1 Production systems and strategies
2.3.2 Natural resource tenure
2.3.3 Reserves and protected areas
2.3.4 Means of enforcement of rules
The LKMS and technologies used for managing natural resources described in the previous sections, are enclosed within a socio-political/economic framework, and institutional and organizational structures. This section puts these daily management practices into their wider context by discussing first the overall production systems and strategies of pastoral societies, followed by the institutional structures that define the common property regimes (both natural resource tenure and protected and reserved resources), and finally the means for enforcing the rules and regulations on natural resources enshrined within the society.
2.3.1 Production systems and strategies
2.3.1.1 Systems
2.3.1.2 Strategies
Pastoral production is not a random set of physical and social factors, but a deliberate attempt to combine economic and production features that minimize risk, and maximize the long term chances of survival of a group. Each group has a distinct production system and set of overall strategies that have evolved through the generations and are adapted to the vagaries of arid and semi-arid lands.
2.3.1.1 Systems
There are many different types of production systems in arid and semi-arid Africa. They include hunting-gathering, transhumant pastoralism, agropastoralism, and transhumants who are opportunistic farmers (see Section 1.2). Many of these different production systems do not exist in isolation of each other. In fact, cooperation between different systems appears to be the norm rather than the exception. Such cooperation can take the form of allowing transhumants to graze one's harvest residue thus benefiting from their manure, such as among the Fulani herders and Hausa farmers of northern Nigeria. Another form of cooperation is where a farmer will entrust his animals to a transhumant herder; the latter benefits from the milk and other fees paid by the former, and the farmer takes advantage of the higher skill of the herder, and also frees up his family's labour for cropping tasks. Some examples are the Mossi and Bisa farmers of southeast Burkina Faso who give their livestock to
Fulani herders^1, and the settled Fulani of the Niger river delta who entrust their livestock to Fulani transhumants². The Pokot of western Kenya are an example of specialization and cooperation within fractions of the same tribe. The Ngelani Pokot cultivate the highlands while the Masol Pokot raise livestock on the lowlands, and they have formalized exchange systems both for products and for social purposes^3. There can also be cooperation between fully pastoral groups. The most famous case is probably that of the "symbiosis" between the Samburu and Rendille of Kenya. They are traditional allies whose residential areas and pastures overlap because of the complementarity between their production systems: the Rendille raise camels while the Samburu have cattle^4.
Spontaneous sedentarization of full transhumants is not solely a modern phenomena but has been occurring gradually and in a piece-meal fashion throughout the ages. The causes are often environmental stress. For example drought encourages herders to diversify into cropping, some of whom do not return to full herding once the drought has passed. Another reason can be finding good physical and social conditions, as was the case with the Fulani who settled on the Jos Plateau in Nigeria.*
* In this case, a group of Fulani came to the Jos plateau in the early 1900's and found uninhabited land free of tse tse, which they could use all year round. The following year they came back and found that Ron farmers had cultivated and settled around their camp grounds, taking advantage of the manure. They then decided to settle near the Ron, with whom they had set up good relations, and who through bush clearing provided them with good dry season fallow grazing (Hickey 1978, p.96).
When comparing the three major production systems, it has been noted that economic productivity (i.e. output per unit of labour) is highest among hunter-gatherers, followed by pastoralists, and lastly by dryland farmers. However, land productivity (i.e. output per unit of land) is the reverse. Thus pastoralism is good where land is abundant but labour scarce, and as land becomes scarce, a switch to farming becomes more efficient^5.
We have come much closer to gaining an understanding of the rationale behind the different systems and how they have evolved and adapted to their physical and social environment. We now see traditional livestock management in Africa as a system adapted to marginal lands^6, that involves a complicated set of calculations, risks, and strategies designed to maximize production and consumption^7, and to minimize the effects of natural hazards.
2.3.1.2 Strategies
The success of the production systems described above in evolving and adapting to their physical and social environment, is partly due to the many different production strategies that are employed to meet each new challenge. These strategies are the major tools that maintain the resilience of the systems, and help to minimize risk^8. Some strategies have already been mentioned in connection with LKMS and management practices, for example, mobility, herd splitting, dispersion, etc., or in connection with production systems, such as economic transactions with non-pastoral people. Other strategies, that may directly or indirectly affect natural resources, are: large herds, diversity of animals, efficient herd structure, emphasis on milk rather than meat, hardy animals, social exchange and insurance schemes, adequate offtake rates, and crisis or fallback activities.
Having large herds, once thought as being simply a status symbol, is now recognized to be an insurance mechanism that allows the individual household to survive through periods of stress, including droughts and disease epidemics^9. Large herds allow faster recovery after a drought, and more supply of milk and meat per herd during the drought^10. The desire to have unlimited number of animals is an ideal that is seldom achieved because of labour constraints for watering and herding^11 (see BOX 2.35). Where there is no pasture shortage and other physical constraints, having large herds, coupled with pasture rotation, mobility and other strategies, do not necessarily pose a threat to the ecological balance. However, with increasing shortages of natural resources, and the recent droughts, the pastoralist has no choice but to retain herd maximization as an economic strategy for the survival of his household.
BOX 2.35
Herd maximization, or the long term strategy of having large herds, is a common feature among pastoralists. Apart from fulfilling social functions, large herds also allow the individual to weather periods of stress. Most pastoralists want large, but not too large, herds. For example, the Samburu say that herds of up to 150 head are optimal because if larger they would take too long to water, and would not have enough time to graze. Therefore, they would either have to stay close to the water points, and thus overgraze the pastures, or employ much more labour to take them to distant pastures. The Rendille have larger herds than the neighbouring Samburu because of more cooperation among herders^12, and also because the camels, herded by the Rendille, need more labour since in any case they have to be taken to distant pastures. Some groups have larger herds than others because of their dietary needs. For example, the Maasai need to have large herds and regular movements because
they subsist entirely on livestock unlike other groups who diversify into crops or wild plant gathering^13.
Diversification, at least of the livestock portfolio, is another common feature of most pastoralists. Small stock have higher reproductive rates and higher resistance to droughts and other stresses than cattle or camels, and are valuable for fast herd regeneration of the herd^14. Cattle and camels are larger sources of food (both milk and meat) and because of higher prices, are also savings banks. Keeping more than two different types of animals also result in more efficient use of rangelands, as each animal has different but slightly overlapping diets with the other^15. They also have different water and herding requirements, different sensitivities to diseases, etc.^16, all of which help the pastoralist to allocate his resources in the best and most resilient way.
The structure of the typical herd is often dominated by female animals. Anywhere from 2/3 to 3/4 of the livestock are female^17, reflecting the pastoralist's concern with milk and reproductive ability of his herd. This strategy may not directly affect natural resources, after all male and female animals consume the same amount per kg-liveweight, but it does affect the success of his production system.
Milk is one of the most important end-products of pastoral production. It is a major component of their diets and features predominantly in their transactions with non-pastoralists. Its importance has been noted among the Fulani of Niger^18, Wodaabe Fulani of Nigeria^19, and Dinka of Sudan^20, among many others. In general, a milk-oriented strategy allows more people to be supported on the land than a meat-oriented ranch^21.
Another important decision taken by pastoralists is in their choice of animal breeds. Given the conditions under which they are raised, long treks with little water or forage, poor quality forage in the dry season, heat, insects and disease, etc., African livestock are selected (in addition to milk output, high fertility, etc.) for their hardiness and ability to survive amid these harsh conditions. An example can be found among the Wodaabe of Nigeria^22. Their very hardiness, and the conditions under which the livestock are raised, often also mean low meat output, a feature that runs counter to modern ranching principles.
Formal redistribution systems, where livestock are used in an intricate web of loans, gifts, obligations, and alliances, act as a "social cement" in pastoral societies^23, as well as mitigating the effects of disease, drought, raids, and other stresses^24. These systems of reciprocal redistribution also tend to homogenize livestock ownership, or at least usufruct, among individual households, which help to prevent strong class differences. Long term loans also distribute the livestock fairly evenly over the rangelands (see BOX 2.36). These redistribution schemes have often been the bane of group ranch projects that try to maintain a fixed number of livestock, belonging to the same people, in one area.
BOX 2.36
Formal redistribution systems serve to homogenize livestock distribution over the pastures. For example, the Borana of southern Ethiopia have a system, called "kallu", where the leader gives to the poor of his tribe, the gifts he received from others^26. The Fulani^27, like the Angolan pastoralists^28, distribute their livestock through different systems among relatives and friends in order to maintain at least an average sized herd in each household. The agropastoralists of Zimbabwe prefer to keep only 10-15 cattle in their own kraal, sending the rest to a number of other related kraals. This reduces overgrazing, and the need for manpower at the owner's place, and helps the stockless relatives/friends^29. The Samburu^30 and the Sukuma^31 have formalized exchange relationships among "stock friends", and the Basotho call their system the "mafisa"^32. The complexity of these redistribution schemes is reflected in the many different types of ownership of livestock recognized by
pastoralists. For example, the Wodaabe of Niger have 8 ownership categories, including many types of lending (such as the "habbanae")^33, and the Twareg have 11 different categories^34.
Rates of offtake of livestock, which are usually 6-10% among pastoralists, are normally considered too low by development workers, since they compare unfavourably with modern ranches that have up to 30% offtake. However, many studies, such as one among the Borana of Ethiopia^25, calculate that their offtake rate is optimal given the age structure and calving rate of the animals. If more is taken off, the reproductive capability of the herd will be threatened.
During times of stress and drought, pastoralists have recourse to a few "crisis" strategies, i.e. activities that they engage in temporarily to tide them over the period of stress. These include raids, the trans-Sahara trade (although this activity has gradually diminished as the importance of that route has decreased), hunting and gathering, spontaneous and temporary farming, wage labour (in urban areas or mines, such as the uranium mines in Niger), and recently, refugee aid^35. Raiding is an ecological adaptation that helps to support subsistence patterns by replenishing stocks, and equalizes wealth among tribes^36. But raiding also means insecurity and high cost of defense for the weaker tribes. The Fulani of the Niger River delta acknowledge that in the days before pacification, even during the time of the Macina kingdom, they had few livestock because of raids, and political and religious tithes^37. The pacification programme of Colonial governments has generally
eliminated raiding, especially in West Africa, but it still occurs in parts of East Africa.
2.3.2 Natural resource tenure
2.3.2.1 Rangeland tenure
2.3.2.2 Tenure of trees, water and other resources
2.3.2.3 Analysis
The degree to which the different natural resource management techniques, discussed in the previous section, are utilized depend in large part on the degree to which rights and tenure are recognized and exercised. This section discusses the many different types of natural resource rights and tenure exercised by pastoralists, and the social organizations underlying them.
The ownership of natural resources (land, water, trees, other wild plants, wildlife, etc.) has been the subject of many studies in recent years. These have helped create an awareness of the importance of ownership, in whatever form, for natural resource management. Resource "tenure" can be defined as the full and exclusive ownership of resources, or the right to use them without owning it ("usufruct"), or something between the two. Ownership includes the right to use the resource, and the right to determine the extent and nature of use by others. Resources can be individually or communally owned. "Communal tenure" implies that the enjoyment of rights is not exclusive to one individual, but is shared collectively by a community^38. Not all types of tenure are communal, and not all resources are regulated by the same rights.
2.3.2.1 Rangeland tenure
One of the more enduring myths of our time has been that of the "tragedy of the commons" first propounded by G. Hardin (1968). In its simplest form, it states that when land is communally owned, each individual has no incentive to reduce and restrict his use of it, thus leading inevitably to abuse of the resources. This concept was falsely attributed to communal property when it really refers to "open access" lands, ie. where there are no communal and social controls over the land^39. In most traditional systems all lands were claimed either privately or communally. The concept of "vacant" or unclaimed land has been introduced by Colonial governments, and applied especially to range and forestlands, since maps of these areas were often based on surveys done only in one season, missing the pastoralists who were on transhumance^40. Some areas did appear to be vacant, in so far as there were no sustained claims to them, but they often were considered to be in the sphere of
influence of certain tribes, or were the object of expansion and warfare between neighbouring tribes. For example the Twareg and Fulani of northern Burkina Faso, in addition to having many areas definitely divided between them, were continuously disputing rights to borderline areas^41.
In general, natural resources are usually owned by the highest social level (e.g. tribe or kingdom) recognized in the group, and are then allocated down the hierarchy to lower levels of social organization through intricate systems of distribution. At a certain socio-political level in the hierarchy natural resources are no longer distributed and are owned and/or controlled by the members of that level. This "lowest" socio-political level can be individual or communal and appears to vary considerably among pastoral groups, at least as far as transit routes and rangelands are concerned**. The few records found on transit routes show that the lowest level can be subtribes, as among the Twareg of Niger^42 and Quaddai of Chad^43, lineages, as among the Bor Dinka of Kongor^44, or herding groups. An example of the latter are the Arab pastoralists of central Chad (such as the Khozam, Ouled Himet, Ouled Zioud, etc.) where the herding units control transit routes ("mukhal"), which
are several kilometers wide and include water points and markets^45.
** Unfortunately many studies do not indicate whether the tenure arrangement they describe is the lowest social unit, or a level further up on the tenure hierarchy. For example, when talking about tenure at the subtribal level, they do not indicate whether the rights are then distributed to lower levels, or are used equally by all in the subtribe.
Some authors have generalized that rangelands are usually allocated at the tribal or sub-tribal level, while water rights are at the clan or subclan level, because the latter require regular repair, are consistently used, and are more fiercely competed for^46. However, the records examined here show that rangelands are divided among so many different types of lower social units that it is impossible to make a generalization. These levels can be kinship units (e.g. tribe, subtribe, segment, clan, etc. down to extended households and individual nuclear families), geographical and/or political associations, and contractual agreements with local land-owning farmers (see BOXES 2.37 and 2.38). In almost all cases, the highest social level (e.g. tribe) retains formal ownership of the land, giving only rights of usufruct to the lower levels. In some cases, the tribe can theoretically change the land distribution pattern, but in most cases, the rights of the lower levels are known,
constant, inalienable, and based on historical precedence.
BOX 2.37
Tenure according to kinship units
In a few pastoral groups, rangeland tenure is held communally at the highest socio-political level, i.e. the tribe, and not distributed among lower levels. Thus all members of the tribe have theoretically equal access to all tribal land, and the tribal chief or king is responsible for ensuring adequate water and pasture for all and protection against trespassers. Some examples are the Lozi of southern Zambia/northern Zimbabwe^47, the lla, who live to the southwest of Kafue Flats in southern Zambia^48, and the camel herding Bedouin tribes of northern Saudi Arabia, where each tribe has its own winter pasture, permanent water point for summer, and an urban market^49.
Communal tenure of rangelands at the sub-tribal level is more common than at the tribal level, but still not as common as at lower levels. The Hottentots of South Africa divided their rangelands at the subtribal level, and each sub-tribe had both wet and dry season pastures^50. Among the Shona of Zimbabwe, the tribal leader allocates a "sphere of influence" to each sub-tribe which includes bush and farmland. The two types of land use are geographically separated, but because of shifting cultivation, the latter has priority over the former in the allocation procedure. Grazing and the use of trees is communal for members of the subtribe, but priority is given to the current user^51.
Division of rangeland among sections, segments and fractions has also been recorded. For example, among the Dinka of Kongor, each section (made up of several clans) has its own particular cattle camps and grazing areas^52. Among the Turkana, all members of a subsection have equal access to the grazing resources within its boundaries^53. Among the Nuer each tribal segment (made up of several lineages) has its own distinct land separated by unoccupied land^54, although single, large lineages will eventually be associated with distinct territories^55. Among the Ait Ben Yacoub of Morocco, the rangeland is divided informally among the four subtractions, based on the customary rule that one does not graze close to another's dwellings and camps. Sub-fraction boundaries are more diffuse and less equally distributed than fraction boundaries, and are the subject of constant disputes^56.
Communal tenure at the clan or sub-clan level is more common than above. Some examples are the Samburu^57, the Suiei Dorobo of Kenya, who are beekeepers and raise shoats^58, and the Twareg. Among the Twareg of Ahaggar Mountains (Algeria), each clan has its own rangelands, except for the dominant clan (Kel Ghela), who can use everyone else's rangelands. The leader, "amenokol", allocates the rangelands among clans, and they in turn pay fees to him^59. The Somali are organized into 6 "clan-families", or groups of clans, each headed by a primarily ceremonial sultan, but no centralized administrative government. Each clan-family has its distinct territory, which can be drawn on a map. Each clan within a clan-family has its own territory, whereas the next lower social level, lineages, use overlapping communal territories^60. Among the Zaghawa of Chad, rangelands are usually common to all members of the tribe, except in the dry season, when pastures are allocated after harvest
through a clan council, based on the principle that herds should not be so close that the animals get mixed up^61.
Probably the most typical form of communal rangeland tenure is at the lineage level. Some examples are the Madi agropastoralists of northwestern Uganda^62, and the Serer of Senegal and Luo of Kenya^63. Among the Kikuyu of Kenya a council of elders of the clan has control over common land and arbitrates between lineages. The "muramati", is an elder chosen on the basis of merit, who allocates and controls this land^64. Kikuyu lineage territories are not necessarily contiguous, as political boundaries are, but they define the land use pattern. Among the Mbeere of Kenya, some bushland can be claimed by lineages, although the remainder is common to all Mbeere^65.
The next most common form of rangeland tenure is at the level of a group of families or extended households, often coinciding with a herding unit. Some examples are the Bedouin of the northwestern coastal zone of Egypt^66, the Mbanderu Herero of northern Botswana^67, and the Bushmen of Kalahari, who have territories for each group of 3-4 families^68. Among the Pokot of Kenya, the range is divided among groups of households including rights to watering points and the meeting place of elders of the group, "kokwo", who decide on pastoral movements and other matters^69. The Maasai divide rangelands according to political structures, "olosho", which correspond to tribal sections based on the age-set system^70. But the actual control of land is in the hands of the "boma" or group of households, who are supervised and regulated by a council of elders^71.
Tenure of rangeland at the family level is rare but has been recorded. In these cases, each household or even nuclear family has rights to its own distinct territory. Some examples are the Afar of Ethiopia^72, and the Kasena, where household land is passed on to the next generation by heredity^73. Each village of the Ngwato Tswana is divided into wards, "dinaga"^74. The ward headmen allocates land to each household for housing, farming and grazing. In addition, there are "royal" grazing lands where only the great chief's cattle (and those of his herders and their lineage members) could graze^75. Among the northern Turkana, each household owns stretches along river courses, "ere", where they have permanent wells. These lands are passed down generations, and outsiders must seek permission before using them^76. In southwestern Angola, the agropastoralists are divided into communities, each claiming a sometimes loosely defined terrain, "tchilongo". In addition, each homestead in
the community has 15-50 acres of private land, which includes farm, residence and private pasture land, "ongole", which is used by the family herd in the dry season^77. Among the Kamba of Machakos (Kenya) land is allocated by the elder's council of the "utui" to each household. The utui is based on contiguity of households (geographical unit) rather than kinship. Fallow land owned by a Kamba family can only be grazed by the livestock of that family or lineage. In addition, some grazing lands can be made exclusive to an individual or a lineage. Called "kisese", these private pastures are established by building and occupying a cattle post, and the land immediately around it is exclusive to the builder(s). The number and size of kiseses are regulated by the elder's council^78.
BOX 2.38
Tenure according to other socio-political units
Not all rangeland tenure is according to kinship groups, but is often based on spatial (geographical) proximity. This is especially true for those systems where tenure is held at the household level (mentioned in BOX 2.37), and the high mobility of households results in frequent changes in the membership of herding units. For example, the Fulani of Fouta-Dialon (Guinea) have a common village territory called "leydi"^79. A similar system exists among the Mbororo Fulani of northern Nigeria^80. The Lahawin of Sudan grant rights to rangelands to each dry-season camp, "mashaikh", which is also a political unit^81. As mentioned above, the Bushmen of Kalahari have distinct territories for each group of families forming a base camp. Although the land is usually handed down on patrilineal lines, claims only last about two generations due to intermarriage and mobility of individuals among base camps^82, thus in effect the base camp, and not the patrilineal group, is the lowest level
of communal land tenure. A similar contradiction between theoretical and actual land tenure occurs among the Kikuyu. The land of a Kikuyu lineage is not necessarily contiguous, since it depends on the local topography of ridges and valleys. Since the best place to build the compound is on top of the ridge, each lineage will have ridgetops and valley bottoms for grazing scattered between different catenas. But in effect, the livestock of a compound will graze over the land of several lineages^83.
In some cases, land tenure is based on political divisions, rather than kinship or geographical units. For example, the agropastoral Ngoni of southeastern Zambia have a feudal political organization headed by a King, and including a Royal family, chiefs, subchiefs, etc. Tribal land is divided among chiefs and sub-chiefs, whose domains are not necessarily contiguous, and there are no distinct pastures associated with a village. In fact, fights and confrontation between different village herds are actively sought by the young herders to show their strength and that of their bulls^84.
Rights to grazing can also be obtained through negotiation and contracts with local land owning peoples. For example, in the dry season, some subtribes of the Tonga in southern Zambia (such as the Mwana) establish long term contracts with the neighbouring Twa fishermen, where the Twa are responsible for reserving the pastures for the Mwana in return for tobacco. The exchange of other goods (cereals and fish for milk and meat) also helps to maintain the relationships. The route from the wet to dry season pasture is constant and always reserved for each subtribe, even in time of war, although no tax or fee is paid to the local people for rights of transit^85. In northern Burkina Faso (southern Yatenga) the Mossi farmers who own the land give long term contracts to the Fulani for grazing rights in the dry season. In the event of a shortage of pasture, the Fulani herd will split up and enter into a second contract with another village. The "earth priests" of the Mossi control
the process of land allocation^86. A similar system exists in northern Yatenga between the Fulani and Kurumba^87. However, not all contracts are well defined. For example, the Fulani agropastoralists of northern Nigeria, living among Hausa farmers, obtain grazing rights around their settlements from the local Hausa ruler by paying tribute and gifts. Although these rights are fixed in general, they are flexible in detail and lead often to conflict between farmer and herder, with the latter loosing most of the time^88.
A few groups appear to recognize no formal tenure of rangelands. However, it is hard to tell whether the studies are referring to rights held at a level below the tribe, or to the existence of any kind of tenure. According to these studies, land use appears to be regulated usually on the basis of ownership of wells, such as among the pastoralists living west of the White Nile River in Sudan^89, and the Kel Adrar Twareg of Kidal (Mali)^90. In a few cases where the pastoralists tend to be recent arrivals to an area, rights to land are regulated by informal rules such as precedence and "first come first serve", such as among the Twareg, Bella and Fulani of northeastern Burkina Faso^91. In the case of the long established Baggara and Kababish of Sudan, the right of precedence also applies, but if there is not enough land, a strong local leader may try to arbitrate and assign rights, or even lots may be drawn, or ultimately wars will be fought, but these rights can be temporary
(yearly) or permanent^92.
Tribal territories usually have distinct boundaries, often following prominent topographical features. However, in some cases the boundaries can be vague, except when they cover important points (wells, salt licks, ponds, etc.). In addition, even if the boundaries are clearly delimited and recognized, many groups tolerate a certain amount of trespass in either direction^93. Not all tribal boundaries are distinct and separate. In some cases there is considerable overlap in tribal territories (see BOX 2.39). Finally, in too many well documented cases, traditional tribal boundaries do not coincide with modern national or regional ones. Some examples are the Somali (divided between Somalia and Ethiopia), the Dinka and Nuer (divided between northern and southern Sudan), and the Maasai (divided between Kenya and Tanzania).
BOX 2.39
The Toubou of northern Chad recognize ownership of specific valleys and drainage ways^94, Shona subtribal boundaries are divided by rivers, hilltops and other topographical features^95, and the Ait Ben Yacoub Berbers have distinct territorial boundaries which are known to all pastoralists and can be delimited on maps^96. The boundaries of the Twareg of Niger are vague except when they cover important points such as water, salt, etc.^97. The Samburu and Rendille have overlapping territories, as mentioned before. The same kind of overlap can occur within a tribe. For example, among the Twareg, because of the quasi-feudal system and the vertical integration of castes, the territory of clans of the same caste and status do not overlap and are well separated, but the terrain of different castes do^98. On the other hand, there are cases of not so friendly relations among neighbouring tribes who share the same rangelands. For example, the Arab pastoralists of central Chad have
definite rainy season pastures, but have to share dry season pastures with other ethnic groups and there is often friction and overgrazing^99.
2.3.2.2 Tenure of trees, water and other resources
The ownership of trees on rangeland, like that on farmland, does not necessarily follow the same tenure patterns as that of the range itself. In other words, land tenure is not necessarily the same as tree tenure^100. Very little has been written on the tree rights of pastoralists. In most cases each pastoralist is free to use any tree within the territory that he has grazing rights to. For example among the Shona of Zimbabwe, the use of trees is communal within the subtribe, but priority is given to the current user^101. There are a few recorded cases of tree tenure at the family level. For example, among the northern Turkana, both water and certain fruit and browse trees on the "ere" (or household's land) are exclusive to the household and passed down to sons^102. The Suiei Dorobo of Kenya recognize individual, exclusive, ownership of valuable trees in the bushland^103. In some cases, ownership of trees in the bush may be de facto, not de jure. For example, the Fulani of
northern Senegal, say that trees in the immediate vicinity of an homestead "belong" to the household^104.
The ownership of water points among pastoralists depends on the type of point. Natural ponds tend to belong to the social unit that owns the rangeland, be it tribe, section, clan, etc. For example, use of natural ponds and springs on Jie and Turkana territory is open to all members of the tribe on a first come first serve basis^105. The Borana of southern Ethiopia distinguish between two types of natural ponds: 1) "lola" or rainy season ponds are open to all unless they are close to settlements, in which case the local people have priority, and 2) "hara" or larger ponds that hold water into (but not all of) the dry season, and may be improved, belong to the clan^106. The volcanic mineral springs, "lahore", of northern Cameroon are owned by different clans. The clan leaders ("lamido") have complete authority over their use, and will often close the springs temporarily. They also use the time when people use lahores to charge traditional taxes^107.
The ownership of wells is usually based on kinship units, but can also be geographical and/or political units, or a mixture of tenure types. The particular system often depends on the type of well (deep or shallow) and the amount of labour that is required to construct and maintain it. There is no record of tenure of wells at the higher socio-political levels, such as tribe or subtribe. Most wells are owned by levels below subsections and clans. As long as wells are owned by large social units, such as clans and lineages, the clan leaders can exert control over the number of wells that can be constructed in an area. When the wells are owned by a family or extended household then there is seemingly no system for regulating the spatial distribution of wells - men own the wells but not the aquifer. However, certain informal rules regulate the distance between wells, such as the desire to avoid intermingling of herds, and the fact that deep wells require considerable labour and
will not be constructed by someone unless he is a regular user of the area (see BOX 2.40).
BOX 2.40
Maasai subsections ("localities") own wells but not the land, and are regulated by a council of elders^108. Among the Zaghawa, wells are owned by the clan that dug it^109. The two types of permanent wells ("ela") of the Borana (one deep and in bedrock, and other shallow and in alluvial sand) are owned by the clan, and remain in its ownership even if silted in and cleaned by another clan^110. In practice access to a Borana well does not necessarily depend on clan membership, but on complex political negotiations based on contribution of manpower to the digging and maintenance of wells^111.
Individual or household ownership of wells is also quite common. Wells usually belong to whoever builds them, such as among the Jie and Turkana^112, the Twareg, Bella and Fulani of northern Burkina Faso^113, and the Wodaabe Fulani of Niger^114. In these cases, even though the herder has exclusive rights to his well, he does not own the pastures or aquifer, and anyone else can theoretically dig a well next to his. Wells may be theoretically owned by a family, but in practice they usually cannot refuse permission to others. For example, among the Samburu outsiders must ask permission of the digger of the well, but if he refuses there is a fight. The rights of the Samburu family are theoretically inalienable as long as the well is used and maintained. Once it is silted, broken and abandoned, it can be redug and owned by anyone else^115. Among the Turkana wells belong to the immediate kin and close agnatic relatives of whoever helped build them^116. But those in the "ere" belong
exclusively to the household^117. Although theoretically anyone in the social unit can dig a well anywhere, the type of well and the amount of labour necessary restricts the digging of deeper wells to those who regularly use the surrounding pastures^118.
In some cases wells are owned by a mixture of tenure types. For example, among the Somali deep and wider mouthed wells are owned by clans and lineages, while smaller wells are owned by smaller lineages or individuals, and the ownership is handed down through generations. If the well is temporarily not in use, it will be covered by a thorn fence and the lineage/clan brand. But if the owner(s) decide to move to a completely new area, then they will abandon the well and others can take over^119. Well ownership among the Bambara of central Mali depends on the ease with which it can be found. Deep wells dug through rock, or wells that need considerable money for structural support materials, are owned by the village or ward, but shallow wells dug through sand are owned and dug by the same household. The Bambara prefer to dig their own well so that they can attract Fulani herders into mutual contracts that exchange water for manure^120.
The ownership of other resources, such as wildlife, wild cereals, fisheries, minerals, etc. is usually open to all members within the land owned by the social unit. However, in a few cases, certain rules have been developed. These include individual and communal ownership of the land and resources used for such activities, or of the resources but not the land. In most cases all members of a social unit have equal access to these resources, or at the most are obliged to give gifts to their leader, but in a few cases, the chiefs have clear, formalized priorities over the use of the resources (see BOX 2.41).
BOX 2.41
Among the Lele of western Burkina Faso, all members of the tribe are free to graze and cultivate in tribal lands without seeking permission, but its wildlife resources are owned by particular villages and any outsider, even a Lele, cannot hunt without permission^121. Although grazing land among the Suiei Dorobo is owned at the clan and subclan levels, each individual owns the trees and surrounding land that he uses for his beekeeping activities^122. In many parts of Africa, local chiefs had control over fisheries, and exercised various protective controls^123.
Those pastoral groups that rely heavily on wild cereal gathering also have some form of tenure of the cereal growing areas. For example, the Zaghawa divide these areas among villages based on the rights of precedence first established by ancestors. Within each village, a woman does not have exclusive formal title to a cereal gathering area, but because of sustained use in the same spot every year, she has priority. If she finds someone else there she can chase them away (but has no right to what has been already collected), although in practice she will go a bit further away to avoid a fight^124. The Teda of Tibetsi, divide the wadis where wild grains grow each year among the clans. There is no permanent continuity as among the Zaghawa, but there is more ritual and communal oversight^125.
In other cases, the tenure of land is different than the ownership of the resource on the land. For example, among the Twareg of Niger, rights to the harvest of Panicum laetum for food belongs to the household, groups or fractions that own the land, but Cenchrus biflorus grains can be harvested by anyone anywhere^126, perhaps because the latter is more abundant and at the same time less valuable. The Tonga have no legal rights to honey or wild plants found on their private farmland^127.
There is usually no tenure associated with the harvesting of thatch for roofing. But in one case, that of the Tiv of northern Nigeria, thatching grass can only come from one's fallow field^128. Finally, although resources may be open to all members of the social unit, not everyone has equal rights. In some cases, chiefs and kings tend to have priority. For example among the Tallensi of northeastern Ghana/southwestern Burkina Faso, all big fish and special portions of hunted or dead wildlife go first to the chief then to the hunter. All stray animals, brass and copper found in the bush or farmland are also given to the chief^129.
2.3.2.3 Analysis
Ownership and actual use are not necessarily synonymous. Whether the resources owned by a social unit will be used by its members depends on several factors. In the first place, although theoretically the land belongs to the social unit, a member's rights to its resources are based on continual exercise of those rights. If any area is abandoned then it reverts to the communal property of the social unit and can be used by any other member. Most people prefer to remain on the land they have come to know best, thus they tend to continuously occupy, and manage an area as if they owned it. Second, an area may belong to the social unit, but in any given year, only a small proportion of the members will actually use it, because of distance, availability of alternative resources and areas, changing needs, etc. Thus, the actual pressure on the resources is lower than would be expected (see BOX 2.42).
BOX 2.42
Among the Maasai each family's de facto, usufruct rights are maintained with long term use of the same area, thus people manage the land as if they own it. In addition, their rights are assured only if they participate effectively in the age-set structure^130. Similar observations have been made among the Dinka of Kongor^131. The Kikuyu have to maintain their rights, especially to the exclusive cattle posts, by showing continual use, such as actual grazing, frequent visits, and renewal of boundary markers^132. De facto ownership of camps, and an unspecified minimum pasture area around it, are recognized by the Twareg of Niger after 4 consecutive years of use^133.
The territory of the Bushmen, such as the /Gwi can cover 10,000 sq.km (diameter of 110 km) but only a small portion is intensively used during any year. The rest is used to follow migratory animals, and reserved for times of famine^134. The Moroccan Berbers close off certain pastures throughout a portion of the year, "agdal", in order to preserve forage, and to ensure equitable use by herders, but in reality, only about 10% of right-holders will actually send their livestock there^135.
As has been shown, ownership of resources exists and is recognized by neighbouring tribes, but in the absence of legal titles and/or formal agreements among tribes, it has to be continuously exercised and defended against intruders or usurpers. The degree of control over the resources depends on various factors. One is the value of the resource and the ease with which it is obtained. Second, rights are more strongly exercised and defended where the resources are more frequently utilized. This is especially evident in the recognition of a "home" territory around settlements. Third, control over territories depends on the political power of tribes, their relationships with neighbouring tribes, and their internal social organization. Wars and raids force pastoralists to have tighter control over their territory, and, may have resulted in more protection of the environment. Finally, political alliances play an important part in determining grazing rights and land tenure. Good
relations are maintained through paying tributes, taxes, and/or gifts to the local people. These points are not restricted to inter-tribal relations, but apply also to the degree of control over resources within a tribe. Intra-tribal boundaries are often more diffuse than inter-tribal ones, and the actual use of a piece of land will depend on the relations between neighbouring social units, and the degree to which the socio-political hierarchy can enforce rules. However, most pastoralist using or even seeking permission to use an area, will not do so if they know that they have bad relations and are likely to be refused access (see BOX 2.43).
BOX 2.43
Among the Toucouleur of Senegal, land tenure rules are more strictly enforced in more fertile land^136. The Turkana, who live in a more arid zone, enforce their rights and rules more than the Pokot who live in a more semi-humid zone. In addition, rules are usually relaxed in the wet season when resources are abundant^137. In southern Darfur (Sudan) among the agropastoralists, tenure rights become more individualized as the land becomes more important; for example river flooded land for cultivation is privately owned, while grazing in unimproved range is communal at the higher social levels^138. For the Dinka of Kongor, ownership of pastures is clearer in the more utilized areas, such as the temporary swamplands (toich) and highlands, than in the less frequented eastern plains^139.
The control that the Moors in the Guidimakha region of Mauritania have over their territory depends on the size and power of the subtribe. Where they were weak, the Fulani were able to infiltrate into peripheral areas if they had a stronger politico-military organization and better fighters^140. The Twareg of northern Niger have a strong centralized hierarchy of chieftainships, with warrior castes, and a leader, "amenokal", responsible for ensuring defense and control of the territory^141. Most Fulani groups are internally cohesive but politically weak and fragmented, and prefer to move on (migratory drift) than to fight usurpers, for example the Fellata of Sudan, and Fulani of Senegal. But some Fulani have developed strong centralized empires, such as the Macina of Mali and the Sokoto Caliphate of Nigeria that was able to subjugate the Hausa Empire.
The Lahawin, originally a section of the Kababish in north Kordofan (Sudan), left their territory around 1870 and moved to the land of the Shukriya. Since they were able to establish good relations, they almost came to be seen as Shukriya, and considered themselves to have more rights to those pastures than other outsiders who arrived at the same time, such as the Fulani, Beni Amer from Ethiopia, and Rashaida Arabs from Arabia^142.
The Tonga, who do not have a centralized hierarchy, formally recognize clan-lands, but are continuously fighting over land. The council of elders settles disputes but has no power to enforce it^143. Among the Lowiili of southern Burkina Faso, if internal relations are good, then there will be overlap in actual use of land between communities, but if not, then they will tend to avoid using overlapping or boundary areas^144.
Because of the high variability of resources, every pastoralist will find that he has to enter another's territory sometime during his career. In most cases, outsiders must first ask permission, which is usually given when there are good relations with them, their livestock do not have contagious diseases, and there is ample forage and water for everyone. In times of stress permission is rarely refused, but is accompanied by a tacit agreement that the outsider will leave as soon as he can. In some cases dues or fees have to be paid, or manpower contributed to the maintenance of wells and other improvements (see BOX 2.44).
BOX 2.44
Many pastoral and hunter-gatherer groups provide permission freely to outsiders in good times. Some recorded examples are the Bor Dinka of Kongor^145, the Samburu^146, the Ghana and !Kung Bushmen of Kalahari^147, and the Bedouins of the northwestern coast of Egypt^148. More resource sharing occurs during times of drought and stress, and most groups will not refuse permission to outsiders, but it is usually asked only in times of dire need. Some examples are the Turkana^149, the Twareg of Ahaggar^150, the Maasai^151, and the Dinka of Kongor^152. Among the Bedouin of the Sinai, the traditional territory is very distinct, but because of high variability in resources, neighbours are routinely given permission to use the rainy season flushes of dense vegetation^153. The!Xo Bushmen have an intricate system of cooperation between up to 7 bands in adjacent territories that allows enough flexibility for alleviating local droughts^154. Outsiders could use Bushmen territory only with
permission and even then it could be regulated so as to prevent over-use^155. In some cases, this flexibility in land rights has led some groups into trouble. For example, the Hottentots of South Africa would grant permission to strangers to use land, which Europeans then interpreted as fixed title and abrogated their lands^156.
Permission to use wells is just as flexible as land, and often defines the use of land by outsiders. It can be given freely, or upon payment of fees or contribution of manpower. For example, among the Kel Adrar Twareg, outsiders can use wells only if passing through^157. The Somali give permission to outsiders to use wells if they pay or establish a long term contract with the owner of wells^158. Among the Borana of southern Ethiopia outsiders can use the well if they petition the well council^159. Outsiders using Zaghawa wells must first ask permission and can only use them after the clan has^160. Among the Tonga outsiders can use wells if they contribute to its maintenance^161.
2.3.3 Reserves and protected areas
Within a pastoral group's territory, certain areas are often totally protected or reserved for certain periods of the year. These reserves may be exceptions rather than the rule in sub-sahara Africa^162, but more pastoralists have reserves than was previously thought. This section discusses three kinds of reserves and protected areas: those concerned with grazing, and regenerating degraded areas, areas where wood gathering/cutting are prohibited or regulated, and sacred areas.
Areas reserved for grazing can be divided into reserves of transit routes, and range reserves proper. The few records available on transit reserves show that they are primarily aimed at keeping open a route between cultivated areas for livestock to pass or to gain access to water points (see BOX 2.45). Range reserves can be large or small (micro) areas. Large range reserves are either seasonal or cover several years, but no record was found of permanent range closure. There are several kinds of large range reserves. One kind are aimed at preventing agricultural expansion into grazing areas, and reducing the need for fencing. Another kind involve the closure of certain pastures in the wet season to allow good forage for the dry season. A third type of large range reserve constitutes a "drought reserve", i.e. preserving an area in normal times as a fall-back during a drought. A fourth type is aimed at allowing degraded areas to regenerate. Micro-reserves are established around
settlements, water points, and holy places, and are used only by special types of livestock or only during ceremonial periods (see BOX 2.45).
BOX 2.45
The Macina Fulani had a system of reserving cattle routes and access tracks for livestock free from cultivation^163. In eastern Sudan access routes to the main rivers, "mashari", were left uncultivated for the pastoralists^164. The separation of range from farmland is a type of land use planning aimed at checking the expansion of cultivation into good rangeland. A few groups, mostly agropastoral, have been recorded to formally prohibit cultivation in areas marked as rangeland, including the Tonga of southern Zambia^165, the Ngwaketse of Botswana^166, the Kikuyu of Kenya^167, and the Luo of Kenya^168.
Some range reserves are aimed at allowing forage to grow unhampered in the wet season, which are then grazed during the dry season. Some examples are the Sukuma of southern Lake Victoria^169, the Turkana^170, the Twareg of Ahaggar^171, and the II Chamus of northern Kenya^172. Among the Berbers of Morocco, the "agdals" are closed to grazing, or open to only certain types of livestock during specific seasons. They are usually adjacent to dry season water points, and/or to cultivated areas. In the latter case, they are reserved for harvest time when all labour is engaged on the farm^173. Among the northern Somali, the local chiefs could impose penalties on those who illegally entered the "xirmo" or dry season reserves^174. The dry season reserves of the Pokot of Kenya are guarded and regulated by the council of elders, and may cover "many thousands of hectares"^175. These Pokot reserves often were imposed on areas with termite-resistant grasses, and fines imposed on
trespassers^176.
Among the II Chamus of Kenya, two types of dry season reserves ("karantili" and "kapkelelwa") are used successively depending on the elders' decisions^177. Each neighbourhood of the Maasai of Meruishi area have dry season reserves, one "dokoya unkishu" to be used early to mid dry season, and the other "enkaroni" to be used in the late dry season. Elders of the neighbourhood decide upon the date of opening of these reserves and ensure that permanent settlements are not built on them^178. Among the Kikuyu, fallow land can be closed to grazing, by putting certain marks on the boundaries^179.
Each year, the Basotho of Botswana set aside a portion of their grazing area (usually the same area every year) for rest to protect thatching grass and to provide spring grazing for milk cows and draft animals^180. These reserves are called "maboella". The decision, made by the village headman, depends on rainfall, the condition of animals, and other factors, and is announced at the village meeting (kgotla). An officer, "modisa" is appointed custodian of the maboella, and is responsible for impounds trespassing animals, but every member of the community is expected to report trespass to the headman^181.
A few records exist of groups reserving certain areas for use only in droughts. One example is the Rendille of Kenya^182. The Twareg owned "estates" in the south, where farmers who paid them tribute also reserved their grazing lands for the Twareg in times of drought^183. The Tilemsi of Niafounke in Mali also had drought reserves, but it appears that this system was eventually abandoned by the herders because the pastures were invaded by toxic plants^184, perhaps due to prolonged rest.
A couple of groups reserve range areas when they are degraded in order to allow them to regenerate. The chiefs of northern Burkina Faso could decree that after intensive grazing, certain wells or watering points should not be used until the pastures around them regenerated^185. And the Berbers of Morocco close off heavily degraded areas to allow regeneration^186.
Small or micro-reserves have been recorded in a few cases. The Gabra of northern Kenya had ritual holy places, often on top of mountains, that belonged to each "phratry" or subtribe, and was used for age-set initiations every 14-21 years. The pastures around these holy places belonged to the subtribes and were reserved for the periods of ceremony^187. The Macina Fulani reserve a portion of communal range for nursing cows^188, and according to the Dina code, households have the right to permanently exclude others from small plots of delta (bourgou) pasture around their settlement for draft animals and milking cows^189. Similarly, the Songhay agropastoralists of Fantio village habitually reserve a radius of 3-4 km around the village for wet season grazing^190. The Maasai reserve a portion of the range around their homestead, or a group of homesteads, called "olopololi", as grazing areas for young livestock. The size of the area varies with need (e.g. is greater in the dry
season). It can be 100-800 ha. according to one account^191, and up to 5 km radius according to another^192. In the case of Meruishi area of Kajiado District, the olopololi make up 20% of the rangelands^193. Among the Twareg of Gourma, the area between the domestic camp (milk herd) and the natural ponds is not allowed to be grazed at all during the dry season, and the main herd has to camp behind the milk herd (i.e. farther from the water point)^194.
A few records were found where timber collection is regulated in woodlands. The Kikuyu customarily reserved certain heavily wooded lands as a timber reserve for the community. In these areas, permission was needed from clan elders to cut large trees, valued trees were absolutely prohibited from being cut, and one could not cultivate in them^195. The Sultan of the Somali could declare forests closed to wood cutting for a certain period of time^196. And the Gabra allowed no hunting or gathering, including wood cutting, in the range reserves around their holy mountains^197.
Sacred areas are often associated with cultural rituals, such as rainmaking, sacrifices to totems, earth spirits, and burial grounds. They may cover a single or grove of trees, special hills, water points, and other unusual landscapes. Members of the community are prohibited from performing certain activities in them, including hunting, gathering, wood cutting, cultivating, grazing, etc. In some cases, trees are deliberately planted on them. In most cases, these areas remain sacred for ever, but in a few cases, because of the mobility of the people, they last only a few generations. The extent of these sacred areas is usually small in relation to the total landscape, but in a few cases their cumulative area can be quite significant (see BOX 2.46). At the very least, they act as in-situ gene banks for some of the local plant and wildlife species.
BOX 2.46
Sacred areas, representing earth spirits, peace, rain, etc., and used for ritual purposes have been observed among quite a few groups. Some examples are the "iiri" of the Mbeere of Kenya^198, and the "ithembo" of the Kamba of Kenya^199. Other examples are the people of northern Burkina Faso^200, the Jie of western Turkana District, who have one for each subtribe^201, the Tonga^202, and the Kikuyu of Kenya^203. They have also been recorded in parts of Nigeria^204, but it is not clear in connection with which ethnic groups.
Some sacred groves are established on burial grounds of ancestors and especially chiefs and kings. For example, the Nyakyusa of southwestern Tanzania plant trees on the burial sites of their chiefs^205, and the Borana of northern Kenya plant trees around the graves of their ancestors and prohibit any tree cutting on these sites^206.
Most studies report the existence of sacred areas, but do not estimate their individual or cumulative size. A few that do, show varying dimensions. One earth shrine of the Lowiili covered approximately 5 sq. miles^207. There are at least 200 sacred groves in two locations in the Kirinyaga District protected by the Kikuyu. Their size varies between 1/10 to 3 acres^208. In Mbeere (Kenya) the Colonial administration listed more than 100 sacred groves ranging in size from 1/4 to 3 ha.^209. Among the Tallensi "a half a mile's walk...takes one past 2 or 3 earth shrines"^210. Although almost all sacred groves are protected for a very long time, some, as among the Tonga of Zambia are only 2-3 generations old^211.
2.3.4 Means of enforcement of rules
Most pastoral groups do not have an internal "police force", which raises the question of how the rules and regulations discussed in the previous section, are maintained and enforced. Some of the rules on land use are so fundamental, that they appear to be taken for granted as inviolable, and are widely respected by all groups. These fundamental rules are "first come first serve", rights of historical precedence, and rights of continual occupancy. These rules, collectively can be described as a "fairness ethic", and do not require formal enforcement since they are embodied in the moral culture of all groups, for example as shown by the Turkana^212, and the Fulani of Yatenga^213. Their violation, when it does occur, is generally resolved by fights or wars.
More complicated rules require some form of informal or formal law enforcement procedure. Informal procedures are part of the social fabric of pastoral societies, where the kinship system and the rules and obligations set up by the culture provide the stabilizing force. "... rights must be respected, duties performed, the sentiments binding the members upheld, or else the social order would be so insecure that the material needs of existence [acquired through communal cooperation] could no longer be satisfied."^214 The power of local "traditions" is so strong, that, no one would even dream of breaking them^215. Social ostracism is a powerful tool used by society to keep its members in line, and includes social rebuke, shame, or different degrees of social isolation. The society also uses praise and social rewards to reinforce positive actions. The belief in and use of curses can be a powerful tool for ensuring adherence to rules. In addition, rules of reciprocal obligations
are daily reinforcers of regulations concerning tenure, consumption, protection, etc. of natural resources (see BOX 2.47). Once the social order and the moral culture are destroyed, these social enforcement rules loose most if not all of their power.
BOX 2.47
According to one account, the traditional African society is not so much afraid of being poor, as of being ashamed^216. The Maasai regularly use social rebuke and avoidance of the individual and his household who fails to adhere to good management^217. Among the Fulani, "sanctions are meted out in the form of rewarding praise for positive, goal fulfilling payoffs, or punishment, generally in degrees of social isolation, for serious transgressions of norms or for failure"^218. The Kikuyu loosely enforce the customary restrictions on the use of woodlands through neighborhood consensus and the anger of local residents^219. Among the Ghana Bushmen unwelcome guests are given permission to use the land but are then "eased out of the band" through social ostracism, thus permission to join the band is rarely sought unless they feel that they will be welcomed^220. Among the Samburu of Kenya, the belief in curses is very strong and is used to sanction decisions, punishments and other
forms of enforcement of rules^221. "Reciprocal altruism", i.e. do good to someone knowing that you can ask a favor in return, in effect enforces customary rules^222.
Although rules and regulations exist in each group, they are rarely explicit, and need to be interpreted to fit each situation. Except for serious disputes which end up in front of traditional judges and courts, most rules are interpreted on a daily basis by the people involved, with the goal of establishing consensus among the parties. For example, the Turkana have general rules limiting access to certain pastures, but there is constant argument about where and when to apply these limitations, and who should apply them. They will use verbal persuasion, involving elaborate rhetorical arguments, in order to influence communal agreement. They often rely on arguments that stress the singularity of the situation to convince others of the need for change in the rules^223. Not all pastoral groups maintain such flexibility and individualism in the application of laws. Some, such as the Ait Ben Yacoub of Morocco, rigorously enforced the decisions laid down by the Council and Chief
of Grass^224.
Another form of informal law enforcement procedure is the traditional relationship between the people and their leaders. In most cases, the political hierarchy is accountable and answerable to the people. In other words, in most cases the people can abandon an oppressive, inefficient chief who does not perform well, is weak in enforcing rules, and does not respect his share of social obligations. The political power of the leader, and his ability to enforce rules, lies in the balance that he can achieve between power/authority, and responsibility/obligations^225.
Thus, the social structure defines the source of the power needed for enforcing rules. The means of enforcing rules vary among different groups. Some have an informal "police force", such as a warrior caste, or official supervisors who monitor the activities of their people or of outsiders. But most groups rely on the observations of each individual member to report transgressions and trespass. Some groups impose fees and penalties for transgression of rules. But the ultimate means, often used when all else fails, is confrontation, fights, and in the case of inter-tribal disputes, warfare (see BOX 2.48).
BOX 2.48
The warrior caste of the Twareg often was used by the leaders as a political chip to prevent internal dissent and to gain concessions from other groups. The II Chamus leaders used the members of the II Murran age-set (18-30 year old males) to supervise and enforce the traditional grazing controls^226. But most groups rely on monitoring by every member in their daily activities, rather than a formal security force. For example, among the Ait Ben Yacoub Berbers, trespass, whether tolerated or not, is easily detected by the herders who spend most of their time on the collective land and know who should use it. Development experts and government agents insist on fences because they can't tell the livestock apart, and can't challenge a herder who claims to be of the collective^227. The Bushmen know that the more scarce the resources, the more chances of being found trespassing because one has to stay longer to find sufficient amount of resources, and only certain areas have
abundant resources, so the chances that others find you are high^228.
Some groups impose penalties for breaking rules (see section 2.2.2.4). Among the Lowiili of southern Burkina Faso, all stray animals (resulting usually from a lack of respect of rules by the herders), are said to belong to the earth shrine, and can only be redeemed into the owner's household upon sacrifices of grain, chicken, etc.^229
The principles of power and fighting are used to maintain order and discipline among the Somali^230. Among the Turkana physical fights and confrontation are ultimate means of enforcing rules. These fights may end at elder's court under the tree, but whatever is decided there may only be valid until the next confrontation where a new court may decide differently^231. Many groups, such as the Maasai^232, are prepared to defend with force their tribal or intra-tribal boundaries if necessary.
2.4 Analysis
In discussing descriptive knowledge, management techniques, and organization of management in that order, this chapter tried to lay the foundation of discussions on LKMS at every step. Through their observation and intimate knowledge of their physical environment, pastoralists have devised techniques for managing (harvesting, improving, protecting, regenerating, etc.) natural resources. Rules and regulations enshrined within the "traditions" of the society ensure the smooth functioning of the system by coordinating the activities of each member. The rules primarily concerned with natural resources include tenure, grazing controls, protection and reservation of valuable resources. It has been argued by some that the pastoralist does not improve nor manage rangelands, and only uses it in a predatory way, but by keeping a low pressure on resources and high mobility and dispersion of his livestock, he is able to maintain an equilibrium^233. This chapter has shown that the
pastoralist is much more of an active manager of his environment than implied by these authors, and that mobility and dispersion are just a few of the deliberate (rather than inadvertent) strategies that he relies on.
Both socio-political expedience, and ecological exigencies define the particular form of techniques and rules practiced by each group. Their objectives are to ensure their survival and to sustain the productivity of their natural system in the long term. Many of their activities have evolved and adapted so that they simultaneously result, in the long term, in sustained production and sustained productivity of the natural resources. A remark made about India can apply just as well to pastoralists in Africa: "... any particular resource of a given region used to be utilized over generations by a small homogenous breeding group which expected the same resources to sustain its future generations as well. These conditions were particularly favourable for the evolution of cultural traits ensuring long-term sustainable utilization of natural resources."^234
Are these activities deliberate attempts to "conserve" natural resources? Is the pastoralist a "conservationist" by nature? Considerable confusion and disagreement surrounds this issue. The problem probably stems from a lack of a clear definition of "conservation". For some, it invokes the western environmentalist's objectives of conserving resources in their "natural" or pristine state. Most of these authors maintain that the pastoralist cannot be a conservationist because his activities are not deliberate attempts to protect resources from use. Their activities may result in proper management and sustenance in the long run, but they do not see it as "conservation"^235.
For others, it merely refers to the preservation or protection of resources on a temporary basis so that it can be used when it is needed the most. These authors talk, for example, of "conserving" the forage during the wet season so that it can be grazed in the dry season, or of preferring wide-diameter wells because the high labour required to pull the water will limit the number of animals and conserve the resource further into the dry season^236. Others say that the low nutritional needs of the pastoralist, and his low material demands, result in a production strategy that "conserves" nature^237. And for still others, it is not clear at all which definition they are using^238.
The discussion of the organization of management and the means of enforcing rules leads to the obvious conclusion that the social structure defines the power base on which rules are enforced. As has been noted among the Maasai, the viability of the organization rests on a system of mutual aid, information network, power lines that reinforce, reward and punishment, cooperation to eliminate competition and conserve energy^239. It also defines the way resource management techniques and rules will react to external forces, and how the society will adapt to new technologies and management strategies proposed by development workers. Thus, pastoral technologies should not be seen as isolated from their overall social framework.
Endnotes
1. Delgado 1979, p. i.
2. Wilson 1986, p. 25.
3. Brandstrom et al 1979, p. 26.
4. Spencer 1965, p. 291.
5. Swift 1982, p. 165.
6. Hjort 1976a, p. 45.
7. Quam 1978, p. 50.
8. Clyburn 1978, p. 108.
9. Quam 1978, p. 55; Schlee 1981, p. 9.
10. Western & Finch 1986, p. 88.
11. Scott & Gormley 1980, p. 99.
12. Spencer 1965, pp. 11 & 292.
13. Jacobs 1980, p. 278.
14. Gallais 1972, pp. 353-356.
15. Swift 1982, p. 162; Barrow 1988, p. 6.
16. Scott & Gormley 1980, p. 98.
17. Swift 1982, p. 162.
18. Gallais 1972, pp. 355-356.
19. Stenning 1959, p. 102.
20. Niamir 1982; McDermott & Ngor 1983.
21. Western 1982, p. 198.
22. Stenning 1959, p. 102.
23. Scott & Gormley 1980, p. 101.
24. Barrow 1988, p. 3.
25. Hjort 1976b, p. 77.
26. Hjort 1976b, p. 72.
27. Gallais 1972, pp. 355-356.
28. de Carvalho 1974, p. 205.
29. Gluckman 1951, p. 13; Scoones 1987, p. 19.
30. Spencer 1965, p. 28.
31. Brandstrom et al 1979, p. 16.
32. Bredemeier 1978, p. 90.
33. Maliki et al 1984, p. 269.
34. Winter 1984, pp. 569-575.
35. Scott & Gormley 1980, p. 101.
36. Sweet 1965b, p. 1147.
37. Benoit 1979, p. 157.
38. Clauson 1953, p. 1.
39. Ciriacy-wintrup & Bishop 1975, pp. 713-727; Runge 1986, p. 626.
40. Noronha & Lethem 1983, p. 12.
41. Barral & Benoit 1977, p. 103.
42. FAO 1972, p. 21.
43. Novikoff 1976, p. 57.
44. Ahmed 1976, p. 58.
45. Gilg 1963, p. 502.
46. Hjort 1976a, p. 49.
47. Gluckman 1969, pp. 252-265; Gluckman 1951, p. 62.
48. Allan et al 1948, p. 63.
49. Sweet 1965a, p. 134.
50. Talbot 1961, p. 302.
51. Holleman 1951, p. 370.
52. McDermott & Ngor 1983, p. 10; Ahmed 1976, p. 58.
53. McCabe 1983, p. 115.
54. Evans-Pritchard 1940, p. 275.
55. Evans-Pritchard 1940a, p. 204.
56. Artz et al 1986.
57. Spencer 1965, p. 5.
58. Spencer 1965, p. 283.
59. Bourgeot 1975, p. 267; Swift 1975, p. 448.
60. Lewis 1961, p. 47; Putman 1984, p. 168.
61. Tubiana & Tubiana 1977, p. 46.
62. Baxter & Butt 1953, p. 117.
63. Noronha & Lethem 1983, p. 14.
64. Middleton & Kershaw 1972, pp. 25 & 51.
65. Brokensha & Castro 1987, p. 14.
66. FAO 1972, p. 14.
67. Devitt 1982, p. 19.
68. Allan 1965, p. 296.
69. Barrow 1988, p. 3.
70. Jacobs 1980, p. 284.
71. Artz 1984, p. 11.
72. Noronha & Lethem 1983, p. 14.
73. Verdier 1965, p. 345.
74. Devitt 1982, p. 18.
75. Schapera 1940, pp. 59 & 78.
76. Barrow 1988, p. 4.
77. de Carvalho 1974, pp. 212-213.
78. Middleton & Kershaw 1972, p. 77-78.
79. Frechou 1965, p. 468.
80. Frantz 1975, p. 343.
81. Morton 1988, p. 6.
82. Cashdan 1984, p. 453.
83. Middleton & Kershaw 1972, p. 49.
84. Barnes 1951, p. 214.
85. Colson 1951, p. 109.
86. Noronha & Lethem 1983, p. 14.
87. Marchal 1983, pp. 295 & 539.
88. Scott 1984, p. 60.
89. Horowitz & Badi 1981, p. 19.
90. Swift 1988a, p. 8.
91. Barral 1967, p. 28.
92. Artz 1984, p. 15.
93. Artz et al 1986.
94. Gallais 1975, p. 71.
95. Holleman 1951, p. 367.
96. Artz et al 1986.
97. Gallais 1975, p. 71.
98. Gallais 1975, p. 72.
99. Gilg 1963, p. 503.
100. Weinstock & Vergara 1987, p. 312.
101. Holleman 1951, p. 370.
102. Barrow 1988, p. 4; Storas 1987, p. 5.
103. Spencer 1965, p. 283.
104. Diop 1987, p. 76.
105. Gulliver 1970, p. 37.
106. Helland 1982, p. 249.
107. Boutrais 1974, p. 162.
108. Jacobs 1980, p. 284.
109. Tubiana & Tubiana 1977, p. 46.
110. Helland 1982, p. 250.
111. Helland 1978, p. 80.
112. Gulliver 1970, p. 37.
113. Barral 1967, p. 28.
114. Sutter 1978, p. 29.
115. Spencer 1965, p. 6.
116. McCabe 1983, p. 115.
117. Barrow 1988, p. 4.
118. McCabe 1983, p. 116.
119. Lewis 1961, p. 169; Putman 1984, pp. 34-53.
120. Toulmin 1983, pp. 10-12.
121. Barral 1968, p. 39.
122. Spencer 1965, p. 283.
123. Brokensha & Riley 1988.
124. Tubiana 1969, p. 61.
125. Tubiana & Tubiana 1977, p. 18.
126. Gallais 1975, p. 51.
127. Colson 1951, p. 120.
128. Bohannan 1954, p. 41.
129. Fortes 1940, p. 258.
130. Jacobs 1980, p. 284.
131. McDermott & Ngor 1983, p. 10.
132. Middleton & Kershaw 1972, p. 78.
133. Gallais 1975, p. 51.
134. Biesele 1971, p. 65.
135. Gilles 1988, pp. 1161-1162.
136. Noronha & Lethem 1983, p. 16.
137. Barrow 1988, p. 4.
138. Behnke 1985, p. 13.
139. McDermott & Ngor 1983, p. 10.
140. Hervouet 1977, p. 72.
141. Bernus 1981, p. 25.
142. Morton 1988, p. 3.
143. Allan et al 1948, pp. 61-63.
144. Goody 1956, p. 37.
145. Ahmed 1976, p. 58.
146. Spencer 1965, p. 5.
147. Cashdan 1984, p. 452.
148. FAO 1972, p. 14.
149. McCabe 1983, p. 115.
150. Swift 1975, p. 448.
151. Jacobs 1980, p. 284.
152. McDermott & Ngor 1983, p. 10.
153. Perevolotsky 1987, p. 156.
154. Biesele 1971, p. 63.
155. Thomas 1959 cited in Allan 1965, p. 296.
156. Talbot 1961, p. 302.
157. Swift 1988a, p. 8.
158. Lewis 1961, p. 53.
159. Helland 1982, p. 253.
160. Tubiana & Tubiana 1977, p. 46.
161. Colson 1951, p. 120.
162. Sandford 1984, p. 6.
163. Gallais 1967.
164. Seif el Din 1986, p. 3.
165. Allan et al 1948, p. 94.
166. Schapera 1943, p. 132 cited in Sandford 1984.
167. Middleton & Kershaw 1972, p. 50.
168. Coldham 1978, p. 93.
169. Brandstrom et al 1979, p. 35.
170. Barrow 1988, p. 3.
171. Swift 1975, p. 448.
172. Little 1984, p. 206.
173. Artz et al 1986.
174. Cerulli 1959 cited in Swift 1977, p. 284.
175. Barrow 1988, p. 2.
176. Schneider 1959 cited in Ware 1977, p. 187.
177. Homewood & Hurst 1986, p. 13.
178. Little & Brokensha 1987, p. 199.
179. Middleton & Kershaw 1972, p. 52.
180. Odell 1982, p. 7; Devitt 1971, p. 54.
181. Devitt 1982, pp. 15-16.
182. Lusigi 1984, p. 345.
183. Scott & Gormley 1980, p. 101.
184. Gallais 1972, p. 358.
185. Ware 1977, p. 186.
186. Artz et al 1986.
187. Schlee 1987, p. 3.
188. Wilson 1986, p. 34.
189. Hiernaux & Diarra 1984, p. 204.
190. Marie 1977, p. 128.
191. Little & Brokensha 1987, p. 198.
192. Western & Dunne 1979, p. 93.
193. Little & Brokensha 1987, p. 198.
194. Bourgeot 1981, p. 167.
195. Brokensha & Castro 1987, p. 21.
196. Cerulli 1959 cited in Swift 1977, p. 284.
197. Schlee 1987, p. 7.
198. Brokensha & Riley 1980a, p. 126.
199. Silberfein 1984, p. 104.
200. Marchal 1983, p. 91.
201. Gulliver 1970, p. 10.
202. Allan et al 1948, p. 94.
203. Middleton & Kershaw 1972, p. 52.
204. Elias 1951, p. 96.
205. Wilson 1951, p. 288.
206. Legesse 1984, p. 482.
207. Goody 1956, p. 93.
208. Brokensha & Castro 1987, p. 19.
209. Little & Brokensha 1987, p. 204.
210. Fortes 1945, p. 80.
211. Colson 1951, p. 159.
212. Storas 1987, p. 6.
213. Benoit 1979, p. 60.
214. Fortes & Evans-Pritchard 1940, pp. 14 & 20.
215. Draz 1978, p. 101.
216. Benoit 1979, p. 24.
217. Jacobs 1980, p. 287.
218. Clyburn 1978, p. 109; Benoit 1979, p. 60.
219. Brokensha & Castro 1987, p. 21.
220. Cashdan 1984, p. 454.
221. Spencer 1965, p. 193.
222. Cashdan 1984, p. 455.
223. Storas 1987, pp. 3-4.
224. Artz et al 1986.
225. Southwold 1964; Hjort & Ostberg 1978, p. 30.
226. Little & Brokensha 1987, p. 200.
227. Artz et al 1986.
228. Cashdan 1984, p. 456.
229. Goody 1956, p. 93.
230. Lewis 1961, p. 30.
231. Storas 1987, p. 14.
232. Jacobs 1980, p. 284.
233. Bernus 1979, p. 125.
234. Gadgil 1985, p. 135.
235. Bernus 1979, p. 125; Little & Brokensha 1987, p. 204; Barrow 1988, p. 1.
236. Bourgeot 1981, p. 171; McCabe 1983, p. 116.
237. Toupet 1975, p. 461.
238. Cassanelli 1984, p. 484; de Souza & de Leeuw 1984 cited in Little Brokensha 1987, p. 191.
239. Jacobs 1980, p. 288.
<section>4</section>
3. TRADITIONAL EDUCATION
Endnotes
The descriptive knowledge, technologies and organizations used by pastoralists to manage their natural resources, have evolved and been passed down the generations. This chapter focusses on the means by which the knowledge has been taught to the young and remembered by the old. It then takes a brief look at formal, modern education, and the problems it has encountered in reaching out to pastoralists, and analyzes the role that traditional education can play in solving these problems.
Very little has been done on how LKMS is passed on down generations^1. In general, young children start to learn about their physical environment as soon as they learn to play games with clay or wooden animals, twigs, grasses, etc. The games usually reflect real-life experiences, such as being chased by lions, or guarding imaginary cows against raiders. As soon as they are old enough, and the age varies between pastoral groups, they start a long process of apprenticeship and learn-by-doing, either under the guidance of their father or elder brother, or under griots, blacksmiths, and other specialized craftsmen (see BOX 3.1).
BOX 3.1
Children's plays reflect the adult world. For example, Fulani children play a game of hyena, sheep and shepherd², or play with clay or wooden toys representing animals and plants^3. In West Africa, traditional education is based on informal apprenticeship with kin and early participation in the work force. Special skills, such as medicine, music, crafts, etc. are acquired through more formal apprenticeship with specialized persons. Other special skills, such as tree felling, hunting, and metallurgy are taught by religious leaders during initiation ceremonies^4. Among the Fulani of northern Senegal, children start pastoral duties at a very young age (5-6), progressing naturally from their plays to actually guarding calves in the compound^5. In almost all groups, the father teaches his sons by going out with them first, then giving hands-on responsibility, and the knowledge is already firmly established by ages 9 or 10, for example among the Samburu of Kenya^6, and the
Tallensi of southwestern Burkina Faso/northeastern Ghana^7.
The knowledge of range and livestock husbandry among the Somali is passed on as young boys (7-8 years) are taken to camel camps and learn from first hand experience which grasses are good, noxious, etc.^8 (unfortunately no mention was made of how Somali girls learn to guard shoats and latter cattle).
At 8-10 years old, Wodaabe children start to learn about herding by being assigned to watch over calves near the camp. Between 10-12 years they start to herd shoats alone in the bush, and at 15 they herd cattle on their own. Wodaabe girls start at 9-10 years to make butter, at 11-12 years to pound millet, and at 14-15 years to milk cows^9. Among the Lozi of Zimbabwe, young boys and girls would go to the cattle posts in the wet season to herd cattle and to be "hardened and taught morals and tribal law."^10 The Fulani of Mauritania say that the initiation of the pastoralist begins at the entrance to the livestock kraal, and ends at its exit, ie at age 63. They consider pastoral education to encompass three phases: "initiation" which takes the first 21 years, "practice" which takes the next 21 years, and "teaching" which takes the last 21 years^11.
Traditional education has four characteristics: 1) it is completely effective, i.e. the child learns all he/she needs to know to become a functioning adult; 2) although the education involves harsh trials and ordeals, every child who survives them is allowed to "graduate"; 3) the cost of education (e.g. paying masters and religious leaders) is not prohibitive; and 4) children are not totally withdrawn from the work force^12.
In the absence of written records, the LKMS is preserved in the memory of the older generation with the help of tales, proverbs, ceremonies, songs, dances, games, etc. (i.e. "folk media"). These mechanisms show how skills are acquired, practiced, and preserved, and how information, whether new or old, is passed on to the young as well as the old (see BOX 3.2).
BOX 3.2
Among the !Kung Bushmen, story telling, based on every day experiences, are used to pass on information and knowledge. The !Kung use a considerable array of non-verbal arts when telling stories, which helps attract people's interest^13. Songs, dance, drama, poetry, oral literature, music and tales ("folk media"), are important for nourishing the educational, spiritual, and entertainment needs of the people^14, but they also reflect the peoples' interest in and priorities for different parts of their environment^15. Folk media are also a means of communication on current events, for example, among those Shukriyya involved with the Rahad and Khashm el-girba projects in Sudan, who sang songs about their grievances with the project, including the fact that people wanted livestock to be integrated with the schemes^16. The Twareg of Niger have many proverbs, poems and riddles dealing with the dynamics of natural resources. For example, "it has so many children riding on one camel,
that no one, not even God, can count them - what is it?" Answer: an Acacia raddiana and its many thorns^17. Games people play show how skills are acquired and practiced^18. For example, a game of pebbles and holes in the ground played by the Twareg of Niger includes names of livestock for pieces and positions, and livestock related activities (watering, grazing, etc.) for movements and strategies^19.
Rayfield (1983) has written a concise review of the problems of applying modern, formal education to the African, and pastoral, context. The main problem of modern schools, starting with missionary schools during the colonial time, is that they withdraw children from society and inculcate them with values and knowledge that make it difficult for them to return to their society. "The very existence of classrooms conveyed the strong message that 'it is more honourable to sit in an office than to earn a living by manual labour'"^20. Colonial governments, such as the French Administration in Senegal, wanted to create a class of Senegalese that could "second the administration and extend the French influence", and they taught that "the only valid culture was the French, African culture was inferior, and that failure to acquire a French education was the fault of the student."^21. With independence, the education systems of those countries still tied very much to colonial powers,
such as Nigeria, Ghana, and Senegal, did not change much, except in teaching more local languages, more funds for higher education, and substituting African for Colonial history, geography and sometimes literature. Countries that adopted socialist policies, such as Guinea and Benin, tried to create new revolutionary schools where the teachers and students would be self-sufficient by planting their own food. Other countries, such as Burkina Faso and Niger tried to create rural schools that taught both French and agricultural skills, but their main problem reportedly was that the students didn't know French and the teachers didn't know agriculture^22.
In Nigeria, the Fulani children "were faced [with] a foreign set of values embodied in the curriculum and teaching methods meant for sedentary children. As a result of these disadvantages, the nomadic children failed to achieve high academic standards, their attendance to school was irregular and many became maladjusted."^23 Recently, President Babangida of Nigeria has acknowledged that the pastoral Fulani have not benefited from the Universal Primary Education programme because the conventional school system and instruction are not suited to their roles, needs and circumstances^24. Recommendations are being made to revise the Nigerian system to include animal rearing and marketing practices, health, etc. in the curriculum, and not western style education that prepares them for white-collar jobs. Although the nomadic boys will be kept in school all-year round, their family are to be compensated for loss of labour with "grazing lands, animal feeds, and veterinary
services"^25. However, it is not clear how these recommendations can replace the highly effective traditional system of on-the-job-learning and apprenticeship.
Paulo Friere (1978)^26 has suggested that African countries need to completely abolish these formal school systems and instead adopt several measures, including teaching literacy in small, brief courses while teaching other skills in spontaneously organized groups formed to meet the local needs. Although substantial amount of resources have already been invested in the formal schools, they still have not been able to adequately cover pastoral areas. Simpler versions of formal schools can be developed to include basic literacy as well as a combination of viable local LKMS and modern technologies. They should plan for a substantial amount of time being spent "on-the-farm" doing practical home-work, and take into account the traditional educational mechanisms discussed above. The folk media can also be used with adult education techniques, such as talks in markets and other gathering places, and radio broadcasts^27.
Endnotes
1. Howes 1980, p.345.
2. Mottin 1977, p.72.
3. Jaxate, Soo & Soo 1979, p.77.
4. Rayfield 1983, p.1.
5. Jaxate, Soo & Soo 1979, p.77.
6. Spencer 1965, p.10.
7. Fortes 1945, p.159.
8. Lewis 1961, p.75.
9. Maliki et al 1984, p.305.
10. Gluckman 1951, p.84.
11. Ba 1982, p.35.
12. Rayfield 1983, p.2.
13. Blurton Jones & Konner 1987, p.10.
14. Compton 1980, p.308.
15. Itani n.d., p.54.
16. Abu Sin 1983, p.48.
17. Bernus 1967, pp. 40-46.
18. Warren & Meehan 1980, p.327.
19. Bernus 1975, p.174.
20. Rayfield, 1983, p.4.
21. Rayfield 1983, pp. 5-6.
22. Rayfield 1983, pp. 12-14.
23. Ezeomah 1985, p.12.
24. Ahmed & Atala 1988, p.4.
25. Ahmed & Atala 1988, p.10.
26. Friere 1978.
27. Monod 1975, p.77.
<section>5</section>
4. VIABILITY OF LOCAL KNOWLEDGE AND SYSTEMS
4.1 Forces of change
4.2 Viability of systems
4.3 Analysis
Endnotes
The LKMS, management technologies, organizational structures, and traditional education discussed in the previous chapters have in the large part undergone changes, whether severe or insignificant, due to recent events affecting pastoralists. This chapter first discusses the different forces of change, and then focusses on the present viability of the systems: whether they have been destroyed, modified, adapted, or remained unchanged.
4.1 Forces of change
4.1.1 Colonial era
4.1.2 Post-colonial era
LKMS and pastoral systems/strategies have by and large changed because of the effects of several external events and pressures. It is difficult to pinpoint exact causes and times of change, since it has generally been a gradual process instigated by the interplay of several different factors applying pressure on the system at the same time. What follows is a short list of factors that have directly or indirectly affected the management of natural resources by the pastoralists.
4.1.1 Colonial era
Although a few agents and processes of change were already in motion before the advent of colonialism, such as droughts, and in some cases sedentarization, it was not until the colonial era that a full array of policies, ranging from taxation to pacification, began to set its mark on traditional pastoral systems. The policies of sedentarization, veterinary care, and emancipation of slaves, although intended to benefit the people, resulted in increasing livestock population and concentration around water points, with the attendant overgrazing. In addition, economic suppression and quarantines, ostensibly aimed at avoiding the spread of diseases, resulted in increasing numbers on the range as less livestock were allowed to be sold off. However, not all policies resulted in an imbalance between livestock and pastures. The policy of pacification actually resulted in the opening of pastures that were hitherto unused due to security problems, but these new pastures were usually
not enough (or not in the right place) to account for the very high concentration of livestock (see BOX 4.1).
BOX 4.1
Colonial policies of sedentarization usually were not forceful but relied on incentives. For example, the British Administration in Nigeria encouraged the creation of settled Wodaabe Fulani villages, with a traditional chief in each village in charge of collecting taxes. The chiefs would vie for the most number of Fulani transhumants by trying to build villages in the best grazing lands. This resulted in local overgrazing and strain on water resources, and attracted non-Fulani farmers, which further decreased the rangelands. The Fulani say that the settled chiefs "are hobbled like a horse - but is not a horse (a symbol of) prestige?"^1
Veterinary action, started as early as the 1920's, became increasingly important as funds and manpower resources were gradually added to the programme. It generally resulted in increased livestock, for example, in Sudan, where increases in livestock numbers followed the implementation of the programme first in the north, and after 1947 in the south². The emancipation of slaves, especially among the Twareg and Fulani in West Africa, also increased livestock numbers as the former slaves then started their own herds³.
Economic suppression was most avidly carried out in Kenya, as the colonial Administration tried to protect the economic competitiveness of the European ranches, and to prevent the spread of disease. For example, in 1906 the Maasai were not allowed to buy or sell livestock because the Administration feared that prices would remain low, and the Europeans would not be able to get good prices for their livestock. In addition, the Maasai were not allowed to raise Merino sheep because the Administration feared that they would then steal sheep from Europeans^4. It also imposed quarantines on tribal trust herds to prevent the spread of disease, thus livestock concentration increased as sales decreased^5.
But not all Colonial policies should be considered as detrimental. The policy of pacification, ie. Preventing raids and wars between pastoral groups, facilitated mobility and freed up underutilized pastures. For example, by suppressing the former Bornu Empire, and intransigent farmers in the highlands, the Colonial Administration in Nigeria allowed the Wodaabe Fulani to freely use pastures they formally avoided^6. Pacification generally resulted in an increase in livestock, as recorded among the Fulani of northwestern Burkina Faso^7.
Another policy that increased the imbalance between livestock and pastures was that of favoring crop cultivation, especially of private farms, and intensively managed (usually European) ranches over traditional pastoral development. Often the best lands were expropriated by the private farms and ranches, and pastoral or hunter-gatherer groups were given "tribal reserves" that were located on the more arid and infertile lands. Two policies, taxation and nationalization of land, resulted in the dismantling of traditional social control over rangelands, the first because in the process of collecting the taxes, the herders were required to remain in one place for an entire season, thus negating their traditional range management techniques, and the second because as land was nationalized the entire land tenure system was in effect annulled. Finally, there were a few cases of deliberate attempts to destroy traditional mores, practices and habits, thus undermining the entire
cultural framework (see BOX 4.2).
BOX 4.2
Colonial Administrations, such as the French in West Africa, deliberately favored farmers over herders, and passed laws that favored crop expansion^8. Parts of the Kafue Flats in southern Zambia were alienated by the Colonial Government for European ranches and farms, forcing some Tonga sub-tribes to overstock or try to negotiate with other sub-tribes for use of their land. The Tonga very clearly saw the root cause of overstocking as being the lack of sufficient land^9. Not all ranches remained successful. For example, in 1914 in northern Nigeria, a European managed to take away some of the best grazing lands of the Wodaabe for his own ranch, but then went out of business in 1920^10. It is well documented that the Colonial Administration in Kenya helped Europeans to expropriate good quality rangeland from the Maasai^11. Then upon seeing overstocking among the Maasai, the Administration devised the "Swynnerton Plan", which included forceful destocking, land reclamation,
commercialization and ranches^12, i.e. it tried to solve the symptoms, not the cause, of the problem it had created.
Taxation often resulted in the misuse of traditional rangelands. For example, the Colonial Administration in Nigeria would force the Wodaabe to stay in one place in order to collect tax, and this would often take all wet season, thus resulting in over-concentration of livestock. Tax avoidance by the Wodaabe was as much to avoid giving money as it was to avoid ecological deterioration^13. We have come to see nationalization of land as a post-colonial phenomenon, but it also occurred during the British Colonial Administration. For example, the Land and Native Rights Ordinance of Nigeria in 1916 made all lands public and under control of the Governor^14, thus initiating a process by which the traditional land tenure regulations of the pastoralists eventually lost their authority.
Finally, the Colonial Administration in Kenya deliberately tried to dismantle the Maasai culture by forbidding the use of ceremonial areas, teaching farming not pastoral activities in the schools, and giving only cereals for food aid (whereas the Maasai diet consisted of only animal products). Although the Maasai resisted passively, they did gradually change, especially since the policy was continued by the post-independence Government^15.
4.1.2 Post-colonial era
Although the process of change had already begun during colonial times, it picked up momentum with the 1950's and has continued to this day. The factors to be discussed below have resulted in increasing livestock numbers, decreasing rangelands, increasing sedentarization and urban influence, decreasing traditional social control over rangelands and a corresponding increase in the power of the Central Government, and an increasing income distribution gap among pastoralists, as well as between pastoralists and non-pastoralists.
Both human and livestock populations appear to have increased since the beginning of the century, although there have been temporary declines in livestock numbers due to droughts and disease epidemics. The increasing population has put strains on resource capacity^16. Veterinary services have become more efficient and are able to reach more pastoralists than before, and in some cases, major epidemics have been stopped in their tracks, but they have been carried out without concerns over their environmental impact. Water development, mostly in the form of deep boreholes, but also improvement of natural ponds and creation of stockponds, has been a major programme aimed at increasing the use of underutilized rangelands and stimulating settlements. Although they have served to open up hitherto unused pastures, they have also contributed to overgrazing around the water points, because they have not been accompanied by appropriate water management structures. In some cases, the
increasing practice of providing supplemental feed, often with the encouragement of Governments and Projects, has resulted in higher quality livestock, but also in increasing livestock numbers and overgrazing of rangelands (see BOX 4.3).
BOX 4.3
Although historical records on livestock and human population numbers in Africa are sometimes inadequate, most of the evidence suggests that populations have increased since the turn of the century. However, some studies, such as one in the Ngorongoro Conservation Area in northern Tanzania, state that although human population has increased, in this case since 1890, livestock numbers have not significantly increased, resulting in a decline in the people's standard of living^17. Although some reports contend that the effectiveness and impact of the veterinary system has been exaggerated^18, it probably has significantly contributed, in most cases, to increased livestock populations^19, for example as recorded among the Fulani of northwestern Burkina Faso^20. In some cases, introduction of supplemental feed to counteract shortages of forage in the dry season, has led to problems for wet season pastures. For example, the Bedouin of the coastal rangeland of Egypt, who now
extensively use supplemental fodder, have increased their herds and added pressure on desert rangelands^21. A similar situation has occurred in other parts of North Africa. For example, in southern Tunisia the cost of hiring herders to take animals away from the village is now more than buying commercial supplement (partly due to subsidies on supplements)^22.
Water development, especially in the form of deep boreholes has almost everywhere been condemned as detrimental to the environment. In most cases the wells have been constructed with Government and International aid, without any contribution from the local beneficiaries, and without the parallel development of a well management and tenure structure. Thus they have contributed to the breakdown of traditional grazing controls^23 and tenure arrangements as outsiders have come in without seeking local permission. For example, when twenty boreholes were built in Twareg territory in Niger between 1961-69, the Fulani and other Twareg clans invaded the lands^24. In many cases, boreholes contributed to overgrazing around the wells, as in the Ferlo region of northern Senegal, and in the Kalahari among the Kgalagari (hunter-gatherer/pastoralists)^25. In Uganda, water development in dry season pastures increased the pasture area, but also the number of livestock, and led to overgrazing
of wet season pastures^26. In central Somalia, the development of boreholes resulted in spontaneous settlement and a land grab of best farmlands as land became scarce, so that even those who did not want to enclose land, had to do so to prevent others from expropriating common lands first^27. The Nuba in Sudan who were displaced from traditional areas due to the Jebel al-Awliya dam, were relocated around Government created boreholes. Their livestock, combined with those of outsiders, were not under any form of regulation, whether traditional or Governmental, and caused overgrazing around the wells^28.
At the same time that livestock numbers, and their concentration around water points have been increasing, the amount of rangelands, especially higher quality pastures, has been decreasing due to several factors. Probably the most important factor, especially in semi-arid zones, is the expansion of farming into rangelands as farm populations increase. Although most of this expansion seems to be due to a spilling-over of farmers from adjacent farmland, it also includes the arrival of new farmers, the sedentarization of pastoralists, both partial and full, and the shortening of fallow periods. In some cases, this has been helped by Government policies that encourage cash cropping, land privatization, and development of large ranches and farms. A further policy, that of the development of National Parks and Reserves for the protection of wildlife, have in some cases taken away traditional pastoral territories. Finally, droughts (especially of the 1970's and 1980's) have put a
tremendous strain on the productivity of rangeland resources, reducing their carrying capacity, making them more vulnerable to overuse, and resulting in greater concentration of livestock around water points and other high quality resources. Not all factors have led to a decrease in rangelands. As mentioned before, water development has opened up new pastures, and pacification policies have continued to open up areas previously avoided by pastoralists. However, the net effect of all these factors has probably been a decrease in range area (see BOX 4.4).
BOX 4.4
Many recent reports state that the real cause of overgrazing is the expansion of crop cultivation into rangelands, and the reluctance or inability of national Governments to reserve areas for grazing. Some examples are reported in the North African Maghreb countries (Algeria, Mauritania, Morocco, and Tunisia)^29, in the Kalahari^30, and among the Kababish of northern Sudan^31. This expansion is also creating conflicts between farmers and herders^32. A large part of the Messeriya's wet season pasture in Sudan are being taken over by grain and oil seeds, and their dry season pasture by cotton^33. In the Senegal River and Niger River valleys rice cultivators are taking over good rangelands, and herders prefer to avoid the areas rather than fight the farmers^34. A similar process is affecting the smaller riverine systems, such as the Black Volta River in northwestern Burkina Faso^35. The present Kenyan government's policies are to encourage crop expansion into wetter areas of
the arid and semi-arid lands. As part of this policy, irrigation schemes are being encouraged, farmers are being settled in traditional pastoral territories, and land disputes are resolved in favor of farmers not herders^36. For example, the II Chamus of Baringo District have lost 75% of their dry season grazing area to crop cultivation^37. The Turkana of Kenya clearly perceive the Government's bias toward farming, and are increasing their sorghum cultivation so as to be in the Government's favor^38.
Crop expansion has pushed herders onto less fertile land in northern Burkina Faso and fallow cycles have decreased. For example, in 1952 the ratio of fallow to cultivated land was 1:6, but in 1973 it was 1:10^39. Programmes that eradicate tse tse flies to open up rangelands for pastoralists invariably bring uncontrolled invasion by farmers^40. Crop expansion into pastures in Sudan actually started in the 1920's, but picked up steam with the Gezira scheme and other mechanized agricultural projects. The process continues as new lands are added to the schemes, while their tenants are increasingly city folk who hire local labourers. As a result, the Rufa'a al-Hoi, knowing that they cannot convince the Government to stop the expansion of these schemes, are trying to get them to evict relatively recent arrivals, such as the Fulani, from their pastures^41.
Pastoralists have also lost some of their rangelands due to the establishment of private, large ranches, especially in East and Southern Africa. For example, in Botswana, there is now increasing gap between the rich and poor, the former being able to take advantage of Government services and laws. One such law, states that on some rangelands, anyone who invests in fences and wells can have private control of the land for 5 years. It has resulted in "beef barons" who overgraze for 5 years, in order to pay back the debts incurred on the capital investments, before handing the land back to the Government^42. The Bushmen game reserve in Botswana, is ostensibly an attempt to save their land in face of ranch expansion, but it has been located in the harshest, least fertile part of the Kalahari^43. However, in some cases, such as the Mambila Plateau of Nigeria, the pastoralists apparently have had adjacent land to fall back into in the face of ranch expansion^44.
Another factor contributing to the decrease of rangelands is the development of national parks and game reserves, especially in East Africa. For example, the Maasai of Ngorongoro Conservation Area are being pushed into smaller range areas due to increasing populations of wildebeest, who can spread disease to cattle^45. The development of Amboseli National Reserve, and Tsavo National Park in Kenya has cut off the Maasai from their dry season pastures^46. Finally, several severe droughts have decreased the quantity and quality of rangelands everywhere. With increasing livestock pressure even during drought years, the long term productivity of the rangelands has probably decreased due to soil degradation.
Not all is bleak. In some cases, range areas have actually been opened up, either with water development, or pacification. The Kenyan Government has reportedly given the Gabra of northern Kenya guns for protection against insurgents and raiders. The Gabra have allocated gunmen to each herding unit and are now able to utilize pastures that were formally considered as unsafe^47. However, the net effect in most countries is probably a decrease in rangelands.
Certain factors have affected the management systems and social controls that pastoralists had devised. Urban influence, especially modern education, and wage labour (in cities, mines and agro-industries) have resulted in a decrease in manpower available on the range, and a resultant change in daily range management strategies, especially to more concentration around water points (although the household economy has been partially compensated with monetary remittances from the wage earning relative). The political powers of the central Governments have increased vis-a-vis that of the periphery, and certain policies, especially land nationalization, land privatization, establishment of regional authority and "local governments", and in some cases deliberate dessimation of an entire tribe, have all contributed to a decrease in the effectiveness of traditional social control over resource management (see BOX 4.5).
Nationalization of land has been perhaps the single most damaging factor to traditional social controls on natural resources. In one stroke, the government denied the local people exclusive access to their traditional commons, and eliminated any local responsibility for its maintenance. At the same time, most governments lack the resources to maintain the rapidly degrading commons. Nationalization of land and abrogation of tribal territorial rights has also contributed to both socio-political fragmentation and increasing claims by non-traditional users. In some cases, the establishment of local governments and their technical divisions are responses to, rather than causes, of a breakdown in traditional control of natural resources. Finally, increasing commercialization, gradual widening of market linkages, and even the presence of Projects, have helped widen the income distribution gap between rich and poor pastoralists (see BOX 4.5).
BOX 4.5
Urban influences, especially the lure of wages has resulted in changes in daily range utilization strategies. For example, Basotho boys are sent to school and men earn wages in cities, resulting in less labour available on the range, and therefore less mobility of livestock^48. A similar situation is occurring in the Maghreb Countries^49. Among the II Chamus of Kenya, one reason for the breakdown of the traditional range control system is that many of the adult age set (18-30 year old men) who traditionally were responsible for enforcing the grazing controls, now go to urban centers for wage labour and other non-pastoral activities^50.
In many cases, the level of decision-making has been transferred from the local community to national or local governments, for example among the Turkana^51. The Kikuyu in Kirinyaga District traditionally managed their forest reserves through social consensus, but now these reserves have become official "forest reserves" and administered by the Forest Department^52. However, given the fact that in many cases the local community is no longer able to enforce its own traditional laws, especially with outsiders (farmers and herders) invading their lands, the local government and its technical divisions does and should have a role to play.
All too often, the Government looks at pastoral areas as a venue for increasing its national coffers, through taxation or duties on the export of animals, but rarely is this money funnelled back into pastoral development. Even the grazing reserves of northern Nigeria, proposed ostensibly to give the Fulani non-congested and non-contested pastures, are regarded as a way to increase the Government's national revenue through the payment of fees for grazing permits^53. Governments have also tried to develop local administrative structures to extend their authority, and in some cases fill a local vacuum, but these attempts are largely inadequate because they do not take into account the traditional or existing socio-political organizations. For example, the Nigerian Government tried to administer the Wodaabe based on the Twareg social system, that is, dividing them into "fractions" the equivalent of which does not exist among the Wodaabe. They also put the Wodaabe and sedentary
Fulani together into "groupements" often under the chieftainship of the settled Fulani, which was not received well by Wodaabe^54.
In some rare cases, entire ethnic groups have been wiped out. For example, the Sakuye of northern Kenya were a small group of pastoralists, who during the 1960's "Shifta" wars got hit from both sides, by Somali separatist (who saw them as pro-Government) and by the Kenyan Army who suspected them of helping the Somali^55. The case of the Dinka in present-day Sudan appears to be a similar situation, in that, as yet an unknown but large number of people are being killed by the Government forces and local Arab militia armed by the Government.
Nationalization of land has meant that all range and forest lands (i.e. non-cultivated land), are in the public domain and can be used by every citizen of the country. It has been reported that nationalization of land has contributed to forest degradation in Niger because villagers see it as the Government's responsibility to maintain and improve the natural resources^56. The French Colonial Administration in Mali recognized eight tribes and their traditional territories in the Gourma Region, but after nationalization of land by the independent Malian Government, 43 independent pastoral groups have registered in the same region^57.
Land privatization laws have resulted in land boundaries that often cut across pastoral routes and pastures, and generally in bitter conflicts among clans, lineages and individuals. For example, during the French Administration of Morocco, some Berbers who cooperated with the French were given private land parcels often in the traditional rangelands of other Berber sections^58. In Mbeere (Kenya) land adjudication, accelerated by the national Government after Independence, has contributed to increasing cash crops, and a loss of cooperation, sharing, visiting, and other social rituals among neighbors, although it has also been an incentive for individuals to plant more trees^59.
One of the effects of increasing market linkages and their extension into rural areas is that they are increasing the value of natural resources, such as land, and so increasing the pressure from outsiders and local elite to expropriate land for private use^60. Pressures to overcut wood for charcoal to be sold on urban and export markets, is increasing and is the cause of major degradation of tree cover in Mbeere^61. An increasing gap in incomes between the rich and the poor is gradually coming to light in many areas, for example in the Maghreb countries^62 and in East Africa. For example in Kenya, some rich pastoralists are becoming absentee owners who pursue other production and investment strategies in towns and cities, and entrust their herds to hired herders^63. Among the Fulani of northern Cameroon, as a household becomes richer, its younger generation moves to urban areas, necessitating hiring of poor Fulani or non-Fulani herders^64. The poor household is left with
less labour and is forced to forego on traditional resource management techniques. An increasing income distribution gap results in a poor class for whom short term cash needs outweigh long term production investments^65.
Group ranches tend to favor those who are already economically and politically in a strong enough position to exploit it. For example among the Maasai "a spirit of capitalism seems to have displaced the formerly far more egalitarian outlook", and the Ranch Committees which are dominated by the elite are now pushing for further sub-division of the group ranch land, in their attempt to gradually privatize the land^66. Similarly in central Somalia, cooperative ranches established in the late 1970's have become vehicles for the elite to privately enclose pastureland even though it is illegal. Once a few people start to enclose land panic sets in, and a general land grab starts. However, it appears that the majority of the Somali society is against these enclosures and there are increasing instances of fence burning and other forms of retaliation^67.
Although each constraining factor has been singled out for analysis, it must be stressed that most pastoral groups are faced with several factors at the same time. For example, among the Turkana the forces of change have been livestock and human population increase, veterinary care, water development without control of rangeland, sedentarization, biased development projects, crop expansion, and irrigation projects^68. In Niger the French administration introduced veterinary care and boreholes (the former between 1952 and 1972, and the latter after 1960), encouraged sedentarization, out migration, crop expansion, and free access to water, with the result that livestock numbers increased, while mobility and control of rangelands decreased^69. Among the Lahawin of eastern Sudan, the recent changes are: crop expansion (both rainfed and mechanized), forced settlement of pastoralists, drought, and landlessness among the poor^70. The Somali traditional system of grazing controls is
apparently breaking down because of: economic stratification due to export of livestock by a few to Arab countries, private expropriation of range (by building private wells, fencing and private fodder production), and monopolization of resources by a few, especially traders^71. The territorial power of Moors in Mauritania is less now than before the colonial era because of pacification, slave emancipation, drought, Government interventions in local politics, and crop expansion^72.
All factors combine to affect local institutions and management of natural resources. Most of these changes, especially destocking, water development, and disease control are in reality aimed at the symptoms and not the root constraints. And in many cases, Governments have imposed these external changes in the name of development, have seen traditional systems gradually disrupted, and then have accused the local people of causing problems, such as degradation and resource depletion. In other words, "we are in a position of calling the tune after having expropriated the fiddle"^73.
4.2 Viability of systems
4.2.1 Descriptive knowledge
4.2.2 Management practices
4.2.3 Organization of management
All of the forces of change just discussed in one way or another affect the LKMS for natural resources devised by pastoral people. In some cases the systems have been completely destroyed, in other cases they survive in a modified form. This section discusses the survival of these systems, and their viability for future development. In this context, viability does not refer to the efficiency of a system, nor "the capability to derive a livelihood from the herd on a sustained basis"^74, but to whether the techniques or systems are still capable of being used.
4.2.1 Descriptive knowledge
Descriptive LKMS seems to be gradually disappearing among most pastoralists, as the younger generation move to the urban areas or are educated in formal schools. In addition, the introduction of other materials, such as imported rice, modern medicines, cement and zinc roofing, are reducing the need for natural resources. Traditional measurement systems (especially time and weight) are also being replaced with modern ones as watches and weighing scales become more common. However, not all knowledge is equally lost. Many groups still retain much of their knowledge, and still use it at least for special purposes such as ceremonies. In general, the LKMS remains viable as long as it is being put to practical use. This also implies that it can be revived if a practical use is found for it, and if some members of the society (specialists, older generation, etc.) still retain the knowledge (see BOX 4.6).
BOX 4.6
Among the Mbeere of Kenya, ritual and ceremonial plants, and to a lesser extent traditional medicinal plants, are no longer being used, and housing is being increasingly made out of bricks and cement^75. Modern educated Mbeere still retain some of the traditional natural resource knowledge, but the knowledge is fuzzy in detail and sometimes completely lost^76. Young Fulani herders of northern Burkina Faso no longer know what a good pasture is^77, perhaps because there are no good pastures left. Many of the traditional measurements of time, weight, etc. have changed spontaneously to modern ones, such as in Botswana^78 and in Ghana^79.
Not all LKMS is lost. For example, traditional healers in Somali cities still have an abundant trade, but they delegate collection of plants for medicines to apprentices, who may not attach as great an importance to the traditional rules governing appropriate harvest of plants as the older generation did^80. Some traditional medicine has even made its way into modern science, such as Hagenia abyssinica, which the Amhara used for intestinal parasites, and which was also used in the 1870's for same reason in Europe^81. Traditional knowledge of the value of trees and range management systems among the Pokot and Turkana of Kenya is still alive, and can form the basis of afforestation, range reseeding, and other innovations previously unknown to them^82.
4.2.2 Management practices
Since livestock management (herding, watering, etc.) is very labour intensive, the availability of labour at the household level in part defines the viability of traditional grazing controls and techniques^83. If labour is available, these systems persist, if not, then people find shortcuts which often result in a breakdown or modification of the systems. Labour availability on the range has generally decreased due to children being sent to formal schools, and young men leaving for salaried wages or other occupations. Fewer members of the younger generation are willing to remain pastoralist^84. In some cases, the emancipation of slaves has meant that the former masters have either to herd livestock themselves or hire herders. Hired herders also work for absentee herdowners and tend to be poorer pastoralists. In general, hired herders work outside the local systems, either through choice or because of demands put on them by the herdowners, a tendency which has contributed to
a breakdown of traditional range management systems. These factors tend to be more important in countries where the formal schooling system is well established in rural areas, and where a large income distribution gap exists among pastoralists (see BOX 4.7).
BOX 4.7
Among the II Chamus of Kenya, the traditional system of livestock herding is weakening because children are increasingly going to school. Thus, in the rainy season, when children are away and grass is abundant, animals are left free to graze around the homestead, which may bode ill for the future of the range^85. In general, the whole concept of herding is gradually being seen by the Fulani as an onerous and thankless job, and few of the younger generation want to do it. In addition, the breakdown of patriarchal family ties, has meant less trust and cooperation between the herd owner and his herder (whether hired or not)^86. Among the Wodaabe, increasing labour migration for cash incomes, has meant less labour left on the range, and more shortcuts taken in daily activities, such as going to nearby boreholes rather than digging wells^87.
With the emancipation of slaves, some groups, especially the Twareg were obliged to herd their animals themselves (at which they are not very good and will often be satisfied with mediocre pastures), or hire Fulani herders^88. The former Twareg slaves in turn are starting their own herds^89. Herders are also being hired by rich absentee herdowners. Among the Wodaabe of Niger, poor people are hired by absentee herd-owners in exchange for milk and perhaps calves to rebuild their herd. This system is called "jokkere". But in recent years with drought and increasing poverty, more people are hiring themselves out and competition is high, so the fee is scaled down to just milk, which is insufficient for rebuilding a herd. This strategy of temporarily becoming a hired herder to rebuild one's herd is more prevalent among the Wodaabe than the Twareg, because the traditional loan systems of the former are more rigid and based on strict rules, including having a minimum number of
livestock to initiate loans. Thus the very poor have to go outside the Wodaabe system to rebuild their herd. The Twareg loan system is less rigid, and is theoretically more able to take care of the poor Twareg^90, although in reality the latter tend to be ostracized and prefer to leave the pastoral system entirely to become labourers or farmers^91.
Hired herders in Kenya usually operate outside the local system, and do not feel bound by its rules^92. Similarly, the jokkere herders in Niger tend to care less about their master's herd than their own. For example, they will take the former to crowded boreholes, rather than dig a well, or will give less milk to the calves and take more for themselves. Other Wodaabe prefer not to cooperate in herding with a jokkere herd because of the latter's reputation for poor management. In addition, the absentee owner will often require the herder to stay close to the city so that the former can pay supervisory visits, which results in overgrazing around the city^93.
Certain external factors, especially land nationalization, livestock population increase, and crop expansion, have resulted in modifications or breakdown of the range management strategies. Sojourn pastures and transit routes have often been changed, either temporarily or permanently, and traditional deferment of pastures to allow rest and regeneration of the range have been shortened or entirely dropped. Distances travelled on transhumance have generally been shortened, with more concentration around boreholes, but in many cases they tend to be accompanied by more frequent displacement around the camp. In addition, in some cases the fluidity of membership in herding units tends to increase as individual households become more concerned with finding adequate pasture than in maintaining social and kinship ties (see BOX 4.8).
BOX 4.8
In Kenya, traditional migration routes have had to be altered to accommodate the increase in livestock numbers^94. Overgrazing in the sahelian part of Burkina Faso, due to increased livestock numbers and crop expansion into rangelands, has forced the Twareg and Fulani to abandon their traditional transhumance to wet season areas and to stay all year in the dry season area, causing more degradation there^95. Since the 1970's drought, many Kel Adrar Twareg of Kidal (Mali) have been faced with complete disruption of their traditional grazing organization, because they have been forced to go outside their usual areas, south to Gao or north to the southern Algerian oases^96. During the 1969-70 drought, the Zaghawa abandoned their traditional routes and went further south; by the end of 1970, only a few had not returned^97. Given the increasing shortage of range areas, and imposition of national Government rule, the traditional strategy of invading new areas when old ones were no
longer sufficient, and perhaps killing, dispossessing or absorbing the existing population in their path, is no longer feasible in the 20th century^98. Similarly, the main agropastoral strategy of moving the settlement to an entirely new area after a few decades, to find fresh resources and allow the old area to rest, helped to maintain the ecological balance in the long term, but with increasing population and shortage of land is no longer a viable strategy.
In many cases, traditional deferment systems are no longer practiced or shortened due to decreasing range resources. For example, the traditional seasonal transhumance in the Algerian Steppe, that allowed the area to rest for 9-10 months, has now changed to 8-9 months rest, and has contributed to deterioration of the Steppes^99. Among the Rufa'a al-Hoi of eastern Sudan, the traditional system of coordinating and deferring the southward movement until after the crop harvest of the local farmers is no longer adhered to because of decreasing resources and increasing competition among new and old pastoralists for land^100. Among the Rendille and Gabra of northern Kenya, the overall trend now, especially for the former, but also for the latter, is a gradual tendency to limit the extent of movements and/or to sedentarize around water points; however, in general, they compensate for shorter distances by moving their livestock more frequently^101. Among the Dinka of Kongor
individual households are moving between herding units more frequently than before, as resources become more scarce, and the main criterion for choosing herding units is no longer kinship or stock friends, but pasture condition and productivity^102.
The viability of other range management techniques, such as range improvements, range evaluation and monitoring, have not been discussed in reports reviewed to date. It can be surmised, however, that those techniques that involved communal action and/or deferment of range areas, are probably no longer being practiced, but the techniques used by individual households, such as range evaluation, probably are.
Social controls on range use have been greatly affected by recent events. The local sociopolitical hierarchy of chiefs and council of elders have for the most part lost much of their power and been partially replaced by an administration appointed by the central Government. Thus, they no longer have the power to enforce the traditional grazing controls and resource use regulations. However, some groups still retain power, and in some cases have been able to modify their system to meet the new constraints. Communal meetings, so effectively used in the past to discuss and devise rules, still regularly convene and are generally viable. Cooperation among herding units has generally declined, and tribal codes and rules governing transhumance movements are gradually being abandoned (see BOX 4.9). No information was found on the viability of informal rules and principles, but it can be assumed that the three fundamental rules (first come first serve, avoid areas in use or recently
vacated, and keep at a good distance of others) are still being observed whenever possible.
BOX 4.9
The French Administration ostensibly recognized the traditional system of the Berbers of Morocco by placing its leaders within the Administrative bureaucracy and paying them regular wages. However, individual herders then saw that they could have recourse to the government rather than the traditional system, and ignored the latter. After independence, the Moroccan government continued the process, so that today it has coopted much of the power of the council of elders, even though the latter still formally exists. In addition, the institution of Chief of Grass appears to have disappeared^103. The traditional supervisor of grazing rights (badisa) among the Tswana of Botswana disappeared 20-30 years ago because of the opening of new pastures, settlement, and commerce^104. However, it has apparently been modified, since the present day "grazing managers" are modeled after them^105. In northern Nigeria, the colonial system of headships among the Fulani, established for the
purpose of tax collection ("jangali" cattle tax), was abolished in 1976, and the settled chiefs, who still retain their role as political leader and representatives of the settled Fulani^106, no longer seem to have an incentive to care for the transhumant Fulani^107.
Some groups appear to still retain their social organization. For example, even though in Lesotho land is now held in trust by the King, and the Ministry of Agriculture issues guidelines for stocking rates, the local chiefs who have to enforce these rates are reluctant to do so because they run counter to the traditional system^108. Power is vested in age-groups among the Kaputiei Maasai (as among other Maasai), but when the Kenyan Government tried to establish a group ranch with them, it found that there were problems of succession in the ruling committee (the existing age-group did not want to step down) which made it difficult to implement the ranch; in other words, far from having broken down, the local socio-political system was functioning normally and well, and could not be circumvented by the Government^109.
With all the changes taking place, it is surprising that traditional meetings are still being held, and they are still the venue for communal decision making. For example, among the Pokot of Kenya, the communal meetings, "kokwo", are still held whenever needed to discuss anything of public concern, and are viable enough to be used in a project context^110. In Botswana, the "kgotla" still survives, even though its power was curtailed during colonial times, and the headmen, even though old and uneducated, still command more respect than leaders of other, new, local institutions. Furthermore, it has adapted to modern needs; for example women and minorities are increasingly allowed to speak in them^111.
In most cases where the social organization of a group has broken down, the systems of range management have also disappeared. In northern Nigeria, the weakening social and family ties among the Fulani has resulted in less cooperation in movements of herding units, even within an extended household^112. The urban absentee owners no longer feel bound by traditional rules, and don't care about their impact on the range^113. Today, collective action among the Berbers of Morocco is rare, and no single institution binds them. However, recently the Government has been trying to initiate collective action (coops, associations, etc.) by giving certain incentives, and it appears that most herders are receptive to the idea^114. The breakdown of traditional grazing discipline among the Somali has meant overgrazing around wells, although the herders state that they are willing to follow traditional rules (such as centripetal grazing) if left alone^115.
The Dina Code of the Macina Fulani, was never accepted by all Fulani (e.g. the Diallube refused to join), and those who didn't hastened the demise of the system by helping the Toucouleurs in their forays into the periphery of the Empire. The French Administration finally subdued the Toucouleurs and Macina between 1887 and 1903 and started the process of the breakdown of the Dina Code^116. The Code also broke because many other outside players joined the scene. There are now at least eight different groups in the area: the delta Fulani agropastoralists (ex-Macina), the sahel Fulani transhumant pastoralists, the Moors, the tenants of the Office du Niger irrigation scheme, livestock traders who use the delta forage for fattening, absentee livestock owners (civil servants, merchants, and large farmers), and those Twareg who used to use the area before the Macina Empire^117. Since the main objective of the Dina Code was to sedentarize the Fulani, its breakdown (and the drought)
actually resulted in a resumption of transhumance and full pastoralism among many of the settled Fulani^118.
In many cases, the knowledge of range principles and daily routines, and even cooperation among herding units still linger on. For example, the Europeans destroyed, pushed back, and scattered the Hottentots in South Africa, but by hiring them as herders on their ranches, they allowed the knowledge and usage of traditional range management systems to continue^119. The fact that the Gabra have been issued guns by the Kenyan Government has meant more coordinated movements between herding units, and a renewal of traditional range control^120. The traditional system still seems to be more intact among the Twareg of the Gourma than other Twaregs, even though they have been equally affected by slave emancipation and crop expansion; the local marabouts even fear that the lack of change may spell problems for subsistence and cohesion in the future^121.
Population increase, resource depletion, and the breakdown of the traditional social system, have often meant that conservation and/or regeneration techniques for trees and shrubs have been abandoned as resource stress became more acute. For example, fast population increase and sedentarization in Kenya have meant that "traditional controls on the cutting of trees for firewood/charcoal, garden clearing, fodder for animals, and house building poles [in Kekarongole, Turkana District] were insufficient to prevent widespread forest destruction"^122. Among the people of northern Burkina Faso, the traditional technique of pruning Acacia albida to aid its regeneration has given way to overuse as the pruning/lopping for browse becomes more severe. In addition, the tradition of protecting spontaneous tree generation in fields is eroding^123. In most systems, browse was used only in the dry season, which meant that ingested seeds were mature and could pass unharmed through the
animal's digestive tract. However, with browse and forage getting more scarce, seeds are being consumed even in the wet season, before they are mature, resulting in less chances of spontaneous regeneration of trees^124.
Traditional management of wells appears in general to be still viable, as among the Borana of Kenya^125, but in some cases the scale of cooperation has been reduced; for example, in Kitui District of Kenya, the traditional rotation of wells in the dry season to prevent overuse has broken down because of changes in the social structure and population increase, and communal activity now occurs only on a smaller scale^126. In central Mali, among the Bambara of Kala, proportionately less wells have been built communally by the entire village as by each individual household (3 wells by the former and 29 by the latter since Independence)^127. This trend is as much a result of reduced communal activity as of increasing number of rich people. In addition, the traditional systems are not being applied to the new, Government owned and/or constructed wells, since the local people believe that the Government has the responsibility for their maintenance; for example, the northern Somali
do not apply their system to Government constructed wells because they are not seen as belonging to community^128. Commercialization has also had its effect on the management of mineral springs and salt cures. For example, the Fulani of northern Cameroon no longer use the mineral springs as frequently and do not regulate communal use of the springs as actively as before, because the herders prefer to buy salt rather than have to pass through congested and heavily cultivated lands on their way to the springs^129.
The fate of other natural resources has been similar to those above. Wild grains are being increasing collected for sale rather than home consumption, implying that the harvesting is done less frequently but on a larger scale each time, and often with destructive methods. For example, millet cultivation is now replacing the Zaghawa's dependence on wild grains (except during droughts), and the women gather them for sale during Ramadan and other special occasions^130. The Twareg Kel Oulli near Gao (Mali), whose slaves frequently gathered wild grains, are now buying the grains in markets (often from their former slaves), rather than collect themselves^131. Not much is known about the fate of traditional fishing systems in arid lands, but in general it appears that the Colonial establishment of fishing fees and permits, and introduction of nylon nets, have resulted in a breakdown of traditional communal control of fisheries^132.
4.2.3 Organization of management
Traditional systems of pastoral production have undergone gradual change, as individual households faced with environmental and economic stress are forced to make permanent choices between production systems. Thus, in any group one finds those households who retain the old system, those that have completely abandoned it for crop cultivation, trade, wage earning, etc., and the vast majority of households that are somewhere in between (see BOX 4.10).
BOX 4.10
The Fulani who were all at one time fully pastoral, now fall into three production systems: 1) the "bororo'en" are still fully pastoral, know much more about livestock and prefer to go to large pastures far from cultivated areas, 2) the "fulbe na'l", are agropastoralists who split herds and send the main one on transhumance, and 3) the "fulbe sire", are settled, town folks, such as the aristocratic "torobe", and the non-cattle-owning farmers^133. Similarly, some Maasai still follow the traditional system and are untouched by modernity (such as the Maasai of Loita Highlands in Kenya, and the Maasai of the Steppe in Tanzania). Other Maasai have completely abandoned the old system, and engage primarily in crop cultivation, trade, and wage labour, or if still pastoral, then their radius of movement has decreased and they stay around boreholes or try to be included in government ranching schemes (such as the Maasai of Machakos district, Mt. Meru Highlands, etc.). These Maasai
appear to have lost all vestiges of their mutual aid society and have no elder meetings and councils. But the majority of the Maasai are in between these two extremes. Their system has modified to meet new needs. For example, elders do meet, but allow the young to join; mutual aid still predominates but gradually one sees individualistic behavior; the diet is diversifying and so is the production system; and they use Government dips and veterinary services^134. Wealthier Twaregs are now diversifying into real estate in cities, transport, small trade, and wages of civil servants, while the poorer remain pastoralists^135.
Many of the strategies that pastoralists are now using, such as trade, crop cultivation, and wage earning, are actually historical strategies that they've always used to deal with resource stress. In the past, the stress was usually of a temporary nature (droughts passed and local overstocking was alleviated with a move to fresh areas), and these strategies were eventually abandoned^136. However, in recent times, resource stress tends to linger on due to other cumulative factors, and many pastoralists find they cannot return to their pastoral system. It is an open question whether the traditional systems could be revived in their entirety if the current resource stress was relieved. An example that points to the affirmative can be found among the Rendille and Gabra of northern Kenya who after the 1960's and 1970's droughts managed to return to their pastoral system by getting livestock loans from Missionary organizations^137.
The old strategy of herd maximization has remained, even in the face of resource depletion, because it is still the only way that many individual household can ensure their long term survival. It appears that the younger and richer folks, as among the Maasai^138, now see other strategies, such as higher offtake, saving cash rather than livestock, and diversifying into other production systems, as necessary for survival in modern times.
The traditional strategy of stock friends, loans, gifts, and reciprocity, are still viable among some groups. For example, the "mafisa" system among the Tswana of Botswana is still practiced even among the rich owners^139, although among other groups, the rich folks and those with access to cash incomes from the outside no longer have any use of these redistribution systems and prefer to avoid them^140. Many Somali no longer participate in the traditional system of communal labour for watering livestock and prefer to hire workers for the task^141.
The fall-back strategy of raids has been reduced drastically in recent times, and eliminated for the most part, except in parts of East Africa (see BOX 4.11). Whereas the absence of the raids has generally resulted in the opening of unused pastures, its continued presence has had the opposite effect, adding to the pressure on rangelands.
BOX 4.11
Raiding is no longer practiced among camel herding Saudi Arabian Bedouins^142. Raids have disappeared in West Africa^143, a fact that has apparently increased the fatalistic sense of the Fulani^144. Cattle raiding, a common feature of the system of the Nyakyusa of southwest Tanzania, is no longer practiced^145. But some groups still raid their neighbors. For example, in the mid-1960's, the Karamajong, forced by droughts and overgrazing, were still raiding^146, the Somali recently raided some northern Kenyan tribes, and the Murle of eastern Sudan still raid the Dinka^147. The Pokot and the Turkana were still raiding by the 1970's. In the past, they used spears and knives to get livestock, and considered raiding as part of the prestige and prerequisite of being a warrior, but now they use machine guns, grenades, and motor vehicles, and steal livestock for sale in urban markets, all the while remaining anonymous and more lethal^148.
Traditional land tenure systems have generally eroded in recent years. In many cases, traditional boundaries are no longer respected both by members of the tribe and by outsiders. The major cause of this has been the nationalization of land by the central Government, but it alone is not a sufficient criterion. Other factors, especially crop expansion, social disintegration, increasing income gaps, and decreasing resource capacity have combined to destroy land tenure systems. Many development projects have also ignored traditional systems and have contributed to their demise. However, the breakdown of tenure rights has not been homogenous between tribes or even within tribes. In a few cases the traditional tenure system is still de facto if not de jure viable. In addition, in some cases communal tenure at the lower levels of socio-political organization may have faded, but they remain intact at higher levels (see BOX 4.12).
BOX 4.12
The traditional grazing lands in Botswana no longer survive because of laws passed by the Land Boards, which dissociated the traditional wards from their territories^149. The Colonial Administration in Botswana broke the chief's stewardship over communal resources, but not his privileged position. The overall effect was to 1) destroy communal management of land, and 2) ossify the income gap at one point in time, so that the rich remained rich and the poor no longer had recourse to the traditional socio-political system^150. The traditional political organization of the Twareg in northern Niger was slowly destroyed by the French Administration starting in 1916, who pushed the Twareg away from their traditional lands, segregating them from farmers with whom they had good relations, and reducing the power of the traditional leader (amenokal) to that of a tax collector, all of which destroyed their control over the range^151. Their traditional territorial rights are no longer
rigid and outsiders, such as the Fulani, are gradually invading it without recognizing Twareg authority^152. In the Niger River delta, "de facto changes in access rights to flood plains, coupled with ambiguous national laws have contributed to an accelerated breakdown of the [traditional Dina] land tenure system."^153 The traditional system of the II Chamus is breaking down because of confusing land tenure laws, population increase, marketing, etc., although most people want to see a form of grazing regulation reinstated^154. The feudal state system of the Fulani of Yatenga gradually lost its distinct territoriality with the coming of colonial power. The system no longer survives in those villages populated by a mixture of Fulani non-Fulani, or solely by the Fulani slave caste (in which case tenure is based only on usufruct rights), but the traditional system is still viable where villages are populated solely by non-slave Fulani^155.
Land nationalization is only one change agent affecting traditional land tenure systems. Among the Fulani of the Sahel in general, the traditional system of dividing grazing lands among sub-tribes and lower divisions, has broken due to crop expansion, drought, and construction of boreholes^156. The Somali say that territories are now blurred because of decreasing resources^157. The French Administration in North Africa, in an attempt to pacify the Berbers, actually gave formal recognition of land ownership to the tribes following traditional boundaries. However, modernization (commerce, population growth, etc.) as well as Government pacification aimed at stopping raids, gradually weakened the whole social system, and resulted in resource degradation^158. Furthermore, the Royal Moroccan Decree of 1969 has left the Berbers with bits and pieces of their own system plus a poor understanding of state control on the land^159. However, the Berbers still recognize and respect their
traditional tribal (i.e. higher level) boundaries^160. In some cases, development projects have contributed to the confusion of land tenure laws. For example, in Katilu (Kenya) an irrigation scheme covers land belonging traditionally to 50 different groups, one of which are the Turkana, and as a result the majority of the resource control systems have broken down in the area^161.
In some cases, the traditional tenure system still survives in fact, if not formally recognized by the Government. Among the Mbanderu Herero of northwestern Botswana, the traditional tenure of pastures at the lineage level, and range utilization rules, still survive and are a potential foundation for modern land tenure and range controls^162. Among the Fulani of Mubi (Gongola State, Nigeria), the traditional chief still retains de facto power over land allocation and politics, even though the 1976 Local Government Reform Act tried to destroy it^163. For some Wodaabe lineages in north/central Niger traditional geographical boundaries no longer hold, but the rest are still geographically cohesive^164. During the 1960-70 drought some Zaghawa chiefs discussed a plan to relocate completely to southern pastures, but not every one agreed because they feared that the Kababish and other neighboring tribes would then take their traditional land^165. In other words, even with land
nationalization, the traditional tenure system is still recognized on a de facto basis. In Maasailand, the traditional territory of sections faded during the colonial era in Kenya, and with the Ujamaa policies in Tanzania, but the locality (the next higher socio-political level) still remains as the focus of communal organization^166.
Land privatization has also contributed to a breakdown of those traditional tenure systems that did not recognize private wild lands. In most cases, the rich and elite have been able to take more advantage of land privatization laws than the poor. However, in some cases the socio-political system is viable enough for people to claim private lands according to their membership in the clan or lineage, thus effectively re-establishing the traditional land boundaries. In cases where the traditional system did recognize private wild lands, population increase and land sales have resulted in the fragmentation of land holdings so that they no longer coincide with traditional socio-political boundaries. In cases where privatization of communal land is illegal, people have been able to claim exclusive rights by gradually expanding the boundaries of their farmland to include both cultivated land and fallow or pastureland (see BOX 4.13).
BOX 4.13
The economic and resource control base of the traditional system among the Bedouins of coastal Egypt is breaking down due to individual ownership and control over natural resources, but the ideology of the tribe and its cultural identity and kinship bonds remain strong^167, suggesting that there is a potential for reviving the resource control systems. The vagueness of common boundaries among the Mbeere of Kenya meant that there were many disputes and bitter litigations when the Government started individual land adjudication^168. But in general the Kenyan people are trying to lay claim to land as close as possible to their old tribal boundaries, thus effectively re-establishing traditional boundaries^169. The traditional private landholdings of the Suiei Dorobo of Kenya, used for beekeeping, are now so fragmented from population increase and sale of land to outsiders, that the traditional clan land tenure boundaries have been erased^170.
Among the agropastoralists of southern Darfur (Sudan) the traditional system gave exclusive rights to certain categories of arable land. But with the increasing shortage of forage and range resources, some people are extending the fences around their farmland to include rangeland, which they claim to be for the future expansion of their farm. They then cut the forage for their own livestock, or plant forage crops for sale in urban markets. It is usually the larger herd owners who have the resources to build the thorn fences for these illegal enclosures^171. Similarly, in central Somali although a part of the private enclosure is cultivated, the rest is planted with fodder crops or left as grassland for livestock^172.
In almost all cases, ownership of water points remains intact, even though the grazing lands around it may no longer be controlled by the group. For example, although traditional pasture rights no longer exist among the Wodaabe of Niger, clan ownership of wells still exists, and in practice contributes to a de facto recognition of traditional grazing lands^173. Government constructed water points have almost entirely been kept out of the traditional system. As a result they are open to all, and have contributed to a breakdown in the traditional resource tenure system, as among the Dinka of Kongor^174. However, some people are learning to fight back (such as the Illabakan Twareg of Niger who eventually forced the Government to close down some boreholes so that they could regain their control over the land when the outsiders left the area^175), while others are taking advantage of the confusion in tenure rights to the detriment of their neighbours. For example, some Somali
lineages have constructed cemented hafirs with the Government's sanction in rival lineage or clan territories, leading to more confusion of grazing rights^176.
Among those groups that had grazing reserves (whether for drought, regeneration, or dry season grazing), very few still are able to restrict grazing according to traditional rules. Most groups have been forced to abandon the system due to increasing resource shortage, the construction of boreholes in the reserves by the Government which then attracts outsiders, and crop expansion into the reserves. In addition, the breakdown of the socio-political system has eliminated the powers of enforcement that the leaders had (see BOX 4.14). In cases where the breakdown of the reserve has been due to resource shortage, closing off portions of the range to starving animals would be a waste, a practical impossibility, and cause further overcrowding and degradation on the remainder of the land. Other alternatives need to be found.
BOX 4.14
One group that still appears to retain its system of reserves are the people of Lesotho^177. However, most groups have lost their reserves. Among the Pokot, the last time that traditional grazing reserves were closed off was in late 1930's and early 1940's^178. Similarly, a colonial rotational scheme, eventually becoming the Batei grazing scheme, appeared to be working well but died in the late 1970's^179. The Pokot elders complain that the Kaplelach (25-35 year generation) have become educated, refuse to follow traditional rules and want private enclosures^180. In addition, with the breakdown of traditional authority, the local Pokot chief can no longer pass on the responsibility to a distant and enigmatic authority, and is often reluctant to enforce rules that involve his neighbours^181. Crop cultivation is taking over the reserved areas of the Berbers of Morocco^182. In addition, a series of unfortunate droughts, and a general breakdown of enforcement and respect of
traditional rules has destroyed the reserve system. The majority of Berbers think that the reserves are good, but say that it is "impossible for everyone to agree to anything" these days^183. Similarly, the breakdown of higher level cooperation among the Somali meant that the British Protectorate's scheme to set up grazing reserves for rest and soil conservation, were seen favorably by the people if it meant securing grazing rights for a clan, but not if it was for several clans^184. Among the II Chamus, the traditional reserves broke down because of the decline of the political power of local elders, and an increase in non-pastoral activities among the young men who enforced the rules^185.
Among the Luo of Kenya, the traditional reserves are breaking down due to increasing private expropriation by local farmers who are taking advantage of the Registered Land Act of 1963^186. Similarly, the Maasai of Kenya are taking advantage of the group ranch programme to expropriate land on the "olopololi" reserves for lease to commercial ranches for fattening of steers. In addition, some Maasai are starting to build houses on the traditional dry season reserves. However, there are indications that local people are concerned and are even forcing these settlers to move out of the reserves^187. Water development has meant that areas that were traditionally left untouched and used in drought times are now used every year^188. The British Colonial Administration in Sudan tried to reserve certain hafirs and pastures in eastern Butana for the Lahawin and Shukriya, but these reservations have now lapsed^189, suggesting that as long as there is no traditional basis for reserves,
continual government intervention is needed to maintain them.
Sacred groves have by and large followed the same track as grazing reserves. The nationalization of land and the breakdown of traditional control over rangelands has eroded the power of the local community to prevent access to the groves by outsiders. In addition, the groves have lost their religious and mystical significance due to modern education and conversion to Christianity or Islam. However, in some cases, central Governments have successfully revived the concept of sacred groves as a way to preserve forests, and in other cases, the local community is still able to protect the groves (see BOX 4.15).
BOX 4.15
The holy places of the Gabra of Ethiopia, and the rangelands around them, are now being used in their absence by Boran pastoralists and miners of salt and quartz. The Gabra periodically have to reclaim the sites for their age-set rituals, but the non-Gabra are challenging their rights to it. In addition, these holy places now straddle national boundaries, bringing the Gabra into conflict with different Governments. Many plants and wildlife in the holy areas are reportedly disappearing due to this increase in use^190. The sacred groves of Madagascar are not being respected as much as before because with modern education people no longer believe in their superstitious and mystical aspects. However, the Government of Madagascar has successfully introduced nature reserves by equating them with sacred groves (see Chapter 5).
Among the Kikuyu of Kenya, although the sacred groves no longer have the religious ceremonial importance that they had (due to the breakdown of the age-set system and religious conversion to Christianity or Islam), the Local Council in the 1930's was able to declare them protected. Recently, community sentiment has continued to protect the places as inviolable, even though they are not being used for ritual purposes anymore^191. The sacred groves or rain shrines of the Tonga of Zambia were still viable in 1951^192, but more recent information is not available.
4.3 Analysis
It is difficult to generalize about the viability of particular LKMS, because each group has been faced with different constraints and forces of change. In some cases, the entire system has broken down, while in other cases it survives well and is able to withstand pressure from the outside. In general, the system is no longer viable when the particular knowledge or technique on which it is based is no longer used, and when only a very few members of the community retain the knowledge. Where the traditional social system has broken down, all management techniques and systems concerned with communal action, such as grazing reserves, deferment schemes and improvement techniques, are no longer being coordinated among the members of the group. But groups also differ in their desire to reinstate the rules. For example the Somali and Berbers express their willingness to do so, while the Pokot think it would be a futile effort.
Another difficulty is that rapid social and environmental change is continually affecting the viability of traditional systems^193. What we conclude now about a particular group may not be valid a year from now. Therefore, how can development workers assess the viability of techniques they may be interested in using? Perhaps local institutions should be replaced only when they are shown to be ineffective and unadaptable^194. In other words, only by attempting to use or revive it will we know if a system is truly viable. A predictive model or framework may be able to guide the development worker, but the final decision must be taken on the basis of experience in each particular place. Similarly, whether the local institutions can handle the increased authority required for managing communal resources now-a days, must be answered by socio-political and environmental research in each area concerned^195.
Not all systems are desirable in the present context. Some traditional strategies, such as raids, slavery, and certain taboos run counter to modern development plans and attitudes. The ultimate choice of what is viable and desirable must be decided upon in a collaborative context between the local people and the development workers. The disappearance of certain traditional systems, whether desirable or not, may not be reversible. For example, the traditional equality of many pastoral groups has disappeared and been replaced by an ever increasing income gap that will not be easily righted, and may be even compounded by unsuspecting development plans.
Many recent development projects suggest that the main prerequisite to pastoral development is that formal rights to land and resources be given to any traditional sub-group (clan, lineage, etc.) or in their absence to newly formed associations, that are still viable and cohesive enough to control the resources within the land^196. The primary change agent may be the lack of formal resource tenure, but its effect is compounded by other factors, such as population increase, resource depletion, and modern education. Thus, simply reinstating tenurial arrangements may not be enough to revive traditional management practices. Other additional programmes are needed, such as effective and enforceable land use planning, rangeland rehabilitation, and especially innovative programmes such as training local herders to translate formal science and LKMS between the development workers and the people^197, training traditional scouts as "technical advisors" to the resource managing
committee^198, and in general providing incentives for keeping people on the range and raising their standard of living.
Endnotes
1. Stenning, 1959, p. 229.
2. Gillespie 1966, p. 19.
3. Benoit 1978, p. 35.
4. Jacobs 1980, p. 291.
5. Little 1987, p. 197.
6. Stenning 1959, p. 208.
7. Benoit 1978, p. 35.
8. Gallais 1975, p. 49.
9. Allan et al 1948, p. 117.
10. Stenning 1959, pp. 88, 90.
11. Jacobs 1980, p. 275; Little & Brokensha 1987, p. 197.
12. Campbell 1981, p. 45.
13. Stenning 1959, p. 222.
14. McDowell 1969, p. 273.
15. Jacobs 1980, p. 292.
16. Little & Brokensha 1987, pp. 194-196.
17. Homewood & Rodgers 1984, p. 435.
18. Homewood & Rodgers, 1984, p. 433.
19. Ware 1977, p. 187.
20. Benoit 1978, p. 35.
21. Abu-Lugod 1984, p. 7.
22. Bedoian 1978, p. 77.
23. Scott & Gormley 1980, p. 103.
24. FAO 1972, p. 8.
25. Devitt 1971, p. 53.
26. Baker 1975, p. 194.
27. Behnke 1988, p. 6.
28. Horowitz & Badi 1981, p. 19.
29. Bedrani 1987, p. 10.
30. Zumer-Linder 1976, p. 181.
31. Viitanen 1982, p. 59.
32. Thomson 1977, p. 60; Thiongane et al 1987.
33. Gillespie 1966, p. 18.
34. Gallais 1972, p. 363.
35. Benoit 1978, p. 46.
36. Campbell 1981, p. 41.
37. Little 1987, p. 200.
38. Barrow 1988, pp. 17-20.
39. Marchal 1983, p. 163.
40. FAO 1972, p. 7.
41. Ahmed n.d., p. 56.
42. Devitt 1971, p. 55; Hjort & Ostberg 1978, p. 17.
43. Zumer-Linder 1976, p. 184.
44. Blench 1985, p. 17.
45. Homewood & Rodgers, 1984, p. 436.
46. Campbell 1981, p. 52.
47. Schlee 1981, p. 55.
48. Devitt 1971, p. 53.
49. Bedrani 1987, p. 10.
50. Little & Brokensha 1987, p. 200.
51. Barrow 1988, p. 19.
52. Brokensha & Castro 1987, p. 23.
53. Adegboye et al 1978, p. 96.
54. Maliki et al 1984, p. 295.
55. Schlee 1984, p. 24.
56. Thomson 1977, p. 59.
57. Gallais 1975, p. 64.
58. Artz et al 1986.
59. Brokensha & Castro 1987, p. 17.
60. Little & Brokensha 1987, pp. 194-196.
61. Brokensha & Riley 1986, p. 78.
62. Bedrani 1987, p. 10.
63. Little 1987, p. 198.
64. Frantz 1981, p. 81.
65. Little & Brokensha 1987, pp. 194-196.
66. Graham 1988, p. 4.
67. Graham 1988, p. 7.
68. Barrow 1988, pp. 17-20.
69. Bernus 1981a, p. 26.
70. Morton 1988, p. 13.
71. Swift 1977, pp. 290-291.
72. Barral & Benoit 1977, p. 104; Hervouet 1977, p. 70.
73. Nowicki 1985, p. 277.
74. Helland 1978, p. 79.
75. Brokensha & Riley 1986, p. 80.
76. Brokensha & Riley 1980a, p. 120.
77. Marchal 1983, p. 561.
78. Warren & Meehan 1980, p. 326.
79. Fink 1980, p. 262.
80. Elmi, Ahmed & Abdi 1984, p. 193.
81. Lemordant 1972, p. 571.
82. Barrow 1988, p. 10.
83. Sandford 1984, p. 10.
84. Petit 1962, p. 462.
85. Homewood & Hurst 1986, p. 6.
86. Gallais 1972, p. 365.
87. Maliki et al 1984, p. 525.
88. Barral 1977, p. 73.
89. Bernus 1975b, p. 243.
90. Maliki et al 1984, pp. 512 & 525.
91. Winter 1984, p. 612.
92. Little 1987, p. 206.
93. Maliki et al 1984, p. 513.
94. Little 1987, p. 206.
95. Barral 1974, p. 131.
96. Swift 1988a.
97. Tubiana & Tubiana 1977, p. 82.
98. Dyson-Hudson & Dyson-Hudson 1982, p. 235.
99. Bourezg 1984, p. 217.
100. Ahmed n.d., p. 49.
101. Lusigi 1984, p. 344.
102. Ahmed 1978, p. 12.
103. Artz et al 1986.
104. Hjort & Ostberg 1978, p. 30.
105. Gulbrandsen 1980 and Hitchcock 1980 cited in Devitt 1982, pp. 18-19.
106. Kjenstad 1988.
107. Adegboye 1978, p. 61.
108. Bredemeier 1978, p. 90.
109. Hjort 1976c, p. 167.
110. Ostberg 1988, p. 58.
111. Odell 1982, pp. 8-9.
112. Adegboye 1978, p. 62.
113. Ware 1977, p. 188.
114. Artz et al 1986.
115. Swift 1977, p. 284.
116. Benoit 1979, p. 129.
117. Helland 1978, p. 81; Wilson 1986, pp. 22-28.
118. Benoit 1979, p. 160.
119. Talbot 1961, p. 305.
120. Schlee 1981, p. 55.
121. Gallais 1975, p. 88.
122. Little 1987, p. 204.
123. Marchal 1983, pp. 171-174.
124. Horowitz & Badi 1981, p. 20.
125. Helland 1982, p. 255.
126. Ostberg 1987, pp. 15 & 43.
127. Toulmin 1983, p. 13.
128. Putman 1984, p. 170.
129. Boutrais 1974, p. 163.
130. Tubiana & Tubiana 1977, p. 28.
131. Marie 1977, p. 123.
132. Brokensha & Riley 1988, p. 25.
133. Riesman 1984, p. 172; Scott 1984, p. 56.
134. Jacobs 1980, p. 289.
135. Winter 1984, p. 614.
136. Cassanelli 1984, p. 486.
137. Lusigi 1984, p. 344.
138. Goody 1956, p. 54.
139. Hjort & Ostberg 1978, p. 29.
140. Hjort 1976b, p. 74.
141. Fadal 1984, p. 76.
142. Sweet 1965b, p. 1148.
143. Scott & Gormley 1980, p. 101.
144. Riesman 1984, p. 183.
145. Wilson 1951, p. 286.
146. Baker 1975, p. 199.
147. McDermott & Ngor 1983, p. 11.
148. Conant n.d., p. 117.
149. Devitt 1982, p. 19.
150. Peters 1984, p. 33.
151. Bernus 1981a, p. 25.
152. Monod 1975, p. 29.
153. Hiernaux & Diarra 1984, p. 201.
154. Little & Brokensha 1987, p. 201.
155. Benoit 1979, p. 59.
156. Artz 1984, p. 13.
157. Lewis 1961, p. 51.
158. Little 1984, p. 12.
159. Artz et al 1986.
160. Artz et al 1986.
161. Barrow 1988, p. 20.
162. Almagor 1978 and Devitt 1981 cited in Devitt 1982.
163. Noronha & Lethem 1983, p. 3.
164. Wilson et al 1984, pp. 243-244.
165. Tubiana & Tubiana 1977, p. 94.
166. Jacobs 1980, p. 285.
167. Abu-Lughod 1984, p. 9.
168. Little & Brokensha 1987, p. 204.
169. Jacobs 1980, p. 285.
170. Spencer 1965, p. 278.
171. Behnke 1985, pp. 15-18.
172. Behnke 1988, p. 24.
173. Wilson et al. 1984, p. 249.
174. Ahmed 1978, p. 12.
175. Bernus 1974, p. 123.
176. Lewis 1961, p. 35.
177. Devitt 1982, p. 17; Odell 1982, p. 5.
178. Schneider 1953 cited in Ostberg 1988, pp. 62-64.
179. Galle 1986 cited in Ostberg 1988, pp. 62-64.
180. Ostberg 1988, pp. 62-64.
181. Ostberg 1988, pp. 64-65.
182. Sandford 1984, p. 10.
183. Artz et al 1986.
184. Lewis 1961, p. 51.
185. Little 1984, p. 206.
186. Coldham 1978, p. 95.
187. Little & Brokensha 1987, p. 199.
188. Western 1982, p. 205.
189. Morton 1988, p. 6.
190. Schlee 1987, pp. 3-12.
191. Brokensha & Castro 1987, pp. 20-21.
192. Colson 1951, p. 160.
193. Richards 1980, p. 182.
194. Little 1984, p. 206.
195. Odell 1982, p. 7.
196. Bernus 1981; Ostberg 1988, p. 65.
197. Stenning 1959, p. 245.
198. Swift & Maliki 1984, p. 723.
<section>6</section>
5. PAST EXPERIENCE WITH LKMS AND DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMMES
5.1 Management associations and committees
5.2 Grazing reserves and land tenure changes
5.3 Other applications
Endnotes
This Chapter presents a short list of projects and programmes that have tried to incorporate LKMS into the development process. Some of the projects were initiated by NGO's or the local people themselves, but the majority were assisted in one way or another by national Governments and International Donor Agencies. The examples all deal directly or indirectly with the management of natural resources, but not all come from Africa. There are examples of resource management associations and committees, of establishing grazing reserves and other land tenure changes, and a miscellany of activities ranging from restocking to vaccination campaigns. They are all intended as concrete illustrations of the potentials and pitfalls of incorporating LKMS into the development process.
5.1 Management associations and committees
5.1.1 Fulani clubs in Niger
5.1.2 Fulani Livestock Association in Nigeria
5.1.3 Bishnois movement in India
5.1.4 The Kgotla as a forum for modern land management in Botswana
5.1.5 Hima grazing society in Uganda
5.1.6 Fulani committee for managing a borehole in Senegal
5.1.7 Afar grazier associations of Ethiopia
One of the more difficult aspects of development has been the creation of local institutional structures to manage natural resources. The examples that follow show how these institutional structures can successfully be based on the local social organization and/or existing local institutions.
5.1.1 Fulani clubs in Niger
On the left bank of the Niger River (south of a line between Tillabery and Filingue, Niger), the transhumant and semi-settled Fulani have created voluntary clubs called "laawol fulbe", meaning "the way of Fulani wisdom". The clubs, created in the late 1970's and early 1980's, are intended to raise the standard of living of the Fulani by re-establishing the traditional communal-aid system. For example, they enforce such traditional obligations as keeping an eye out for each others' livestock, cooperating and exchanging labour for herding, and lending and borrowing livestock on the traditional "habbanae" basis^1.
5.1.2 Fulani Livestock Association in Nigeria
In response to decreasing grazing lands (due to crop expansion), the Fulani of Nigeria organized the "Miyetti Allah Association" in 1970. It was initially an Islamic organization aimed at facilitating access to pastures for its members. After ten years of existence, it was finally recognized by the Federal Government and six northern State Governments. A meeting was held at the Ahmadu Bello University, Zaria, in 1980 between the Association and a Special Assistant to the President where the Association had a chance to present its case and to receive backing from the Government. In response to Government concerns about its religious undertones, the Association also changed its name to "National Livestock Rearers Association"².
5.1.3 Bishnois movement in India
The Bishnois ("twenty-niner") pastoralists of India follow the visions of a young man in the late 15th century, who predicted total environmental collapse unless people restrained and controlled their use of natural resources. Among his 29 principles, most of which deal with hygiene, diet and social relations, are three principles dealing with the environment: 1) Bishnois must love all forms of life, 2) they must protect beneficial animals, and 3) they must not cut living trees. The Bishnois, especially women, have achieved fame by repeatedly hugging trees to protect them from cutters. The first time women hugged trees was in 1730, when the Maharajah Ajit Singh was building a palace and needed wood to fire his brick-kiln. It was only after 363 women were cut down along with the trees that the King relented and granted the Bishnois total immunity and freedom to use and manage their natural resources. The Bishnois are now active in nature conservation on a national scale. They
have set up the "All India Bishnois Jeev Raksha (Life Protection) Committee", and give awards to people particularly active in nature conservation³.
5.1.4 The Kgotla as a forum for modern land management in Botswana
The Kgotla, or traditional formal communal meetings, of Botswana are still viable and are regularly convened. In 1979 a Presidential Commission, chaired by the Vice President of Botswana, observed the continuing viability of the Kgotla, and called for a restoration of the traditional leaders and institutions. A Communal Area Land Use Planning and Development Programme for western Botswana (starting in 1979), defined the Kgotla as the forum for discussion and decision-making for all land management programmes, including grazing management systems and regulations, and established it as a consultative body for the project^4.
5.1.5 Hima grazing society in Uganda
The traditional clan structure of the Hima people of southwestern Uganda placed enough controls on individual members to prevent mismanagement of natural resources. In the 1970's, a project in the Ankole District of southwestern Uganda was able to form Grazing Societies based on this clan structure, and helped to prevent resource degradation^5. However, the present fate of this project is unknown.
5.1.6 Fulani committee for managing a borehole in Senegal
The Tatki borehole in northern Senegal was created and managed by the parastatal Société d'Outillage Mécanique et Hydraulique of Louga. Since November 1985 the Government has tried to hand over the borehole to a local management committee. However, they chose the committee members from a minority ("wodaabe") rather than a majority ("bisnabe") group, with the result that this Government sanctioned committee has failed to establish and enforce a management plan for the borehole. At the same time, the bisnabe have created their own committee alongside the Government one, and are more effective at collecting dues for fuel from individual users. However, the bisnabe committee lacks the necessary backstopping from the Government, and has been unsuccessful in maintaining the borehole^6.
5.1.7 Afar grazier associations of Ethiopia
The pastoral Afar of northeast Ethiopia and Djibouti have traditional grazier associations based on clan membership. The associations have a general assembly, an association committee, elders of each community that mediate between the association and an individual, and a traditional association chief. The associations have distinct pasture boundaries. Recently, the Government of Ethiopia has incorporated these associations as local administrative units. The association committee is the main liaison between the association and the government, whose members are elected for two years. All major decisions, such as range improvement plans, are first passed by the Government to the Committee who then will decide on their merits and pass them on to the general assembly for approval. By 1986 when a study of these associations was done, it appeared that the Government had successfully adapted a traditional institution to modern needs^7.
5.2 Grazing reserves and land tenure changes
5.2.1 Legalizing traditional grazing boundaries in the Sudan
5.2.2 Reviving grazing reserves in Somalia
5.2.3 Reviving grazing reserves in Zambia in 1940's
5.2.4 Reviving sacred groves in Madagascar
5.2.5 Hema grazing reserves in the Middle East and North Africa
The experience with reviving traditional grazing reserves has been mixed. In some cases they have been successfully planned and implemented. In other cases they have started well but later been overtaken by political changes or droughts. In all cases, the examples show that the chances of success are greater if these reserves have a traditional basis, are accompanied by appropriate legislature, and are given enough time to become established.
5.2.1 Legalizing traditional grazing boundaries in the Sudan
As part of its policy of restructuring the local political system, the Anglo-Egyptian Condominium (British Colonial Administration) in Sudan established "nazirates" or chieftainships in northern Sudan, and assigned them to land areas that usually followed the traditional grazing boundaries. Thus they effectively legalized the traditional land tenure system. However, after Independence, the Sudanese military Government in 1969 abolished these nazirates, and attempted to introduce a modern land tenure system aimed at replacing the traditional system^8. Unfortunately this new system resulted in greater confusion and conflicts over pasture rights among the pastoralists.
5.2.2 Reviving grazing reserves in Somalia
Following a failed attempt by the British Administration in Somalia to revive traditional grazing controls and reserves, some projects in the late 1960's were more successful at creating grazing associations. However, after a good start, the associations were overtaken by the 1974 drought which completely disrupted all forms of grazing control^9. Since the herders continue to show their willingness to abide by grazing rules, there still is a potential for reviving grazing controls and reserves, but any new attempt should allocate enough time for the associations to "mature", and that contingency plans should be in place in case of droughts and other disasters.
5.2.3 Reviving grazing reserves in Zambia in 1940's
The Tonga of southern Zambia had a traditional system of grazing reserves, called "machelelo a ngombe", where certain areas were reserved for grazing in order to protect them from crop expansion. These areas included seasonally flooded grassland, slopes of escarpment hills above farmland, and thorn grassland. However, the system broke down in the 1930's as a result of population increase and uncontrolled crop expansion. In the 1940's the Agriculture Department of the Native Authority based its land use plans on these traditional reserves, and helped to revive them^10. However, the present fate of the reserves is unknown.
5.2.4 Reviving sacred groves in Madagascar
Traditional sacred groves in Madagascar were established on the graves of ancestors and sites of ritual importance. The resources in the groves were protected by the local people against all forms of use. However, with a decreasing belief in the traditional religion, many groves were no longer being protected. The Government has successfully established new nature reserves, sometimes on the site of the old groves, by couching them in the same terms as the sacred groves (asking the people to "protect the memories of the past") accompanied by education and training on the ecological reasons for nature reserves^11.
5.2.5 Hema grazing reserves in the Middle East and North Africa
The "hema" (plural "ahmia") is probably the world's oldest effective range conservation programme. There are five types of ahmia reserves: 1) reserves were all types of grazing are prohibited, but hay can be collected at specified times and places, and by a specified number of needy people, 2) reserves were grazing and/or cutting are allowed, but only in specified seasons, such as the Elazahra and Hameed ahmia near Belgurashi in Saudi Arabia, 3) reserves were grazing is allowed all year round, but the number and type of livestock are controlled, such as most of the ahmia around Taif in Saudi Arabia, 4) reserves for beekeeping where grazing is allowed only after flowering, and 5) reserves where certain trees are protected, such as the Oneiza hema in the Najd Plateau where Haloxylon persicum is protected to help stabilize the dunes.
The ahmia date before the advent of Islam, but the Prophet Mohammed was instrumental in persuading his followers to maintain them. Ahmia, or similar systems, can be found in Syria, Saudi Arabia, Kurdistan, the border of Syria and Lebanon, and Tunisia. However, political and legislative changes in this century have contributed to a breakdown of the systems. For example, in Saudi Arabia, a 1953 Royal decree that was aimed at breaking the power of local emirs, was misunderstood by the herders and actually resulted in a breakdown of the ahmia and other range controls. In Syria, the Government has tried to revive them by creating project-assisted "Hema cooperatives". Eight coops were established in 1968-1972, and 22 were in operation by 1978. The Government has signaled the importance it attaches to the programme by passing supporting land tenure legislation (such as an Act in 1973 that prohibits ploughing and cultivating of rangelands within the Syrian steppe), and setting up
research/development centers in each hema for developing appropriate range management techniques^12.
5.3 Other applications
5.3.1 Restocking drought-hit Wodaabe Fulani of Niger
5.3.2 Veterinary programme in Mali
5.3.3 Using pastoralists as project researchers in Niger
The following examples show how particular elements of the traditional social system and technical know-how can be incorporated into development activities.
5.3.1 Restocking drought-hit Wodaabe Fulani of Niger
The Oxfam-Abala project in 1974 tried to help the Wodaabe who had lost considerable numbers of livestock during the drought to restock their herds. The project based its programme on the traditional system of lending cows, called "habbanae". According to this system, the borrower of the cow could retain her for three carvings, after which he would have to return the cow. The project slightly modified the traditional system by: 1) allowing women to borrow cows, 2) accepting equivalent cash returns for the loans, and 3) empowering an elder or other member of the community to record loans and repayments, thus in effect relying on traditional social sanctions against unrepaid loans^13. The project has been considered a success since most of the loans have been repaid. Between 1974 and 1983, about 350 families were given loans. By 1982-83, 80% of the cows had been given back to the project, which when sold, increased the original capital of the project by over 80%^14.
5.3.2 Veterinary programme in Mali
The Office of Animal Husbandry and the OMBEVI (Malian Office of Livestock and Meat) depend on the technical knowledge of the herders to implement their programmes. For example, their vaccination programme was easily accepted by the herders because it was explained in terms of the traditional vaccination technique^15.
5.3.3 Using pastoralists as project researchers in Niger
The Niger Range and Livestock Project in the early 1980's could not find enough trained Nigeriens to accompany the pastoral camps for a survey of labour allocation and household budgets. Thus the project decided to train and pay local herders for the job. The problem of illiteracy was solved by choosing herders who knew "tifinagh" (the phonetic Twareg script). These herders would then use it to write Fulfulde, and read it back to a supervisor every two weeks. Additional training included how to read a watch for the labour allocation study, and how to write numbers. Although the survey results were satisfactory, there were some problems related to the social relationship between the surveyor and the surveyed, which were rectified by the supervisor in the course of the study. For example, initially children's work was not recorded well, women were neglected, and some surveyors were constrained by social prohibitions, such as not being allowed into the house of a new wife^16.
Less problems might be encountered if the herders are used as forest and range researchers.
Endnotes
1. Riesman 1984, p. 186.
2. Ezeomah 1985, p. 9.
3. Sankhala & Jackson 1985, pp. 207-209.
4. Odell 1982, pp. 9-12.
5. Monod 1975, p. 79.
6. Diop 1987, p. 44.
7. Gebre Mariam, A. 1986, cited in Swift 1988b, pp. 15-16.
8. Adams 1982, pp. 268 & 278.
9. Swift 1977, pp. 289 & 299.
10. Allan et al 1948, pp. 115-116.
11. Andriamampianina 1985, p. 86.
12. Draz 1974; Draz 1978; and Draz 1985.
13. Scott & Gormley 1980, p. 107.
14. IFAD 1987, p. 6.
15. Woillet 1979, p. 208.
16. Maliki et al 1984, pp. 333-339.
<section>7</section>
6. POLICY IMPLICATIONS FOR SOCIAL FORESTRY DEVELOPMENT IN ARID AND SEMI-ARID LANDS OF AFRICA
6.1 Methodology for the analysis of LKMS
6.2 Potential applications
6.3 Prerequisites
6.4 Recommended follow-up activities
Endnotes
The preceding chapters have shown how LKMS was instrumental in the management of natural resources by local people, and how these techniques and systems have, or have not, changed in the past decades. Furthermore, their value for designing and implementing development assistance has been demonstrated through the experiences of several recent and not so recent projects. This chapter addresses the question of what needs to be done to effectively incorporate LKMS into the development process.
Consideration is first given to developing a methodology for collecting and analyzing information on LKMS, followed by a look at some potential applications of LKMS in the realm of social forestry and natural resource management. A third section discusses some of the prerequisites: what needs to be done on a policy and institution-building level before LKMS can effectively be incorporated? And finally, certain gaps in our knowledge of both the content and the value of LKMS are highlighted.
6.1 Methodology for the analysis of LKMS
A main reason why LKMS is seen as a means to further popular participation in development activities is that in every step of the way - collection of data, analysis of its significance, incorporation of data into technical and managerial solutions, implementation of activities, etc. - the involvement of the local people is a necessary factor.
Some experiences in the past show how it is possible to be willing to incorporate LKMS into the development process, but still fail due to faulty data collection. For example, in 1921 the District Commissioner of northeastern Uganda wanted to draw county lines according to traditional territorial boundaries. However, by conducting his survey in the wet season, a lot of dry season pastures were declared "unoccupied" and given to tribes who had no traditional rights in the area. This led to increasing hostility in the area, and contributed to the destruction of traditional organization^1.
Data collection on the LKMS of natural resource management cannot be concerned solely with physical matters, but must also look at the socio-economic and institutional aspects. The classic type of socio-economic survey, based on questionnaires administered to a random number of people, is not sufficient by itself and cannot show the logic behind production systems. An integrated survey method must find the specific aspects and constraints facing the decision-maker, and determine which information is actually used to make the decision, and which information is unused but may nevertheless be given to interviewer. Such a survey method requires active participation by the local people and daily observation of the production routine by the researcher².
Data collection on the physical aspects must go beyond land use, botanical, pedological, and other classical surveys, to how the people perceive their environment, and which aspects of the physical resources are filtered through into their decision-making process. For example, many ethnotaxonomies and other cognitive studies of ethnoecology tend to be too exhaustive; one needs to always ask what is the value of this information to the local people's actual behavior and strategies - is the information reflecting an ideal or a norm?³ Environmental perception surveys should consider, among other things, the perceived value of resources for their livestock and other production activities^4, the choice of indicators for predicting environmental dynamics, their knowledge of the spatial and temporal variability of resources (and their standard deviations), etc. Environmental cognition surveys, including cognitive maps, are useful for obtaining these types of information, since they
show how the people characterize their landscape, and which of its parts they consider important or prominent. Some researchers, mostly in the late 1960's, have already studied spatial cognition in the African context^5. The method, as carried out among the Maasai^6, obligates the researcher to accompany the herder into the field.
Other types of surveys on LKMS are aimed at collecting data on decision making processes and logic, fundamental paradigms of knowledge (e.g. how the physical world is ordered and related to the social world), means of coping with risk and uncertainty, manual and mental skills, etc.^7.
The data collection methodology should be an iterative process that starts with a pilot survey to test the survey method, observes activities related to the survey in order to verify the survey method, modifies the survey method, and finally does the full survey. Four types of survey methods may need to be carried out for the same project: 1) "specification" surveys, where the highest level of detail is needed on some aspects; usually the most knowledgeable persons are interviewed; 2) "formalization" surveys, where one makes sure that all knowledge is covered; usually one will need to contact a wider range of people, and to randomize the sample; 3) "generalization" surveys, where non-specialized information is needed to make sure that data represents a wider population; and 4) "verification" surveys, where the data is re-collected or compared with existing information, etc.^8 (see BOX 6.1).
BOX 6.1
C.G. Knight (1980)^9 has provided a concise listing of survey methods used in the study of LKMS. Specification surveys include informal discussions with the most knowledgeable person(s), participant observations, informal/semi-formal interviews, questionnaires, and teacher-pupil relations where the informant is the teacher.
Formalization surveys include paired comparison (e.g. between ideal and norm, or between traditional and modern techniques, and then asking people to explain the differences^10), tree drawing (flow-charts with yes/no dichotomies)^11, slip sorting (sorting diagrams of plants, soils or other resources according to what they have in common), eliciting dictionary definitions, triad tests, gaming approaches, and group discussions. Triad tests are used to show and explain differences and similarities between objects, such as plant species, soil types, etc. These tests can become too exhausting if there are too many things to compare, therefore they are often combined with other methods^12. For example, triad tests have been used to compare the taxonomy and classification of body parts among Maasai, Kikuyu and Americans, as a way to facilitate cross-cultural communication^13. The gaming approach (i.e. "lets imagine" conversations) are useful in stimulating discussion on some
central theme (e.g. droughts, bush fires, etc.). They are valuable because the respondents use their own opinions and logic rather than the interviewer's^14. Group discussions are especially useful in the pastoral context. They increase our understanding of the dynamics of communal decision making, since it is often arrived at by a consensus within the group^15.
Generalization surveys use formal questionnaires, ranking tests, and sentence completion exercises. Verification surveys usually involve a return to the same population to observe and compare behavior at a later date, to translate and re-translate the information, to extrapolate from the data to other situations and ask again (gaming approach), and to actually use the data on a trial run (e.g. technical details of the production routine are actually tried out in the field).
We also need to go beyond the classical approach of surveying only the local people, to surveying both them and the extension agents and scientists with the same or similar techniques. This approach would help to identify differences in perception, and to stimulate discussion between the two sides^16.
Apart from an appropriate methodology for collecting information on LKMS, we also need to develop a framework for analysis that highlights local ideas that are obstacles to those change that are necessary, and identifies local ideas that are realistic appraisals of, and realistic solutions to environmental problems^17. Because of the high heterogeneity in LKMS (both within and between groups), and the fact that the social and physical environment is rapidly changing, the final test of the value of a local technique or system for development will only be when it is actually used on a trial basis in a pilot project. For example, the viability of a local technique or system, and its value for development, can be evaluated through a process whereby the LKMS and formal scientific outlooks and objectives are compared and combined through discussions between the local people and extension agents, during or after the data collection stage. In addition, these discussions should help
identify whether a particular LKMS is still remembered and in use, by all or only a few people.
6.2 Potential applications
Only relatively few projects and programs have incorporated LKMS into their designs - some of these have been briefly described in the previous chapter. However, many field researchers and workers have proposed and recommended a diverse portfolio of potential applications for LKMS. These can be grouped under several project-types.
The first, and perhaps the most important type is the use of local knowledge and social structures in development planning. This can either be done through discussions with the "target" people during the project formulation stage, or through regional, national and even international workshops. In the case of the former, the short period allotted to project formulation by the donors must be extended to a flexible period that allows the local people to fit in the time required for discussions and decision-making with their production and social schedule.
Workshops have been used recently to help local people identify their development constraints and to communicate these to government and donor agencies. For example, a recent regional NGO workshop, entitled "Survival in the Drylands" held in Mali, was aimed at strengthening cooperation between NGOs in the Sahel and drawing up an action plan to combat land degradation and to assess the impact of local and national dryland policies^18. Workshops have also been organized for local people without the existence of an umbrella NGO. For example, a UNEP workshop held in May 1986 brought together pastoralists from four different tribes in Kenya for discussions across ethnic lines as well as across local/scientific lines. A follow-up workshop and field visit was later organized, this time including two additional ethnic groups^19.
A second type of applied LKMS is aimed at the education system. For example, inclusion of the history of the tribe into formal history lessons would help the student establish his people's role and relationships to the outside world. In addition, local concepts of measurement and mathematics (see section 2.1.2.8) can be used to teach modern math^20.
Many authors have proposed the use of local social structures (see section 2.2.2) as the basis for new organizational institutions. In the case of pastoral associations (herders' associations, group ranches, etc.), most researchers suggest that the relevant socio-political level should be the herding unit rather than higher (larger) associations^21, because the herding unit is usually a tighter cooperating unit, can be identified more precisely with a given land area, and is easier to manage because of its smaller size. However, the problem of higher fluidity remains: the members of a herding unit do not necessarily remain the same from year to year, whereas membership in higher social levels, such as a clan or tribe, is more constant.
Many technical details of LKMS appear to be still viable and can be used to develop locally appropriate solutions to environmental problems. For example, the knowledge of trees and browse, and the traditional protection of spontaneously regenerated seedlings (see section 2.2.3) can be used in reforestation projects, such as those proposed for the Pokot and Turkana^22. The traditional range management system, such as rotation schedules and deferment periods (see section 2.2.2), can be modified with Western range techniques to develop a system more appropriate to current rangeland shortages and droughts. In addition, analysis of the traditional range system - for example, where it lies on the continuum between year-round, continuous grazing and rotation grazing - can direct the design of new systems and shorten the period needed for research and trials. The recruitment of herders as primary level veterinarians in various projects has also shown one venue for the use of local
veterinary knowledge^23.
Another area where LKMS can be useful is in environmental monitoring programs. One aim of most of these programs is to identify when and how the local people have to change their resource exploitation strategies to avoid or minimize environmental damage. Using local methods of monitoring (see section 2.2.2.2), alongside Western ones, would facilitate the communication of the results with the people, and help convince them of the need for change. In addition, local people could assist researchers in conducting the monitoring exercise. Local observers could record vegetation changes as part of an early warning systems for environmental degradation, locusts and pests, and farmers could report crop yields for census and monitor the results of on-farm experiments^24. Herders could report on disease epidemics, help police the boundaries of group ranches against outsiders, and in general help ensure compliance with range management plans and controls. Although local observers need
to be backstopped by extension agents, they could allow a saving on the project's manpower and logistical support especially in remote pastoral areas.
The local knowledge of environmental dynamics (see section 2.1.2), in conjunction with that of formal science, can be used as short cuts for resource inventories, such as the distribution of soil and vegetation types^25. Local concepts of measurement can be used by local observers to conduct some forms of research for formal scientists, especially if the standard deviation of traditional units can be ascertained beforehand. Areas that are still being managed well by the traditional system, could be delimited as "research stations" in order to recognize the value of traditional knowledge, and prevent its untimely demise^26. These research stations can then be used to experiment with modifying and improving the traditional system and extrapolating the lessons to other areas.
6.3 Prerequisites
Paying lip service to the need to incorporate LKMS into development designs can be just as bad as paying lip service to popular participation. Too many projects have tacked on a "research on LKMS" phase as an after thought, resulting in volumes of interesting but too exhaustive and inappropriate research reports, which are then filed and not used by project designers and implementors. LKMS needs to be incorporated effectively into the development process, but to do so would require certain preliminary changes in the process.
For example, project planning should be accompanied with a flexible timetable for discussions with local people, pre-formulation action research designed to identify promising and viable LKMS, and a joint (local and outsider) project formulation process.
Another problem is that Western experts and Western-trained Africans are trained not to see LKMS as potentially useful. The general attitude is that formal science is superior to LKMS, thus there is very little political will to incorporate LKMS into the development process^27. Many government officials, "accustomed to a paternalistic one-way mode of communication, become impatient at the prospect" of using popular participation and LKMS^28. Extensive discussions at the level of policy-makers (government officials and donor representatives) and national and international scientists will need to highlight previous successes with LKMS. At the level of extension agents, similar discussions need to be accompanied with a change in extension training programs, such as incorporating LKMS subjects into term papers, theses, etc., and training on an appropriate methodology for data collection^29. The local people too will need to change their attitude, especially those groups who have
seen too many failed projects and have come to expect only top-down interaction with governments and donor agencies.
Certain government policies that affect arid lands and pastoralists in particular also need to be changed. The most notable are land tenure laws, the absence of land use planning and enforcement, economic incentives that pull young herders off the range, urban-oriented education systems, etc. In addition, strict environmental impact studies should be required of all projects by the Governments. These studies should make a point of going beyond physical aspects to impacts on the social and production systems, and in particular, their underlying LKMS^30.
6.4 Recommended follow-up activities
Apart from elucidating the many different types of LKMS that may be of eventual use to the development process, this paper has also served to point out some of the gaps in our understanding of the LKMS of natural resource management in arid and semi-arid Africa. Several follow-up actions can be suggested.
Certain topics within LKMS seem to be more neglected than others. For example, the descriptive knowledge of how and when natural resources are harvested, stored and processed is less well known than what the resources are used for. Furthermore, our understanding of how climatic changes and other ecological dynamics are predicted is far less than how the different resources are labelled and classified. In other words, more research is needed to highlight those aspects of LKMS directly useful for the management of natural resources.
Daily management practices, as a whole, also tend to be less well known than descriptive knowledge and organizational structures. Studies of range management practices need to go beyond simple descriptions of seasonal movements, to details on the frequency of movements, duration of sojourns, and other rotational practices. Traditional range improvement techniques also need to be identified in order to find a local base on which to build new improvement and revegetation techniques. The internal organization of herders and herding units is another neglected topic, without which it would be difficult if not impossible to revive traditional techniques or to introduce new ones. In particular, the role of women herders needs to be clarified.
Our knowledge of tree and shrub management among pastoralists is much weaker than among farmers in more humid areas. More details are needed on how they harvest browse, tannin and other products (cutting techniques, frequency of cuts and duration of rest, quantities harvested, etc.), and how they protect and regenerate trees and shrubs.
We are gradually becoming aware of the tremendous diversity in land and resource tenure types across Africa. There are many different types of communal resource tenure, including reserved areas and sacred groves, each of which have different implications for resource management. To illustrate, take the case of the Turkana in Kenya. It was only after about 20 years of detailed research, that the existence of private, household-owned trees and sections of riverbeds came to light. The fault was not in the research per se, but the fact that the earlier work had been done almost exclusively among those Turkana living in more humid areas in the south, while the private tree tenure was found among the northern Turkana living in more arid areas^31. Thus, although quite a bit may appear to have been done on resource tenure so far, more studies need to be commissioned to unearth inter-tribal and intra-tribal variations.
Pure, exhaustive research on LKMS may be of academic interest, but would be a waste of development finances. As far as possible action research, ie. the identification of potentially useful LKMS and, when appropriate, the incorporation of the LKMS into trials and experiments, should be the preferred type of research. A compendium of potentially useful LKMS should be accompanied by an evaluation of their value for development. To do so would require a framework or guidelines for analyzing their viability and how they could be modified or revived. While the development of such a framework will be facilitated as more and more projects experiment with LKMS, a workshop bringing together development workers involved with LKMS will help to pave the way for it.
A few case studies can be suggested. Certain groups and countries of arid and semi-arid Africa appear to be under-represented in the English and French literature. More work needs to be focused on them, either in the form of field research, or the translation of literature written in other languages. Some examples are Angola and early Italian work done in Somalia, Ethiopia and Libya. Other groups and countries have particularly interesting forms of LKMS that have direct impact on development, or may be useful for extrapolation to other neighbouring groups. A few examples are, the intricate water management structure of the Borana of southern Ethiopia, the role of women herders among the Somali, the emergence of private range enclosures in Sudan and Somalia, the rotational range use of the Wodaabe Fulani, the current viability of the range controls devised by the Macina Fulani, differences in herding style between the Twareg and the Fulani, the range tenure arrangements of
the Tonga of Zambia, and the Kgotla meetings of the people of Botswana. Finally, particular attention can be paid to those groups that have traditional range reserves and sacred groves, such as in Zambia, Kenya, Botswana, Mali, Burkina Faso and Morocco.
Endnotes
1. Baker 1975, p. 192.
2. Richards 1980, p. 185; Gladwin 1980, pp. 9-11; Warren & Meehan 1980, p. 327.
3. Johnson 1980, p. 49.
4. Stiles & Kassam 1986, p. 14.
5. Knight 1980, p. 222.
6. Western & Dunne 1979, p. 95.
7. Knight 1980, p. 221.
8. Knight 1980, p. 226.
9. Knight 1980, p. 226.
10. Johnson 1980, p. 63.
11. Gladwin 1980, p. 25.
12. Richards 1980, p. 189.
13. Burton and Kirk 1980, pp. 269-302.
14. Richards 1980, p. 186.
15. McDermott & Ngor 1983, p. 5.
16. Knight 1974a, p. 62; Richards 1980, p. 190.
17. Richards 1975, p. 109.
18. "Survival in the Drylands: Regional NGO Workshop", Segou, Mali, September 14-17 1988, organized by International Institute for Environment and Development (IIED), London and UNEP.
19. UNEP 1986a, and UNEP 1986b.
20. Fink 1980, p. 261.
21. Bourgeot 1981, p. 178; Barrow 1988, p. 15.
22. Barrow 1988, p. 21.
23. McCorkle 1986, p. 137.
24. Warren & Meehan 1980, p. 327; Howes 1980, p. 339; Richards 1980, p. 193.
25. Aubert & Newsky 1949, p. 109; Howes 1980, p. 339.
26. Brownrigg 1985, p. 41.
27. Warren & Meehan 1980, p. 332; Howes 1980, p. 339; Brokensha et al 1980, p. 5.
28. Brokensha & Riley 1980b, p. 266.
29. Brokensha et al 1980, p. 7.
30. Brokensha & Riley 1980b, p. 268.
31. Dr. James Ellis, Natural Resources Ecology Laboratory, Colorado State University, 1989, pers. comm.
<section>8</section>
7. SUMMARY OF ISSUES AND CONCLUSIONS
7.1 Introduction
7.2 Descriptive knowledge
7.3 Management practices
7.4 Organization of management
7.5 Education
7.6 Conclusion
Local technical knowledge and systems are a fluid and dynamic package of elements that change and adapt to new circumstances, and form the backbone of management decisions taken by local people. Several basic questions have been dealt with in the preceding chapters. Did the LKMS work in the past? In the great majority of cases, it did. Has the LKMS survived and is it still viable? It has been abandoned in quite a few cases, but depending on the type of LKMS, it continues to be generally viable. Is it possible to incorporate the LKMS into the development process? Yes - In some cases it has been incorporated successfully, and the potential to do more remains high. Is it cost effective to incorporate LKMS into development projects? In most cases, yes.
This chapter brings out some of the salient issues that have led to the above conclusions. It summarizes the more important techniques and systems and considers the viability of each one. It concludes with some thoughts on how one can determine the viability of any LKMS, and what it would take to incorporate the LKMS into the development process.
7.1 Introduction
Contrary to previous assumptions and paradigms, African pastoralists are active managers of natural resources. They do not simply use, but also actively manipulate their livestock, rangelands and forests, to sustain an adequate level of production in the long term. Traditional techniques and systems were adapted both to ecological necessities as well as the sociopolitical needs of the people. Their primary objective is not necessarily conservation (sensu absolute preservation), but sustaining the long term productivity of their environment while fulfilling their social and biological needs.
In terms of their ecological impact, pastoral systems are on a continuum stretching from "very simple" (where mobility, low population, and high dispersion serve to minimize deleterious ecological impacts), to "highly complex" (where elaborate social controls are devised to coordinate the behavior of individual members). Most pastoral systems fall somewhere in between. In general, where land is abundant and labour scarce, pastoral systems are more efficient than farming or hunting systems. Pastoral systems are not isolated, but work in close cooperation with each other and non-pastoral systems.
But generalities can only go so far. There is a great amount of heterogeneity both inter- and intra-groups. Individual herders can vary in how they manage the natural resources and respect social controls, because of their differing skills, experience, needs, and personalities. Management techniques and systems also vary depending on the resource and the time they are used. Valuable resources and those frequently used tend to be more strictly managed than low quality or inaccessible resources.
In the past century, pastoralists have seen tremendous changes in their social and physical environment. Most of these changes are due to external factors, which were initiated in the Colonial era and have continued to this day.
In the Colonial period, modern veterinary care and the emancipation of slaves had beneficial results, but they invariably resulted in an increase of livestock. Sedentarization, economic suppression and quarantines of livestock resulted in concentration around water points and settlements, and a decrease in the customary sale of livestock. Policies that actively favored crop cultivation, especially for large scale commercial agriculture, led to crop expansion into rangelands and expropriation of high quality land, which further exacerbated the problem of overstocking. Although pacification and water development resulted in the opening of hitherto unused pastures, these were not enough to offset the general decreasing trend in range area.
In a few cases, there were deliberate attempts to destroy traditional attitudes and behavior. In most cases, taxation, political reform and land nationalization resulted in a gradual dismantling of the traditional political authority, which weakened the social cohesion necessary for maintaining traditional control over the use of rangelands.
These external influences did not abate with the advent of the post-colonial era. More efficient veterinary services continued to spread their benefits without regard to their impact on the environment. Indiscriminate water development did open up new pastures, but the lack of organizational structures to manage the water points led to over-concentration of livestock and settlement around the points. In some countries, subsidized supplemental feed allowed pastoralists to increase their herd sizes beyond what could normally be carried on the range. Crop expansion and cash cropping, due to both population increases and Government policies, ate away at the best rangelands, forcing the livestock onto less, and lower quality land. In some countries, the creation of National Parks and Reserves meant the expropriation of pastoral land. Again, the net effect was a reduction in range area and over-concentration of livestock.
The process of social and political disintegration continued, as Local Governments and military units were established, and as urban and commercial influences made their inroads into the pastoral economy. The results were lower labour availability on the range, weakening of the power of local leaders to enforce traditional range and forest controls, and a widening income gap among pastoralists.
These, and other factors were compounded by a series of relentless droughts, and eroded many, but not all, traditional techniques for managing arid and semi-arid lands.
7.2 Descriptive knowledge
The descriptive knowledge of the environment, such as typologies and nomenclature, give us a window into the way local people perceive and categorize their environment, how much control they think they have over the elements, how they predict environmental processes and future events, how they adjust their production system and cycle to environmental dynamics, and what their decisions are based upon.
The descriptive knowledge is based on many years of continual observation, monitoring and experimentation. It is composed of material that has accumulated in the memory of the members (cultural "traditions"), material that is modified through contact with outsiders, and material that is continuously and progressively learned through daily observations. Although lacking a regional/national outlook, it makes up by being rich on local details and historical trends.
Descriptive knowledge is primarily functional and utilitarian. It is forgotten if their is no use for the knowledge, and the degree of complexity of a piece of knowledge depends on how many uses are made of it. However, other factors, especially aesthetics and symbolism, are also determining factors.
Although some basic aspects are universally known, not every member of a group has, or is privileged to have, the same amount of descriptive knowledge. Knowledge specialization occurs because of divisions of labour, age and experience, individual skill, aptitude and interest, and specialization of certain tasks (such as ironmongers or healers). One must tap many people before the collective knowledge can be adequately covered. In the absence of written records, the descriptive knowledge resides in songs, proverbs, games, etc. - i.e. the "folk media". Sometimes the analysis of the folk media can provide a better clue to the LKMS than strict question and answer survey techniques. The folk media can also be an appropriate venue to pass on new knowledge.
Most of the descriptive knowledge still survives today, especially in the minds of the older generation. In some cases, it is eroding as the younger generation leave the home range for urban areas and other occupations. It is also eroding where new, imported materials replace the older ones, (e.g. rice replacing wild cereals, or watches replacing observations of the sun), and where the materials are used only occasionally or for ceremonies. In general, the descriptive knowledge can be revived if a member of the group still remembers it, and if a practical use (new or old) can be found for it.
7.3 Management practices
7.3.1 Herd management
7.3.2 Range management and social controls on grazing
7.3.3 Management of trees, shrubs and other resources
The daily management of natural resources is the domain of the individual herder, acting in concert with other herders in accordance with formal and informal traditional rules. The objectives of the herder/stockowner are not static nor single. They depend on his socio-economic circumstances, which can change during his lifetime.
7.3.1 Herd management
The herding unit, composed of the livestock of an individual or a group of households, is the basic management unit. It determines the dispersion and concentration of livestock on the land, and the nature of communal cooperation. Membership in a herding unit can change during a year, since individual households are usually free to enter and leave it as they wish. However, most people prefer to stay with the herding unit and the land area they know best. Thus, although the structure of the basic management unit is in theory and sometimes in praxis flexible, it usually has a fairly high degree of continuity and consistency. Whether the herding unit (rather than a higher communal unit) can be used as the focal contact point for development is best determined locally.
The technique of herd splitting is highly adapted to both ecological dynamics and nutritional requirements of the animals. The herder splits his diverse portfolio of livestock in many different ways so as to best take advantage of rangeland productivity and to decrease competition between his animals. It generally results in better range use and better dispersion of livestock. However, it requires more labour and skill.
In most cases men and boys are responsible for herding large ruminants, while children and women are responsible for herding small ruminants, fattening special animals, and milking all animals. In a few recorded cases, women have greater responsibility for herding than was previously thought. In general, the role of women in pastoral production has been neglected. This role may become more important as more men leave the range for urban attractions.
With decreasing labour on the range, people are finding shortcuts in their daily management. For example, they split the herd in fewer ways, do not disperse as much, and stay around the main settlement for longer periods, thus reducing their mobility and increasing concentration around settlements and water points. In general, these changes have increased the damage to natural resources.
With increasing income gap, droughts and degraded lands, more poor herders are seeking herding jobs with the rich (usually former transhumants who are now towndwellers), as a way to build up their own herds. Hired herders usually have to take shortcuts because not enough labour is hired for the unit. In addition they are usually from other groups and do not feel bound by local rules and controls. Thus they have a more negative impact on the range than normal.
7.3.2 Range management and social controls on grazing
Mobility is a well adapted strategy used in different degrees by pastoralists. It is adapted to the ecological necessities of a variable environment both in normal years and in times of drought. During droughts, mobility can increase (if there is enough land but low numbers of animals), or decrease (if not enough land). Some types of rangelands require more, and different types of, mobility than others, but in general, wherever mobility has decreased significantly compared to the traditional technique, land degradation has followed.
Mobility or transhumance patterns are not random, but have well defined routes and sojourn pastures. Although the timing of the movements may vary depending on ecological events, socio-economic needs, and political exigencies, the territories used remain fairly constant. On a global scale, pastoral production in arid and semi-arid lands requires large tracts of land which herders obtain through membership in a group, maintaining territorial rights of the groups, and establishing alliances with neighbours in case of need. With recent changes and increasing resource constraints, most sojourn pastures and routes have shifted or entirely changed, as tribal territorial boundaries become more confused. Although in many cases traditional rights to territories are recognized de facto, the fact that they are not recognized de jure has meant that people are taking advantage of the confusion, and the situation now resembles a free-for-all, open range scenario.
In the past, pastoral groups were able to adjust the number of animals to the carrying capacity of the land by sending surplus livestock to neighbouring territories and splitting and dispersing the herd further. Now, neighbours too are overcrowded, and the herds have been split to the highest degree possible given labour constraints. Even so, surplus livestock are not culled at a rate greater than normal because of short term uncertainty and economic subsistence needs.
Pastoral groups have many more different and intricate forms of pasture rotation and deferment than was previously thought. Rotations can be in the form of seasonal transhumance, frequency of movement, length of stay in the same pasture, rate of return to the same pasture, and drought deferments. Some rangelands are more heavily used than others, but still appear to be in good shape. With recent constraints, traditional rotation and deferment techniques are no longer being respected, or have been shortened. However, the type of traditional pasture rotation can give a good indication of the ecological requirements of the range (for the traditional stocking pressure), and help design new range management plans.
The herder has developed a precise and holistic system of monitoring the productivity and condition of rangelands. Since he continuously monitors the range and the performance of his livestock, he has no need to quantify the "carrying capacity" of the land, although he does recognize the concept. His environmental indicators can be used in monitoring programs and early warning systems.
Very few range improvement techniques have been recorded among pastoralists, perhaps because there has not been a need for improvements until now. Among the few techniques that they have are water development, shrub clearing with goats and selective lopping, and bush fires (to obtain fresh regrowth, and better biomass in the following year, to decrease shrub encroachment, to facilitate access by people and livestock and to destroy disease vectors). There is nothing to indicate a philosophy against range improvement, but new techniques that are proposed must be economically feasible.
In general, those range improvement and monitoring techniques that require communal labour and cooperation are no longer practiced, but those that are done by individual herders or households are still viable.
Cooperation among herding units is ensured through formal and informal rules of conduct. Scouts, headmen, councils of elders, and range supervisors form differing organizational structures charged with the execution of the rules. Cooperation at higher levels, such as clan, subtribal or inter-tribal, also exists in many cases, and is regulated by traditional Codes and agreements. "Passive" coordination, where herding units follow several informal principles of common sense, also serve to regulate daily use of resources. Both formal and informal rules act as checks on random individualism and a "tragedy of the commons".
In recent years, cooperation between herding units has generally declined, and many formal Codes are no longer respected. Communal meetings, the venue of cooperative decision making, still convene, and although they still retain their symbolic and judicial functions, they are gradually loosing their managerial functions, precisely because of the growing non-cooperation between herding units. In general, formal rules have been the first to disappear because they rely on social cohesion and the power of local leaders to enforce rules, both of which have been affected by various Government policies. Informal rules are still viable, but they are being modified to fit the requirements imposed by resource scarcity.
7.3.3 Management of trees, shrubs and other resources
Very little is known about how African pastoralists manage trees and shrubs. The general image is that pastoralists normally harvest these resources wrongly and do not regenerate or protect them. A few detailed studies, however, show otherwise. Many groups have precise harvesting rules (such as when and where to cut), protection of valuable species or grove of trees, and active planting of seedlings. Deliberate abuse or carelessness apparently occurred only outside one's territory. Pastoralists, especially fully transhumant ones, have higher demand for construction wood than fuelwood - the former usually being live wood, and the latter dead wood. But because of their mobility and dispersion, their collective impact on forest resources is low. As mobility has decreased in recent years, so has forest degradation increased. In addition, as competition has increased for diminishing resources, many of the traditional rules for protecting trees and shrubs have been dropped or
weakened.
African pastoral societies in general do not cultivate fodder because it is not economically viable: feeding a significant portion of one's herd requires more labour and time than is available. Thus on the whole, range forage is a better option even if it is nutritionally inferior. On the other hand, hay collection is widely practiced. In the majority of cases standing hay is cut for a small number of special animals (cows or fattening rams), and has low labour requirements and low impact on the range. In some cases there are private or communal enclosures of high quality rangeland for the purpose of hay collection. In recent years, there has been a sharp increase in the number of private hay reserves in Sudan, Somalia and Kenya. In most cases these reserves have been controversial since they are created from communal land.
The distribution and type of water points, and customary watering schedules are major determinants of range use. There is no evidence yet of formal rules on the minimum distance between man-made water points. However, most groups will try to spread the water points wide enough to cover several types of range vegetation. Many groups have techniques for de-silting natural ponds and purifying pond water, which can form the basis for teaching new methods. Water harvesting techniques are more common where there has been substantial Arab influence (such as North Africa, Sudan and Somalia). Although almost all groups have informal rules for using wells, a few groups have formal rules and organizational structures for managing communal wells - i.e. using, maintaining and even closing wells. Traditional management of water points is generally still viable, but the scale of cooperation is gradually reducing. Traditional management structures have not been applied to new Government
constructed wells in part because the wells do not have clear titles and have been open to all pastoralists. In some cases, pastoralists have been constructing wells, with Government approval, in other peoples' traditional territories, thus adding to the confusion in range tenure.
There are not enough studies on the management (rather than use) of plants for food and medicine, and on what impact the method of harvesting has on natural resources. A few studies suggest that the scale of harvesting for medicine and auto-consumption is smaller than gathering for sale. In some cases there are formal rules that regulate the harvesting of these plants. In recent years, such rules are being less respected and harvesting for home-consumption has decreased, but gathering for sale has taken over and created shortages in the immediate vicinity of major towns.
7.4 Organization of management
Many pastoral, economic strategies affect natural resources. Herd maximization (up to the limits imposed by labour availability and ecological carrying capacity) is the only way they can survive short term resource scarcity, but can have negative impacts on the range. A "low" rate of offtake (compared to western standards) is actually necessary for maintaining the long term reproductive capacity of the herd. On the other hand, herd diversification means greater efficiency in resource use. The emphasis on milk rather than meat allows more people to be supported by the same amount of land. Formal redistribution systems (e.g. stock loans) result in greater equality and dispersion of livestock among households and on the range.
Crisis strategies, often used in times of drought or major epidemics, were temporary activities that took people and livestock off affected pastures for short periods of time. However, as the crisis has been prolonged in recent years, these temporary strategies are now becoming permanent ones. Many pastoralists have been forced to make permanent choices between production systems and a significant number (but admittedly hard to quantify) are going into farming or other activities. However, the majority of pastoral households are still hedging their bets, rather than quitting pastoralism, by sending individual members off to other activities. Although the household then takes advantage of renumerations sent by the absent members, they nevertheless are faced with labour shortages.
In the traditional pastoral system, no land is unclaimed or "vacant", although the ownership of a tract of land may be temporarily in dispute. Communal tenure of range and forest land can be at the tribal level, or the land can be distributed further down the socio-political hierarchy. The lowest level where communal land is no longer distributed can be non-kinship associations or kinship groupings such as clans, herding units and even individual households. Tribal boundaries are usually distinct and follow prominent landscape features. In some cases, however, there may be considerable overlap in the territories of friendly tribes. Intra-tribal boundaries tend to be more diffuse than inter-tribal ones. Outsiders are rarely denied permission to use one's territory, but at the same time, outsiders rarely seek permission unless they are on friendly terms and are reasonably sure of getting a positive response.
In most cases, if one owns the land then one also owns the water, trees, wildlife and minerals. But exceptions do occur. Some groups recognize clear ownership of certain trees or groves of trees as separate from the land. Wells can be owned at different socio-political levels than the land. In general, whenever the harvesting of a natural resource has a high economic importance for the group concerned, then its tenure is different (and at lower sociopolitical levels), than tenure of the land it is found on. Similarly, rights to resources are more strongly exercised when the resource is more valuable or more frequently used.
In recent years, land nationalization has wrested de jure control of rangelands from pastoral groups. Most pastoralists continue to use their former territories, but primarily because of historical precedence and ownership of wells rather than active control by the tribal political hierarchy. De facto control over traditional territories has eroded more at lower socio-political levels than at the tribal level, suggesting that land nationalization is not the only cause of the disintegration of tribal territories. The privatization of communal rangelands, and the fragmentation of traditionally private land, is increasing in areas where resource scarcity is being keenly felt.
More pastoralists have grazing and forest reserves than was previously thought. Grazing reserves can be seasonal, short term or medium term, and are applied to transit routes and seasonal pastures in order to stop crop encroachment, allow livestock access to water and other pastures, reserve pastures for drought periods, and to regenerate degraded areas. In addition, some areas, especially areas in the vicinity of settlements and water points, are reserved for certain types of livestock.
Forest reserves can be permanent timber reserves with limited harvesting allowed, or seasonal/short term reserves where harvesting is prohibited to allow regeneration. Sacred groves and areas are smaller reserves that are permanently closed to all kinds of use, and have religious and symbolic meaning. In some cases trees can and are transplanted in them. Sacred groves are usually small areas, but reserves of 3 or more hectares have also been recorded. These reserves act as in-situ gene banks.
Most grazing and forest reserves have been abandoned because traditional territorial rights have weakened, resources have become more scarce, crops have expanded into the reserves, and even Governments have built boreholes in them. The possibilities of reviving the reserves can be high unless the underlying cause of the demise was resource shortage. Sacred groves have also been largely abandoned because of the same reasons, but also because they have lost their religious and mystical connotations. In some cases, Governments have been able to revive them and have used them as the basis of larger nature parks and reserves.
The enforcement of territorial and resource rights are based on both fundamental principles and socio-political power. Three fundamental principles (rights of first occupancy, historical precedence, and continual occupancy) are universally accepted. Other rules are enforced through the political power of leaders, social ostracism, the power of "tradition", curses and religious authority, and reciprocal obligations. The means of enforcement are based on continual observation by every member of the group, by judges, courts, penalties, and in rare cases, monitoring by an informal "police force". Tribal warfare and fights among herders are the ultimate means of settling disputes.
In general, socio-political modes of enforcement are the first to disappear as the society breaks up. The viability of courts, judges, etc. depends on the particular circumstances and the degree to which Government policies, such as pacification and the imposition of "local" governments, are applied. The fundamental principles appear to be the last to go, and in most cases are still viable.
7.5 Education
Traditional education of the young in pastoral technical knowledge and systems is based on on-the-job training, lessons given at rights of initiation, and children's games. Traditional education in general costs less than modern education, and has the advantage that the children are not withdrawn from the work force. Formal schools provide the literacy needed in modern times, but their content is too foreign to the pastoralist. They teach the value of sitting in offices behind desks, rather than the value of the land. Traditional educational techniques are still intact, although less exercised as the young leave the range, and can be used in development efforts. A combination of traditional and formal education is feasible if more emphasis is placed on decentralizing the formal education structure.
7.6 Conclusion
In general, if a traditional practice or knowledge is still in use, even if by a small portion of the population, it can be considered to be viable. If social cohesion and political authority are still intact then communal cooperation for natural resource management is still viable, even if de jure land tenure has been destroyed. In most cases descriptive knowledge has survived better than management practices and organizational structures.
The situation in most parts of Africa is changing so fast, that what one concludes now may no longer be appropriate a few years later. Therefore, many of the studies already mentioned in this report may need to be revisited. In addition, this suggests that any development project wishing to include LKMS into its design, must first conduct field surveys to validate and update its information on the LKMS.
Viability of a particular technique or knowledge is best analyzed through several complementary activities. In the first place, a good methodology is needed to collect information on the LKMS. Several appropriate methodologies have been developed and tested by various researchers, most of them concentrating on an action-research type method that weeds out superfluous details and collects the more salient techniques. Secondly, the attitude of the local people toward the LKMS needs to be elucidated through formal and informal talks. There is not much point in trying to revive something that the people think is useless and/or unrevivable. Thirdly, pilot activities aimed at experimentally reviving a part of LKMS can provide the ultimate litmus test, and in their aggregate may help develop general guidelines for analyzing the viability of other LKMS.
Certain general conditions need to be met before LKMS can be used in development programs. Although some of the outmigration from the pastoral system is due to entire families leaving for other activities, some of it is also due to young men leaving for urban and industrial jobs, causing a serious manpower shortage in the remaining household. Ways must be found to provide incentives to keep the young on the range, before the old (or new) grazing cooperation regulations can be revived. In addition, grazing coordination cannot be reinstated unless the underlying resource shortage is alleviated (through proper land use planning with enforcement to stop crop expansion, and/or range improvement techniques).
The national policy on land tenure is often one (but not the only one) of the stumbling blocks for proper management of natural resources. Decentralization of the tenure structure to give greater control over natural resources to the local people would be a probable solution. However, resource tenure decentralization is also a politically sensitive issue with a potential for creating or aggravating regional competition and conflicts. Thus, the exact mechanism by which decentralization is achieved needs to be carefully considered.
Project planning, design and implementation need to be made more flexible in time and scope in order to properly take into account LKMS and popular participation. The attitude of experts, donor agencies, government officials and extension agents needs to be modified so that there is a greater willingness to consider the advantages of LKMS. The attitude of the local people, who are by now used to top-down projects, may also need to be changed.
<section>9</section>
REFERENCES
Abu Sin, M. El-H. 1983. Livestock economy and attitude of tenants in Rahad and Khashm el-Girba projects: a comparative study, Rahad Agricultural Corporation/Ford Foundation, Univ. of Khartoum.
Abu-Lughod, L. 1984. "Change and Egyptian bedouins", Cultural Survival Quarterly 8(1):6-10.
Adam, J.G., N. Echard & M. Lescot. 1972. "Plantes médicinales Hausa de l'Ader (Rep. du Niger)" Journal d'Agriculture Traditionnel et de Botanique Applique (JATBA) 19(8-9):258-399.
Adams, M. 1982. "The Baggara problem: attempts at modern change in southern Darfur and southern Kordofan (Sudan)", Development and change. 13(2):259-289.
Adegboye, R.O. et al. 1978. A socio-economic study of Fulani nomads in Kwara State, Federal Livestock Department (Kaduna), Ibadan.
Ahmed, A.G.M. n.d. "Nomadic competition in the Funj area", Sudan Notes and Records, Khartoum.
Ahmed, A.G.M. et al. 1976. Jonglei socio-economic research team interim report, Executive Organ Development projects in Jonglei area. Rep. of Sudan.
Ahmed, A.G.M. 1978. Integrated rural development: problems and strategies. The case of the Dinka and the Nuer of the Jonglei project area in the Sudan, Executive Organ Development Projects in Jonglei area, report no. 8, Rep. of Sudan.
Ahmed, H.U. & T.K. Atala. 1988. "Educational status of cattle Fulanis in Kaduna State of Nigeria", presented 26-29 June 1988 at Pastoralism conference in Nigeria, Ahmadu Bello Univ., Zaria.
Allan, W. et al. 1948. Land holding and land usage among the plateau Tonga of Mazabuka District: a reconnaissance survey, 1945. Oxford Univ. Press, Cape Town.
Allan, W. 1965. The African husbandman. Oliver & Boyd, London.
Amanolahi, S. 1986. "The ecological adaptation of the Lutfi herder-horticulturalists of south Iran", Human Ecology 14(3):355-360.
Andriamampianina, J. 1985. "Traditional land-use in nature conservation in Madagascar", pp. 81-89, in McNeely, J.A. & D. Pitt. eds. Culture and conservation: the human dimensions of environmental planning. Croom Helm, London.
Artz, N.E. 1984. A critique of the "tragedy of the commons" paradigm in pastoral development policy, draft paper.
Artz, N.E., B.E. Norton & J.T. O'Rourke. 1986. "Management of common grazing lands: Timahdite, Morocco, pp. 259-280" in BOSTID ed. Proc. Conf. Common Property Resource Management, National Research Council, Washington DC.
Aubert, G. & B. Newsky. 1949. "Note on the vernacular names of the soils of the Sudan and Senegal", pp. 107-109, in Commonwealth Bureau of Soil Science. Proceedings 1st Commonwealth conference on tropical and subtropical soils. Commonwealth Bureau of Soil Science technical communication no. 46, Harpenden.
Ba, A.S. 1982. L'art vétérinaire des pasteurs Sahéliens, ENDA série études et recherches no. 73-82, Dakar.
Baker, R. 1975. "Development and the pastoral people of Karamoja, northeast Uganda. An example of the treatment of symptoms", pp. 187-205, in Monod, T. ed. Pastoralism in tropical Africa. Oxford Univ. Press, London.
Barnes, J.A. 1951. "The Fort Jameson Ngoni", pp. 194-252, in Colson, E. & M. Gluckman, eds. Seven tribes of British Central Africa. Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford.
Barral, H. 1967. "Les populations d'eleveurs et les problemes pastoraux dans le nord-est de la Haute-Volta. 1963-1964", Cahier ORSTOM serie sciences humaines 4(1):3-30.
Barral, H. 1968. "Tiogo: etude geographique d'un terroir Lela (Haute-Volta)", Atlas des Structures Agraires au Sud du Sahara no. 2, ORSTOM, Paris.
Barral, H. 1974. "Mobilite et cloisonnement chez les eleveurs du Nord de la Haute-Volta: les zones dites 'd'endodromie pastorale'", Cahier ORSTOM serie sciences humaines 11(2): 127-136.
Barral, H. 1977. "Les populations nomades de l'Oudalan et leur espace pastoral", ORSTOM Travaux et Documents, #77, ORSTOM, Paris.
Barral, H. & M. Benoit. 1977. "Nature et genre de vie au Sahel. L'annee 1973 dans le nord de la Haute-Volta", pp. 91-112, in Gallais, J. ed. Strategies pastorales et agricoles des Saheliens durant la secheresse 1969-1974. CEGET/CNRS, Bordeaux.
Barrow, E. 1988. "Trees and pastoralists: the case of the Pokot and Turkana", Social Forestry Network paper no. 6b, Overseas Development Institute (ODI), London.
Baumer, M.C. 1975a. Noms vernaculaires soudanais utiles a l'ecologiste CNRS, Paris.
Baumer, M.C. 1975b. "Catalogue des plantes utiles de Kordofan (Republique du Sudan) particulierement du point de vue pastoral" JATBA 22(4-5-6):81-119.
Baxter, P.T.W. & A. Butt. 1953. The Azande, and related peoples of the Anglo-Egyptian Sudan and Belgian Congo. International African Institute, London.
Bedoian, W.H. 1978. "Human use of the pre-saharan ecosystem and its impact on desertification", pp. 61-109, in Gonzalez, N.L. ed. Social and technological management in dry lands: past and present, indigenous and imposed, American Association for the Advancement of Science (AAAS) selected symposium no. 10, Westview, Boulder.
Bedrani, S. 1987. Les pasteurs et agro-pasteurs au Maghreb, FAO (ESH), Rome.
Behnke, R.H. 1985. "Open-range management and property rights in pastoral Africa: a case of spontaneous range enclosure in south Darfur, Sudan", Pastoral Development Network Paper no. 20f, ODI, London.
Behnke, R.H. 1988. "Range enclosure in central Somalia", Pastoral Development Network Paper no. 25b, ODI, London.
Behnke, R.H. & C. Kerven. 1984. Herd management strategies among agro-pastoralists in the Bay region, Somalia, Bay Region socio-economic baseline study, Somalia.
Benoit, M. 1978. "Pastoralisme et migration. Les Peuls de Barani et de Dokui (Haute-Volta)", Etudes Rurales no. 70:9-50.
Benoit, M. 1979. "Le chemin des Peuls du Boobola", ORSTOM Travaux et Documents no. 101, ORSTOM, Paris.
Bernus, E. 1967. "Cueillette et exploitation des ressources spontanees du Sahel Nigerien par les Kel Tamasheq", Cahiers ORSTOM serie sciences humaines 4(1):31-52.
Bernus, E. 1974. "Possibilites et limites de la politique hydraulique pastorale dans le sahel Nigerien", Cahier ORSTOM serie sciences humaines 11(2): 119-126.
Bernus, E. 1975a. "Jeu et elevage: vocabulaire d'elevage utilise dans un jeu de quadrillage par les Touaregs Iullemmeden Kel Dinnik (Niger)", JATBA 22(4-5-6): 167-176.
Bernus, E. 1975b. "Les composantes geographiques et sociales des types d'elevage en milieu Touareg", pp. 229-244, in Monod, T. ed. Pastoralism in tropical Africa. Oxford Univ. Press, London.
Bernus, E. 1977. "Les tactiques des eleveurs face a la secheresse: le cas du sud-ouest de l'Air, Niger", pp. 201-217, in Gallais, J. ed. Strategies pastorales et agricoles des Saheliens durant la secheresse 1969-1974. CEGET/CNRS, Bordeaux.
Bernus, E. 1979. "L'arbre et le nomade", JATBA 26(2): 103-128.
Bernus, E. 1981a. "'Range management' traditionnel et planifie: remarques a propos des eleveurs Nigeriens", pp. 23-30, in Salzman, P.C. ed. Contemporary nomadic and pastoral peoples: Africa and Latin America. Studies in Third World Societies, no. 17, College of William and Mary, Williamsburg.
Bernus, E. 1981b. "Points cardinaux: les criteres de designation chez les nomades Touaregs et Maures", Bull. des etudes africaines de l'INALCO 1(2): 101-106.
Biesele, M. 1971. "Hunting in semi-arid areas: the Kalahari bushmen today", pp. 62-67, in Botswana Society, ed. Proceedings of a Conference on Sustained Production from Semi-Arid areas. Botswana Society, Gabarone.
Blench, R. 1985. "Pastoral labour and stock alienation in the sub-humid and arid zones of West Africa", Pastoral Development Network Paper no. 19e, ODI, London.
Blurton Jones, N. & M.J. Konner. 1987. !Kung knowledge of animal behavior, paper, UCLA/Emory Univ., Los Angeles.
Bohannan, P. 1954. Tiv farm and settlement, Colonial Research Studies no. 15, London.
Bourezg, K. 1984. "Management of grazing systems of the Algerian steppe: proposals for an integrated approach", pp. 216-218, in Joss, P.J., P.W. Lynch & O.B. Williams, eds. Rangelands: a resource under siege. Proceedings 2nd International Rangeland Congress. Adelaide, Australia.
Bourgeot, A. 1975. "Analyse des rapports de production chez les pasteurs et les agriculteurs de l'Ahaggar", pp. 263-283, in Monod, T. ed. Pastoralism in tropical Africa. Oxford Univ. Press, London.
Bourgeot, A. 1981. "Pasture in the Malian Gourma: habitation by humans and animals", pp. 165-182, in Galaty, J.G., D. Aronson, P.C. Salzman & A. Chouinard, eds. The future of pastoral peoples: proceedings of conference., IDRC, Ottawa.
Boutrais, J. 1974. "Les conditions naturelles de l'elevage sur le plateau de l'Adamaoua (Cameroun)", Cahier ORSTOM serie sciences humaines 11(2):145-198.
Brandstrom, P., J. Hultin & J. Lindstrom. 1979. Aspects of agro-pastoralism in East Africa. Scandinavian Inst. of African Studies Research Report no. 51, Uppsala.
Bredemeier, L.F. 1978. "Sociopolitical practices hinder improved range management", pp. 90-91, in Hyder, D.N. ed. Proceedings of the 1st International Rangeland Congress, SRM, Denver.
Bremaud, O. & J. Pagot. 1962. "Grazing lands, nomadism and transhumance in the Sahel", pp. 311-324, in UNESCO. ed. The problems of the arid zone: proceedings of the Paris symposium UNESCO, Paris.
Brokensha, D. & A.H.P. Castro. 1988. "Common property resources", paper presented 15-20 February at FAO Expert Consultation on forestry and food security, FAO, Rome.
Brokensha, D. & B.W. Riley. 1980a. "Mbeere knowledge of their vegetation, and its relevance for development: a case-study from Kenya", pp. 111-127, in Brokensha, D., D.M. Warren & O. Werner. eds. Indigenous knowledge systems and development. Univ. Press of America, Washington DC.
Brokensha, D. & B.W. Riley. 1980b. "Introduction to cash crops in a marginal area in Kenya", pp. 244-274, in Bates, R.H. & M.F. Lofchie. eds. Agricultural development in Africa: issues of public policy. Praeger, New York.
Brokensha, D. & B.W. Riley. 1986. "Changes in uses of plants in Mbeere, Kenya", Journal of Arid Environments 11:75-80.
Brokensha, D. & B.W. Riley. 1988. "Managing natural resources: the local level", draft paper, Univ. of California, Santa Barbara.
Brokensha, D., D.M. Warren & O. Werner. eds. 1980. Indigenous knowledge systems and development, Univ. Press of America, Washington DC.
Brownrigg, L.A. 1985. "Native cultures and protected areas: management options", pp. 33-44, in McNeely, J.A. & D. Pitt. eds. Culture and conservation: the human dimensions of environmental planning. Croom Helm, London.
Burton, M.L. & L. Kirk. 1980. "Ethnoclassification of body parts: a three-culture study", pp. 269-302, in Brokensha, D., D.M. Warren & O. Werner. eds. Indigenous knowledge systems and development. Univ. Press of America, Washington DC.
Campbell, A.C. 1971. "Traditional utilization of wildlife in the Kalahari", pp. 108-113, in Botswana Society, ed. Proceedings of a Conference on Sustained Production from Semi-Arid areas. Botswana Society, Gabarone.
Campbell, D.J. 1981. "Land use competition at the margins of the rangelands: an issue in development strategies for semi-arid areas", pp. 39-61, in Norcliffe, G. & T. Pinfold, eds. Planning African development, Westview, Boulder.
Capot-Rey, R. 1962. "The present state of nomadism in the Sahara", pp. 301-310, in UNESCO, ed. The problems of the arid zone: proceedings of the Paris symposium UNESCO, Paris.
Carlier, H. 1987. Understanding traditional agriculture: bibliography for development workers, ILEIA, Leusden.
Carrington, J.F. 1983. "Linguistic pit-falls in upper Zairean folk taxonomy research", JATBA, 30(2): 149-158.
Cashdan, E. 1984. "Ghana territorial organization", Human Ecology 12(4):443-463.
Cassanelli, L.V. 1978. "Historical perspectives on pastoral development", pp. 483-487, in Joss, P.J., P.W. Lynch & O.B. Williams. eds. Rangelands: a resource under siege. Proceedings 2nd International Rangeland Congress. Adelaide, Australia.
Chambers, R. "Editorial", Institute for Development Studies (IDS) Bulletin, 10:2, Univ. of Sussex.
Chambers, R. 1987. "Sustainable livelihoods, environment and development: putting poor rural people first". Discussion Paper no. 240, Institute of Development Studies, Univ. of Sussex, Brighton.
Ciriacy-Wintrup, S.V. & R.C. Bishop. 1975. "Common property as a concept in natural resource policy", Natural Resources Journal 15:713-727.
Clad, J.C. 1985. "Conservation and indigenous peoples: a study of convergent interests", pp. 45-62, in McNeely, J.A. & D. Pitt. eds. Culture and conservation: the human dimensions of environmental planning. Croom Helm, London.
Clanet, J-C. 1977. "Les consequences des annees seches 1969-1973 sur la mobilite des eleveurs du Kanem", pp. 237-259, in Gallais, J. ed. Strategies pastorales et agricoles des Saheliens durant la secheresse 1969-1974. CEGET/CNRS, Bordeaux.
Clauson, G. Sir. 1953. Communal land tenure FAO Agricultural Studies no. 17, Rome.
Clyburn, L. 1978. "The process of change in certain livestock owner and operating groups in the West African Sahel", pp. 108-110, in Hyder, D.N. ed. Proceedings of the 1st International Rangeland Congress, SRM, Denver.
Coldham, S. 1978. "The effect of registration of tide upon customary land rights in Kenya", Journal of African Law 22(2):91-111.
Colson, E. 1951. "The plateau Tonga of northern Rhodesia", pp. 94-162, in Colson, E. & M. Gluckman, eds. Seven tribes of British Central Africa. Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford.
Compton, J.L. 1980. "Indigenous folk media in rural development", pp. 303-315, in Brokensha, D., D.M. Warren & O. Werner. eds. Indigenous knowledge systems and development. Univ. Press of America, Washington DC.
Conant, F.P. n.d. "Thorns paired, sharply recurved: cultural controls and rangeland quality in East Africa", paper prepared c.1978 under National Science Foundation project "Satellite analysis of human ecosystems in the sahel of East Africa".
Cossins, N. 1978. "Resource conservation and productivity improvement under communal land tenure", pp. 119-121, in Joss, P.J., P.W. Lynch & O.B. Williams, eds. Rangelands: a resource under siege. Proceedings 2nd International Rangeland Congress. Adelaide, Australia.
de Beij, I. 1986. Femmes et karite: l'importance de karite pour les femmes dans un village Gourounsi en Burkina Faso, Centre de Recherche et de documentation femmes et development, Univ. d'Etat de Leyde, Pays-Bas.
de Carvalho, E.C. 1974. "'Traditional' and 'modern' patterns of cattle raising in southwestern Angola: a critical evaluation of change from pastoralism to ranching", The Journal of Developing Areas 8:199-226.
Delgado, C.L. 1979. Livestock versus food grain production in southeast Upper Volta: a resource allocation analysis. Monograph #1, Livestock production and marketing in the Entente States of West Africa Project, Center for Research on Economic Development (CRED)/United States Agency for International Development (USAID).
Despois, J. 1961. "Development of land use in northern Africa", pp. 219-237, in Stamp, L.D. ed. A history of land use in arid regions. UNESCO Arid Zone Research, Vol. 17, Paris.
Devitt, P. 1971. "Man and his environment in the western Kalahari: or a little technology is a dangerous thing", pp. 50-56, in Botswana Society, ed. Proceedings of a Conference on Sustained Production from Semi-Arid areas. Botswana Society, Gabarone.
Devitt, P. 1982. "The management of communal grazing in Botswana", Pastoral Network Paper no. 14d, ODI, London.
Diop, A.T. 1987. Les ressources de l'aire pastorale de Tatki: inventaire et etude du mode d'exploitation, proposition de plan d'amenagement et de gestion rationnelle. Institut Senegalais de Recherche Agricole (ISRA)/Laboratoire Nationale d'Elevage et de Recherche Veterinaire (LNERV)/FAO, Dakar.
Draz, O. 1974. "The Hema system of range reserves in the Arabian peninsula: its possibilities in range improvement and conservation projects in the Near East", Appendix 2, in FAO. Range management and fodder development: report to the Government of the Syrian Arab Republic, FAO no. TA 3293, Rome.
Draz, O. 1978. "Revival of the Hema system of range reserves as a basis for the Syrian range development program", pp. 100-103, in Hyder, D.N. ed. Proceedings of the 1st International Rangeland Congress, SRM, Denver.
Draz, O. 1985. "The Hema system of range reserves in the Arabian peninsula", pp. 109-121, in McNeely, J.A. & D. Pitt. eds. Culture and conservation: the human dimensions of environmental planning. Croom Helm, London.
Dyson-Hudson, N. & R. Dyson-Hudson. 1982. "The structure of East African herds and the future of East African herds" Development and Change 13(2):213-238.
Dyson-Hudson, R. & J.T. McCabe. n.d. "South Turkana nomadism: coping with an unpredictably varying environment", draft paper.
Dyson-Hudson, R. & J.T. McCabe. 1983. "Water resources and livestock movements in south Turkana, Kenya", Nomadic Peoples 14:41-46.
El Amami, S. 1983. Les amenagements hydrauliques traditionnels en Tunisie, Centre de Recherche du genie rural. Rep. Tunisienne.
El-Arifi, S.A. 1979. "Some aspects of local government and environmental management in the Sudan", pp. 36-39, in Mabbutt, J.A. ed. Proceedings Khartoum Workshop on arid lands management, Univ. of Khartoum/United Nations Univ.
Elias, T.O. 1951. Nigerian land law and custom, Routledge & Kegan Paul, London.
Ellis, J.E. et al. 1984. "Aspects of energy consumption in a pastoral ecosystem: wood use by the south Turkana", pp. 164-187, in Barnes, C., J. Ensminger & P. O'Keefe. eds. Wood, energy and households: perspectives on rural Kenya, Beyer Institute/Scandinavian Institute of African Studies, Uppsala.
Elmi, A.S., A.M. Ahmed & Y.A. Abdi. 1984. "Use of plants in Somali traditional medicine", pp. 185-198, in Labahn, T. ed. Proceedings of the 2nd International Congress of Somali Studies, 1-6 August 1983, Univ. of Hamburg, Vol.3: "Aspects of Development", Verlag, Hamburg.
El Sammani, M.O. 1978. The demographic characteristics of the Dinka of Kongor Community, Executive Organ development projects in Jonglei area, Rep. of the Sudan.
Evans-Pritchard, E.E. 1940a. The Nuer. Clarendon, Oxford.
Evans-Pritchard, E. 1940b. "The Nuer of the southern Sudan", pp. 272-296, in Fortes, M. & E. Evans-Pritchard. eds. African political systems Oxford Univ. Press, London.
Ezeomah, C. 1985. "Land tenure constraints associated with some recent experiments to bring formal education to nomadic Fulani in Nigeria", Pastoral Development Network Paper no. 20d, ODI, London.
Fadal, M.O. 1984. "The ongoing process of gradual disintegration of the traditional social and economic system of pastoralism in Somalia", pp. 71-85, in Labahn, T. ed. Proceedings of the 2nd International Congress of Somali Studies, 1-6 August 1983, Univ. of Hamburg, Vol. 3: "Aspects of Development", Verlag, Hamburg.
FAO. 1972. Report on the FAO Expert Consultation on the settlement of nomads in Africa and the Near East, Cairo, 4-12 Dec. 1971, FAO RP no. 20, Rome.
Fink, D.R. 1980. "The Bono concept of measure an essential factor in formal and non-formal education programs", pp. 243-267, in Brokensha, D., D.M. Warren & O. Werner. eds. Indigenous knowledge systems and development. Univ. Press of America, Washington DC.
Fortes, M. 1940. "The political system of the Tallensi of the northern territories of the Gold Coast", pp. 238-271, in Fortes, M. & E. Evans-Pritchard. eds. African political systems Oxford Univ. Press, London.
Fortes, M. 1945. The dynamics of clanship among the Tallensi: being the first part of an analysis of the social structure of a trans-Volta tribe. Oxford Univ. Press, London.
Fortes, M. & E.E. Evans-Pritchard. eds. 1940. African political systems, Oxford Univ. Press, London.
Frantz, C. 1975. "Contraction and expansion in Nigerian bovine pastoralism", pp. 338-353, in Monod, T. ed. Pastoralism in tropical Africa. Oxford Univ. Press, London.
Frantz, C. 1981. "Settlement and migration among pastoral Fulbe in Nigeria and Cameroon", pp. 57-94, in Salzman, P.C. ed. Contemporary nomadic and pastoral peoples: Africa and Latin America. Studies in Third World Societies, no. 17, College of William and Mary, Williamsburg.
Fratkin, E. 1986. "Stability and resilience in East African pastoralism: the Rendille and the Ariaal of northern Kenya" Human Ecology 14(3):269-286.
Frechou, H. 1965. "Le regime foncier dans la region des Timbi (Fouta-Dialon)", pp. 452-468, in Poirier, J. ed. Etudes de droit Africain et de droit Malgache, Univ. de Madagascar, Etudes Malgaches no. 16, Madagascar.
Friere, P. 1978. Pedagogy in progress, Seabury Press.
Gadbin, C. 1976. "Apercu sur l'apiculture traditionnelle dans le sud du Tchad", JATBA 23(4-5-6): 101-115.
Gadgil, M. 1985. "Social restraints on resource utilization: the Indian experience", pp. 135-154, in McNeely, J.A. & D. Pitt. eds. Culture and conservation: the human dimensions of environmental planning. Croom Helm, London.
Galaty, J.G. 1981. "Maasai pastoral ideology and change", pp. 1-22, in Salzman, P.C. ed. Contemporary nomadic and pastoral peoples: Africa and Latin America. Studies in Third World Societies, no. 17, College of William and Mary, Williamsburg.
Gallais, J. 1967. Le delta interieur du Niger: etude du geographie regionale, Institut Fondamental de l'Afrique Noire (IFAN), Dakar.
Gallais, J. 1972. "Les societes pastorales ouest-africaines face au developpements", Cahiers d'etudes Africaines 12(3):353-368.
Gallais, J. 1975. Pasteurs et paysans du Gourma: la condition Sahelienne, CEGET/CNRS, Paris.
Gast, M. 1972. "Cereales et pseudo-cereales de cueillette du Sahara central (Ahaggar): Usages et valeurs alimentaires de quelques graines du Sahara central", JATBA XVIV(1-2):50-67.
Gilg, J-P. 1963. "Mobilite pastorale au Tchad occidental et central", Cahiers d'etudes Africaines 3(12):491-510.
Gilles, J.L. 1988. "Slippery grazing rights: using indigenous knowledge for pastoral development", pp. 1159-1166, in Whitehead, E.E., C.F. Hutchinson & B.N. Timmermann. eds. Arid lands, today and tomorrow: proceedings of an International research and development conference, Westview, Belhaven.
Gillespie, L.A. 1966. "The nomads of the Sudan and their livestock in the 20th century", Sudan Journal Veterinary Science and Animal Husbandry, Special issue, 7(2): 13-25.
Gillet, H. 1987. "Quelques arbres alimentaires sauvages de l'Afrique seche", Europe Outremer. 63(683-684-685): 16-17.
Gladwin, C. 1980. "Cognitive strategies and adoption decisions: a case study of non-adaptation of an agronomic recommendation", pp. 9-28, in Brokensha, D., D.M. Warren & O. Werner. eds. Indigenous knowledge systems and development. Univ. Press of America, Washington DC.
Gluckman, M. 1951. "The Lozi of Barotseland in north-western Rhodesia", pp. 1-93, in Colson, E. & M. Gluckman, eds. Seven tribes of British Central Africa. Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford.
Gluckman, M. 1969. "Property rights and status in African traditional law", pp. 252-265, in Gluckman, M. ed. Ideas and procedures in African customary law, Oxford Univ. Press, London.
Goody, J.R. 1956. The social organization of the LoWiili. Colonial research studies No. 19, Her Majesty's Stationary Office, London.
Graham, O. 1988. "Enclosure of the East African rangeland: recent trends and their impact", Pastoral Development Network Paper no. 25a, ODI, London.
Guillaumet, J.L. 1972. "Note sur la connaissance du milieu vegetal par les nomades de la basse vallee du Wabi Shebelle (Ethiopie)", JATBA. 19(4-5):73-84.
Guillemin, R. 1956. "Evolution de l'agriculture autochtone dans les savanes de l'Oubangui: deuxieme partie", L'Agronomie Tropicale XI(2): 143-176.
Gulliver, P.H. 1970. The family herds: a study of two pastoral tribes in East Africa, the Jie and Turkana, Negro Univ. Press, Westport.
Gulliver, P.H. 1975. "Nomadic movements: causes and implications", pp. 369-386, in Monod, T. ed. Pastoralism in tropical Africa. Oxford Univ. Press, London.
Hardin, G. 1968. "The tragedy of the commons", Science 162:1243-1248.
Helland, J. 1978. "Sociological aspects of pastoral livestock production in Africa", pp. 79-81, in Hyder, D.N. ed. Proceedings of the 1st International Rangeland Congress, SRM, Denver.
Helland, J. 1982. "Social organization and water control among the Borana", Development and change. 13(2):239-258.
Hervouet, J-P. 1977. "Strategies d'adaptations differenciees a une crise climatique. L'example des eleveurs agriculteurs du centre-sud Mauritanien, 1969-1974", pp. 61-88, in Gallais, J. ed. Strategies pastorales et agricoles des Saheliens durant la secheresse 1969-1974. CEGET/CNRS, Bordeaux.
Hickey, J.V. 1978. "Fulani nomadism and herd maximization: a model for government mixed farming and ranching schemes", pp. 95-96, in Hyder, D.N. ed. Proceedings of the 1st International Rangeland Congress, SRM, Denver.
Hiernaux, P. & L. Diarra. 1984. "Is it possible to improve the traditional grazing management in the flood plain of the Niger River in central Mali?", pp. 201-204, in Joss, P.J., P.W. Lynch & O.B. Williams, eds. Rangelands: a resource under siege. Proceedings 2nd International Rangeland Congress. Adelaide, Australia.
Hjort, A. 1976a. "Traditional land use in marginal drylands", pp. 43-53, in Rapp, A., H.N. Le Houerou & B. Lundholm. eds. Can desert encroachment be stopped. Ecological Bulletin (Stockholm), vol. 24, UNEP/SIES, NFR, Stockholm.
Hjort, A. 1976b. "Constraints on pastoralism in drylands", Ecol. Bull. (Stockholm). 24:71-82.
Hjort, A. 1976c. "Regional studies and proposals for development: Kenya", Ecol. Bull. (Stockholm), 24:165-169.
Hjort, A. & W. Ostberg. 1978. Farming and herding in Botswana, Swedish agency for research cooperation with developing countries, no. R:1.
Holleman, J.F. 1951. "Some 'Shona' tribes of southern Rhodesia", pp. 354-395, in Colson, E. & M. Gluckman, eds. Seven tribes of British Central Africa. Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford.
Homewood, K.M. & A.V. Hurst. 1986. "Comparative ecology of pastoralist livestock in Baringo, Kenya", Pastoral Development Network Paper no. 21b, ODI, London.
Homewood, K.M. & W.A. Rodgers. 1984. "Pastoralism and conservation", Human Ecology 12(4):431-441.
Horowitz, M. & K. Badi. 1981. Sudan: introduction of forestry in grazing systems, FAO/SIDA Forestry for local community development program, GCP/INT/347/SWE, Rome.
Howes, M. 1980. "The uses of indigenous technical knowledge in development", pp. 335-351, in Brokensha, D., D.M. Warren & O. Werner. eds. Indigenous knowledge systems and development. Univ. Press of America, Washington DC.
Ichikawa, M. 1987. "A preliminary report on the ethnobotany of the Suiei Dorobo in northern Kenya", African Study Monographs supplementary issue no. 7, Center for African area studies, Kyoto Univ., Kyoto.
IFAD. 1987. "Pastoral credit", document de travail no. 7, Niger programme special national rapport d'evaluation, Vol. 3, IFAD, Rome.
Imperato, P.J. 1972. "Nomads of the Niger", Natural History 81(10):61-68, 78-79.
Itani, J. n.d. "The Turkana's view of nature", paper, Lab. Physical Anthropology, Kyoto Univ.
Jackson, I.J. 1982. "Traditional forecasting of tropical rainy seasons". Agricultural Meteorology 26:167-178.
Jacobs, A.H. 1980. "Pastoral Maasai and tropical rural development", pp. 275-300, in Bates, R.H. & M.F. Lofchie. eds. Agricultural development in Africa: issues of public policy. Praeger, New York.
Jaxate, A., J.A. Soo & A.Y. Soo. 1979. Enfants jeunes du Koya: etat actuel et perspectives, UNICEF/ENDA, Dakar.
Johnson, A. 1980. "Ethnoecology and planting practices in a swidden agricultural system", pp. 49-66, in Brokensha, D., D.M. Warren & O. Werner. eds. Indigenous knowledge systems and development. Univ. Press of America, Washington DC.
Kerharo, J. 1968. "Les plantes magiques dans la pharmacopee senegalaise traditionnelle", reviewed in JATBA 1970, 17(12):468.
Kjenstad, V.M. 1988. Land tenure in the subhumid zone of Nigeria: Implications for agricultural innovations. A literature review, report, International Livestock Center for Africa (ILCA), Nigeria.
Knight, C.G. 1974a. Ecology and change: rural modernization in an African community. Academic Press, New York.
Knight, C.G. 1974b. "Ethnoscience: a cognitive approach to African agriculture", paper prepared for Social Science Research Council (SSRC) conference on environmental and spatial cognition in Africa, May 1974.
Knight, C.G. 1980. "Ethnoscience and the African farmer: rationale and strategy", pp. 203-229, in Brokensha, D., D.M. Warren & O. Werner. eds. Indigenous knowledge systems and development. Univ. Press of America, Washington DC.
Langley, P. 1975. "The ethnolinguistic approach to the rural environment: its usefulness in rural planning in Africa", pp. 89-101, in Richards, P. ed. African environment: problems and perspectives. International African Institute, Special report No. 1, London.
Le Mouel, J-F. 1969. "Connaissance et utilisation des vegetaux chez les Eskimo Nauja'miut (Groenland Occidental)" JATBA 16(11-12):469-494.
Leff, E. 1985. "Ethnobotany and anthropology as tools for a cultural conservation strategy", pp. 259-268, in McNeely, J.A. & D. Pitt. eds. Culture and conservation: the human dimensions of environmental planning. Croom Helm, London.
Legesse, A. 1984. "Boran-Gabra pastoralism in historical perspective", pp. 481-482, in Joss, P.J., P.W. Lynch & O.B. Williams. eds. Rangelands: a resource under siege. Proceedings 2nd International Rangeland Congress. Adelaide, Australia.
Lemordant, D. 1972. "Histoire et ethnobotanique du Kosso", JATBA 19(12):560-582.
Levy-Luxereau, A. 1980. "Note sur quelques criquets de la region de Maradi (Niger), et leur noms Hausa", JATBA 27(3-4):263-272.
Lewis, I.M. 1961. A pastoral democracy: a study of pastoralism and politics among the northern Somali of the Horn of Africa. Oxford Univ. Press, London.
Little, P.D. 1984. "Critical socio-economic variables in African pastoral livestock development: toward a comparative framework", pp. 201-214, in Simpson, J.R. & P. Evangelou. eds. Livestock development in Sub-saharan Africa: constraints, prospects, policy, Westview, Boulder.
Little, P.D. 1987. "Land use conflicts in the agricultural/pastoral borderlands: the case of Kenya", pp. 195-212, in Little, P.D., M.M. Horowitz & A.E. Nyerges. eds. Lands at risk in the third world, Westview, Boulder.
Little, P.D. & D.W. Brokensha. 1987. "Local institutions, tenure and resource management in East Africa", pp. 193-209, in Anderson, D. & R. Grove. eds. Conservation in Africa, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge.
Lusigi, W.J. 1984. "The integrated project on arid lands (IPAL) Kenya", pp. 338-349, in Joss, P.J., P.W. Lynch & O.B. Williams, eds. Rangelands: a resource under siege. Proceedings 2nd International Rangeland Congress. Adelaide, Australia.
MAB. 1978. Management of natural resources in Africa: traditional strategies and modern decision-making, UNESCO/MAB Technical Note no. 9, Paris.
Mackay, T.C. 1988. Sudan, Idd el Ghanam rural development project: livestock and range, FAO working paper.
Maliki, A. et al. 1984. "The Wodaabe", pp. 255-530, in Swift, J.J. ed. Pastoral development in central Niger: Report of the Niger range and livestock project USAID/Ministry of Rural Development, Niamey.
Marchal, J.Y. 1983. "Yatenga, nord Haute Volta: la dynamique d'un espace rural soudano-sahelien", ORSTOM Travaux et Document no. 167, ORSTOM, Paris.
Marie, J. 1977. "Strategie traditionnelle d'adaptation a la secheresse chez les eleveurs Saheliens. Perte de betail, mobilite, ethnie", pp. 115-137, in Gallais, J. ed. Strategies pastorales et agricoles des Saheliens durant la secheresse 1969-1974. CEGET/CNRS, Bordeaux.
McArthur, I.D. & G.N. Harrington. 1978. "A grazing ecosystem in Western Afghanistan", pp. 596-599, in Hyder, D.N. ed. Proceedings of the 1st International Rangeland Congress, SRM, Denver.
McCabe, J.T. 1983. "Land use among the pastoral Turkana", Rural Africana 15-16:109-126.
McCorkle, C.M. 1986. "An introduction to ethnoveterinary research and development", Journal Ethnobiology 6(1): 129-149.
McDermott, J. & M.D. Ngor. 1983. Grazing management strategies among the Tuic, Nyarraweng and Ghol Dinka of Kongor Rural Council: prospects for development, draft report for Kongor Integrated Rural Development Project, FAO, Rome.
McDowell, C.M. 1969. "The breakdown of traditional land tenure in northern Nigeria", pp. 266-278, in Gluckman, M. ed. Ideas and procedures in African customary law, Oxford Univ. Press, London.
Middleton, J. & G. Kershaw. 1972. The Kikuyu and Kamba of Kenya. International African Institute, London.
Monod, T. 1975. "Introduction", pp. 8-98, in Monod, T. ed. Pastoralism in tropical Africa. Oxford Univ. Press, London.
Morey, R.V. & N.C. Morey. 1978. "A case for indigenous participation in rangeland development", pp. 116-118, in Hyder, D.N. ed. Proceedings of the 1st International Rangeland Congress, SRM, Denver.
Morgan, W.T.W. 1980. Vernacular names and the utilisation of plant species among the Turkana of northern Kenya: Plants collected by the Royal Geographical Society south Turkana expedition 1968-70, Univ. of Durham, special report, Durham.
Morton, J. 1988. "The decline of Lahawin pastoralism (Kassala Province, eastern Sudan)", Pastoral Development Network Paper no. 25c, ODI, London.
Mottin, M-H. 1977. Quelques techniques traditionnelles des Al Pularen, ENDA, Dakar.
Ngur, N. 1988. "Profile of pastoral women in development: a case study in Gongola State of Nigeria", paper presented at the Conference on Pastoralism in Nigeria, NAPRI, Ahmadu Bello Univ., Zaria, June 1988.
Niamir, M. 1982. Report on animal husbandry among the Ngok Dinka of the Sudan: Integrated rural development project, Abyei, south Kordofan, Sudan. HIID Rural Development Studies, Harvard Univ., Cambridge.
Niamir, M. 1985. "Range Management", pp. 57-251, in Clark, A., H. Josserand, M. Niamir & P. Thomas. Eastern Senegal range and livestock project: final monitoring and evaluation report, CRED, Univ. of Michigan, Ann Arbor.
Niamir, M. 1987. Grazing intensity and ecological change in eastern Senegal: implications for the monitoring of sahelian rangelands, PhD thesis, Univ. of Arizona, Tucson.
Noronha, R. & F.J. Lethem. 1983. Traditional land tenure and land use systems in the design of agricultural projects. World Bank Staff Working Paper no. 561, Washington DC.
Novikoff, G. 1976. "Traditional grazing practices and their adaptation to modern conditions in Tunisia and the Sahelian countries", Ecol. Bull. (Stockholm) 24:55-69.
Nowicki, P. 1985. "Culture, ecology and 'management' of natural resources or knowing when not to meddle", pp. 269-282, in McNeely, J.A. & D. Pitt. eds. Culture and conservation: the human dimensions of environmental planning. Croom Helm, London.
Oba, G. 1985. "Local participation in guiding extension programs: a practical proposal" Nomadic Peoples 18:27-45.
Odell, M.J. 1982. "Local institutions and management of communal resources: lessons from Africa and Asia", Pastoral Network Paper no. 14e, ODI, London.
Ogunsiji, O. et al. 1988. "Pastoralism in Egbado division of Ogun State", paper presented at Conference on pastoralism in Nigeria, NAPRI, Ahmadu Bello Univ., Zaria, June 1988.
Ohta, I. 1984. "Symptoms are classified into diagnostic categories: Turkana's view of livestock disease", African study monographs, supplementary issue no. 3:71-93.
Ohta, I. 1987. "Livestock individual identification among the Turkana: the animal classification and naming in the pastoral livestock management", African Study Monographs 8(1): 1-69.
Ostberg, W. 1987. Ramblings on soil conservation: an essay from Kenya, SIDA Agricultural Division, Varnamo.
Ostberg, W. 1988. We eat trees: tree planting and land rehabilitation in West Pokot District, Kenya. A baseline study. Swedish Univ. of Agricultural Sciences, Working Paper 82, Uppsala.
Perevolotsky, A. 1987. "Territoriality and resource sharing among the Bedouin of southern Sinai: a socio-ecological interpretation". Journal of Arid Environments 13(2):153-161.
Peters, P. 1984. "Struggles over water, struggles over meaning: cattle, water and the State in Botswana", Africa 54(3):29-49.
Petit, J. 1962. "The attitude of the population and the problem of education in the Sahara", pp. 459-470, in UNESCO, ed. The problems of the arid zone: proceedings of the Paris symposium UNESCO, Paris.
Putman, D.B. 1984. "Agro-pastoral production strategies and development in the Bay Region", pp. 159-186, in Labahn, T. ed. Proceedings of the 2nd International Congress of Somali Studies, 1-6 August 1983, Univ. of Hamburg, Vol. 3: "Aspects of Development", Verlag, Hamburg.
Quam, M.D. 1978. "Cattle marketing and pastoral conservatism: Karamoja District, Uganda 1948-1970", African Studies Review 21(1):49-71.
Rabeh, O.O. 1984. "The Somali nomad", pp. 57-69, in Labahn, T. ed. Proceedings of the 2nd International Congress of Somali Studies, 1-6 August 1983, Univ. of Hamburg, Vol. 3: "Aspects of Development", Verlag, Hamburg.
Rayfield, J.R. 1983. The legacy of colonialism in education in West Africa. mimeo paper, York Univ., Toronto.
Richards, P. 1975. "'Alternative' strategies for the African environment. 'Folk ecology' as a basis for community oriented agricultural development", pp. 102-117, in Richards, P. ed. African environment: problems and perspectives. International African Institute, Special report No. 1, London.
Richards, P. 1980. "Community environmental knowledge in African rural development", pp. 181-194, in Brokensha, D., D.M. Warren & O. Werner. eds. Indigenous knowledge systems and development. Univ. Press of America, Washington DC.
Richards, P. 1985. Indigenous agricultural revolution: ecology and food production in West Africa. Hutchinson, London.
Riesman, P. 1984. "The Fulani in a development context: the relevance of cultural traditions for coping with change and crisis", pp. 171-191, in Scott, E.P. ed. Life before the drought, Allen & Unwin, Boston.
Runge, C.F. 1986. "Common property and collective action in economic development", World Development 14(5): 623-635.
Sandford, S. 1983. Management of pastoral development in the Third World. John Wiley & Sons, Chichester.
Sandford, S. 1984. "Traditional African range management systems", pp. 475-478, in Joss, P.J., P.W. Lynch & O.B. Williams, eds. Rangelands: a resource under siege. Proceedings 2nd International Rangeland Congress. Adelaide, Australia.
Sankhala, K.S. & P. Jackson. 1985. "People, trees and antelopes in the Indian desert", pp. 205-210, in McNeely, J.A. & D. Pitt. eds. Culture and conservation: the human dimensions of environmental planning. Croom Helm, London.
Santoir, C. 1977. "Les societes pastorales du Senegal face a la secheresse (1972-1973): reactions a la crise et degre de retablissement deux ans apres. Le cas de Peuls du 'Galodjina'", pp. 17-59, in Gallais, J. ed. Strategies pastorales et agricoles des Saheliens durant la secheresse 1969-1974. CEGET/CNRS, Bordeaux.
Schapera, I. 1940. "The political organization of the Ngwato of Bechuanaland Protectorate", pp. 56-82, in Fortes, M. & E. Evans-Pritchard. eds. African political systems Oxford Univ. Press, London.
Schlee, G. 1981. "The orientation of progress: conflicting aims and strategies of pastoral nomads and development agents in East Africa", paper for the Conference on Cultural Identity and Development in Africa, 11-13 June 1981, Bayreuth.
Schlee, G. 1984. "Une societe pastorale pluriethnique: Oromo et Somalis au nord du Kenya", Production pastorale et societe 15:21-39.
Schlee, G. 1985. "Interethnic clan identities among cushitic-speaking pastoralists", Africa 55(1):17-38.
Schlee, G. 1987. "Holy grounds", presented at Workshop Changing rights in property and problems of pastoral development in the Sahel. Manchester Univ., April 1987.
Scoones, I. 1987. "Economic and ecological carrying capacity: implications for livestock development in the dryland communal areas of Zimbabwe", paper presented at a seminar, Dept. Biological Sciences, Univ. of Zimbabwe, 24 September 1987.
Scott, E.P. 1984. "Life before the drought: a human ecological perspective", pp. 49-76, in Scott, E.P. ed. Life before the drought, Allen & Unwin, Boston.
Scott, M.F. & B. Gormley. 1980. "The animal of friendship (habbanae): an indigenous model of Sahelian pastoral development in Niger", pp. 92-110, in Brokensha, D., D.M. Warren & O. Werner. eds. Indigenous knowledge systems and development. Univ. Press of America, Washington DC.
Seif el Din, A.G. 1986. Integrated land use in forest reserves in eastern region: global diagnosis and the involvement of the people, FAO field document no. 11, GCP/SUD/033/NET, Rome.
Silberfein, M. 1984. "Differential development in Machakos District, Kenya", pp. 101-123, in Scott, E.P. ed. Life before the drought, Allen & Unwin, Boston.
Southwold, M. 1964. "Leadership, Authority and the village community", pp. 211-255, in Fallers, L.A. & A.I. Richards, eds. The King's men: leadership and status in Buganda on the eve of independence, Oxford Univ. Press, London.
Spencer, P. 1965. The Samburu: a study of gerontocracy in a nomadic tribe. Routledge & Kegan Paul, London.
Stenning, D.J. 1959. Savannah nomads: a study of the Wodaabe pastoral Fulani of western Bornu Province, northern Region, Nigeria. Oxford Univ. Press, London.
Stewart, P.J. 1978. "Islamic law as a factor in grazing management: the pilgrimage sacrifice", pp. 119-120, in Hyder, D.N. ed. Proceedings of the 1st International Rangeland Congress, SRM, Denver.
Stigter, K. 1987. "Traditional manipulation of microclimate factors: knowledge to be used", ILEIA 3(3):5-6.
Stiles, D. & A. Kassam. 1986. "An ethno-botanical study of Gabra plant use, Marsabit District, Kenya", Journal of the East Africa Natural History Society and National Museum 76(191): 1-23.
Storas, F. 1987. "Intention or implication - the effects of Turkana social organization on ecological balance", presented at Workshop Changing rights in property and problems of pastoral development in the Sahel. Manchester Univ., April 1987.
Stubbendieck, J. 1978. "Constraints to improvement of rangeland and livestock in the central plains and central plateau of Morocco", pp. 140-142, in Hyder, D.N. ed. Proceedings of the 1st International Rangeland Congress, SRM, Denver.
Sutter, J.W. 1978. Pastoral herding in the Arrondissement of Tanout, a socio-economic study for the Niger Range and Livestock Project, Ministry of Rural Development, Zinder.
Sweet, L.E. 1965a. "Camel pastoralism in north Arabia and the minimal camping unit", pp. 129-152, in Leeds, A. & A.P. Vayda. eds. Man, culture and animals: the role of animals in human ecological adjustments, American Assoc. Advancement of Science, publication no. 78, Washington DC.
Sweet, L.E. 1965b. "Camel raiding of north Arabian bedouin: a mechanism of ecological adaptation", American Anthropology 67:1132-1150.
Swift, J.J. 1975. "Pastoral nomadism as a form of land use: the Twareg of the Adrar n Iforas (Mali)", pp. 443-454, in Monod, T. ed. Pastoralism in tropical Africa. Oxford Univ. Press, London.
Swift, J.J. 1977. "Pastoral development in Somalia: herding cooperatives as a strategy against desertification and famine", pp. 275-305, in Glantz, M.H. ed. Desertification: environmental degradation in and around arid lands. Westview, Boulder.
Swift, J.J. 1982. "The future of African hunter-gatherers and pastoral peoples" Development and Change, Special Issue on the future of nomads in Africa, 13(2):159-181.
Swift, J.J. 1988a. Mali Republic. Kidal development project identification report. IFAD, Rome.
Swift, J.J. 1988b. Major issues in pastoral development with special emphasis on selected African Countries, FAO, Rome.
Swift, J.J. & A. Maliki. 1984. "Pilot herder associations", pp. 703-756, in Swift, J.J. ed. Pastoral development in central Niger: Report of the Niger range and livestock project USAID/Ministry of Rural Development, Niamey.
Talbot, W.J. 1961. "Land utilization in the arid regions of southern Africa. Part 1: South Africa", pp. 299-331, in Stamp, L.D. ed. A history of land use in arid regions. UNESCO Arid Zone Research, Vol. 17, Paris.
Thiongane, P.I. 1987. Etude des transhumances et de l'insertion de l'elevage dans les zones agro-pastorales de CEBV (Benin, Burkina Faso, Cote d'Ivoire, Niger, Togo, et les pays voisins): rapport de synthese de la mission. FAO, Rome.
Thomson, J.T. 1977. "Ecological deterioration: local level rule-making and enforcement problems in Niger", pp. 57-79, in Glantz, M.H. ed. Desertification: environmental degradation in and around arid lands. Westview, Boulder.
Tobayiwa, C. & P. Jackson. 1985. "Shona people, totems and wildlife", pp. 229-235, in McNeely, J.A. & D. Pitt. eds. Culture and conservation: the human dimensions of environmental planning. Croom Helm, London.
Toulmin, C. 1983. "Herders and farmers or farmer-herders and herder-farmers?", Pastoral Network Paper no. 15d, ODI, London.
Toupet, C. 1975. "Le nomade, conservateur de la nature? L'exemple de la Mauritanie centrale", pp. 455-467, in Monod, T. ed. Pastoralism in tropical Africa. Oxford Univ. Press, London.
Tubiana, M-J. 1969. "La pratique actuelle de la cueillette chez les Zaghawa du Tchad", JATBA XVI(2-5):4-83.
Tubiana, M-J & J. Tubiana. 1975. "Tradition et developpement au Soudan oriental: l'exemple Zaghawa", pp. 468-486, in Monod, T. ed. Pastoralism in tropical Africa. Oxford Univ. Press, London.
Tubiana, M-J. & J. Tubiana. 1977. The Zaghawa from an ecological perspective. Balkema, Rotterdam.
Turner, B. 1984. "Changing land-use patterns in the 'fadamas' of northern Nigeria", pp. 149-170, in Scott, E.P. ed. Life before the drought, Allen & Unwin, Boston.
UNEP. 1986a. Proceedings of the camel workshop, UNEP/GTZ, 9-11 May 1986, Wamba, Samburu District, Kenya.
UNEP. 1986b. Proceedings of the camel workshop, UNEP/GTZ/KALRES, 25-30 September 1986, Marsabit District, Kenya.
Verdier, R. 1965. "'Chef de terre' et 'terre de lignage': contribution a l'etude des systemes de droit foncier negro-africains", pp. 335-355, in Poirier, J. ed. Etudes de droit Africain et de droit Malgache, Univ. de Madagascar, Etudes Malgaches no. 16, Madagascar.
Vidal, F.S. 1978. "Utilization of surface water by northern Arabian bedouins", pp. 111-126, in Gonzalez, N.L. ed. Social and technological management in dry lands: past and present, indigenous and imposed, AAAS selected symposium no. 10, Westview, Boulder.
Viitanen, E. 1982. "Nomadism and desertification: a case study of northern Kordofan, Sudan", Nomadic Peoples 10:58-60.
Wagenaar, K.T., A. Diallo & A.R. Sayers. 1986. Productivity of transhumant Fulani Cattle in the Inner Delta of Mali. ILCA Research Report no. 13, Addis Ababa.
Ware, H. 1977. "Desertification and population: sub-saharan Africa", pp. 166-202, in Glantz, M.H. ed. Desertification: environmental degradation in and around arid lands. Westview, Boulder.
Warren, D.M. 1986. "The transformation of international agricultural research and development: linking scientific and indigenous agricultural systems", chapter 5, in Compton, J.L. ed. The transformation of international agricultural research and development: some U.S. perspectives. Westview, Boulder.
Warren, D.M. & P.M. Meehan. 1980. "Applied ethnoscience and dialogical communication in rural development", pp. 317-334, in Brokensha, D., D.M. Warren & O. Werner. eds. Indigenous knowledge systems and development. Univ. Press of America, Washington DC.
Weinstock, J.A. & N.T. Vergara. 1987. "Land or plants: agricultural tenure in agroforestry systems", Economic Botany 41(2): 312-322.
Western, D. 1982. "The environment and ecology of pastoralists in arid savannas", Development and Change 13(2): 183-211.
Western, D. & T. Dunne. 1979. "Environmental aspects of settlement site decisions among pastoral Maasai", Human ecology. 7(1):75-98.
Western, D. & V. Finch. 1986. "Cattle and pastoralism: survival and production in arid lands", Human Ecology 14(1):77-94.
Wiersum, K.F. 1985. "Trees in agricultural and livestock development", Netherlands Journal of Agricultural Science 33(2): 105-114.
Wilson, G. 1951. "The Nyakyusa of southwestern Tanganyika", pp. 253-291, in Colson, E. & M. Gluckman, eds. Seven tribes of British Central Africa. Oxford Univ. Press, Oxford.
Wilson, R.T. 1986. Livestock production in central Mali: long term studies on cattle and small ruminants in the agropastoral system. ILCA Research Report # 14, Addis Ababa.
Wilson, R.T., K. Wagenaar & S. Louis. 1984. "Animal production", pp. 69-144, in Swift, J.J. ed. Pastoral development in central Niger: Report of the Niger range and livestock project USAID/Ministry of Rural Development, Niamey.
Winter, M. 1984. "The Twareg", pp. 531-620, in Swift, J.J. ed. Pastoral development in central Niger: Report of the Niger range and livestock project USAID/Ministry of Rural Development, Niamey.
Woillet, J.C. 1979. "A survey of traditional technology: a basis for development programmes (activities)", African Environment 3(3-4):207-211.
Wylie, B. et al. 1984. "Grazing and animal plant relationships", pp. 163-213, in Swift, J.J. ed. Pastoral development in central Niger: Report of the Niger range and livestock project USAID/Ministry of Rural Development, Niamey.
Zumer-Linder, M. 1976. "Regional studies and proposals for development: Botswana", Ecol. Bull. (Stockholm) 24:171-187.
<section>a</section>
BIBLIOGRAPHY
Adjanohoun, E.J. 1980. Medicine traditionnelle et pharmacopee: contribution aux etudes ethnobotaniques et floristiques au Niger, ACCT, Paris.
Akol, J.P. 1958. "The nilotics and their cattle wealth", El-Baittar (Sudan) 1:24-28.
Antoniotto, A. 1984. "Traditional medicine in Somalia: an anthropological approach to the concepts concerning disease", pp. 155-169, in Labahn, T. ed. Proceedings of 2nd International Congress of Somali Studies, Univ. of Hamburg, Verlag, Hamburg.
Bake, G. 1983. Water resources and water management in southwestern Marsabit District, IPAL technical report no. B-4, MAB/UNESCO, Paris.
Barral, H. 1982. Le Ferlo des forages: gestion ancienne et actuelle de l'espace pastoral. Etude de geographie humaine, ORSTOM, Dakar.
Barral, H. et al. 1983. Systemes de production d'elevage au Senegal dans la region du Ferlo, ISRA/ORSTOM, Paris.
Baumer, M. 1984. L'apprentissage du pastoralisme: la formation des pasteurs, ENDA, Dakar.
Baxter, P.T.W. 1987. "The new East African pastoralism: an overview (Munro Lecture, 1985)", pp. 1-25, in Barnard, A. ed. Edinburgh Anthropology no. 2, Univ. of Edinburgh.
Beauvilain, A. 1976. Les Peuls du Dallol Bosso, These Doctorat de 3e cycle en geographie, Institut de Geographie, Rouen.
Benoit, M. 1984. Le seno-mango ne doit pas mourir: pastoralisme, vie sauvage et protection au Sahel, ORSTOM, Paris.
Benoit, M. 1977. "Introduction a la geographie des aires pastorales soudanienne de Haute Volta", Travaux et Documents de l'ORSTOM no. 69, Paris.
Bernus, E. 1984. "Attitude des populations", Bulletin de la Societe Languedocienne de geographie 18(3-4): 179-184.
Bernus, E. 1981. Touaregs Nigeriens: unite culturelle et diversite regionale d'un peuple pasteur, Memoires ORSTOM no. 94, ORSTOM, Paris.
Bernus, E. 1980. "L'arbre dans le nomad's land", Cahiers ORSTOM serie sciences humaines 17(3-4): 170-176.
Bille, J.C. 1978. "Woody forage species in the Sahel: their biology and use", pp. 392-395, in Hyder, D.N. ed. Proceedings 1st International Rangeland Congress, SRM, Denver.
BOSTID. 1986. Proceedings of Conference on Common Property Resource Management, April 1985, National Research Council, National Academy Press, Washington DC.
Botswana Society. 1971. Proceedings Conference on Sustainable Production from semi-arid areas, Botswana Society, Gabarone.
Boutrais, J. 1983. "L'elevage soudanien: des parcours de savanes aux ranchs (Cameroun - Nigeria)", Travaux et Documents ORSTOM no. 160, Paris.
Breman, H. 1982. La capacite de charge des paturages Saheliens pour les systemes d'elevage de la region, CABO, Wageningen.
Breman, H. et al. 1977. The ecology of the annual migration of cattle in the Sahel, CABO, Wageningen.
Breman, H. 1977. "Dynamics of Sahelian pastures in relation to drought and grazing", Oecologia 28:301-325.
Caponara, D.A. 1973. Water laws in Moslem countries, FAO Irrigation and Drainage Paper nos. 20/1 & 20/2, Rome.
Cernea, M.M. ed. 1985. Putting people first: sociological variables in rural development. World Bank, Oxford Univ. Press, New York.
Child, R.D. et al. 1984. Arid and semiarid lands: sustainable use and management in developing countries, Winrock International, Morilton.
Cisse, S. 1986. "Les territoires pastoraux du delta interieur du Niger", Nomadic Peoples 20:21-32.
Cisse, S. 1984. "Les unites pastorales: l'elevage transhumant en question, ou les questions posees par l'elevage", pp. 49-60, in Formation en amenagement pastorale integre au Sahel, Seminaire regional sur l'organisation des eleveurs en milieu pastoral sahelien et les effets des differentes formes d'appui technique et economique, EISMV, Dakar.
CNRS. 1977. L'elevage en Mediterranee occidentale: actes du colloque international de l'Institut de Recherches Mediterraneennes, CNRS, Paris.
Cossins, N.J. 1987. "Resource management and the improvement of productivity of traditional pastoral systems", pp. 321-343, in Economic Development Institute (EDI) ed. Seminar on Land and Water Resource Management, World Bank, Washington DC.
Coughenour, M.B. et al. 1985. "Energy extraction and use in a nomadic pastoral ecosystem", Science 230(4726):619-625.
Dabin, B. 1948. La classification vernaculaire et son interpretation pedologique, ORSTOM, Paris.
Diallo, A. 1978. Transhumance: comportement, nutrition et productivite d'un troupeau zebus de Diafarabe, These Doctorat de 3e cycle en biologie, Centre Pedagogique Superieur, Bamako.
Dougall, H.W. & A.V. Bogdan. 1958. "Browse plants of Kenya: with special reference to those occurring in south Baringo", The East African Agricultural Journal, April 1958:236-245.
Driouchi, A. 1985. "The common property rangeland: case study of Ain Leuh (Middle Atlas, Morocco)", paper written for BOSTID, Washington DC.
Dupire, M. 1975. "Exploitation du sol, communaute residentielles et organisation lignagere des pasteurs Wodaabe (Niger)", pp. 322-337, in Monod, T. ed. Pastoralism in Tropical Africa, International African Institute, London.
Equipe les societes nomades dans l'Etat. 1986. Nomadisme: mobilite et flexibilite?, ORSTOM, Bulletin de liaison no. 8, Paris.
Evangelou, P. 1984. Livestock development in Kenya's Maasailand, Westview, Boulder.
Fadul, A.M. 1987. The exercise of traditional rights in Rawashda and Wad Kabo forest, FAO field document no. 26, GCP/SUD/033/NET, Rome.
Faniran, A. & O. Areola. 1976. "The concept of resources and resource utilisation among local communities in Western State (Nigeria)", African Environment 2(3):39-50.
Fofana, B.S. 1984. Organisation des eleveurs fractions Tamasheq Karwassa (Douentza) pour la mise en place d'association pastorale, OMBEVI, Bamako.
Francis, P. 1984. '"For the use and common benefit of all Nigerians': consequences of the 1978 Land Nationalization", Africa 54(3):5-28.
Gilles, J.L. & K. Jamtgaard. 1981. "Overgrazing in pastoral areas: the commons reconsidered", Sociologia Ruralis 21(2): 129-141.
Gilles, J.L. 1982. "Planning livestock development: themes from indigenous systems". Agricultural Administration 11(3): 215-225.
Gulliver, P.H. 1958. "Land tenure and social change among the Nyakyusa: an essay in applied anthropology in south-west Tanganyika", East African Studies no. 11, East African Institute of Social Research, Kampala.
Homewood, K. & W.A. Rodgers. 1987. "Pastoralism, conservation and the overgrazing controversy", pp. 111-128, in Anderson, D. & R. Grove, eds. Conservation in Africa, Cambridge Univ. Press, Cambridge.
Horton, R. 1967. "African traditional thought and western science", Africa, 37:50-71, + 155-187.
ILCA. 1981. Arid zone programme. A compendium of background papers, ILCA, Bamako.
Jacques-Felix, H. 1963. "Contribution de Rene Caillie a l'ethno-botanique africaine au cours de ses voyages en Mauritanie et a Tombouctou 1819-1928", JATBA 10(8-9):287-334, and 10(10-11):449-520.
Johnson, G.A. 1983. "Decision-making organization and pastoral nomad camp size", Human Ecology 11(2): 175-199.
Kaba, L. 1984. "Power, prosperity and social inequality in Songhay (1464-1591)", pp. 29-48, in Scott, E.P. ed. Live before the drought, Allen & Unwin, Boston.
Kerharo, J. & J.G. Adam. 1974. La pharmacopee senegalaise traditionnelle: plantes medicinales et toxiques, Vigot Freres, Paris.
Kjenstad, V. 1987. Opportunities and constraints among cattle owners and farmers: a presentation of Ganawuri District, Plateau State, Nigeria, ILCA, Nigeria.
Koehn, P. 1982. "African approaches to environmental stress: a focus on Ethiopia and Nigeria", pp. 253-298, in Barrett, R.N. ed. International dimensions of the environmental crisis, Westview, Boulder.
Konczacki, Z.A. 1978. The economies of pastoralism: a case study of sub-saharan Africa, Frank Cass, London.
Kuper, H. & L. Kuper. 1965. African law: adaptation and development, Univ. California Press, Berkeley.
Le Houerou, H.N. ed. 1980. Browse in Africa: the current state of knowledge, ILCA, Addis Ababa.
Lemordant, D. 1971. "Contribution a l'ethnobotanique Ethiopienne", JATBA 18(1-2-3): 1-35, + 18(4-5-6):142-179.
Little, P.D., M.M. Horowitz & A.E. Nyerges. eds. 1987. Lands at risk in the third world, Westview, Boulder.
MAB. n.d. Human ecology: consultancy reports on the Rendille, Samburu and the role of women, IPAL technical report no. F-2, MAB/UNESCO, Nairobi.
Maguiraga, Y. 1984. "Problemes fonciers et l'organisation des eleveurs dans l'Operation de Developpement de l'Elevage dans la region de Mopti (ODEM)", pp. 61-84, in Formation en amenagement pastorale integre au Sahel, Seminaire regional sur l'organisation des eleveurs en milieu pastoral sahelien et les effets des differentes formes d'appui technique et economique, EISMV, Dakar.
Maliki, A. 1985. La vie pastorale au Sahel, ENDA, Dakar.
Marie, J. 1985. "Elevage et problemes fonciers dans le delta interieur du Niger au Mali", Cahiers de la Recherche-Developpement 7:38-42.
Mascott Ltd. 1986. Central rangelands development project: study of the future development of the central rangelands of Somalia. Final report, National Range Agency, Somalia.
McNeely, J.A. & D. Pitt. eds. 1985. Culture and conservation: the human dimension in environmental planning, Croom Helm, London.
Megerssa, G. & A. Kassam. 1987. "Oromo thinking: towards a 'folk' model of cultural interpretation with particular reference to trees", paper presented at Conference on African Folk Models and their Application, Univ. of Uppsala.
Monod, T. & C. Toupet. 1961. "Land use in the Sahara-Sahel region", pp. 239-253, in Stamp, L.D. ed. A history of land use in arid regions, UNESCO, Paris.
Morgan, W.T.W. 1981. "Ethnobotany of the Turkana: use of plants by a pastoral people and their livestock in Kenya", Economic Botany 35(1):96-130.
Morgan, W.T.W. 1972. East Africa: its people and resources, Oxford Univ. Press, London.
Morvan, H. & J. Vercruysse. 1978. "Vocabulaire des maladies du betail en langue Fulfulde chez les Mbororo de l'Empire Centreafricain", JATBA 25(2): 111-118.
Muhammad-Baba. T.A. 1988. "Pastoralists and social marginalization in Nigeria: preliminary observations on Ful'be social history", paper presented at National Conference on Pastoralism in Nigeria, NAPRI, Ahmadu Bello Univ., Zaria.
Naveh, Z. 1965. "The importance of integrated sociological and ecological approach to the development of semi-arid grasslands in East Africa", pp. 1563-1565, in Proceedings of 9th international grassland congress, Brazil.
ORSTOM. 1974. Les Illabakan (Niger): une tribu Touaregue sahelienne et son aire de nomadisation, ORSTOM Atlas des Structures Agraires au sud du Sahara, no. 10, Paris.
ORSTOM. 1968. Cahiers ORSTOM serie sciences humaines 5(3), "Temps et developpement: quatre societes en Cote d'Ivoire".
Ould Cheick, A. W. 1986. Les problemes actuels du nomadisme sahelien: le cas de la Mauritanie, Institut de Sahel, Etudes et travaux de l'Unite socio-economie et demographie no. 4, Bamako.
Oussouby, T. 1987. Une societe pastorale en mutation sous l'effet des politiques de developpement: les Peuls du Ferlo du debut du siecle a nos jours, ISRA/Institut de Sahel, Etudes et travaux de l'Unite socio-economie et demographie no. 8, Bamako.
Peacock, C.P. 1987. "Herd movement on a Maasai group ranch in relation to traditional organization and livestock development", Agricultural Administration and Extension 27(2):61-74.
Penning de Vries, F.W.T. & M.A. Djiteye. 1982. La productivite des paturages Saheliens, CABO, PUDOC, Wageningen.
Pousset, J-L. date? "Herboristes et tradipraticiens Africains", Europe Outremer 63(683-685):47.
Price, M.R.S. 1979. The rangelands: pastoralism and ranching, Workshop on development of Kenya's semi-arid areas, 23-26 July 1979, Nairobi Univ., Institute for Development Studies, Nairobi.
Redhead, J. 1985. "Decline and revival of traditional food plants in East Africa", Food and Nutrition 11(2): 17-22.
Sall, A. 1980. "Groupes semi-nomades et education: quelques reperes choisis dans le Ferlo", in Reunion la sante des adolescents, ENDA/UNICEF, Dakar.
Sarukhan, J. 1985. "Ecological and social overviews of ethnobotanical research", Economic Botany 39(4):431-435.
Savonnet, G. 1980. "L'arbre, le fruit et le petit berger du Lobi", Cahiers ORSTOM serie sciences humaines 17(3-4):227-234.
Schultz, E.A. ed. 1980. Image and reality in African interethnic relations, Studies in Third World Societies, publ. no. 11, College of William and Mary, Williamsburg.
Semenye, P.P. & P.N. de Leeuw. 1984. "Milk for calves or man in Maasai pastoral system in East Africa?", pp. 118-119, in Joss, P.J., P.W. Lynch & O.B. Williams, eds. Rangelands: a resource under seige. Proceedings of 2nd International Rangeland Congress, Adelaide, Australia.
Soret, M. 1949. Apercu sur l'ethnologie alimentaire et l'habitation de quelques populations du Soudan, de la Haute-Volta, de la Cote d'Ivoire et de la Guinee. Mission anthropologique, Dalaba, ORSTOM, Paris.
Soret, M. 1949. "Plantes utiles d'A.O.F. - Dalaba, mission anthropologique", ORSTOM, mimeo report.
Stauch, A. 1960. Etude et critique de la peche de decrue au "ndambe", Dir. Gen. Eaux et Forets du Cameroun.
Stauch, A. 1961. La peche au filets dormants dits "agatou", Dir. Gen. Eaux et Forets du Cameroun.
Stauch, A. 1960. Redevance coutumiere et industries de la peche dans le Nord Cameroun, Dir. Gen. Eaux et Forets du Cameroun.
Steward, J.H. ed. 1967. Contemporary change in traditional societies, Univ. of Illinois Press, Urbana.
Toure, I.A., P.I. Dia & M. Maldague. eds. 1985. Seminaire regional sur la problematique et les strategies sylvo-pastorales au Sahel, CILSS/Projet FAPIS, Dakar.
Vogt, K. 1987. '"Ekwars, ere and ewoi': browse and fodder trials in a traditional sylvo-pastoral system", paper for an OXFAM workshop Semi-arid lands management, OXFAM, Oxford.
Warren, D.M. & K. Cashman. 1988. Indigenous knowledge for sustainable agriculture and rural development, IIED gatekeeper series no. SA10, London.
Wilson, K.B. 1988. "Trees in fields in southern Zimbabwe", submitted to Journal of Southern African Studies.
Wilson, R.T. ed. 1982. "Livestock production in central Mali", ILCA Bulletin no. 15, ILCA, Addis Ababa.
Wilson, R.T. 1979. "Woldo Gebre Mariam medicine and magic in central Tigre: a contribution to the ethnobotany of the Ethiopian plateau", Economic Botany, 33(1):29-34.
Yusuf, H.I. et al. 1984. "Traditional medical practices in some Somali communities", pp. 171-183, in Labahn, T. ed. Proceedings of 2nd International Congress of Somali Studies, Univ. of Hamburg, Verlag, Hamburg.
