<title>ADCP/REP/89/36 - A Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in Africa South of the Sahara. A Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in the Sahara</title>
<section>1</section>
FOREWORD
Aquaculture continues to grow in economic importance. The main reason for this is the quantifiable contribution aquaculture is making in many countries to fill the growing gap between supply and demand for fisheries products. This gap continues to widen because of increasing human populations and the static growth rates of capture fisheries brought about by declines in stocks and the increasing cost of obtaining fish through conventional methods. Although this gap can (and in some cases is already) being met by alternatives, such as inexpensive poultry and white meats, aquaculture particularly provides consumers with a choice of fresh products.
Aquaculture is also evident in earning foreign exchange for many countries through the export of high-value products. It also creates employment, particularly in economically depressed coastal and remote regions, and contributes to the household economy of rural farmers.
This sixth regional survey prepared by the Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (ADCP) covers the existing aquaculture sector in the countries of Africa south of the Sahara. The countries of North Africa are included in the Regional Survey of the Mediterranean already published.
This present survey is not exhaustive. It has been prepared by Benedict Satia in a relatively brief desk study. For some countries of this highly active aquaculture region detailed information is still difficult to obtain. The ADCP apologizes for any omissions and errors which may exist in the survey, and hopes that these can be corrected in an up-dated survey. New information and notification of changes and errors should be indicated to the ADCP in the Fisheries Department, FAO, Rome. The detailed Table of Contents illustrates the range of information which, hopefully, will be assembled in due course for all regions.
The survey is directed toward administrators, executives, and managers who require broad overviews, rather than for scientists and technologists who require detailed information about species and practices. It is the sixth of a series of regional surveys. To this end, the ADCP hopes that the reader will find the information described here useful.
Colin E. Nash
Craig B. Kensler
Rome, 1989
<section>2</section>
INTRODUCTION
This Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in Africa South of the Sahara is a contribution to the global survey of the sector currently being undertaken by the Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (ADCP). It has been prepared from the considerable information available at FAO Headquarters in Rome, together with individual Country Reports resulting from specific missions in 1988 to Côte d'Ivoire, Ghana, and Nigeria, followed by Kenya, Malawi, Tanzania, and Zambia.
Figure 1: Sub-Saharan Africa
There are 22 francophone, 19 anglophone, and 6 lusophone countries in the region as described by the survey, as well as one bilingual (French-English) country. This makes a total of 48 countries (see Figure 1). Countries included in the regional survey are:
English speaking
Botswana
Ethiopia
Gambia
Ghana*
Kenya*
Lesotho*
Liberia*
Malawi*
Mauritius*
Nigeria*
Seychelles
Sierra Leone*
South Africa*
Sudan*
Swaziland
Tanzania*
Uganda*
Zambia*
Zimbabwe*
French speaking
Benin*
Burkina Faso*
Burundi*
Central African Republic (CAR)*
Chad
Comoros
Congo*
Côte d'Ivoire*
Djibouti
Gabon*
Guinea*
Madagascar*
Mali*
Mauritania
Niger*
Réunion
Rwanda*
Senegal*
Somalia
St. Helena
Togo*
Zaïre*
Portuguese speaking
Angola*
Cape Verde
Equatorial Guinea
Guinea Bissau
Mozambique
Sao Tomé-et-Principe
Bilingual (French and English)
Cameroon*
* countries which reported aquaculture production for 1985
About one-third of the countries in the region as described are land-locked, namely, Botswana, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Central African Republic, Chad, Lesotho, Malawi, Mali, Niger, Rwanda, Uganda, Zambia, and Zimbabwe.
Although there are a few inland water bodies in the region, their water levels have dropped considerably in the last decade due to successive droughts. Consequently inland capture fisheries activities in these waters have been reduced substantially. In addition, like most of the other countries world-wide, the marine fish resources of most African countries are reported to be exploited to their maximum.
Data on active aquaculture production (for 1985) are reported for only 31 of the 48 countries described (noted above by asterisk). However, this does not infer that aquaculture is not being practised in the others. The author is of the opinion that data obtained from these non-reporting countries would not alter the substance of this report.
<section>3</section>
1. CONSUMPTION OF FISH AND SHELLFISH AND THE REGIONAL MARKETS
1.1 Nutritional benefits of fish and shellfish
1.2 Characteristics of consumption in the region
1.3 Annual consumption of fish and shellfish
1.4 Gross market data
1.5 Specific market data
1.6 Information for the trade
1.7 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
1.1 Nutritional benefits of fish and shellfish
First and foremost, increasing the per caput consumption of fish and shellfish in any country benefits health. Aquatic animals contain a high level of protein (17-20%) with an amino acid profile similar to that of the meat of land animals. The flesh of fish is also readily digestible and immediately utilizable by the human body which makes it suitable for complementing the high carbohydrate diets prevailing in almost all the countries of the region under survey. Compared with land animals (with some exceptions, such as shellfish), aquatic animals have a high percentage of edible flesh, and there is little wastage.
Aquatic animals are a source of minerals such as calcium, iron and phosphorus as well as trace elements and vitamins. Marine species are particularly rich in iodine. The fatty-acid content is high in polyunsaturates and particularly those which are attributed to reduce blood cholesterol. There are also some indications that certain fatty acids in fish may provide protection against renal disease.
On a unit weight basis, fish is relatively expensive compared with the local prices of vegetables and grains, but it is frequently less costly than alternative animal protein sources. Where and when fish and other aquatic products are available they are the major animal protein source for the rural poor.
1.2 Characteristics of consumption in the region
Fish constitutes an important nutritional component in the diets of the people of almost all the countries of the region as described. Fish properly preserved, prepared, and presented in the right form is popular in most households. The appeal of an otherwise tasteless diet is greatly improved, and much use is made of fish and shellfish as soups and condiments, especially when smoked or dried. Almost all types and sizes of fish are highly acceptable to poor families and, when eaten with cereals or tubers, form the basis of their diet. Among some religious groups, such as the Coptic orthodox church in Ethiopia, fish plays an important role in fasting days when the eating of meat products is forbidden.
In a survey of 27 countries in Africa (numbering 470 million people) active in aquaculture activities in 1980 the average annual fish consumption was 10.5 kg per caput. Typical of all low-income countries, the consumption ratio of fish to meat was high, ranging from 0.2 to 2.9; European and Latin American countries, by contrast, ranged from 0.2 to 1.4. Recorded fish production, however, only contributed 0.3% to the annual consumption, compared with Asia (14.2%), Europe (8.7%), North America (4.7%), and Latin America (2.1%). Africa as a whole is a net importer of fish and, with the increasing population rate, national production is forecast to increase.
Based on further analysis of the aquaculture data available for all regions in 1980, the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and others concluded that most aquaculture developed countries have a per caput fish catch which exceeds (sometimes even by far) the per caput fish consumption. On a world-wide basis the fish to meat consumption ratio is high in low-income countries and low in high-income countries (with the exception of Japan). Despite this, however, fish consumption in general is a function of income, and both in Asia and Latin America fish farming is correlated with fish consumption.
FAO went on to speculate that there would be an autonomous growth of the aquaculture industry when the threshold production is exceeded. In the case of fish, this is 50-100 g per caput per annum. Applying this somewhat inexact but useful indicator to the most recent set of aquaculture production statistics for Africa, the following countries (from a total of 52 which responded to the aquaculture production survey) have attained the threshold of 50-100 g per caput per annum, and are therefore functioning actively in the sector: Zambia (147 g). Central African Republic, (129 g), Congo (112 g), Zimbabwe (99 g), Ghana (57 g), Kenya (55 g), Mauritius (51 g), and Nigeria (50 g). Countries just below the threshold are Côte d'Ivoire (38 g), Gabon (28 g), Cameroon (22 g), and Togo (21 g).
Of the five North African countries included in the responses, namely Algeria, Egypt, Libya, Morocco, and Tunisia, only Egypt (1 042 g) and Tunisia (171 g) have attained the threshold. However, North African countries are not included in this regional survey as their aquaculture resources and activities are more related to those of other countries in the Mediterranean. Predominantly they only participate in programmes in that region, and their data are included in the Regional Survey of the Mediterranean.
1.3 Annual consumption of fish and shellfish
Total fish and fisheries products available to the population (427 million) of the 48 countries of the region as described was 3 590 543 tonnes (t) in 1984 (see Table 1). The per caput consumption was 8.41 kg.
Capture fisheries contributed about 71% to the total fish intake in the region but the contribution from aquaculture, according to the figures provided, was insignificant. In 1985, the year when more or less complete information on aquaculture production was obtained by FAO from 31 countries in the region, recorded production represented only 0.3% of the total fish catch. Its contribution to fish consumption would, however, have been much lower than 0.3% (Table 2).
Africa is a net importer of fish. In 1984 the region imported 1 056 041 t of fish, or 29% of its fish intake. The major fish importers in absolute terms (kg/caput of imported fish) were: Congo (22 kg). Côte d'Ivoire (13 kg), Liberia (9 kg) and Gabon (7 kg).
Within the region only six countries, namely Seychelles (47.5 kg), Sao Tomé-et-Principe (37.6 kg), Congo (33.4 kg), Gabon (24.3 kg), Senegal (22.6 kg) and Reunion (22.6 kg), which represent less than 2.5% of the region's population, had a per caput yearly consumption of more than 20 kg.
Twenty-four countries (31% of the population), consumed less than 5 kg/caput/y. The countries with the least consumption included: Ethiopia (0.1 kg), Swaziland (0.1 kg), Rwanda (0.2 kg), Niger (0.9 kg), Sudan (1.4 kg), and Burkina Faso (1.5 kg). No information was available for two countries: St. Helena and Djibouti. The remaining sixteen countries were moderate consumers of 5 to 20 kg/caput/y.
In some countries, such as Côte d'Ivoire, Ghana, Madagascar, and Nigeria, there are also differences in consumption between coastal/riverine and water "deprived" populations, and between urban and rural inhabitants. In either case the coastal/riverine and urban populations consume more fish.
From data of the FAO Food Balance Sheets for 1984 (Table 1), the cumulated meat plus fish per caput yearly consumption ranged from 5.16 to 74.32 kg. Fish represented about 40% of the cumulated intake. However, there were wide variations between countries, ranging from 0.77% for Ethiopia to 83% for Sao Tomé-et-Principe. Furthermore, certain low fish consuming countries compensated the "shortfall" in fish by consuming more meat. This is the case for Somalia 41.94 kg meat (2.0 kg fish), Botswana 24.99 kg meat (2.5 kg fish), Sudan 24.27 kg meat (1.4 kg fish), CAR 22.31 kg meat (5.3 kg fish), and Madagascar 14.2 kg meat (5.8 kg fish).
1.4 Gross market data
Data from the World Bank Atlas, 1987 (Table 3) indicated that the 48 countries in the region had a total population of 453 648 000 in 1985. About 21% of this population was concentrated in Nigeria (99 669 000). Five other countries had populations ranging from 20 to 43 million, which represented about 31% of the region's total population. These countries were: Ethiopia (42 169 000), South Africa (32 432 000), Zaïre (30 557 000), Tanzania (22 243 000), and Sudan (21 931 000). The population in nine countries, namely Botswana, Cameroon, Congo, Côte d'Ivoire, Ghana, Kenya, Madagascar and Mozambique was between 10 and 20 million, while that in 35 countries was less than 10 million. Data were not available for St. Helena, and Djibouti.
A characteristic of the region is the high population growth rates of 1.1-4.3% between 1973 and 1985.
In 1985, the Gross National Product (GNP) per caput in the region ranged from US$ 110 for Ethiopia to US$ 3 340 for Gabon. The GNP per caput (with % real growth for 1973-85) for 9 countries in the region with more than US$ 500 was Gabon US$ 340 (-0.6), South Africa US$ 2 010 (0.0), Mauritius US$ 1 070 (1.8), Congo US$ 1 050 (4.5), Botswana US$ 840 (6.4), Cameroon US$ 810 (3.8), Nigeria US$ 760 (-2.5). Zimbabwe US$ 650 (0.0), and Côte d'Ivoire US$ 630 (1.1). Eleven countries, namely Lesotho, Cape Verde, Liberia, Mauritania, Zambia, Ghana, Sierra Leone, Senegal, Sudan, Guinea, and Sao Tomé-et-Principe. had GNP per caput of between US$ 300-US$ 600. Twelve other countries, namely Kenya, Rwanda, Comoros, Benin, CAR, Tanzania, Somalia, Madagascar, Togo, Burundi, Gambia, and Niger, had GNP per caput of US$ 200-300; the remaining eight countries ranged between US$ 110-170. Data were not available for 8 countries in the region, namely Angola, Chad, Djibouti, Equatorial Guinea,
Mozambique, Seychelles, St. Helena, and Uganda.
Between 1973-85, 18 (37.5%) countries had a negative percent real growth, ranging from -0.2 for Sierra Leone to -3.8% for Zaïre. Real growth rate greater than 3% was obtained by only 5 countries, namely Botswana (6.4), Cape Verde (4.9), Lesotho (4.6), Congo (4.5), and Cameroon (3.8). The remaining 25 countries experienced either no growth, as in South Africa, or only moderate growth, ranging from 0.3% for Kenya to 2.0% for Rwanda.
1.5 Specific market data
Well-established marketing systems and distribution channels, dominated by "fish mammies" in West and Central Africa and by middlemen in East Africa, exist for the products of capture fisheries. The volume of aquaculture products in the region is small and almost all production, particularly fish, is sold fresh, either whole or in the round. Frequently it is sold alive on the pond side or in village markets, and therefore the total volume of aquaculture products is not recorded, or easily estimated.
In some cases, as in Ghana, fish producers select larger pieces for smoking or drying to add value to the products, but on the whole post-harvest handling and packaging practices are limited to molluscs and crustaceans, particularly in Kenya, Mauritius, Reunion, and South Africa.
Few distribution channels have evolved for aquaculture products in the region. In Côte d'Ivoire production from brackishwater net pens and cages is harvested and sold in Abidjan markets weekly. In Zambia production from corporate farms is given to estate employees, and the corresponding value is deducted from their wages. In Nigeria harvests from the Rock Water fish farm near Jos are sold in local hotels in the northern states of the country, and in Kenya production from Baobab farm (tilapia) near Mombasa and from Ngomeni shrimp farm are sold in local hotels in Nairobi and Mombasa. Production from trout farms in Kenya and Madagascar is sold to local tourist hotels.
Tilapias are the most popular species, although this may be because they are also the most readily available. In popularity they are closely followed by the various catfish species, and then the carps. Carps have low preference among ethnic and religious groups who do not accept pork. Other species, such as trout, and all the crustaceans and molluscs, are high-value "class" products which are usually sold on export markets or to the small exclusive markets associated with local tourism.
In general there is a strong preference for cultured products in the national markets over those from capture fisheries. In particular cultured products have a high priority among inland populations not accustomed to marine products; for example, among certain populations in CAR, Côte d'Ivoire, Ghana, and Nigeria, given capture fisheries and aquaculture products of similar size, the preferences are for cultured fish.
Among consumers in certain countries there is a common complaint, justified or not, that fish from some lakes are seasonally prone to off-flavours. This is often evident in Bouaké, Côte d'Ivoire, for example, by the scramble for cultured tilapia, given the equivalent price, despite its smaller size compared with tilapia from nearby Kossou Lake.
Fish pricing traditionally is guided by bargaining. The final price depends on many factors, such as the quantity available, the season of the year (with respect to the intensity of capture fisheries activities), the size and type of fish, and the quality, but it often includes the economic status of the buyer in terms of appearance and dress. Within this milieu of factors prices of fish are highly variable, not only within a country but also between countries. In general, fish farmers have taken advantage of those factors which influence pricing, particularly the freshness of their products and/or the fact that they can sell live products which command fairly good prices.
Aquaculture products are invariably sold either by numbers, often in heaps, or by weight. In general prices of aquaculture products are comparable to those of products from capture fisheries, and they have been increasing over the last decade. It is difficult to provide meaningful average prices for aquaculture products in the region. However, as an example, indicative prices per kg of product obtained in Côte d'Ivoire for fish products and protein-related products were as follows: tilapias (lake and cultured fish) - CFA.F. 500-600; Clarias spp. (freshwater) CFA.F. 600-700; tilapias (brackishwater culture) CFA.F. 600-800; and Chrysichthys spp. CFA.F. 900-1 200. By comparison, small frozen pelagics CFA.F. 400-550; other frozen fish CFA.F. 600-800; smoked/dried fish (CFA.F. 1 000-1 300); pork CFA.F. 1 000; beef CFA.F. 900; mutton CFA.F. 1 100, and poultry CFA.F. 850-1 000. In 1985 tilapias sold at CFA.F. 400-500/kg. The conversion rate of exchange was CFA.F. 450 and CFA.F. 280
to US$1.00 in 1985 and 1988, respectively.
Exports from the countries of the region are limited to crustaceans and molluscs. In 1985, about 40 t of freshwater prawns were produced from Malawi, Mauritius, Reunion, and Zimbabwe. In addition, there were about 35 t of marine shrimps from Kenya, 100 t of turtles from Réunion, and 2 t of oysters from Madagascar. Most of this production was exported. In the same year, South Africa and Mauritius produced about 200 t of molluscs (oysters and mussels), but the quantities exported are not known.
1.6 Information for the trade
The principal marketing information service in the region is INFOPECHE, although it does not differentiate aquaculture products as yet. INFOPECHE assists the fishing industry and governments in the region by establishing contacts between buyers and sellers of fish products, and providing technical information and advice on post-harvest aspects of fisheries, such as handling, processing, equipment selection, and quality assurance. INFOPECHE is based in Côte d'Ivoire and its working languages are French and English.
INFOPECHE is one of four regional services which, in addition to Africa, include a region of Arab countries, Asia/Pacific, and Latin America. This network of services produces a fortnightly news bulletin, called Trade News, in English, French, Spanish and Arabic. This deals with prices, cold storage holdings, short-term market trends, and business opportunities. The network also publishes a two-monthly magazine called INFOFISH International (incorporating Marketing Digest) in English, which contains articles of market analysis, new products, processing, packaging, equipment and other aspects of fisheries including aquaculture with summaries in the other three languages. Again, as yet, little information is relevant to aquaculture in the region.
A fifth member of the service is the FAO computerized system of fish marketing called GLOBEFISH. This database stores original information collected by INFOPECHE and the other regional services on such things as production and trade statistics, price series, the supply and demand situation, information on aquaculture, investment, joint ventures, and general economic data relevant to fisheries. Specific searches are made on request. FAO also produces Globefish Highlights, which is a quarterly analysis of medium trends. It is based on the information in the databank and is distributed as a supplement to the Trade News (above) in four languages.
Annual fishery statistics are also stored on an FAO database called FISHDAB. As yet aquaculture statistics are not separated.
Eurofish Report is a fortnightly review (published in the United Kingdom) of European fisheries and world fishing news. In addition to items of current news in the industry, including aquaculture, it contains data of supplies and prices of commodities, including aquaculture products, some of which are relevant to Africa.
Similarly, many of the international markets relevant to the interests of the region are covered by Seafood Business (USA), Seafood International (UK), Seafood Leader (USA), and Il Pesce (Italy). All these commercial publications are available through subscription and, in addition to prices and market trends, etc., often have relevant articles about aquaculture production world-wide.
1.7 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
There are no technical assistance projects dealing specifically with the consumption of aquaculture products in the region. The main project in the region supporting fish trade, identifying markets, etc., is INFOPECHE. INFOPECHE was established by the Government of Norway and FAO initially to assist the member countries of the Fishery Committee for the Eastern Central Atlantic (CECAF), but subsequently all countries. However, as the North African countries work more closely with INFOSAMAK, and many countries are land-locked and have little interest in fish trade, the INFOPECHE regional project now works predominantly with countries of West and Central Africa.
INFOPECHE was established in 1985 as a regional project and part of a world-wide fish marketing and promotion network (see 1.6). It provides guidance for such investments and production decisions, and identifies important opportunities in export-oriented fisheries and aquaculture. INFOPECHE can, on request, provide specific advice with regard to handling and marketing of fish and aquaculture products.
Through FAO's Technical Cooperation Programme, projects on fish handling and marketing have been undertaken recently in Benin, Cameroon and Ghana, and in April 1988 the Consultative Meeting of Experts on Fish Handling and Processing in the Region took place in Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire, at which some aquaculturists participated. Finally, the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) is considering a US$ 10 million project for the development and modernization of coastal artisanal fisheries in Nigeria which has a major component on fish handling, processing, and marketing.
<section>4</section>
2. PRODUCTION OF FISH AND SHELLFISH IN THE REGION
2.1 Characteristics of production in the region
2.2 Regional production data
2.3 Production systems and practices in the region
2.4 Producers in the region
2.5 Organizations of producers
2.6 Financial investment by public and private enterprises
2.7 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
2.8 Capital assistance projects in the sub-sector
2.1 Characteristics of production in the region
The production of fish and shellfish through aquaculture in the African region as described is limited compared with the historical production in Asia, and modern production in Europe and even Latin America. Except in a few countries, such as Benin, Ghana, and Mauritius, where the attachment of the people to capture fisheries probably enabled them to evolve traditional forms of aquaculture and management (in acadjas, whedos, and barochois, etc.), aquaculture is not a tradition in most African countries.
Classical aquaculture was introduced into inland areas of the region in the late 1940s and early 1950s. It is presently practised in all three environments, namely freshwater, brackishwater, and marine waters, but almost all activities continue to be concentrated in freshwater from which about 97% of the region's production is derived. This is predominantly fish, and in particular the indigenous and ubiquitous species of tilapias. Brackishwater fish culture and marine fish culture, as well as the culture of crustaceans and molluscs, are recent innovations, dating back no more than 20 years. So far, marine algae are not cultured in the region.
Aquaculture practices are characterized by the use of numerous small production units, mainly earthen ponds of less than 0.04 ha in size, a low level of inputs, such as seed, feed, and fertilizer, and simple technologies. Yields are generally low.
2.2 Regional production data
FAO statistics for 1985 (Table 2) indicate that collectively some 31 of the 48 countries of the region which provided information, produced less than 10 500 t of fish and shellfish. The world production was 7 815 569 t and the main producer was East Asia (6 288 000 t).
The figure of 10 500 t, however, requires qualification. Most fisheries administrations in African countries, which are usually responsible for the aquaculture sub-sector, do not have strong statistical collection and collation services. Furthermore, aquaculture production activities in the region are peculiar in that they are predominantly rural and oriented toward meeting the nutritional needs of the farmer and his extended family. For example, a large percentage of family production, from about 25% in Côte d'Ivoire and CAR to as much as 50% in Kenya, is consumed directly and therefore not reported and recorded. Only in the last decade has modern small-scale commercial aquaculture been practised and benefited the producer in terms of maximizing the family income. This trend, particularly freshwater farming in Kenya, Nigeria, and Zambia, and brackishwater farming in Côte d'Ivoire, Mauritius and Réunion, has enabled more reliable but basic statistics to be produced.
Of the 10 500 t produced in the region in 1985, over 89% came from only eight countries, namely Nigeria (5 000 t), followed by Kenya (1 120 t), Zambia (975 t), Zimbabwe (830 t), Ghana (450 t). Côte d'Ivoire (383 t), CAR (294 t) and Cameroon (256 t). Four countries, Burkina Faso, South Africa, Tanzania, and Zaïre, produced 100 to 220 t each, while the other 19 countries reported production of less than 75 t.
About 97% of the region's production was from freshwater, 1% from brackishwater aquaculture, and 2% from coastal marine waters. In terms of fish type, 97.5% were finfish, 0.6% were crustaceans, and 1.9% molluscs.
2.3 Production systems and practices in the region
Excluding the traditional systems of enhanced fisheries, that is, the acadjas, whedos, and barachois, etc., all three principal production systems based on the level of intensity and inputs are practised in the region. These are the extensive, semi-intensive, and intensive systems.
As the spectrum of possible practices within these systems is continuous it is frequently difficult to set precise limits for each. However, in brief, in the extensive system cultured organisms are kept at low densities and they are dependent on natural productivity for food, but at times productivity is assisted by fertilization of the substrate using manure or organic wastes. This is the oldest and most widespread system practised in the region. Extensive farming is also practised in ricefields in Madagascar, and for oysters in Mauritius, Senegal, and Sierra Leone.
In the semi-intensive system cultured organisms are kept at higher densities than would be the case in extensive culture; they are dependent on both increased productivity provided by organic fertilization (compost or manure) and some supplementary feeding made up with locally available agricultural by-products and household leftovers. In some countries, for example, CAR, Madagascar, and Zambia, livestock husbandry is combined with the culture of fish to provide manure in the ponds.
The intensive system entails stocking cultured organisms at very high densities, providing artificial feed for their nutritional requirement, and all other inputs. This is the least used system in the region, but a number of commercial farms exist in Kenya, and to a lesser extent in Nigeria and Zambia and Zimbabwe. The intensive culture system has so far not been able to maintain commercial viability in the region, either as private or public enterprises; for example, the Natio Kobadara fish farm, cage culture in Kossou Lake, and the Africa BP farm, all in Côte d'Ivoire, the Godomey fish farm in Benin, the Banfora fish farm (closed in 1984) in Burkina Faso, the Brazzaville industrial fish farm in Congo, and the Aviara fish farm in Nigeria, have all closed for a number of reasons, or are experiencing financial difficulties.
Earthen ponds are the basic production units in the region, but some raceways and tanks are also in use in Congo, Kenya, South Africa, and Zambia, and net pens and cages are being used in Côte d'Ivoire and Zimbabwe.
Countries with no reported aquaculture production have been excluded from Table 4. These countries are Botswana, Cape Verde, Chad, Comoros, Djibouti, Equatorial Guinea, Ethiopia, Guinea Bissau, Mauritania, Sao Tomé-et-Principe, Seychelles, Somalia, and St. Helena.
The species cultured in the region include a variety of indigenous and exotic species (Table 4). However, the most widely cultivated species is the tilapia, especially Tilapia nilotica (Oreochromis niloticus). The species has been introduced into salt-water areas as well, in addition to Tilapia melanotheron (Sarotherodon melanotheron) and Tilapia guineensis which naturally occur in brackishwater. The common carp is grown in Cameroon, Kenya, Madagascar, Malawi, and Nigeria, and Clarias gariepinus is cultured in Burundi, Cameroon, CAR, Gabon, Malawi, and Nigeria, and to a lesser extent in at least five other countries. Other species are grown only in 2 or 3 countries.
Among the crustaceans, the penaeids, Penaeus monodon, P. indicus and P. notialis, are produced in Kenya and Tanzania, and are being cultivated on an experimental basis in about six countries, namely Côte d'Ivoire, the Gambia, Guinea, Guinea Bissau, Madagascar and Senegal. Macrobrachium rosenbergii is cultivated in Mauritius, South Africa, and Zimbabwe.
The oysters Crassostrea sp. are grown in Mauritius, Senegal, and Sierra Leone, and Pinctada margaritifera in Sudan.
In the 1950s, about 300 000 fish ponds were operating throughout the African continent, but this number has dwindled substantially. Many ponds have been abandoned because of poor returns, lack of fingerlings, continuous drought, or loss of water to competing agricultural users. Available information indicates that in 1985 there were about 49 000 (1 869 ha) rural ponds averaging 0.04 ha in the region (Table 5). The country with the largest surface under water was Zaïre (265 ha), followed by Nigeria (200 ha), Cameroon (170 ha), Ghana (150 ha). Côte d'Ivoire and Malawi (140 ha each). The remaining countries had less than 100 ha under water. About 455 ha has currently been put to rice and fish culture in Madagascar (Table 5).
A few large-scale commercial fish farms are found in Nigeria (5-8), Kenya (6), Zambia (5) and Côte d'Ivoire (2). They range in size from 2.4 to 30 ha.
2.4 Producers in the region
Socio-economic surveys of rural fish farmers have been undertaken in a number of countries in the region. These include Cameroon, CAR, Congo, Côte d'Ivoire, Kenya, Madagascar, and Zambia. These surveys have revealed the adaptability of producers. The producers include not only crop and livestock farmers, but also civil servants, retired civil servants, local businessmen, storekeepers, and individuals with other jobs. Furthermore, women are also involved directly as owners of fish ponds in Benin, Cameroon, Côte d'Ivoire, CAR, Congo, Gabon, and Zaïre.
There are two main types of producers in the region, namely the owner/operator and the owner/non-operator. Different groups of individuals appear also to be attracted by different aquaculture systems. In most cases the small-scale rural farmers are owner/operators and practise extensive farming. The more aggressive farmers, particularly chose living near large towns and who in most cases have other professional jobs, practise semi-intensive farming. Semi-intensive husbandry is dominated by well-placed individuals, corporate companies, and estates, all of whom operate large-scale production units. The intensive system, for the most part, remains experimental, although it is used in Congo, Kenya, South Africa, Zambia, and Zimbabwe.
The total number of producers in the region is not known accurately. It can be estimated through extrapolation of reasonably accurate figures for family type ponds in Cameroon (5 500), CAR (6 495), Côte d'Ivoire (2 900), Kenya (6 000), and Madagascar (3 625), which indicate that, on average, a producer has 1.3 ponds. On this basis, it is estimated chat there are about 49 600 families or small-scale producers in the region, together with about 50 large-scale operators most of whom are in Kenya, Nigeria, Zambia, Malawi, and Zimbabwe (see Table 5).
2.5 Organizations of producers
Fish farmers' organizations exist in a number of countries at both the national and local levels. At the national level they can be found in Ghana, Malawi, Nigeria, and Zimbabwe. The Ghana Fish Farmers' Association (GFFA) was founded in 1979 and had branches at Accra, Ashanti, and Tema. However, only the Ashanti branch, with about 20 members, exists at present. The Fish Farmers' Association of Nigeria (FFAN) was launched in January 1988 at Ibadan, and regional branches are yet to be formed. Associations of purely regional or local character are the Groupement à Vocation Coopérative (GVC) in Côte d'Ivoire (5) and the fish farmers' associations in Cameroon (15) and CAR (6). Except in Côte d'Ivoire, where the first GVCs were formed at the impulsion of the Government in 1980, the formation of fish farmers' associations has been largely autonomous with little outside financing and minimal governmental involvement.
The objectives of the organizations include, among others, stimulation of interest in aquaculture, discussion of problems facing the industry, sharing and promotion of ideas and experiences, and obtaining assistance from government and financial institutions to develop the sector of aquaculture. The organizations are governed by a set of rules and regulations (statutes).
In addition to these farmer-oriented organizations, there are aquaculture programmes for schools in Côte d'Ivoire, Kenya, Madagascar, and Zambia. In Côte d'Ivoire, for example, 86 schools own 316 ponds (13 ha). Whereas voluntary cooperative groups face organizational problems which are often complicated by village socio-cultural characteristics for decision-making, as among the GVCs in Côte d'Ivoire, the fish farming programmes at school level have been very effective with a high degree of participation by the children, parents, and teachers involved.
2.6 Financial investment by public and private enterprises
During the past 5 years public sector financing of the aquaculture sector has been limited. This has been due to the difficult economic climate in most countries throughout the region, but also as a result of the sector's poor performance record in the past. However, financial investments made by some governments in the sector have been substantial. Between 1978-86 the Government of Côte d'Ivoire spent about CFA.F. 848 million as its contribution to the United Nations Development Programme(UNDP)/FAO project for freshwater fish production, extension, and training, and has committed to spend CFA.F. 1 482 million during the third phase of the project. CAR provided over CFA.F. 72 million to aquaculture development between 1972-84. In the fiscal year 1988 the Government of Nigeria has allocated Naira 6 million, or 43% of the total budget of Naira 13 million of the Department of Fisheries, for aquaculture. The Governments of Gabon and Nigeria supported the training of 2 and 39 of
their citizens respectively at courses organized at the UNDP/FAO African Regional Aquaculture Centre (ARAC) in Port Harcourt, Nigeria (see Section 4.1) between 1980 and 1986. Many other governments have made investments in the training of staff.
Figures of investments by other countries are not available, but in most cases, the investments covered little more than staff salaries. The lack of financial resources has adversely affected the efficiency of extension services and the operation of fish seed production centres in many countries.
All aquaculture practices require some initial capital investment, particularly for the construction of ponds or other production units, but the operator also needs to procure initial inputs as well as annual inputs. Rural ponds are often built by farmers and their families. While this is still an important investment in time, not much cash may be required. Available information indicates that the cost of constructing 100 m^2 ponds in CAR and Sierra Leone is approximately US$ 60-100, while large-scale ponds of about 1 ha cost about US$ 2 700 to construct in Nigeria. These costs are high in relation to the GNP of the region.
2.7 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
The development of the aquaculture sector in the African region has been greatly aided by international technical assistance at the level of producers by the major multilateral and bilateral institutions. Technical assistance, as distinguished from capital assistance (see 2.8) which refers to the provision of funds for capital infrastructure, refers to funds for carrying out investment studies for production, demonstration projects, and production-support activities.
Some 16 technical assistance organizations currently support aquaculture development in Africa as a whole. This support is manifest in about 60 ongoing projects, many of which have components of production. These may be either assisting production in private operations or government fish farms. In association with active support for production at the farm level, these projects invariably support credit, extension, and technical training.
National projects within the region financed by UNDP which are concerned with production currently exist in CAR for freshwater fish farming and supply of credit; in Congo for the development of fish culture; in Côte d'Ivoire for freshwater fish production in rural areas, extension, and training; in Kenya for small-scale farming in the Lake Basin for fish production, extension, and training; in Madagascar (2) for rice and freshwater fish and marine shrimp production, extension, and training, and in Mali (2) for freshwater fish production in irrigated areas and for assisting government organization of the sector.
The European Development Fund supports projects in Benin for the production of tilapia and catfish, extension, and training; in Burkina Faso for freshwater fish production in small water bodies, and extension; and in Malawi for fish farming research and development, extension, and training.
FAO, through its Technical Cooperation Programme (TCP), supports short-term activities in the region for the management of fish farming and extension, for the production of shrimps in rice fields in reclaimed coastal land, and for freshwater fish and duck farming. In Zimbabwe it is rehabilitating the Henderson Research Station.
US Peace Corps Volunteers have maintained a long association with the development of rural fish farming in many African countries for many years, particularly in Cameroon, CAR, Kenya, Senegal, Togo, and Zaïre.
The US Agency for International Development (US AID) currently supports work in Rwanda for freshwater fish production and integrated farming in ponds; the Overseas Development Administration of the United Kingdom is active in Tanzania supporting general fish culture development; the Directorate General for International Cooperation (DGIS) and the University of Wageningen in the Netherlands support a project in Zambia for fish farming and integrated farming development, fingerling production in the Cameroon, shrimp production in the Gambia, and freshwater fish production potential in Nigeria; and the Norwegian Agency for International Development (NORAD) of Norway supports an integrated fish farming and extension project in the Northern Province of Zambia.
The Ministère de la Cooperation (FAC) in France supports regional development in pisciculture as a whole, and has individual projects in Congo, Côte d'Ivoire, Gabon, Guinea, Madagascar, Niger, and Senegal for both freshwater fishes and crustaceans.
The German Agency for Technical Cooperation (GTZ) promotes fish culture in Benin, Burkina Faso, Liberia, and Malawi, in addition to support for research and information.
Sweden, through the Swedish International Development Authority (SIDA), supports a regional project in Zambia, and through the Agency for Research Cooperation with Developing Countries (SAREC) a national project in Cape Verde.
Non-governmental Organizations (NGOs) are also active in rural fish culture development in Africa. Several of these projects, such as those in CAR, Côte d'Ivoire, and Madagascar, are large and long-term, and have been responsible for expanding the national sectors substantially.
2.8 Capital assistance projects in the sub-sector
Capital assistance projects in this sub-sector in the region are very few. The Government of the Netherlands in 1979 built the first modern hatchery in the region for the reproduction of Clarius gariepinus in CAR. Bilateral assistance from France, through the Caisse Centrale de Cooperation Economique (CCCE) and/or the Ministère de la Coopération (FAC), supports projects in Congo (industrial fish farming); in Côte d'Ivoire (brackishwater aquaculture project); in Niger (cage culture project in the Niger) and in Senegal (fish culture project in Matam).
The African Development Bank (AfDB) provides funds for the construction of ponds in Guinea. The International Tilapia Foundation in the Netherlands supports small projects in Benin and Togo on fish farming and rural community development. The World Bank (WB) is making a major loan to Nigeria for the development of aquaculture, and the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) is considering additional assistance which includes the rehabilitation of two fish farms at Mando (Kaduna) and Umuna-Okigwe (Owerri), as well as the construction of hatcheries at these farms. In addition, some of the projects detailed in section 2.7, particularly the UNDP-funded projects in CAR, Congo, Côte d'Ivoire, Madagascar, and Kenya have small components of capital assistance.
<section>5</section>
3. LOCAL INFRASTRUCTURE
3.1 Extension services in the region
3.2 Training of extension agents
3.3 Seed production facilities in the region
3.4 Manufacture of feed and fertilizers in the region
3.5 Manufacture of equipment for the industry
3.6 Other services for the industry
3.7 Local credit programmes
3.8 Trade publications for producers
3.9 Technical assistance projects in the sector
3.1 Extension services in the region
Local infrastructure for aquaculture development, and to support the primary beneficiaries, is limited in the region.
In the context of extension services their organization and efficiency in most of the countries in the region are similar. Aquaculture and capture fisheries are placed in a single administration, usually the Department of Fisheries, which is within the Ministry of Agriculture, Rural Development, or Animal Production.
In Côte d'Ivoire and Gabon a distinction is made between freshwater and brackishwater aquaculture. In Côte d'Ivoire freshwater aquaculture (pisciculture) is in the Ministry of Waters and Forests, and brackishwater aquaculture in the Ministry of Animal Production. In Gabon both sections are in the Ministry of Waters and Forests but in different Departments. Brackishwater aquaculture is in the Department of Marine Fisheries and freshwater aquaculture is in the Department of Inland Fisheries.
The organization of extension services in the region is normally hierarchical. Various levels of extension staff are employed, the last being the field worker. As workers in the broader administrations of fisheries, forestry, or wild life, extension workers may exercise parallel repressive functions. For example, in Benin and Gabon they also police as game or forest wardens; in Ghana, Kenya, and Nigeria they enforce fisheries regulations. Only in a few countries, particularly in Cameroon, Côte d'Ivoire, Madagascar, Sudan, and Zimbabwe, is a distinction made between aquaculture and fisheries extension.
Throughout the region extension services suffer from lack of funds. This is reflected in inadequate access to transport and equipment, the lack of extension materials, and with agents simultaneously performing other duties.
Most extension services in the region are overstaffed relative to their present needs. For example, Kenya has over 1 000 agents, followed by Nigeria (over 1 000), Tanzania (946), Malawi (172), Ghana (160), and Cameroon (150). This may be due to a concentration on the Training and Visit (T and V) System as the method to provide training and advice to farmers on their own farms.
Unfortunately, due to the stratification of extension services staff, most of the work in the field is being undertaken by personnel with little training themselves. In CAR, Congo, Côte d'Ivoire, Ghana, and Madagascar, extension agents are recruited and trained on the job. On the job training is appropriate when facilities exist and are operational, and also where senior staff or colleagues have the possibilities to perform their duties. At present, in many countries of the region, these conditions are lacking or are inadequate.
Extension agents, particularly field workers, have limited opportunities for career advancement. This is due to the lack of training institutions in many countries and to the lack of basic qualifications to pursue training outside the country. Even those who have the opportunity to train externally, such as the trainees of the UNDP/FAO project at ARAC, fail to further their career advancement because of a lack of follow-up by the institutions concerned; for example, the failure to issue the trainees with transcripts of their results, and diplomas or certificates of qualification.
In the region as a whole, the T and V is the most widely used extension method. However, demonstrations by "model farmers" and at aquaculture stations are also used in CAR, Côte d'Ivoire, Kenya, and Zambia. The transfer of advice through manuals, leaflets, visual aids, etc., has often been overlooked. Where they have been developed, as in CAR, Côte d'Ivoire, Madagascar, and Zambia, they have been of high quality. A number of countries (Cameroon, CAR, Kenya, Madagascar, Nigeria, and Tanzania) have produced booklets, sometimes in the local language, explaining fish culture principles and extension techniques.
3.2 Training of extension agents
Three levels of core personnel required for aquaculture have been identified as senior aquaculturists, technicians, and extension workers by UNDP and FAO. However, in many countries in the region, all three levels of trained personnel are lacking. In cases where senior aquaculturists exist their efficiency and work performance as supervisors of extension workers, who include technicians as well, are constrained by insufficient managerial and technical experience due to minimum exposure to the industry.
Vocational training, (practical training of farmers and technicians), which is probably the kind of training which is most urgently needed in the region, can be obtained from at least 10 institutions. These are:
Cameroon
Foumban Training Centre
Côte d'Ivoire
The UNDP/FAO Rural Aquaculture Development Project
Kenya
Baobab Farms Ltd., Mombasa
Naivasha Wildlife and Fisheries Training Institute
Limuru Girls School, Nairobi
Madagascar
Ambatolampy Fish Culture Station
National Centre for Oceanographic Research, Nosy-Be
Nigeria
Demonstration and Training Centres at Ibadan, Umuna-Okigwe (Owerri), Mando (Kaduna) and New Bussa
Sierra Leone
Makali Fish Culture Station
Zimbabwe
Various farmers training centres
Specialized institutions for the training of technicians in aquaculture are available in Cameroon (Centre de Formation Aquacole) and in Côte d'Ivoire (Centre de Formation Piscicole). The school at Bouaké was created in 1966 by the Centre Technique Forestier Tropical (CTFT) to cater for the needs of francophone African countries. The Centre was transferred to the Government of Côte d'Ivoire in 1984. The Centre at Foumban is the product of a UNDP/FAO fish culture project which dates back to 1969-75. Initially it trained only low-level extension workers. In 1986 it was upgraded as a National Training Centre comparable to agriculture, forestry, and livestock institutions which train low-level and mid-level personnel. Both centres lack qualified staff as well as sufficient and appropriate didactic materials.
At least seven other countries in the region have fisheries training institutions, or have used facilities of other local institutions (agriculture, forestry, etc.) to provide mid-level courses of short duration in aquaculture for their personnel. Some of these countries and the corresponding institutions are:
Kenya:
The Naivasha Wildlife and Fisheries Training Institute
CAR:
Collège Technique d'Agriculture, Grimari
Côte d'Ivoire:
Ecole des Pêches de Kossou as well as 6 agricultural, animal production and forestry training centres
Nigeria:
Federal Fisheries School, Lagos, plus several agriculture and livestock schools
Madagascar:
Ecole d'Application des Sciences et Techniques Agricoles at Antananarivo and Mahajanga
Tanzania:
Nyegezi Freshwater Institute, Nwanza
Kunduchi Fisheries Institute
Mbengani Fisheries Development Centre, Bagamoyo
Zimbabwe:
Farmers Training Colleges
Many of these institutions have aquaculture components as appendages to their programmes.
Training in aquaculture skills is provided through short-term training courses organized for technicians and low-level extension workers. FAO has organized such training in CAR, Congo, Côte d'Ivoire, Kenya, Madagascar, and Zambia as part of UNDP/FAO projects in these countries. According to FAO about eleven countries in the region provide such training.
Specialized in-region or in-country training courses are also provided through bilateral or international arrangements. In 1987, the Commonwealth Secretariat ran a 6-week fish culture course in Ghana for 20 technical officers. It also ran a Workshop on Aquaculture for Commonwealth Countries in the region in 1985 at Freetown, Sierra Leone. FAO organized a one-month aquaculture extension course for 18 participants from 14 French speaking countries in Côte d'Ivoire in 1987.
In 1987-88 FAO, in collaboration with the Government of Hungary, organized three training courses in hatchery management, farm management» and feeds and feeding in Hungary. Each lasted for 3 months and 17 aquaculturists from 6 countries in Africa participated.
3.3 Seed production facilities in the region
Many rural freshwater farmers and all brackishwater farmers are dependent on government support for fish seed (fingerlings). Throughout the region many fish breeding centres, which were originally built in the 1950s, are in a state of disrepair due to the lack of maintenance. Consequently there are shortages of fish seed, even of the tilapias which require the simplest of hatchery technology.
All the countries in the region have fish breeding centres, ostensibly to produce fingerlings and particularly for the tilapias. There are about 237 (422 ha) fish breeding centres in the region. However, due to lack of funds for operation and maintenance, and adequately trained management, the production from many centres is extremely low. In some countries such as Côte d'Ivoire, CAR, Kenya, Malawi, Madagascar, and Zambia, some rural farmers are producing their own tilapia fingerlings. Large-scale farmers in Zambia and Nigeria produce their own fingerlings of tilapias, and occasionally carps.
Hatcheries are an innovation in the region and there are no more than 15. There are hatcheries for the production of Clarias gariepinus in Cameroon, CAR, Côte d'Ivoire, and Nigeria (at ARAC), but only those in CAR and Côte d'Ivoire are currently operating. Lesotho and Madagascar have carp hatcheries. Trout hatcheries exist in Kenya, Lesotho, Madagascar, Swaziland, and Zimbabwe for the hatching of eyed-eggs imported from Denmark in the case of Kenya, and from South Africa for Lesotho and Swaziland. There are trout hatcheries in South Africa. An experimental semi-commercial hatchery for the production of Chrysichthys sp. is operated by the Centre de Recherche Océanographiques (CRO) in Côte d'Ivoire. This hatchery supplies fingerlings of C. nigrodigitatus and T. melanotheron for cage culture in the lagoons. Mauritius and Zimbabwe have hatcheries for prawns, while Kenya has a shrimp hatchery at Malindi. There are no organized fish seed collectors in the region, except in
Madagascar.
The main species produced in hatcheries, and the major producers for each species, are the Tilapia spp. (Benin, Côte d'Ivoire, Kenya, and Niger); C. gariepinus (CAR and Côte d'Ivoire); Chrysichthys spp. (Côte d'Ivoire); common carp (Lesotho and Madagascar); trout spp. (Kenya, Madagascar, and Zimbabwe); marine shrimps (Kenya and Senegal); freshwater prawns (Mauritius and Zimbabwe).
In 1987 the Clarias gariepinus hatchery at Loka, Côte d'Ivoire, produced 138 000 fingerlings, while the CRO hatchery at Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire produced 1 800 000 Chrysichthys and 140 000 S. melanotheron fingerlings. In the same year, the UNDP/FAO freshwater rural fish farming project in Côte d'Ivoire produced about 4 million fingerlings of Oreochromis niloticus, and the UNDP/FAO project in Madagascar produced 700 000 common carp fingerlings. The total number of fingerlings produced in the region is not known.
Two major factors influence the cost of fish seed in the region. These are the high cost of production from government breeding centres and insufficient supply. In general fish seed prices are subsidized by governments as they are produced at public facilities, but the cost remains high and constitute a major operating cost for aquaculture development in the region. Indicative prices for tilapia from three countries are CFA.F. 15 per piece in Côte d'Ivoire, and Naira 0.25 per piece in Nigeria. For C. gariepinus the price is CFA.F. 50 in Côte d'Ivoire, and Naira 0.45 in Nigeria. For common carp fingerlings in Madagascar the price is F.MG. 20 per piece.
3.4 Manufacture of feed and fertilizers in the region
Small and medium-scale animal feed manufacturers exist in many countries of the region. However, owing to limited demand and the high cost of agricultural by-products which make up the components of fish feed, the feed industry to support the aquaculture sector has not developed in the region. Some large-scale farmers in Kenya and Nigeria have attempted to use poultry feeds but gave up after a few trials owing to their unsuitability and high costs.
Trout pellets are available in Kenya, and a high protein content (over 35%) pellet is used by Chrysichthys and T. nilotica cage culture farmers in Côte d'Ivoire. In both cases these are obtained through special arrangements with local animal feed manufacturers. The cost of producing one tonne of fish feed with a 25% protein content in Nigeria is about Naira 1 500, whereas a tonne of fish sells for Naira 6 000. The conversion ratio of this feed is said to be 2.5:1. Large scale aquaculture producers in Nigeria and Zambia produce their own feeds, or import them, as in Congo.
For the rural farmer growing tilapia, fish feed is not a constraint at the moment. However, as aquaculture develops and more intensive practices are adopted, the search for less expensive feeds may become necessary. The UNDP/FAO project in Côte d'Ivoire has developed, and is marketing at subisidized prices (CFA.F. 42/kg compared with about CFA.F. 110/kg cost price), a composite feed named "3A" to "progressive farmers" in the project area.
Kenya produces small quantities of fertilizers but attempts to set up fertilizer production plants in other countries, such as Cameroon, have met with little success. In general fertilizers are imported for agricultural use, but currently are in short supply. Priority for their use is given to arable farming.
Although artificial resources are not absolutely necessary for aquaculture production in the region, the alternatives, such as improved composting techniques and better pond management, require further applied research and introduction through trained extension workers.
3.5 Manufacture of equipment for the industry
A number of relevant industries and services support the aquaculture sector in many countries of the region. For example, most countries have engineers for the design and construction of cages and ponds under the guidance of experienced aquaculturists trained in pond construction techniques. There are also light engineering companies and government departments (such as Farm Engineering) to support the manufacture of basic tools, tanks, pipes, grain hullers, and grinders. Asbestos pipes are manufactured in Ghana and Nigeria, and steel pipes in Kenya and other countries. Cameroon is the headquarters of the association of French Speaking Farm Machinery Engineers and produces maize and rice hullers and grinders. This equipment is also produced in Kenya, Madagascar, and Nigeria. Two fish net factories exist in Nigeria but are not operating.
A number of countries, such as Ghana, Kenya, Nigeria, and Senegal, have subsidized fishing equipment in the past, but these subsidies have been removed or the amounts substantially reduced.
3.6 Other services for the industry
Consultants in the broad field of aquaculture are found in Ghana (Adumua-Bossman Fisheries and Aquaculture Consultants, Ashanti), in Kenya (Baobab Tilapia Farm, Mombasa), and in Nigeria (Okorie Fisheries Consultants, Enugu). A number of universities and research institutes also have qualified staff in the broad field of aquaculture and provide support to the industry.
3.7 Local credit programmes
Credit lines for aquaculture projects exist in some agricultural development banks and commercial banks in the region. In Nigeria, by a directive of the Central Bank of Nigeria (CBN) in 1977, commercial banks are required to lend not less than 15% of their total of loans or advances to agriculture, including aquaculture but not necessarily capture fisheries. However, in Nigeria as in many other countries in the region few people have obtained loans from conventional lending sources because they do not have collateral as, typically, they do not own land or have rights to water.
The mechanics of obtaining credit are difficult and interest rates are high. In Ghana the interest rate on aquaculture and rural development loans is 23.5%, plus 1% service charge. In Madagascar the interest rate is 17%.
Many farmers are not able to prepare viable and bankable dossiers, and local banks do not have adequate expertise to evaluate loans in the sector. In some cases, due to the weakness of the extension services, farmers are unaware of the existence of credit facilities.
Throughout the region the sector has been unable to prove its economic viability and is plagued with insufficient seed supply, inadequate management, and lack of technical support. Banks are sceptical that repayments will be made as planned. So far, the rate of repayment on loans made to individuals for aquaculture through cooperatives or to government institutions in some countries in the region (such as CAR, Côte d'Ivoire, Ghana, Kenya, Madagascar, and Nigeria), has been low.
As the loan requirements of small-scale farmers are relatively low, they usually obtain loans from their various meeting groups. A socio-economic survey of rural fish farmers in Cameroon, for example, indicated that of the farmers who had obtained loans for their operations less than 6% got them from the local agricultural or commercial banks, 16% obtained their loans from friends and relatives, while about 79% obtained credit from meeting groups. The rate of repayment on loans from meeting groups was 80% compared with less than 30% for those from conventional sources.
In Côte d'Ivoire eleven farming groups practising cage culture in the lagoons are financially supported by the French organization SEPIA, but very little information on the arrangement is available.
The total volume of loans made so far in the region is not known. However, loans which have been made to individuals in Ghana, Kenya, and Nigeria, and to GVC and the Natio Kobadara fish farm in Côte d'Ivoire, have been substantial, ranging from US$ 10 000 to 40 000 equivalent.
3.8 Trade publications for producers
There are no trade publications specifically for producers published within the region. Technical information is periodically available in INFOPECHE Marketing Digest published six times yearly, which has articles on aquaculture practices both within and outside the region (see 1.6). In Nigeria, the Fisheries Society of Nigeria (FISON) produced a book on fish culture practices targeted at farmers and extension agents and their annual publication includes advertisements from aquaculture service companies.
There are many foreign trade publications which include an international section. These are not readily available in Africa, and their information is not immediately relevant, but they are a source of technical information for producers (and others) in the region. These include Fish Farming International (UK), Fish Farmer (UK), Aquaculture Magazine (USA). Aquaculture Digest (USA), Progressive Fish Culturist (USA), Water Farming Journal (USA). These are obtainable through subscription.
A number of other publications often contain relevant information to producers as well as professionals. These include the Quarterly Newsletter of the European Aquaculture Society (Belgium), which is obtainable through membership of the Society (see 4.6), as well as the publications of the World Aquaculture Society (USA) and the American Fisheries Society (USA).
There are two Trade Directories of aquaculture products (Buyers Guides) which are published at regular intervals. One is available through subscription to Aquaculture Magazine (USA), and the other through the European Aquaculture Society (Belgium).
3.9 Technical assistance projects in the sector
Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector of local infrastructure are invariably divided into two types, namely those which have components of extension and those which have components of credit.
In the context of extension services, UNDP is providing support to CAR for freshwater fish farming and extension, to Côte d'Ivoire for freshwater fish production in rural areas, extension and training, to Kenya for small-scale farming in the Lake Basin for fish production, extension and training, and to Mali for small-scale and integrated farming.
The European Development Fund supports projects in Benin, Burkina Faso, and Malawi which have major components of extension. FAO, through its Technical Cooperation Programme, supports short-term activities in Burkina Faso for the management of fish farming and extension. The Swedish International Development Authority (SIDA) is funding a major extension-oriented project in the Southern African Development Coordination Conference (SADCC) region (see Section 6.4). Other technical assistance projects related to training in extension techniques and skills are detailed in section 3.2.
GTZ supports projects in Benin, Burkina Faso, Liberia, and Malawi for extension, and the latter two projects have components of financing. NORAD supports a project in Zambia with extension for integrated farming and tilapia production.
FAO has commissioned studies on the possibilities of introducing a component of aquaculture credit in the projects it executes in Côte d'Ivoire, Madagascar, and Zambia, and presently technical assistance projects in CAR and Guinea (see 2.2 above) are dealing with credit.
<section>6</section>
4. NATIONAL INFRASTRUCTURE
4.1 Manpower training in aquaculture technologies
4.2 Manpower training in management
4.3 Aquaculture research in the region
4.4 Management of credit
4.5 Associations of professionals in the region
4.6 Information for professionals
4.7 Technical assistance projects in the sob-sector
4.8 Capital assistance projects in the sub-sector
4.1 Manpower training in aquaculture technologies
At the level of national infrastructure there is a shortage of trained manpower. Mid-level and lower-level staff are recruited from among candidates of elementary and general education, and trained on the job. In some countries they are recruited from among graduates of agricultural, forestry, animal production, or fisheries colleges (see 3.1). However, as there are few fisheries stations, hatcheries, and extension services operating in the region, many personnel may not always get job satisfaction. Similarly, production from the sector is low, hence there are few opportunities yet in marketing or in elements of post-harvest technology.
Senior staff are recruited from among graduates trained in the biological sciences or other relevant fields such as agriculture and agricultural engineering. However, as aquaculture does not as yet have an image in the region, most graduates prefer more attractive government departments such as agriculture, forestry, or wildlife, where career advancement and job satisfaction are likely to be better.
There are no universities which provide a departmental graduate or post-graduate degree in aquaculture in the region.
A number of institutions in Cameroon, CAR, Congo, Côte d'Ivoire, Ghana, Kenya, Madagascar, Nigeria, Senegal, Sudan, Tanzania, and Zimbabwe (Table 6) have a component of aquaculture in some of their graduate and post-graduate programmes in the biological sciences and other relevant fields, such as fisheries and agriculture. Courses within these components include biology, fish husbandry, production systems and practices, and fish breeding, with some practical work, at the graduate level, and research at the post-graduate level. The number of hours devoted to aquaculture ranges from 5 hours at the University of Ghana to over 40 hours at the University of Ibadan.
There are programmes for a B.Sc. degree in marine biology and oceanography at the University of Tanzania; for M.Sc. hydrobiology at the University of Nairobi in Kenya; for M.Sc. animal production and Ingénieur Halieutes at the University of Madagascar; and for the graduate and post-graduate programmes of the University of Ibadan (Nigeria).
There is a shortage of outdoor facilities for experimental production and culture work in most of the universities. The University of Ghana has only 4 ponds, while at Ibadan there are only 6 ponds. There are no outdoor facilities in Cameroon, Côte d'Ivoire, or Senegal. All the institutions have laboratories but many of them need upgrading and strengthening.
The UNDP/FAO African Regional Aquaculture Centre (ARAC) in Port Harcourt, Nigeria trained 131 senior aquaculturists in six one-year courses from 1980-86. Of these, 129 received the ARAC Diploma in Aquaculture, and 1 the ARAC Certificate in Aquaculture. A total of 81 went on to obtain the degree of M.Tech.(Aquaculture) from the Rivers State University of Science and Technology which affiliated with the programme. The courses were bilingual. The majority of anglophone trainees (48) were from the host country, Nigeria, followed by Kenya (15), Tanzania and Zambia (5), the Gambia, Ghana, and Malawi (3), Sudan, Uganda, and Zimbabwe (2) and Ethiopia and Liberia (1). Among the francophone countries were Congo (7), CAR and Gabon (6), Guinea (4) Côte d'Ivoire (3), Cameroon, Mali, and Rwanda (2) and Burundi, Mauritania, Senegal, and Zaïre (1). One trainee, a francophone, came from Haiti, outside the region. Seventeen of 131 graduates were women.
Special high-level technical training courses have been organized in the region by FAO, other international organizations, and by the governments of some of the countries. These have been described in 3.2.
4.2 Manpower training in management
As aquaculture is not developed in the region, manpower training in business, farm and credit management, and in research is lacking. Graduates from ARAC and agriculture-trained graduates working in the aquaculture sector have basic working knowledge in these disciplines. A number of trainees from the region participated in a Fish Farm Management course organized by FAO in Hungary in 1987, with the financial assistance of the Arab Gulf Programme for UN Development Organizations (AGFUND).
4.3 Aquaculture research in the region
The region has a long history of aquaculture research. Almost all the countries concerned have been active in research, much of which has been applied and empirical in nature.
Prior to the 1980s the most well-known centres for applied research included the Djoumouna fish station in Congo; the CTFT/Division de Recherches Piscicoles at Bouaké, Côte d'Ivoire; the Sagana Fish Farm in Kenya; the Analamazaotra and Ampamaherana fish farms in Madagascar; the Kajansi fish culture station in Uganda; the Kipopo fish station in Zaïre; the Chilanga Fish station in Zambia; and the Henderson Research Centre in Zimbabwe. Except at the research centre at Bouaké, Côte d'Ivoire, now known as "Institut de Savannes" (IDESSA), and at Chilanga, Zambia, research work at all the other stations has been discontinued. The work at the Henderson Centre in Zimbabwe is being restarted through an FAO TCP project.
A major initiative in research support for the region was provided by the UNDP/FAO through the creation of ARAC in Nigeria. ARAC was intended to conduct lead research for the region. Unfortunately it was not able to fulfil this role due to the lack of adequate facilities. ARAC has succeeded in building a group of senior aquaculturists with some research training, spread throughout Africa (see 4.1), who should/could serve as the nucleus for future research and development of aquaculture in the region. However, the region is devoid of well-equipped research centres. Most laboratories have been neglected, and their equipment is outdated or in need of replacement parts which cannot be purchased because of economic hardships. Outdoor facilities are also in disrepair (see 4.1) and, where they still exist, the number of ponds are few and do not permit well designed experimental production and culture work to be carried out in a single location. In view of the fact that most of the
research needs of the region are applied in nature, they could be carried out by research staff now in place if facilities were refurbished and upgraded.
Compared with other regions there is little national research in aquaculture in Africa. The following analysis of aquaculture publications (by percentage of total publications as indexed) supports this statement as follows:
Region treated
Developed Countries
Developing Countries
Africa
Americas
Asia/Pacific
Australia/New Zealand
Europe (including USSR)
Middle East
Source: Aquaculture Abstracts (2), 1985
A similar pattern was obtained by the International Centre for Living Aquatic Resources Management (ICLARM) in 1984 in an analysis of the characteristics of tropical fisheries literature.
The following countries presently have aquaculture research institutes or fisheries research institutes, at which research on aquaculture can be undertaken:
Congo
Centre Piscicole National at Djoumouna
Côte d'Ivoire
IDESSA, Bouaké for freshwater, and CRO, Fisheries Research Station, Layo, for brackishwater.
Madagascar
Centre National de Recherches Océanographiques (CNRO) for brackishwater at Nosy Be
Freshwater stations at Analamazaotra, Ampamaherana and Kianjasoa
Ghana
Institute of Aquatic Biology, Aquaculture Research Centre, Akosombo.
Nigeria
NIOMR Inland Fish Culture Station, Aluu, Port Harcourt, and Kainji Lake Research Institute for freshwater; Buguma for brackishwater.
Cameroon
Aquaculture Research Centre at Foumban for freshwater, and Fisheries Research Station, Limbe, for brackishwater.
Zambia
Chilanga Fish Culture Station.
Malawi
Domasi Fish Farm.
Lesotho
Maseru Hatchery and Fish Farm.
Kenya
Sagana Fish Farm and Kenya Marine Fisheries Research Institute.
At present only the Djoumouna station in Congo, the IDESSA and CRO fish research stations in Côte d'Ivoire, the four stations in Madagascar, the Domasi Fish Farm in Malawi, and the Chilanga Fish Station in Zambia are operating normally, but not necessarily carrying out research. The facilities in most of the other institutions, including the so-called "lead" centres of the 1960s, are in a state of disrepair or are inadequate.
The centres in Cameroon and Ghana are new and are still under construction, the former since 1986, and the latter since 1982.
The programme objectives of IDESSA, CRO, and Chilanga include the development of techniques for mass production of local fish species and low cost technology systems for local farmers to increase fish production. IDESSA is undertaking researcher-farmer collaborative research using systems developed under the UNDP/FAO Aquaculture Development Project in the country. The three operating institutions have good facilities. IDESSA, for example, has 60 ponds (2.8 ha water surface), 14 raceways, 24 aquaria plus laboratories, classrooms, and offices.
ICLARM is working in association with national researchers for the development of tropical aquaculture technology at Domasi Fish Farm in Malawi. ICLARM is cooperating mainly with the SADCC countries. System research on integrated fish fanning has been carried out in Zambia for the last 8 years.
Several universities in the region, for example, the University of Nairobi (Kenya); the Universities of Calabar, Ibadan, Lagos, Nsukka, and Rivers State, all in Nigeria (see 4.1); and the University of Malawi, also undertake research in aquaculture.
The FAO publishes a list of personnel active in aquaculture research in Africa. Based on this most recent publication there are probably over 100 aquaculture researchers or potential researchers in the region.
4.4 Management of credit
Credit management is not a priority as the volume of credit available and utilized is usually small. Studies on the modalities for granting loans to fish farmers have been undertaken in CAR, Côte d'Ivoire, Madagascar, and Zambia. However, there is need for training of both aquaculture personnel and bank managers, especially officers-in-charge of credit; the former on the production of appropriate information materials and the latter (bank officials) in the sector and its practices. This training can be done through seminars and short-term specialist courses.
4.5 Associations of professionals in the region
Unlike the agricultural and forestry sectors, which have professional societies in many countries, there are no professional societies in the aquaculture sector. In Nigeria aquaculturists are members of the broader fisheries association, the Fisheries Society of Nigeria (FISON). In other countries aquaculturists meet under the umbrella of their respective fisheries administrations.
FISON and the fisheries administrations in some countries have organized meetings, seminars, workshops, etc. which contain certain aspects of aquaculture. In Nigeria, for example, the Fifth Conference of FISON, held at Ilorin in 1986, was devoted to the theme "Investment Opportunities in Commercial Aquaculture in Nigeria". In 1981 the Kenya Department of Fisheries, in collaboration with the Kenya Marine Fisheries Institute, organized a Symposium on the "Identification of future priorities in Fisheries Research in Kenya". More recently the Fisheries Department in Tanzania, in collaboration with the University of Dar es-Salaam, organized a 3-day national seminar on "Fisheries Policy and Planning" at the University of Dar es-Salaam.
The Hydrobiological Society of Eastern Africa, an association of biologists mainly based in Kenya, with members in Tanzania and Uganda and other countries, was formed in 1985. It has not been active in recent years.
There are no aquaculture research networks in the region. Some professionals have opportunities to meet and share ideas and experiences at conferences, meetings, or workshops organized by FAO and other international organizations, such as the International Foundation for Science (IFS) of Sweden, and the International Development Research Centre (IDRC) of Canada.
The main aquaculture workshops and meetings which have taken place in the past 5 years include the Seventh Session of CIFA held at Accra, Ghana, in December 1987, and the "SADCC Workshop on the Development of Village Level and Commercial Aquaculture in the SADCC Region" held at Kariba, Zimbabwe in 1986. Both these meetings were under the auspices of FAO. The "Consultative Workshop on Village Level Aquaculture Development in Africa" was organized by the Commonwealth Secretariat at Freetown, Sierra Leone in 1985.
The IFS organized a seminar on "Aquaculture Research in the Africa Region" at Kisumu, Kenya, in 1985. IDRC and the UNDP/FAO Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (ADCP) hosted their first workshop on "Research Priorities for African Aquaculture" at Dakar, Senegal, in 1986, and the second workshop in Bouaké, Côte d'Ivoire, in 1988.
A few professionals in the region are members of the World Aquaculture Society (WAS). This society is based in the USA and disseminates scientific research information and arranges annual conferences. An affiliate of WAS is the European Aquaculture Society (EAS) based in Belgium. This society has members from the region and also arranges conferences in which the development of aquaculture in Africa is often discussed, for example in Amsterdam in 1987. Membership of these two societies is individual or commercial, and materials can also be obtained through library membership.
A few professionals in Africa have joined the recently-formed Asian Fisheries Society, which is based in the Philippines.
4.6 Information for professionals
There is evidence that aquaculture might have started in the region in South Africa in 1859. By 1977 at least 100 papers on research work carried out in the region had been published in international journals, or were available in manuscript form. However, scientists in the region have little access to this information, or more recent information on aquaculture, due to the lack of information centres, libraries, computer facilities, but also due to language problems and financial resources.
In the 1960s several good technical libraries for fisheries and aquaculture were established; for example, in the francophone countries of Cameroon, CAR, Chad, Côte d'Ivoire, Congo, and Senegal, where CTFT/Office de la Recherche Scientifique et Technique Autre-Mer (ORSTOM) were active in aquatic research; in Ghana (Achimota) at the Institute of Aquatic Biology; in Nigeria (Lagos) at the West African Fisheries Research Institute; in Uganda (Jinja) at the East African Freshwater Fisheries Research Organization; in Zaïre at the Kipopo Research Station and at the INEAC Headquarters at Yangambi; in Zambia at the Chilanga Fish Station; and in Zimbabwe at the Henderson Research Centre. Few, if any, recent additions have been made to all these library collections since that time.
The best collection of aquaculture documents in the region is probably now in the care of the Nigerian Institute for Océanographie and Marine Research (NIOMR) at its inland fish culture station at Port Harcourt in Nigeria. This collection was the library of ARAC, the UNDP/FAO regional programme (see 4.1 and 6.4).
Presently there are two journals published in the region. These are "Kenya Aquatica" published by the Kenya Marine Fisheries Research Institute" and the "West Africa Journal of Fisheries" published in Nigeria. Outside these more specific regional journals, scientists publish their work in broader based journals in their countries, in international journals, in proceedings of seminars, workshops, etc., or as technical papers of their institutions.
For countries throughout the region FAO remains the principal information resource base, although recently new inputs have been provided by CRO, ICLARM, and IDRC.
The largest resource of aquaculture information for scientific and technical professionals is in FAO, Rome, Italy. FAO produces a series of publications, many of which are relevant to aquaculture in Africa. These are FAO Fisheries Reports, FAO Fisheries Technical Papers, and FAO Fisheries Synopses. All titles are categorized and produced regularly. Some documents are free and others are priced.
The FAO Fisheries Departmental Library is probably the largest repository of books on fisheries and related topics dealing with the region, many of which are on aquaculture subjects. It also maintains a large serial collection on all subjects related to fish and fisheries received from fisheries institutes, government departments, and commercial publishers throughout the world. It also has special collections of documents on a country basis, and subject files.
The Aquatic Sciences and Fisheries Information System (ASFIS) is an international information system for the Science, technology and management of marine and freshwater environments, including their socio-economic and legal aspects. The system's information outputs currently include: (1) the computer searchable ASFA database and its print product derivatives. Aquatic Sciences and Fisheries Abstracts (ASFA) and ASFA Aquaculture Abstracts; (2) Marine Science Contents Tables (MSCT); (3) Freshwater and Aquaculture Contents Tables (FACT); (4) the ASFIS Meetings Register; and (5) the World List of Serial Titles in Aquatic Sciences and Fisheries.
For African countries the main international databases that include aquaculture are:
(1) ASFA-I (Aquatic Sciences and Fisheries Abstracts);
(2) Biosis Previews (BioSciences Information Service publications);
(3) ICLARM (International Centre for Living Aquatic Resources Management);
(4) CAB Abstracts (Commonwealth Agricultural Bureau International);
(5) AGRIS International (Agricultural Sciences and Technology);
(6) Clearing House for Fisheries Advisory Services (UNDP/FAO project).
Professionals have access to a considerable volume of information about aquaculture because of their proximity to the Mediterranean and European regions, and communications with Asia and North America. This is usually through library membership, individual membership, or personal subscription.
The European Aquaculture Society (EAS) based in Belgium publishes a regular Newsletter for members which also contains the contents of some abstracts of the more important aquaculture journals. It also publishes special volumes on aquaculture technology available at reduced rates to members. The EAS is an affiliate of the World Aquaculture Society (WAS) which is based in the USA, and members have reciprocal benefits. The WAS produces the Journal of the World Aquaculture Society which is free to members.
The other specialist journals on aquaculture are obtained on subscription. These are Aquaculture (Netherlands), Aquaculture and Fisheries Management (UK), Aquaculture Engineering (UK), Bamidgeh/Journal of Aquaculture (Israel), Bulletin Français de la Pêche et de la Pisciculture (France), Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences (Canada), Diseases of Aquatic Organisms (FRG), Journal of Fish Biology (UK), Journal of Fish Diseases (UK), Progressive Fish Culturist (USA), Transactions of the American Fisheries Society (USA), etc.
4.7 Technical assistance projects in the sob-sector
Academic and basic research is receiving some broad scientific and technical support through technical assistance and international cooperation. Some 137 scholarships were offered for ARAC trainees over a six year period (see 6.2). Thirty six scholarships were offered by the African Development Bank (AfDB), 22 from the Commonwealth Fund for Technical Cooperation (CFTC) of the Commonwealth Secretariat, 11 from the European Economic Community (EEC), one from the German Foundation for International Development (GFID), 4 from the US Agency for International Development (USAID), 21 from UNDP/FAO projects, 2 from FAO, and 39 and 2 respectively from the Governments of Nigeria and Gabon.
Other scholarships and training opportunities have contributed to educational development. FAC (France), IDRC (Canada), IFS (Sweden), and ODA (UK) have been particularly supportive of graduate and post-graduate education and research, in addition to other institutions.
The IFS in Sweden currently provides research support for 8 scientists in Congo (2), Ghana, Kenya, Malawi, Niger, Nigeria, and Zambia, all working on projects from the biological control of schistosomiasis to sex reversal in tilapia. The Swedish Agency for Research Cooperation with Developing Countries (SAREC) supports research in Cape Verde on the introduction of aquaculture into the country with supporting research and development: the IDRC of Canada supports research projects in Cameroon (2) for a socio-economic survey of rural fish culture, and for researcher-farmer trials of integrating fish farming, in Côte d'Ivoire (2) for fish farming using acadjas in the lagoons, and for researcher-farmer trials on culture technologies developed under the UNDP/FAO Freshwater Fish Culture Development project; in Gambia and Sudan on oyster culture; and in Malawi for polyculture systems.
The ODA of the United Kingdom supports nine research projects at the University of Stirling, Scotland, and one at the University of Swansea, Wales, relevant to tilapia breeding, genetics, and production practices, and the culture of other species, notably Macrobrachium spp., and turtles. Similarly, the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries in the Netherlands is supporting research on the culture of African catfishes; the US Agency for International Development supports research and development at a number of US universities and research organizations working on aspects of aquaculture relevant for the region under survey, including the pond dynamics/aquaculture Collaborative Research Support Program (CRSP) in Rwanda, in association with five other non-regional countries and research institutions in the USA. The other two are in support of institutions in the USA (Auburn University) and the Philippines (ICLARM) for research on tilapia.
Many aquaculture development projects have some research components. Most of the UNDP/FAO field projects support research, together with the various CTFT projects funded by FED (Benin), and FAC (Niger). The GTZ-funded ICLARM project in Malawi is a significant development for research in Southern Africa.
4.8 Capital assistance projects in the sub-sector
Some of the research projects listed in section 4.7 and, in particular, the IDRC-supported research undertaking in Cameroon, Côte d'Ivoire, and Malawi, as well as those financed by the IFS in Benin, Cape Verde, Congo, Madagascar, Lesotho, and Tanzania, have a small input of capital assistance. This was also the case for ARAC. There are no projects which currently provide support for capital construction of research facilities.
<section>7</section>
5. NATIONAL SECTOR MANAGEMENT
5.1 Government policy in the region
5.2 Government organization in the region
5.3 Aquaculture legislation
5.4 Trade and business associations
5.5 Information resources for management
5.6 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
5.1 Government policy in the region
In all the countries of the region, to varying degrees, agriculture (used in this sense to include crop and animal production, forestry, fisheries, and aquaculture), has been traditionally characterized as the "mainstay" of the national economy, with many assigned roles to perform in the course of the country's economic development.
Among the many roles conventionally ascribed to the agricultural sector in a growing economy are those of providing adequate food for an increasing population, supplying adequate raw materials to a growing industrial sector, constituting a major source of employment and foreign exchange, and providing a market for the products of the industrial sector.
Regarding government policy in some countries, one significant development has been the strong encouragement and policy statements during the last few years for fish culture development by certain governments but without any corresponding support (extension advice, availability of fingerlings, etc.). This action by governments may in fact set back aquaculture development in these countries as potential producers may be disappointed at their poor results following raised expectations.
The Economic Commission for Africa (ECA), in collaboration with FAO, carried out an evaluation of the performance of the agricultural sector of the region in 1980/81 and concluded that the sector had not satisfactorily performed its roles. In the fisheries sector the drought of the early 1970s had adversely affected inland fisheries, especially the flood plain fisheries; while there was evidence that most of the marine fisheries stocks of the region were being exploited at their maximum and, in some cases, were over-exploited.
It was in this background that Heads of States and Governments in the region, excluding South Africa, adopted the "Lagos Plan of Action" in 1980 which outlined strategies for the attainment of food self-sufficiency within the region. The development of aquaculture was identified in the Plan of Action, which was later adopted by both the Lomé III Convention and in the United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-90, and accepted as a potential agricultural activity which could reduce shortfalls in fish catch and fish imports.
In addition to these statements all endorsed at the regional level, heads of governments and government officials in individual countries, in speeches dealing with food production and/or nutrition, often refer to the need to develop aquaculture. Public awareness of the sector has also been heightened by seminars, conferences, and symposia organized in a number of countries, such as Nigeria and Tanzania (see 4.5); by featuring aspects of aquaculture at agricultural shows and fairs, as in Kenya in 1985, in Nigeria in 1986 and 1988 and in Cameroon in 1984. Countries in the region took advantage of the 1985 "World Food Day" which was dedicated to small-scale fishermen, fish farmers and their communities, to publicize aquaculture. Local and international press have also commented on aquaculture development in the region. However, owing to economic hardships, the Lagos Plan of Action has remained inactive, not only in the aquaculture sector but in almost all other sectors - hence
the need for the UN Action Programme for Africa. Only a few countries in the region, among them Côte d'Ivoire, CAR, Madagascar, and Zambia have identified aquaculture as a priority vis-a-vis agriculture and actively support the development of the sector (see 2.6).
The primary social objectives of aquaculture in all the countries in the region have been to improve the nutritional status of rural people, and to diversify their activities and incomes. Only in recent years has aquaculture been viewed as an activity likely to meet shortfalls in fish supply and to reduce fish imports. Furthermore, only in a few countries, such as Kenya, Nigeria, and Zambia, etc., where large-scale commercial aquaculture has started, is the activity regarded as a "major" source of income.
In Kenya, Mauritius, and Réunion, aquaculture is also a source of foreign exchange. In addition to government employees, the sector provides employment directly or indirectly, usually on a part-time basis, to almost 50 000 families in the region (see 2.4).
The only existing planning documents for aquaculture for some countries in the region are CAR, Côte d'Ivoire, Ghana, Kenya, Madagascar, Nigeria, Sudan, and Tanzania, some of which date back to 1975. These rather ambitious and very useful background reviews have not been updated. Studies have been undertaken in some countries, such as Cameroon, Côte d'Ivoire, Gabon, Madagascar, and Nigeria, with the aim of establishing National Development Plans for Aquaculture, but these are yet to materialize.
In the absence of coherent aquaculture development plans with phased programmes and budgets, the tendency in almost all the countries has been to propose a shopping list of projects to external aid donors or financing institutions, or for inclusion in national economic, social, and cultural development plans. During the past six years, FAO has undertaken to study and produce "National Reviews of Aquaculture" of countries in the region. Twenty such reviews are now available. The UNDP/FAO ADCP has recently produced guidelines on aquaculture planning which is now being distributed to African countries.
Government support to the sector has been little at best. In Nigeria, for example, in the Third National Development Plan 1975-80, about Naira 641 451 million was allocated to dam construction and irrigation schemes, but only Naira 9.77 million for aquaculture to the various States, and Naira 1.84 million to the Federal Department of Fisheries (FDF). Less than half of this amount was released however. Between 1981-86, funds allocated to FDF for aquaculture amounted to Naira 9.06 million, while actual expenditure was Naira 5.22 million. In the fiscal year 1988, 43% of FDF's budget of about Naira 13 million is earmarked for aquaculture. In Ghana, none of the aquaculture projects listed in the "Agricultural Development Plan 1984-88", is costed or budgeted for.
5.2 Government organization in the region
The organization of the aquaculture sub-sector/sector is within the fisheries sector, but in no country in the region is there an independent Ministry of Fisheries. At one time such a Ministry existed in Ghana, but was dismantled in 1977.
The following table illustrates the multitude of ministries which are responsible for fisheries and aquaculture in the countries of the region:
Angola
Agriculture
Burkina Faso
Environnement et du Tourisme
Cameroon
Livestock, Fisheries and Animal Husbandry
CAR
Eaux et Forêts
Chad
Tourisme, Artisanal, Eaux, Forêts et Chasse
Ethiopia
Agriculture
Gabon
Eaux et Forêts
Guinea Bissau
Développement Rural et de la Pêche
Kenya
Tourism and Wildlife Regional Development, Science and Technology
Lesotho
Agriculture and Marketing
Malawi
Forestry and Natural Resources
Mauritania
Pêche et de l'Economie
Niger
Agriculture et de l'Environnement
Nigeria
Agriculture, Water and Rural Development
Sudan
Agriculture and Natural Resources Animal Resources
Swaziland
Agriculture and Co-operatives
Tanzania
Land, Natural Resources and Tourism
Togo
Développement Rural
Uganda
Animal Industries and Fisheries
Zimbabwe
Agriculture
Lands Resettlement and Rural Development
Natural Resources and Water Development
The fisheries sector is therefore always part of a broader Ministerial responsibility. The special situations in Côte d'Ivoire and Gabon were alluded to in section 3.1. The principal Ministries within which the fisheries sector is placed in some of the countries are the Ministry of Agriculture, the Ministry of Animal Production/Livestock, and the Ministry of Forestry or Waters and Forests.
In all the countries in the region, the Fisheries Department is responsible for the administration and development of the public sector of aquaculture. More precisely, it is responsible for policy, planning, monitoring, and the provision of extension services to the private sector. However, this responsibility is shared by other agencies as well, particularly parastatal organizations involved in irrigation schemes or in integrated rural development projects. This situation is not peculiar to the aquaculture sector, and the agricultural sector (crop and animal production) is often organized in the same way. It is seldom true, however, for the forestry and wildlife sectors.
In the anglophone countries in the region there is a corps of fisheries personnel/staff within the Civil Service, and aquaculturists are assimilated into this corps. In most francophone countries, the exception being Senegal and only recently Cameroon, there is no special corps for fisheries staff. They are recruited within the existing corps of workers in Waters and Forests, Veterinary, Animal Production, or Agriculture. However, in both systems the staffing is stratified or hierarchial in both a vertical and horizontal sense, For example, the typical structure is as follows:
Figure
Recruitment in either strata is based on basic educational training, while promotion within the strata is based on the number of years of service, merit and, at times, examination. Only in exceptional cases can one be promoted from the cadre of technical officers (technician) to that of fisheries officers (ingénieur), and usually only in the francophone system. The fisheries officers are generally responsible for administration, policy and planning, while technical officers are specifically responsible for operations.
As noted in section 3.1, the Departments are heavily staffed. The staff complement in the Inland Fisheries Division in Ghana in April 1988 was 6 fisheries officers. 111 technical officers, and 127 technical assistants; but most of the mid-level personnel are not trained and there are no specialist staff.
A number of graduates from the UNDP/FAO Regional Programme (ARAC) are currently in staff positions within governments in Cameroon, Congo, Côte d'Ivoire, Ghana, Kenya, Nigeria, Sudan. Tanzania, and Zambia, and have responsibilities for the sector.
5.3 Aquaculture legislation
Where legislation for the fisheries sectors exists most of it was enacted before 1980 and did not deal with the aquaculture sector. A few countries have updated their regulations, for example, Cameroon, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, the Gambia, Madagascar, and Senegal.
The new fisheries legislation in Cameroon, Gabon, and the Gambia contains specific clauses dealing with the aquaculture sector. Notably they deal with registration and licensing, and the exportation and importation of fish species. The importation of exotic species into Malawi is forbidden by law.
The Investment Code of many countries makes provisions for creating joint ventures. These provisions are also applicable to the aquaculture sector. However, the principal constraints of access to land and water rights need to be removed, or the procedures for obtaining them simplified, if joint ventures in the sector are to succeed.
5.4 Trade and business associations
There are no trade and business associations specifically for aquaculture in the region at the present time. Primarily this is because most aquaculture production is for national markets and little, if any, is exported. Each country has national Chambers of Commerce which encourage bilateral trade and assist with import documentation. Most of the national overseas embassies help the industry by sourcing equipment and advising on import regulations through their Commercial Attaches for international trade.
5.5 Information resources for management
There are no publications in the region for management. Any general information about the sector is usually in association with publications for producers (see 3.8) or for the professionals (see 4.6).
Through the UNDP/FAO Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (ADCP) a number of documents are available which deal with planning and management of the sector. ADCP also produces a Newsletter, called Aquaculture Minutes, for administrators and managers. Some of the publications produced by ADCP are guidelines for the preparation of national plans, planning aquaculture development, and aquaculture engineering.
5.6 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
Technical assistance projects directed at developing or improving the aquaculture administrations in the countries of the region in terms of organization, structure and managerial capacity, are few in number. This is in spite of the fact that lack of managerial expertise has often been cited as a principal reason for the failure of large-scale aquaculture ventures in particular, and for the poor performance of the extension services in general.
Only three technical assistance projects have been undertaken in the sub-sector. Two of them were in Gabon (1982) and the other was in Côte d'Ivoire (1984) and were studies aimed at formulating National Aquaculture Development Plans for these countries. The third was the Fish Farm Management Course organized through FAO in Hungary with funds provided by AGFUND. However, some of the projects detailed in sections 2.7, 3.9 and 4.8, particularly the UNDP-supported project in Mali for freshwater fish production in rice fields, have a small component of management.
At the Sixth Session of the Committee for Inland Fisheries of Africa (CIFA) at Lusaka, Zambia in 1985, there was a workshop on "Planning for Aquaculture in Africa".
<section>8</section>
6. REGIONAL SECTOR MANAGEMENT
6.1 United Nations organizations in the region
6.2 Other organizations in the region
6.3 Economic communities of the region
6.4 Regional and global aquaculture development projects
6.1 United Nations organizations in the region
Many of the countries in the region described by the survey are active in a number of regional organizations in which aquaculture has been recognized as a sector, either individually or as a component of a larger sector such as fisheries or agriculture, and which has received support in some form.
The principal regional organizations are those of the United Nations in which almost all the countries in the region actively participate as member states. Most of these same countries participate in the specialized agencies of the UN system, such as the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the World Bank (WB), etc., all of which have a substantial record of providing technical and financial assistance to aquaculture development.
Another UN organization of particular concern for the region, (including North African countries - Algeria, Egypt, Libya, Morocco and Tunisia - not included in this review), is the Economic Commission for Africa (ECA) which, in its programme for agriculture and natural resources, seeks self-sufficiency in food production and management of resources. ECA also has multi-national programming and operational centres (MULPOCs) in Cameroon, Morocco, Niger, Rwanda, and Zambia.
Other UN organizations active in the development of aquaculture in the region, or in other regions and hence are of benefit to countries of the region under survey through interregional project activities, are the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), and the World Health Organization (WHO). Some specialized agencies of the UN which are also active in their support to the aquaculture sector directly or indirectly are the UN Children's Fund (UNICEF), and the UN Environment Programme (UNEP).
The UN system assistance to aquaculture in the region began in the mid-1960s and included such projects as experimental work on brackishwater aquaculture in the Niger Delta of Nigeria in 1965, and a regional project for Cameroon, CAR, Congo, and Gabon, which was based in Bangui, CAR. Until the mid-1970s, the efforts were few. Since then development projects have become more frequent, either exclusively for aquaculture or as components of fishery or rural development projects. Between 1972-84 assistance from UNDP, including Funds-in-Trust which are primarily channelled through FAO, amounted to US$ 17.2 million, of which US$ 16.1 million (94.8%) were provided by UNDP, US$ 0.7 million through Trust Funds, and US$ 0.3 million through FAO's Technical Cooperation Programme (TCP).
The World Bank's lending, including technical assistance, has often been included with larger fisheries, agriculture, or rural development projects. The only major World Bank aquaculture project in the region would have been in Kenya, where the Bank was expected to provide a loan component for about US$ 1 million for the construction of a 25 ha (water area) fish farm at Kabonyo, near Lake Victoria. This project, however, was discontinued after several years of support and technical work by the UNDP/FAO ADCP programme when the loan was cancelled. Currently the Bank is planning to provide a loan to Nigeria which will have an aquaculture component.
UNICEF has provided funds for school ponds projects in Côte d'Ivoire under the UNDP/FAO Freshwater Rural Fish Culture Development Project. It is also supporting feasibility studies on cage and pen culture in Ghana, and provided US$ 302 400 for the payment of salaries of fish farm extension workers and for materials used for extension in CAR. UNEP provided funds for a symposium on Marine and Freshwater Ecology which took place in Nairobi in 1985, and involved participants from the region. Finally, IFAD is considering assistance of about US$ 10 million to Nigeria, in which there is a small aquaculture component which is expected to lay the foundations for a subsequent investment programme.
UN assistance has been instrumental in the development of aquaculture in the region. It has directly supported several levels of the aquaculture sector but aspects of policy making, planning, and management have never been included.
6.2 Other organizations in the region
There are several other regional organizations other than those of the UN system which support aquaculture development. One is the Organization of African Unity (OAU). The OAU was established in 1963 at Addis Ababa on signature of Charter by representatives of 32 governments which included all the countries described by this survey except Réunion, South Africa, and St. Helena. Another is the African Development Bank (AfDB), with headquarters in Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire, which has 50 African and 25 non-African members. In addition, there is the Southern African Development Coordination Conference (SADCC), which has nine member countries; and the Commonwealth with 15 members. Finally there is the European Economic Community (EEC) which has 45 African ACP States which are signatories of the Third Lomé Convention.
Other smaller organizations, mainly River and Lake Basin Authorities or Commissions, have expressed interest in the sector through fisheries enhancement activities. These organizations are the Lake Chad Basin Commission (LCBC) with 4 members, namely Cameroon, Chad, Niger, and Nigeria, the Niger River Commission, with 9 members, the Lakes Tanganyika and Kivu Basin Commission, with 5 members, and the Commission of the Great Lakes, with 3 members (Burundi, Rwanda and Zaïre). A detailed list indicating country membership to these organizations is given in Table 7.
Some of these organizations have been active in their support to the sector. The AfDB is providing funds for the construction of fish ponds in Guinea and supported the training of 36 participants at ARAC. The Commonwealth, through its Secretariat, provided scholarships for 22 trainees at ARAC and organized two workshops on aquaculture in Nairobi, Kenya, and in Freetown, Sierra Leone; the EEC supported 10 trainees at ARAC and provides support for projects in at least three countries, Benin, Burkina Faso, and Malawi. Finally, through concerted effort, SADCC has been able to attract a major project ALCOM - "Aquaculture for Local Community Development" in the region, for which the donor, SIDA, is expected to contribute about US$ 986 000 (see section 6.4).
6.3 Economic communities of the region
There are two monetary unions and two regional central banks in the region. The first, the Union Monétaire de l'Afrique Centrale, with its Banque des Etats de l'Afrique Centrale (BEAC), groups Cameroon, CAR, Chad, Congo, Equatorial Guinea, and Gabon, and has its banking Headquarters in Yaoundé, Cameroon. The second, the Union Monétaire de l'Afrique de l'Ouest, has its Banque Centrale des Etats de l'Afrique de l'Ouest (BCEAO) in Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire, and groups Benin, Burkina Faso, Côte d'Ivoire, Guinea, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Senegal, and Togo. The monetary unions and banks act as institutions in charge of money issue and harmonization of monetary policies in member countries.
There are four economic communities in the region. These are (1) Union Douanière et Economique de l'Afrique Centrale (UDEAC), created in 1966, with headquarters in Bangui, CAR, and groups Cameroon, CAR, Chad, Congo, Equatorial Guinea and Gabon: (2) Communauté Economique de l'Afrique de l'Ouest (CEAO) created in 1966 with headquarters in Ouagadougou, Burkina Faso, and groups Burkina Faso, Côte d'Ivoire, Mali, Niger, Senegal and Mauritania, with Benin and Togo as observers: (3) the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS), established in 1975 with headquarters in Lagos, Nigeria, with a membership of 16 English, French and Luso-speaking countries; and finally (4) the Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS) created in 1983 with a membership of 10 English, French and Luso-speaking countries.
The objectives of these economic communities are to encourage harmonious and balanced development in the economic activities of member states with a view to rapid improvement in the standard of living of their populations. Furthermore, to set up at the regional level an active policy of economic integration and cooperation in particular with respect to the development of agriculture, cattle breeding, fisheries, industry, transportation and tourism, and to develop exchange of agricultural and industrial projects between member states, in particular through the establishment among them of an organized trade zone.
These organizations have expressed interest in the sector and Fisheries Committees have been established within UDEAC, CEAO and ECOWAS. CEAO has planned and designed a new aquaculture research and training centre in Tiebissou in Côte d'Ivoire as a facility for its members, but there is no funding for its construction as yet. This centre is part of the Institut Supérieur des Sciences et Techniques Halieutiques (ISSTH) of CEAO.
6.4 Regional and global aquaculture development projects
The FAO/ADCP Aquaculture Aid Profiles (1988) lists three African regional development projects active in 1987. The first is ALCOM, "Aquaculture for Local Community Development". This project is funded by SIDA and executed by FAO. It is directed toward the nine SADCC countries, Angola, Botswana, Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Swaziland, Tanzania, Zambia, and Zimbabwe. The project is centred in Lusaka, Zambia. The main objective of the project is to improve the utilization of knowledge by the beneficiaries - the local community. To this end, the project is expected to elaborate effective strategies, policies, and methodologies for assisting rural peoples in improving their quality of life through the development of aquaculture, either in conjunction with land-based farming, or as an alternative to fishing. During this initial phase therefore, the project is undertaking a series of in-depth studies covering socio-cultural, economic, technological and ecological aspects of
aquaculture in rural development. It is establishing pilot community fish farming activities as a part of an existing general rural development project, and preparing a set of guidelines and protocols for selecting, formulating and implementing similar development activities elsewhere.
For eight years UNDP supported a project to establish the African Regional Aquaculture Centre (ARAC), executed by FAO. The programme, which ended in 1987, was sponsored by 18 countries, namely Burkina Faso, Cameroon, CAR, Côte d'Ivoire, Gabon, Ghana, Kenya, Lesotho, Madagascar, Malawi, Mauritius, Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra Leone, Sudan, Tanzania, Uganda, and Zambia, and was centred in Port Harcourt, Nigeria. The project was most active in the academic training of 131 senior aquaculturists, and had lesser components of research and information exchange.
As a follow-on of this project, and further support at the regional level, UNDP is currently considering financing a new project for called an "Integrated approach to aquaculture development in Africa". This will probably involve 11 countries, mostly in West and Central Africa.
Finally, UNDP funded the Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (ADCP) in support of global initiatives in aquaculture. Its activities have extended into Africa, Asia, Latin America, and the Mediterranean regions. Advisory and guideline publications deal with both administration of the sector, such as in technical assistance, economic development, planning, engineering, marketing, etc., and in technology. Through ADCP's interregional programmes, 16 participants from eleven countries in the region, namely: Cameroon (4), Kenya (3), Ghana (2), Côte d'Ivoire, Malawi, Mauritius, Nigeria, Tanzania, Uganda, and Zambia (one each), have attended the 3-4 months Integrated Fish Farming courses organized by NACA in Wuxi, China. IDRC funded the participation of African trainees at this training course: Cameroon (2); Kenya (2); Côte d'Ivoire (1), Nigeria (1) and Tanzania (1).
<section>9</section>
ANNEXES
I. Support data, figures, tables
II. Bibliography
III. Abbreviations
IV. List of ADCP reports
I. Support data, figures, tables
Table 1: Fish Supply and Consumption of Fish and Meat (kg/caput/y) in the African Region in 1984
Table 1 contd: Fish Supply and Consumption of Fish and Meat (kg/caput/y) in the African Region in 1984
Source: FAO Yearbook of Fishery Statistics, Fisheries Commodities Vol. 63, 1986. Published in 1988.
Table 2: Fish Catch and Aquaculture Production in the Africa Region South of the Sahara in 1985 (mt)
Country
Capture Fisheries
Aquaculture
Total
Aquaculture of Total
Angola
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Cape Verde
Cent. Afr. Rep.
Chad
Comoros
Congo
Côte d'Ivoire
Djibouti
Eq. Guinea
Ethiopia
Gabon
Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea Bissau
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mozambique
Niger
Nigeria
Reunion
Rwanda
Sao Tomé
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
St. Helen
Swaziland
Sudan
Tanzania
Togo
Uganda
Zaïre
Zambia
Zimbabwe
Source: FAO, 1988
Table 3: Gross Market Data (1985) for the Africa Region
Population
% Real Growth
GNP US$
% Real Growth
GNP/caput
% Real Growth
Angola
na
na
na
na
Benin
Botswana
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cameroon
Cape Verde
Cen. Afr. Rep.
Chad
na
na
na
na
Comoros
Congo
Côte d'Ivoire
Djibouti
na
na
na
na
na
na
Eq. Guinea
na
na
na
na
Ethiopia
Gabon
Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Gu. Bissau
Kenya
Lesotho
Liberia
Madagascar
Malawi
Mali
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mozambique
na
na
na
na
Niger
Nigeria
Reunion
na
na
Rwanda
Sao Tomé Pr.
Senegal
Swaziland
Seychelles
na
na
na
na
Sierra Leone
Somalia
South Africa
St. Helena
na
na
na
na
na
na
Sudan
Tanzania
Togo
Uganda
na
na
na
na
Zaïre
Zambia
Zimbabwe
Source: World Bank Atlas, 1987
Table 4: Fish Species Cultured in the Africa Region South of the Sahara
Table 5: A Composite Estimate of Aquaculture Production Units in 1985 in the Africa Region South of the Sahara
Table 5 contd: A Composite Estimate of Aquaculture Production Units in 1985 in the Africa Region South of the Sahara
Table 6: Aquaculture Training Opportunities in Universities of the Africa Region
Country
University
Department
Level
Cameroon
Centre Universitaire de Dschang, Ecole Normale Supérieure Agronomique (ENSA)
Forestry
Ingénieur
CAR
Institut Supérieur de Développement Rural (ISDR) Université de Bangui
Forestry
Ingénieur
Congo
Institut de Développement Rural, Université Marien Ngouabi, Brazzaville
Forestry
Ingénieur
Côte d'Ivoire
Université d'Abidjan Laboratoire de Biologie Marine, BP 4322, Abidjan
Marine Biology Laboratory
Short courses
Ecole Nationale Supérieure Agronomique (ENSA) Abidjan
Agronomy
Ingénieur
Ghana
University of Ghana PO Box 67, Legon
Zoology
B.Sc.; M.Sc.
Kenya
University of Nairobi PO Box 019, Nairobi
Zoology
B.Sc.; M.Sc.
Kenyatta University Nairobi
Agriculture
B.Sc. (Aquatic Ecology)
Madagascar
Centre Universitaire Régional de Toliari
Fishery and Aquaculture
Ingénieur Halieute
Etablissement d'Enseignement Supérieur des Sciences Agronomiques (EESSA), Université d'Antananarivo
Water and Forestry
Ingénieur
Etablissement d'Enseignement Supérieur des Sciences (EESS), Université d'Antananarivo
Hydrobiology Zoology Animal Production
M.Sc.; Ph.D.
Malawi
University of Malawi
Biology
B.Sc.; M.Sc.
- Chancellor College, Zomba
- Bunda College of Agriculture, Bunda
Animal Science
Diploma
Nigeria
University of Ibadan
Fisheries
B.Sc.; M.Sc. and Ph.D.
University of Lagos
Zoology
B.Sc.; M.Sc. and Ph.D.
University of Ife
Zoology
Marine Science
B.Sc.; M.Sc.
B.Sc.; M.Sc.
Rivers State University of Science and Technology (RSUST), Port Harcourt
Aquaculture
M. Tech (Aquaculture)
Rwanda
Université Nationale Faculté des Sciences, Butare
Zoology
Agronomy
B.Sc.; M.Sc.
Senegal
Université de Dakar, Dakar
Veterinary Medicine
D.V.M.
Sierra Leone
University of Sierra Leone Four ah Bay College PMB Freetown, Sierra Leone
Marine Biology and Oceanography
Diploma
Sudan
Khartoum University
Juba University
Zoology & Botany
National Resources
Tanzania
University of Dar es-Salaam PO Box 668, Zanzibar
Marine Sciences
B.Sc.; M.Sc.
Zaïre
Faculté des Sciences Université de Kinshasa
Zoology and Botany
B.Sc.; M.Sc.
Zimbabwe
University of Harare Zimbabwe
Agriculture
B.Sc.; M.Sc. and Ph.D.
Table 7: Membership of regional organizations not detailed in the text
1. The Niger Basin Authority
Benin
Burkina Faso
Cameroon
Chad
Côte d'Ivoire
Guinea
Mali
Niger
Nigeria
2. Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS)
Benin
Burkina Faso
Cape Verde
Côte d'Ivoire
Gambia
Ghana
Guinea
Guinea Bissau
Liberia
Mali
Mauritania
Niger
Nigeria
Senegal
Sierra Leone
Togo
3. Economic Community of Central African States (ECCAS)
Angola
Burundi
Cameroon
Central African Republic
Chad
Congo
Equatorial Guinea
Rwanda
Sao Tomé-et-Principe
Zaïre
4. Lakes Tanganyika and Kivu
Burundi
Rwanda
Tanzania
Zaïre
Zambia
5. The Commonwealth
Botswana
Gambia
Ghana
Kenya
Lesotho
Malawi
Nigeria
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
South Africa
Swaziland
Tanzania
Uganda
Zambia
Zimbabwe
II. Bibliography
ADCP, 1989. Aid Profiles, 1989. UNDP/FAO Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme, ADCP/AP/89/10, FAO, Rome.
ALCOM News, 1988, 1989. Newsletters of ALCOM (Aquaculture for Local Community Development Programme), GCP/INT/436/SWE. Lusaka, Zambia.
Anon (undated). Report on the work of the Centre de Recherches Océanographiques, Côte d'Ivoire, mimeo, 12p.
Balarin, J.D. 1984. National reviews for aquaculture development in Africa. 1. Zimbabwe. FAO Fish. Circ. (770.1):69p.
__________, 1984. National reviews for aquaculture development in Africa. 2. Liberia. FAO Fish. Circ. (770.2):45p.
_________, 1984. National reviews for aquaculture development in Africa. 3. Sierra Leone. FAO Fish. Circ. (770.3):55p.
_________, 1984. National reviews for aquaculture development in Africa. 4. Togo. FAO Fish. Circ. (770.4):66p.
_________, 1984. National reviews for aquaculture development in Africa. 5. Benin. FAO Fish. Circ. (770.5):52p.
_________, 1985. National reviews for aquaculture development in Africa. 6. Cameroon. FAO Fish. Circ. (770.6):88p.
_________, 1985. National reviews for aquaculture development in Africa. 7. Kenya. FAO Fish. Circ. (770.7):96p.
_________, 1985. National reviews for aquaculture development in Africa. 9. Ethiopia. FAO Fish. Circ. (770.9): 109p.
_________, 1985. National reviews for aquaculture development in Africa. 10. Uganda. FAO Fish. Circ. (770.10): 109p.
__________, 1985. National reviews for aquaculture development in Africa. 11. Tanzania. FAO Fish. Circ. (770.11): 105p.
_________, 1987. National reviews for aquaculture development in Africa. 12. Malawi. FAO Fish. Circ. (770.12): 82p.
_________, 1988. National reviews for aquaculture development in Africa. 17. The Sudan. FAO Fish. Circ. (770.17): 118p.
__________, 1988. National reviews for aquaculture development in Africa. 18. Ghana. FAO Fish. Circ. (770.18): 121p.
Chakroff, M.S., 1981. Aquaculture extension services case studies. FAO Fish. Circ. (740):27p.
Chakroff, M.S., 1982. Aquaculture extension services review. FAO Fish. Circ. (747):25p.
Chondoma, E.C., 1988. National reviews for aquaculture development in Africa. 19. Lesotho. FAO Fish. Circ. (770.19): 132p.
_________, 1988. National reviews for aquaculture development in Africa. 20. Swaziland. FAO Fish. Circ. (770.20): 104p.
Christian Science Monitor, 1987. West Africa: Here comes the catfish. 8-14 June, 1987.
Coche, A.G., 1987. Selected aquaculture publications: serials, newsletters, proceedings, and bibliographies/directories/glossaries. FAO Fish. Circ. (808):108p.
_________, 1987. List of aquaculture personnel in Africa for 1987/88. CIFA/87/inf. 13:21p. Rome, FAO.
Deceuninck, V. 1985. National reviews for aquaculture development in Africa. 13. Central African Republic. FAO Fish. Circ. (770.13):68p.
_________, 1988. National reviews for aquaculture development in Africa. 15. Congo. FAO Fish. Circ. (770.15): 81p.
_________, 1988. National reviews for aquaculture development in Africa. 16. Gabon. FAO Fish. Circ. (770.16):60p.
FAO, 1985. Regional seminar on the status of aquaculture. Bouaké, Côte d'Ivoire. Country status reports from Benin, Central African Republic, Congo, Côte d'Ivoire, Gabon, Mali, Rwanda, Togo, and Zaïre. Unpublished.
_________, 1985. Food Balance Sheets, 1982-1984, Rome, FAO.
_________, 1985. Aquaculture Abstracts, Vol. 2. Rome, FAO.
_________, 1986. Training opportunities in fisheries and aquaculture. FAO/FIDI Database, November 1986. Rome, FAO.
_________, 1986. Fishery Statistics, Vol. 63, Rome, FAO.
_________, 1987. Aquaculture développement. COFI/87/Inf. 6. Rome, FAO.
_________, 1989. Integrated aquaculture development in Africa. FAO (FI: DP/RAF/87/077). Background aquaculture sector surveys of Cameroon, Central African Republic, Congo, Côte d'Ivoire, Ghana, Kenya, Madagascar, Malawi, Nigeria, Tanzania and Zambia. Rome, FAO. (Unpublished).
_________, 1989. Aquaculture Production (1984-1986). FAO Fish. Circ. (815):106p.
Federal Ministry of Agriculture, Nigeria, 1986. Investment opportunities in Nigerian agriculture, 33 p.
_________, 1988. Agricultural policy for Nigeria.
Fish Farming International, 1988. Zimbabwe's fish needs stimulate farming. January 1988.
ICLARM, 1984. Who cites your publications when you work in the tropics? ICLARM Newsletter, 7(2), April 1984.
_________, 1984. Characteristics of tropical fisheries literature. ICLARM Newsletter, 7(2), April 1984.
__________, 1986. Fisheries training opportunities worldwide. NAGA, The ICLARM Quarterly, October 1986.
IDRC, 1987. Research priorities for African aquaculture, I. Ed. H. Powles. International Development Research Centre, Canada, IDRC-MR149e, 172p.
_________, 1989. Research priorities for African aquaculture, II. Ed. H. Powles, International Development Research Centre, Canada. In press.
Khouja, M. 1987. Introduction du Credit Piscicole. Côte d'Ivoire. FAO (FI: DP/IVC/001), Projet développement de la pisciculture en milieu rural.
OAU, 1980. Lagos Plan of Action for the Economic Development of Africa, International Institute for Labour Studies, Geneva.
Pouomogne, V. 1987. Cameroon Fisheries. Report to the 7th Course in Integrated Fish-Farming. Integrated Fish Farming Centre, Wuxi, China, mimeo, 8p.
Rabelahatra, A, 1988. National reviews for aquaculture development in Africa. 22. Madagascar. FAO Fish. Circ. (770.22):82p.
Unesco, 1987. Marine science teaching and training at first degree (undergraduate) level. Unesco Reports in Marine Science, 45. Unesco, Paris, France. 48p.
United Nations, 1986. United Nations Programme of Action for African Economic Recovery and Development 1986-1990. New York, UN.
Vincke, P. comp. 1982. Catfishes of the genus Clarias - a general bibliography. FAO Fish. Circ. (739):38p.
World Bank, 1988. The World Bank Atlas, 1987. Washington D.C.
Additional sources of material included international trade papers, trade magazines, project newsletters, and project and country files of the Fisheries Library, FAO, Rome.
III. Abbreviations
ADCP
Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (UNDP/FAO)
AfDB
African Development Bank
AGFUND
Arab Gulf Programme for United Nations Development Organizations
ARAC
African Regional Aquaculture Centre (UNDP/FAO)
BCEAU
Banque Centrale des Etats de l'Afrique de l'Ouest
BEAC
Banque des Etats de l'Afrique Centrale
CAR
Central African Republic
CBN
Central Bank of Nigeria
CCCE
Caisse Centrale de Coopération Economique (France)
CEAO
Communauté Economique de l'Afrique de l'Ouest
CECAF
Fishery Committee for the Eastern Central Atlantic (FAO)
CFTC
Commonwealth Fund for Technical Cooperation
CIFA
Committee for Inland Fisheries of Africa (FAO)
CNRO
Centre National de Recherches Océanographiques (Madagascar)
CRO
Centre de Recherches Océanographiques (Côte d'Ivoire)
CRSP
Collaborative Research Support Program (US AID)
CTFT
Centre Technique Forestier Tropical (France)
DGIS
Directorate General for International Cooperation (Netherlands)
EAS
European Aquaculture Society
ECA
Economic Commission for Africa
ECCAS
Economic Community of Central African States
ECOWAS
Economic Community of West African States
EEC
European Economic Community
FAC
Ministère de la Coopération (France)
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
FDF
Federal Department of Fisheries (Nigeria)
FED
European Development Fund
FFAN
Fish Farmers' Association of Nigeria
FISON
Fisheries Society of Nigeria
GFFA
Ghana Fish Farmers' Association
GFID
German Foundation for International Development (Fed. Rep. Germany)
GTZ
German Agency for Technical Cooperation (Fed. Rep. Germany)
GVC
Groupement à Vocation Coopérative
ICLARM
International Center for Living Aquatic Resources Management
IDESSA
Institut de Savannes (Côte d'Ivoire)
IDRC
International Development Research Centre (Canada)
IFAD
International Fund for Agricultural Development (UN)
IFS
International Foundation for Science (Sweden)
ISSTH
Institut Supérieur des Sciences et Techniques Halieutiques (CEAO)
LCBC
Lake Chad Basin Commission
NGOs
Non-Governmental Organizations
NIOMR
Nigerian Institute for Océanographie and Marine Research
NORAD
Norwegian Agency for International Development
OAU
Organization of African Unity
ODA
Overseas Development Administration (United Kingdom)
ORSTOM
Office de la Recherche Scientifique et Technique Autre-Mer
SADCC
Southern African Development Coordination Conference
SAREC
Agency for Research Cooperation with Developing Countries(Sweden)
SIDA
Swedish International Development Authority
TCP
Technical Cooperation Programme (FAO)
UDEAC
Union Douanière et Economique de l'Afrique Centrale
UN
United Nations
UNDP
United Nations Development Programme
UNEP
United Nations Environment Programme
Unesco
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
UNICEF
United Nations Children's Fund
USAID
United States Agency for International Development
WAS
World Aquaculture Society
WB
World Bank
WHO
World Health Organization
Abbreviations of Databases and other Terminology
ASFIS
Aquatic Sciences and Fisheries Information Service
ASFA
Aquatic Sciences and Fisheries Abstracts
GLOBEFISH
FAO Computerized System of Fish Marketing Information
FISHDAB
FAO Yearly Statistics
IV. List of ADCP reports
ADCP/REP/75/1
Aquaculture Planning in Africa
ADCP/REP/76/2
Aquaculture Planning in Asia
ADCP/REP/76/3
Aquaculture Planning in Latin America
ADCP/REP/76/3A
FI/R188
Kyoto Conference
ADCP/REP/78/4
Aid for Aquaculture Development
ADCP/REP/78/5
Outline of an Applied Research and Experimental Development Programme for the Latin American Regional Centre for Aquaculture
ADCP/REP/78/6
Curriculum for the Training of Aquaculturists in the Latin American Regional Centre for Aquaculture
ADCP/REP/79/7
Curriculum for the Training of Aquaculturists in the African Regional Centre for Aquaculture
ADCP/REP/79/8
Training in Fish Feed Technology. Report of the FAO/UNDP Training Course in Fish Feed Technology held in the University of Washington, Seattle, 9 October-15 December 1978
ADCP/REP/79/9
Aquaculture Information - Report of the Meeting of an Aquaculture Information Group held in Rome, 25-28 April 1979
ADCP/REP/79/10
Aquaculture Development in China - Report of a FAO/UNDP Aquaculture Study Tour to the People's Republic of China, 2 May-1 June 1978
ADCP/REP/80/11
Fish Feed Technology - Lectures presented at the FAO/UNDP Training Course in Fish Feed Technology, held at the College of Fisheries, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, 9 October-15 December 1978
ADCP/REP/80/12
Outline Research Programme for the African Regional Aquaculture Centre, Port Harcourt, Rivers State, Nigeria.
ADCP/REP/80/13
Curriculum for the Training of Aquaculturists in the Asian Aquaculture Network
ADCP/REP/80/14
Outline Research Programmes for the Regional Aquaculture Lead Centres in Asia - Parts I and II
ADCP/REP/80/15
Outline Research Programmes for the Regional Aquaculture Lead Centres in Asia - Part III
ADCP/REP/81/16 (out of print)
Reproductive Physiology of Teleost Fishes - A Review of Present Knowledge and Needs for Future Research
ADCP/REP/82/17
Aid for Aquaculture Development in the Third World
ADCP/REP/83/18
Fish Feeds and Feeding in Developing Countries - An Interim Report on the ADCP Feed Development Programme
ADCP/REP/83/19 Rev. 1
AQUIS Aquaculture Information System - Users' Manual
ADCP/REP/83/20
Planificación del Desarrollo de la Acuicultura - Guía Preliminar (An Introductory Guide to Aquaculture Development)
ADCP/REP/84/21
Inland Aquaculture Engineering - Lectures presented at the ADCP Interregional Training Course in Inland Aquaculture Engineering, Budapest
ADCP/REP/85/22
Nutritional Fish Pathology - Morphological Signs of Nutrient Deficiency and Toxicity in Farmed Fish
ADCP/REP/86/23
Observations on International Technical Assistance to Aquaculture
ADCP/REP/86/24
Planning an Aquaculture Facility - Guidelines for Bioprogramming and Design
ADCP/REP/87/25
Future Economic Outlook for Aquaculture and Related Assistance Needs
ADCP/REP/87/26
Feed and Feeding of Fish and Shrimp - A Manual on the Preparation and Presentation of Compound Feeds for Shrimp and Fish in Aquaculture
ADCP/REP/87/27
Aquaculture Sector Development - A Guideline for the Preparation of a National Plan
ADCP/REP/87/28
Women in Aquaculture - Proceedings of the ADCP/NORAD Workshop on Women in Aquaculture. Rome, FAO, 13-16 April 1987
ADCP/REP/87/29
The Markets for the Prime Mediterranean Species - Sea Bass, Sea Bream, Mullets and Eel - and their links with investment
ADCP/REP/88/30
A Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in Eleven Middle East Countries
ADCP/REP/88/31
A Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in East Asia
ADCP/REP/88/32
A Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in the Pacific
ADCP/REP/89/33
Planning for Aquaculture Development - Report of an Expert Consultation held in Policoro, Italy, 26 July-2 August 1988
ADCP/REP/89/34
A Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in the Mediterranean Region
ADCP/REP/89/35
A Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in West Asia
ADCP/REP/89/36
A Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in Africa South of the Sahara
