<title>ADCP/REP/89/35 - A Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in West Asia</title>
<section>1</section>
FOREWORD
Aquaculture continues to grow in economic importance. The main reason for this is the quantifiable contribution aquaculture is making in many countries to fill the growing gap between supply and demand for fisheries products. This gap continues to widen because of increasing human populations and the static growth rates of capture fisheries brought about by declines in stocks and the increasing cost of obtaining fish through conventional methods. Although this gap can (and in some cases is already) being met by alternatives, such as inexpensive poultry and white meats, aquaculture particularly provides consumers with a choice of fresh products.
Aquaculture is also evident in earning foreign exchange for many countries through the export of high-value products. It also creates employment, particularly in economically depressed coastal and remote regions, and contributes to the household economy of rural farmers.
This fifth regional survey prepared by the Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (ADCP) covers the existing aquaculture sector in the countries of West Asia, namely Bangladesh, Burma, India, Indonesia, Kampuchea, Malaysia, Maldives, Nepal, Pakistan, Singapore, Sri Lanka, and Thailand. A regional survey of the countries of East Asia is the subject of another ADCP document. The division of the countries in East and West Asia is based on the division established by the Asian Development Bank (ADB).
This present survey is not exhaustive. It has been prepared by Dr. S.C. Pathak in a relatively brief desk study. For some countries of this highly active aquaculture region detailed information is still difficult to obtain. The ADCP apologizes for any omissions and errors which may exist in the survey, and hopes that these can be corrected in an up-dated survey. New information and notification of changes and errors should be indicated to the ADCP in the Fisheries Department, FAO, Rome. The detailed Table of Contents illustrates the range of information which, hopefully, will be assembled in due course for all regions.
The survey is directed toward administrators, executives, and managers who require broad overviews, rather than for scientists and technologists who require detailed information about species and practices. It is the fifth of a series of regional surveys. To this end, the ADCP hopes that the reader will find the information described here useful.
Colin E. Nash
Craig B. Kensler
Rome, 1989
<section>2</section>
INTRODUCTION
Asia, of all the continents, plays the most significant role in world aquaculture production. Fish farming is a traditional and age-old practice in almost every Asian country. Over 80% of the total aquaculture production globally comes from Asia. The estimated world aquaculture production in 1986 was 11.09 million tonnes (t), of which Asia alone produced 9.05 million t.
This survey describes the regional aquaculture sector in 12 West Asian countries. These countries are:
Bangladesh
Burma
India
Indonesia
Kampuchea
Malaysia
Maldives
Nepal
Pakistan
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Thailand
By comparison with the East Asian group of countries (which includes the leading global producers China, Japan, Republic of Korea, and the Philippines) the West Asian region produces less than 750 000 t. This figure is in fact confused by the contribution of India which, for many years, had been recorded at about 1 million t. However, it is known that much of this is from inland fisheries, some of which are supplemented by aquaculture through annual stocking programmes.
Although aquaculture is as much of a tradition in continental West Asia as it is in East Asia, the diversity of aquaculture in the region is produced by the range in environmental characteristics and individual resources of each country. The Maldives for example has no need for aquaculture as a group of oceanic islands with ready access to marine resources. Nepal on the other hand is a land-locked country very dependent on its freshwater resources.
In general terms, the countries of Bangladesh, India, Nepal, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka have preference for freshwater culture, and the countries of Burma, Indonesia, Kampuchea, Malaysia, Singapore and Thailand, place more emphasis on brackishwater and marine culture.
In addition to variable but good resources for aquaculture, the region has many diversities. Individual populations range from the high of 751 million in India to the low of 200 000 in the Maldives. There is the high per caput GNP in Singapore of US$ 7 260 to the low of US$ 70 in Kampuchea but, compared with the group of East Asian countries, the GNP of most of the countries in the West region is low (below US$ 600 per caput). However, each country invariably has natural assets for aquaculture in terms of water resources, coastline, ox-bow lakes and, most importantly, the liking of fish and fishery products.
In spite of their high aquaculture profiles these countries are predominantly classified as developing countries. Like those countries of East Asia they are characterized by high population growth rates, low incomes, low levels of education, health and personal consumption, and low levels of infrastructure development and industrialization.
<section>3</section>
1. CONSUMPTION OF FISH AND SHELLFISH AND THE REGIONAL MARKETS
1.1 Benefits of fish and shellfish to the consumer
1.2 Characteristics of consumption in the region
1.3 Annual consumption of fish and shellfish
1.4 Gross market data
1.5 Specific market data
1.6 Information for the trade
1.7 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
1.1 Benefits of fish and shellfish to the consumer
Fish and shellfish are particularly important in Asia where they contribute significantly to human food needs, particularly to those individuals in densely populated countries at risk of under-nutrition and malnutrition.
The nutritional quality of fish and shellfish is similar but somewhat higher than that in meat and dairy products (milk), and less than that in eggs. The protein content of most fish species varies between 15-20%; fat content varies more widely than protein, water, or mineral content.
Fish provides a good combination of amino-acids well suited to human nutritional requirements. Fish is particularly high in lysine (in which cereal proteins are relatively low) and sulphur amino-acids; this makes it extremely efficient in supplementing the low protein/high carbohydrate diets of most of the countries in the region. A relatively small amount of fish protein in combination with a cereal-based diet therefore enhances the nutritional quality of the cereal protein and improves the overall quality of the diet, including the taste.
In addition, fish and fishery products are high in vitamins (particularly A, B and D), a good selection of minerals (especially phosphorus, calcium, and iron), trace elements, and iodine in the marine species. The high content of polyunsaturated fatty acids also contributes significantly to essential fatty acid requirements important in some cases in lowering blood cholesterol levels.
1.2 Characteristics of consumption in the region
In some parts of the West Asia region described in this review a number of countries, like India and Nepal, have a significant part of their population which is vegetarian by habit and religious belief, and there is no interest in land animal proteins and little in fish.
The countries of the region can be divided into four groups on the basis of per caput meat consumption per year (1985 data):
- two countries (India and Sri Lanka) have annual meat consumption below 2 kg per caput,
- three countries (Bangladesh, Indonesia, and the Maldives) have consumption more than 2 kg but below 5 kg per caput per annum,
- four countries (Burma, Kampuchea, Nepal, and Pakistan) have consumption more than 5 kg but below 10 kg per caput per annum, and
- three countries (Malaysia, Singapore, and Thailand) have consumption greater than 10 kg per caput per annum.
The range in the region is wide. In Singapore, for example, where the individual Gross National Product (GNP) is high (US$ 7 260), the meat consumption is 73.91 kg per caput per annum.
In some countries the natural preference for, or availability of, meat and poultry reduces the consumption of fish and fishery products. In Kampuchea, Pakistan, and Singapore the consumption of meat is about eight times greater than that of fish and fishery products. In Bangladesh, Burma, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Maldives, Sri Lanka, and Thailand it is the converse. The largest fish consumer compared with meat is the Maldives (16.9 to 1 ratio) followed by Sri Lanka (9:1).
For most of the region the geographical location of the population and availability of products play the most decisive role in characterizing consumption habits. For example, people living in the coastal areas have access to and preference for marine fish and shellfish products. In India 97.8% of fish production is consumed in coastal states which support some 50% of the total Indian population. However, in the north east and east of the country, and in Bangladesh and Nepal, where the rainfall is high and large resources of freshwater are available, the traditional preferences are for freshwater fish.
Although shellfish are widely available in the region, particularly marine shrimps and molluscs which are all heavily fished, there is little national consumption except in the immediate vicinities of the fisheries, and then mostly by the fishermen and their families. The prices are beyond the reach of the indigenous population and the majority of shellfish are exported because of their high value on international markets. Some are exported to countries within the region. On the whole all large populations throughout the region have access to fish, and particularly freshwater fish.
1.3 Annual consumption of fish and shellfish
The nominal fishery catches and annual consumption of fish and fishery products vary greatly in the region (see Tables 1 and 2). Consumption is above 40 kg/y in the Maldives; 20-40 kg in three countries (Malaysia, Singapore, Thailand); 10-30 kg in three countries (Burma, Indonesia, and Sri Lanka); and is below 10 kg in the other five countries of the region (Bangladesh, India, Kampuchea, Nepal, and Pakistan). Obviously per caput consumption is influenced by population density and other factors. In India and Nepal, for example, a sizeable percentage of the population is vegetarian; and in Bangladesh it is reported that the fishermen themselves consume about 60% of the total marine and inland fish production.
In Pakistan the marine catch is marketed fresh, frozen, or processed, but freshwater fish is mostly sold fresh. Marine shrimp is the major item (86%) of the total export trade which is principally with Dubai, Germany, Fed. Rep., the Netherlands, Hong Kong, Iran, Japan, New Zealand, UK, and USA. Processed fish products, particularly dried and salted, are exported to Sri Lanka and countries in the Middle East, such as Kuwait and Saudi Arabia. Pakistan's export production of 187 000 t in 1985 earned a total of P.Rs. 1 299 million which was the country's third largest foreign exchange earner. The Government has banned importation of fish and fishery products.
Bangladesh earned about US$ 86 million through exports of marine shrimp, frog legs, and frozen fish in 1985, mostly to Belgium, Germany, Fed. Rep., Italy, Japan, the Netherlands, Thailand, UK, and USA. The country also exports freshwater and other cultured products to Middle East countries. The fishing industry is third in the list for producing foreign exchange earnings.
Nepal has no official exports of fish but much cultured fish is reported to find its way to nearby markets in India. Aquaculture centres in the country supply Chinese carp broodfish for culture purposes and also pituitary glands for induced breeding. These go to Bangladesh, Bhutan, and Pakistan under TCDC arrangements. Imports into Nepal are also prohibited. All the trade in Nepal is with freshwater fish. The country's total production is over 8 000 t, of which production through aquaculture is about 50% of the total.
In Malaysia more than 60% of commercial landings are consumed as fresh fish. In 1983 about 12% of landings were processed for consumption, particularly dried, salted, or smoked; 36% of landings were used for fish meal and fish sauce. Malaysia is a net importer of fishery products (about 8%) to meet the national demand of 758 300 t; about 75% of imports are from Thailand, and the rest from Bangladesh, Burma, India, Indonesia, Japan, and other countries in the region. In 1985 total imports were over 218 000 t, valued at US$ 277 million; exports were over 159 000 t, valued at US$ 192 million. Principal export markets are Singapore, Thailand, Japan, Europe and Australia. Fishing and fish trade are important in the national economy. In 1982 overall contributions from the industry toward GNP was about 2%. The country has increased its aquaculture production which is estimated to be over 52 000 t. This has been due to increases in brackishwater production of molluscs, especially
cockles.
In India it is estimated that the demand-supply gap of fish in domestic markets, presently 1 million t, will increase further by the end of the century in spite of increased inland fish production; brackishwater fish production currently supplies 57% of the total demand. Compared with the internal markets, exports of marine products are rapidly rising. From a total of about 20 000 t (I.Rs. 24.6 million) in the early 1950s the export of marine fishery products is now about 85 000 t (I.Rs. 4 600 million). The major share of the export trade is in crustaceans, particularly marine shrimp and lobsters. There is also an international trade in seed for aquaculture; India exports about 40% of its fry catch of marine shrimp to Japan and 25% to the USA. The adult shrimp catch is also exported to these two countries, in addition to Malaysia, Singapore, and others. Until 1986 India was the largest exporter of shrimps in the world, but in 1987 aquaculture production enabled China, Taiwan
PC, and Thailand to overtake India. Each of these countries exports over 20 000 t of shrimp per annum to the USA (1986 data).
In India fisheries output is constantly increasing and is about 3.5% per year over the last five years. Contributions from aquaculture have been rising and now stand at about 23% of total fish production, of which freshwater production contributes 21% and coastal aquaculture 2%.
In Indonesia the foreign exchange earnings through fisheries have increased to over US$ 250 million, from a mere US$ 7 million in 1970. Earnings from marine shrimp exports are over 70% of the total, with the rest from tuna, marine fish, frog legs, jelly fish, and ornamental fishes. Hong Kong, Japan, Singapore, and the USA are the main markets for Indonesia's products. In 1985 Indonesia exported about 186 000 t of crustacean and molluscan products with a value of US$ 324 million. The country's fishery production has increased on average about 4.5% per annum, with inland fish production at about 2%. It is currently over 500 000 t, about 25% of the total fishery production. In the inland sector the contribution of aquaculture is increasing and capture fisheries have dropped from 62% to 42% in the last decade.
Thailand exports frozen shrimp principally to Japan, and USA, but with smaller markets in Australia, France, Germany, Fed. Rep., Hong Kong, Singapore, and UK. The total marine shrimp exports to the USA is currently over 1 000 t. Thailand also exports molluscs and freshwater shrimp to Japan and countries in Europe. It also produces fishmeal and exports it to Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, and other Asian countries. Thailand also imports molluscs; about 15 000 t in 1985.
1.4 Gross market data
About 1.27 thousand million people live in the West Asia region as outlined in Table 3, or about 27% of the world's population. More than half (781 million) live in India which, together with Bangladesh (103 million), Indonesia (165 million) and Pakistan (100 million), make up some 90% of the regional total.
Apart from Thailand (51 million) and Burma (37 million) the remaining countries are comparatively unpopulated. Malaysia (16 million), Nepal (16 million), and Sri Lanka (16 million), are similar in total population but not in population density; these are followed by Kampuchea (7 million) and Singapore (2.5 million). The people of the oceanic Maldives number about 189 000.
Only Singapore can be considered as having a developed economy with a high GNP of US$ 7 260 per caput. None of the other countries can be even considered as having a medium level GNP (US$ 3 000-6 000) or developing economy. Malaysia (US$ 1 990) and Thailand (US$ 850) are in the low range (US$ 600-3 000). The rest can only be considered as very low (below US$ 600), with Indonesia (US$ 540), Pakistan (US$ 380), Sri Lanka (US$ 360), India and the Maldives (US$ 260), Burma (US$ 180), Nepal (US$ 160), Bangladesh (US$ 130), and Kampuchea (US$ 70). Compared with the countries of East Asia, the West Asia group is considerably poorer on average (see Table 3).
1.5 Specific market data
In a region of twelve countries spread over a wide geographic area with a variety of aquatic resources the consumption of fish and fishery products cannot be easily generalized. For example, in the colder regions (Nepal) there are preferences for coldwater fishes. The people of Bangladesh and West Bengal in India eat most of the indigenous species but their preferences are for the freshwater Indian major carps and some riverine fish, such as hilsa. The people of northern India (Punjab, Himachel, Pardes and Harayana), Pakistan, and Thailand value the native cat fishes more than the carps, but the trouts, schezothorax, and mahaseer are preferred in the colder regions of India (Jammu and Kashmir) and Pakistan. It has been reported that the demand for trout, for example, in that region may be as high as 50 000 t per annum.
The people of Thailand have probably the greatest market range of products, making use of the variety of products available. There are demands for the high-value catfish and snakeheads, gouramis and others. A variety of molluscs are in demand, such as cockles and mussels, as well as marine shrimps and freshwater prawns. Fish is mainly sold fresh in local markets, and there are good transportation networks by boat, road, or rail to supply urban centres and the large wholesale market in Bangkok where most aquaculture products are brought. However, the long distances between production centres and markets in the country reduce the prices to the farmers.
In Indonesia and Malaysia there are preferences for marine shellfish species, including cockles, green mussel, oysters, horse mussels, etc. In Singapore there is a variety of choice as much is imported; all the local fish production is consumed. Marketing activities in Malaysia are in the hands of the private sector; the catch is sold to either agents, wholesalers, or retailers, or direct to the consumer. The wholesalers dominate the trade.
In most Asian countries fresh fish in any form is preferred to frozen, processed, or canned products. In some small areas of Bangladesh, Burma, India, and Nepal, for a number of reasons, there is a demand for special products such as sun-dried, smoked, or preserved fish.
In the Maldives, where domestic consumption of fish is high (40 kg/annum), the only choice is oceanic fish and skipjack is preferred.
In India, as well as in Bangladesh, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka, fish is marketed through many different channels and outlets. In addition to the usual hands of wholesalers, commission agents, and private vendors, there are also marketing distribution channels and outlets in the fishermen's cooperative societies and the individual State Fisheries Development Corporations. National markets for marine shrimps and other high-value cultured products are not established in spite of the production of these products.
In Kampuchea, the Maldives, and Sri Lanka market data regarding trade in natural and cultured products are not readily available. In Sri Lanka fish caught from the large tanks or reservoirs are mostly sold to the consumers by vendors who control the prices. Fish are sold in numbers rather than by weight and are therefore classified by size. The fishermen, who are organized in associations or cooperatives, have a better bargaining position with the middlemen for prices.
Shrimp exports from Burma have increased during the last three years to about 4 000 t, with exports to Japan, the USA and some to Europe.
The importation of fish and shellfish to Singapore establishes far higher price ranges than found elsewhere in the region, and the demand is for live products. For example, live red grouper (US$ 25-30/kg) and black grouper (US$ 15-28) are the preferred fish and command top prices; snappers and sea bass (US$ 12-17) are next. Live banana prawns are US$ 27-30, and dead only US$ 18-20. The red tilapia when alive can fetch US$ 10-12, but has little value dead.
The region has a number of common marketing problems for its aquaculture produce. For the most part the transportation systems are poor. Production locations are often inaccessible at times with long distances to market centres. There is a lack of marketing infrastructure for both wholesale and retail markets. The large percentage to the middlemen and commission agents, which can be about 65% of the price to the consumer (including transportation costs), reduces the price to the farmers. Also many of the markets are in poor condition. India, for example, has some 132 marketing terminals but these are greatly in need of modernization. Also the trade is overloaded with agents and retailers.
The lack of good infrastructure in many countries has led to a rapid rise in fish price indexes. In India, for example, the index of fish and fishery product prices to other basic food commodities has risen since 1950 to 1985 by a factor of 18. The average of all wholesale prices has been only 7.6 times during the same period, with standard food articles 6.7, and meat 12.7. Similar changes have occurred in Bangladesh, Nepal, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, and Thailand.
1.6 Information for the trade
The principal marketing information service in Asia (and the Pacific) is INFOFISH, although it does not differentiate aquaculture products as yet. INFOFISH assists the fishing industry and governments in the region by establishing contacts between buyers and sellers of fish products, and providing technical information and advice on post-harvest aspects of fisheries, such as handling, processing, equipment selection, and quality assurance. INFOFISH is based in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, and its working language is English.
INFOFISH is one of four regional services (in Africa, Arab Countries, Latin America, in addition to Asia). This network of services produces a fortnightly news bulletin, called "Trade News", in four languages. This deals with prices, cold storage holdings, short-term market trends, and business opportunities. The network also publishes a two monthly magazine called "INFOFISH International" (incorporating Marketing Digest) in English, which contains articles of market analysis, new products, processing, packaging, equipment, and other aspects of fisheries, including aquaculture, with summaries in the other three languages. Again, as yet, little information is relevant to aquaculture in the region.
A fifth member of the service is the FAO computerized system of fish marketing called "GLOBEFISH". This database stores original information collected by INFOFISH and the other regional services on such things as production and trade statistics, price series, the supply and demand situation, information on aquaculture, investment, joint ventures, and general economic data relevant to fisheries. Specific searches are made on request. FAO also produces "Globefish Highlights", which is a quarterly analysis of medium trends. It is based on the information in the databank and is distributed as a supplement to the "Trade News" (above) in four languages.
Annual fishery statistics are also stored on an FAO database called FISHDAB. As yet aquaculture statistics are not separated.
The Southeast Asian Fisheries Development Center, which is based in Thailand, produces a quarterly Newsletter in English. This often carries feature articles on marketing of aquaculture products, and processing and post-harvest technology. It also produces articles for the consumer on fish and fisheries products.
Other publications in the region (India) are Indian Seafoods (produced in Cochin), together with Krishi vigyan patrika (for marine products). Fishing Chyme Vishahapatnam, and Mach (Bengali) Kalynai. These are all obtainable through subscription.
As most of the high-value products are exported out of the region, other marketing resources on the periphery are important. The Japanese External Trade Organization (JETRO) publishes marketing reports and disseminates them to its offices outside Japan. These reach the trade after many weeks. The Japanese Marine Products Importer Association produces a monthly leaflet.
Eurofish Report is a fortnightly review (published in the UK) of European fisheries and world fishing news. In addition to items of current news in the industry, including aquaculture, it contains data of supplies and prices of commodities, including aquaculture products.
Many of the international markets are covered by Seafood Business (USA), Seafood International (UK), and Il Pesce (Italy). All these commercial publications are available through subscription and, in addition to prices and market trends, etc., often have relevant articles about aquaculture production world-wide.
1.7 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
The most important technical assistance project in the sub-sector in the region is INFOFISH - a marketing information and advisory service specializing in Asian and Pacific fisheries. INFOFISH is part of a network of marketing services established by FAO in four regions (see 1.6). It was financed at its inception by the Government of Norway for a three year period. It is now partly financed by the Government of Norway, by income from its services and publications, and by contributions from its member countries. Malaysia, the host country, provides office facilities and support staff. Although aquaculture information is not separated as yet INFOFISH serves the sector directly, and its publications contain many useful articles on marketing aquaculture products.
Another externally-funded regional project which indirectly serves the aquaculture sub-sector is the ASEAN Regional Post-harvest Technology Project. Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, and Thailand are all members of ASEAN. The project is funded by the Canadian International. Development Agency (CIDA).
The Asian Development Bank (ADB) conducts a number of regional fish market studies, and the FAO/UNDP South China Sea Programme (which continues at a much-reduced level) produces reports on important fishery commodities in the region.
The UN Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP) sponsored study tours on post-harvest handling, marketing, and consumption of aquaculture products in China for senior fisheries officials from Bangladesh, Malaysia, the Philippines and Thailand, in collaboration with the Southeast Asian Fisheries Development Center (SEAFDEC), Agence pour la Coopération Technique, Industrielle et Economique (ACTIM), and l'Institut français de recherche pour l'exploitation de la mer (IFREMER).
<section>4</section>
2. PRODUCTION OF FISH AND SHELLFISH IN THE REGION
2.1 Characteristics of production in the region
2.2 Regional production data
2.3 Production systems and practices in the region
2.4 Producers in the region
2.5 Organizations of producers
2.6 Financial investment by public and private enterprises
2.7 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
2.8 Capital assistance projects in the sub-sector
2.1 Characteristics of production in the region
Aquaculture production in the West Asia region is influenced mainly by geography (see Table 4). However, the long traditions of aquaculture in the region, and the agricultural and rural backgrounds of large numbers of people, have enabled relatively modern technologies to be readily applied and made productive. In addition, apart from the vegetarian habits of some religious sects, the majority of the people in the region like fish and grow them wherever possible.
The continental countries of Bangladesh, India, Nepal, and Pakistan, together with the insular Sri Lanka, all have preferences for freshwater fish. Because of its northerly position and altitude Nepalese like the cold water fish from the river systems, but in the flat terrain there are some 5 000 ha of natural lakes and about 1 400 ha of reservoirs in which it is possible to produce warmwater fish. Sri Lanka, on the other hand, has few natural freshwater bodies but has established fisheries in some 140 000 ha of irrigation reservoirs or tanks through aquaculture. It also has some 1 700 km of coastline, large tracts of which are flat and suitable for the construction of ponds.
Bangladesh, India, and Pakistan have good water resources with extensive rivers and flood plains, most of which have man-made lakes and reservoirs for irrigation projects for agricultural development. Bangladesh has no large lakes but innumerable ox-bow lakes (about 292 000 ha) and reservoirs (90 000 ha). Unfortunately much of the delta region is still subjected to flooding which is costly for the construction and maintenance of fixed structures, such as coastal ponds. India has many natural lakes (0.72 million ha) and inland reservoirs (3 million ha), most of which have been adapted for fisheries through stocking programmes and which are now independent fisheries in their own right. However, many of these lakes are stocked with seed each year to supplement the natural production. The long coastal areas of India are also suitable for the development of marine and brackishwater species. Pakistan is drier, its river systems are shorter, and its lakes are not available for
aquaculture. It has about 80 000 ha of reservoirs created by the large irrigation systems which have been constructed.
Burma, Kampuchea, Malaysia, Singapore, and Thailand, although physically part of the Asian land mass, have preferences for marine fish and shellfish. With the exception of Kampuchea and Singapore, all have extensive coastlines of more than 2 500 km in addition to good freshwater resources. In addition to its rivers Burma has some 33 000 ha of lakes and 80 000 ha of reservoirs; Malaysia has 10 000 km^2 of reservoirs; and Thailand has 300 000 ha of lakes and 225 000 ha of reservoirs, as well as extensive brackishwater coastal areas. Singapore is the exception. With limited coastal and freshwater areas, and its restrictions on the use of available land, the country has confined its coastal development to four sites and a few long-existing coastal enclosures. Its interest in freshwater fish production is directed mainly at the high value aquarium fishes rather than food fish. Kampuchea also has a limited area for coastal development but it has one river system and about 10 000
km^2 of lakes.
Indonesia is predominantly an island population with a strong tradition in coastal fish culture. Many of its coastal areas are already established as productive aquaculture zones. Inland there are innumerable lakes totalling 1.7 million ha, and some 27 000 ha of reservoirs. Its natural rivers are few and short.
In spite of these extensive water resources in the region for possible aquaculture, like the other countries of Asia there are many competing uses. Agriculture is the principal sector in most of these countries. The large urban populations require large quantities of drinking water and new industries also make demands on water resources. However, much is being done in the development of aquaculture but the systems and practices are still traditional and extensive. They require little in the way of costly inputs, and they are also labour intensive. In the last two decades modern, semi-intensive and intensive systems have been developed in some locations for high-value products. There is considerable interest in the use of floating cages and net-pens in lakes and man-made reservoirs, which are available in most countries and which are often naturally productive. Large tracts of coastal tidal land are being reserved and used for mollusc production.
In the region some fundamental problems remain. Land ownership and water-use rights are severe constraints for potential farmers. The large areas of land needed for aquaculture development close to good water resources are either not available or are costly. Many of the lakes and reservoirs are public and inaccessible for aquaculture purposes.
2.2 Regional production data
Almost all the governments in the West Asia region have policies and national programmes for aquaculture development (see 5.1); in many cases with the intention of aquaculture breaking the present reliance on capture fisheries. The results so far have been good. The 1986 production among the twelve countries was reported to be about 732 000 t (see Table 5), which excludes most reported production from India as this figure is uncertain. India reports annual production of over one million t but it is known that this figure includes the yields of fisheries in lakes, some of which are supplemented with seed.
There is, however, much aquaculture production in India, and it has been increasing. For example, the average pond production was about 600 kg/ha/y in the 1960s but is now over 1 500 kg and likely to increase to 2 000 kg by 1989-90. Other countries, such as Bangladesh, Nepal, and Sri Lanka, are showing similar improvements in pond yields and increases in areas under production, particularly for the Indian and Chinese carps. Nepal now has about 5 000 ha of ponds under culture. Bangladesh's aquaculture production in 1986 was over 133 000 t, with a potential area of 155 000 ha for development. Burma now produces about 5 000 t of fish, mostly through extensive culture, and the area under production can be increased manifold.
Typical pond yields in Malaysia, Pakistan and Thailand, on average produce about 1 000 kg/ha/y. Thailand produces about 122 000 t, most of which are a variety of high-value species, and has developed a cockle industry. Malaysia's total aquaculture production is over 52 000 t, mainly the production of cockles (59%) in its coastal brackishwater areas.
Indonesia has increased its production from mixed farming on a large scale. Inland fish culture continues to increase at a rate of about 2% per annum and has now reached over 538 000 t, or over 24% of the country's total fisheries production. As a whole the capture fisheries' share of the country's total fish production is decreasing and is being replaced by aquaculture production, which now totals some 382 000 t.
In the region the contribution of aquaculture production toward total fish production is therefore becoming even more substantial. Currently it is reported to be about 22% overall, excluding the production of marine algae. In some land-locked countries, and in countries with large land-masses, the contribution of aquaculture to total aquatic animal production is far higher. For example, in Nepal it is over 45%, in India 43%, and in China 39%. In Bangladesh, Indonesia, and Sri Lanka the aquaculture contribution ranges between 11-17%. In terms of total aquaculture production in the region (excluding the Maldives which has no aquaculture) the range is from Sri Lanka with 52 t to Indonesia with 382 885 t (1986 figures).
Indonesia's freshwater fish production is mainly the common carp (Cyprinus carpio) at 24 209 t, tilapia (Oreochromis mossambicus) at 16 353 t, and Java carp (Puntius javanicus) at 11 793 t. Among brackishwater fishes the milkfish (Chanos chanos) at 93 508 t, the mullets (Mugil sp.), tilapias, and sea bass (Lates calcarifer) dominate production.
In Bangladesh reported production is about 125 000 t. The Indian carps (Labeo rohua, Catla catla and C. mrigla) are being cultured on a small scale (about 30 t each) followed by silver carp (H. molitrix), grass carp (C. idella) and common carp (C. carpio). In brackishwater the interest is marine shrimps with production of Penaeus monodon and P. indicus currently about 150 and 130 t respectively.
Malaysia's production figure of 52 639 t is mostly due to the culture of the cockle, the giant sea perch, and the estuarine grouper, all in brackishwater. In freshwater production it is the prawn (Macrobrachium sp.), grass carp, silver carp, Puntius gonionotus, common carp, Labeo rohita, bighead carp, Trichogaster pectoralis, Oxyleotris sp., and tilapia sp.
In Sri Lanka (only 52 t reported), India (unverified production), and Pakistan (10 000 t) the India major carps and the freshwater prawn are the most common freshwater species being produced. In brackishwater the shrimps (Penaeus and Metapeneaus sp.) are cultured, together with sea bass, mullets, milkfish, etc. In India the culture of air-breathing fishes is increasing, but the introduction of tilapias for fanning has been discouraged. In Sri Lanka tilapia are now cultured on a large scale.
A summary of the principal groups or species cultured in the region as reported to FAO is given in Table 6.
2.3 Production systems and practices in the region
The strong traditions of aquaculture in the region, and the experience of adapting the available knowledge and technology about culture systems and practices to local conditions, have resulted in almost every type of development.
In the last 15 years the polyculture of carps (or composite fish culture) in semi-intensive systems has spread rapidly in the region, particularly in Bangladesh, India, and Nepal, where it is widely accepted as a feasible technology for meeting the diverse demands of local markets.
Rice-cum-fish culture is practised in Bangladesh, India, Indonesia, Philippines, and Thailand. Thailand is reported to have over 31 000 km^2 of rice paddies involved in fish production. Fish yields from rice paddies in Indonesia average about 400 kg/ha/y, and the country has some 92 000 ha under production. Although rice paddies are abundant in India only about 1 million ha have been brought into fish production so far.
Carp culture is also practised in cages and net pen enclosures in Malaysia, Singapore, and Thailand. Thailand produces about 300 t and Malaysia about 6 t. Yields in cages in Singapore are about 2 kg/m^3. The cage culture of carps has been tried in Bangladesh, Burma, India, Indonesia, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka, but so far has not been taken up by farmers.
Cage farming of the catfish is a thriving industry in Thailand but this too has not yet developed in Bangladesh, India, and Nepal, mainly because of the lack of seed and resources for feed. Production of Anabas testidinens, Heteropneustes fossilis, and Clarias batrachus is gaining interest in these three countries.
Aquaculture production through the stocking of reservoirs and lakes is very important in Bangladesh, India, Nepal, and Sri Lanka, and it is practised on a large scale. The average annual production of carps and other freshwater species in reservoirs ranges from 3-37 kg/ha, depending on size of water body, productivity, management, etc. In India there are plans to develop 200 more reservoirs for fish production by the end of the century. Nepal has about 1 380 ha of reservoirs under production, and Bangladesh has the potential of some 90 000 ha of reservoirs and 293 000 ha of ox-bow lakes for fish stocking.
The increase in the production costs of fish farming, particularly seed, feed, and fertilizer, has increased the development of integrated fish farming practices in the region. Fish production is now integrated with animal husbandry (pigs), poultry husbandry (ducks and chickens), and plant husbandry (horticultural plants, bananas, rice, etc.). In Nepal fish culture is also integrated with nappier and paragrass. Integrated fish culture is common in Bangladesh, India, Indonesia, Nepal, and Thailand.
In India a number of experimental and demonstration fish production centres use sewage from treatment plants. This practice is becoming popular because of the associated benefits of recycling organic wastes.
The production of common carp in raceways (running water culture) is practised in Indonesia.
In many coastal brackishwater areas the polyculture of fish and shrimps is practised in ponds. The more common species used are the mullets, sea bass, and milkfish with penaeid shrimps. In Bangladesh and India the traditional semi-intensive culture system produces annually about 500-1 500 kg/ha of shrimps and 3 000 kg/ha of fish. Thailand has adopted all three culture systems: the extensive system produces about 100-300 kg/ha per annum; the semi-intensive system produces about 1 000-3 000 kg/ha; and the intensive system produces about 4 000-6 000 kg/ha. In certain cases the intensive system can yield some 15 000 kg/ha.
Indonesia practises extensive and semi-intensive culture systems in coastal areas and produces over 98 000 t of fish and shrimps in some 15 000 ha of tambaks. Pakistan so far has shown little interest in brackishwater farming because of the lack of suitable environmental conditions.
Sri Lanka has about 12 000 ha of brackishwater resources with lagoons, estuaries and mudflats, but is only adopting the extensive system. Burma is currently developing some brackishwater areas for culture purposes.
Thailand produces over 113 000 t of bivalve molluscs (blood cockles, green mussels, oysters, and horse mussels) which are harvested through marine culture. In addition to the production of molluscs on rafts and ropes Singapore has reserved a number of coastal zones for the production of groupers and sea bass in cages.
Malaysia has well developed marine culture practices and produces cockles, prawns, and fish in brackishwater areas, as well as molluscs for pearls. Pearl culture on average yields 34-57 pearls/ha per annum in the country.
The culture of marine algae (both edible and industrial seaweeds) is practised widely in the region and contributes about 20% of the total aquaculture production.
2.4 Producers in the region
Aquaculture is part of the way of life of much of the rural populations in the West Asia region. As it is often not recognized as an independent sector from either fisheries or agriculture, statistics are not always separated or well defined. It is almost impossible to provide accurate numbers of producers (farmers) in the region, or those who are involved in production of seed in hatcheries or fingerling farms.
Obviously the numbers of farmers in a region which produced over 732 000 t of aquaculture products in 1986 are substantial. For example, in Indonesia the total number of farmers increased at a rate of almost 10% per annum between 1977 and 1984, from 600 000 to 1 150 000. Of these about 18 000 operate cages and net pens; 260 000 rice-cum-fish production in paddy fields, 131 000 in brackishwater pond culture, and the rest in freshwater pond production.
In 1985 the aquaculture industry in Indonesia employed around 1.3 million people in the following farming categories:
tambak = 134 400
freshwater ponds = 839 577
paddy fields = 302 486
cage culture = 5 132
In Thailand there are some 4 000 families who operate brackishwater farms for fish, shrimps, and molluscs, and 27 000 families involved in freshwater farms using fish ponds. There are also over 600 farmers operating cage units in freshwater and over 250 in brackishwater. Thailand now has a large number of small hatchery operations for the production of both freshwater prawn and marine shrimp seed. Over 1 000 backyard hatcheries now exist and 200 more are in the process of development. The cockle industry in Thailand fluctuates from year to year and the number of farmers regularly employed is not certain.
The Department of Fisheries in Bangladesh reported in 1988 that about 3 million people directly or indirectly participate in the entire range of aquaculture activities, from farming to marketing and processing.
In Pakistan there are some 168 fish farms registered in the province of Sind, and another 3 069 in the Punjab. There are 28 farms registered in the Northwest Frontier Province.
At present there is little specific aquaculture production recorded in Sri Lanka (52 t). Aquaculture seed production for stocking inland reservoirs and other water bodies is an important part of the large inland fisheries production. The fish are harvested from the reservoirs by fishermen using boats, and statistically one boat works about 7-10 ha of surface area. Aquaculture therefore contributes part-time to the livelihoods of about 15 000 fishermen in the country.
Singapore has four coastal areas reserved for fish culture, plus a number of kelangs or traps (some of which have cages inside) and a few coastal impoundments. There are 107 workers employed in aquaculture, but not all are owners/operators. Each farm leased is 5 000 m^2, and the farmer pays for the lease and an annual operating fee.
2.5 Organizations of producers
Most of the producers in the region organize themselves into private fish farmer associations or cooperatives for availing themselves of certain benefits which are not accessible to individual farmers; for example, financial assistance from governments is often available to cooperatives but not to individuals. This is particularly true for government development projects which aim at socio-economic advancement of small-scale fish farmers in depressed rural communities. It is also more convenient for post-harvest and export marketing services if producers are organized into cooperatives because minimum quantities are usually required, especially for export shipments.
There are many organizations of producers, such as cooperatives and associations, in the region but these differ in purpose. For example, in some states of Bangladesh, India, and Nepal associations of farmers (or fishermen) have been formed around the multi-ownership of water resources and ponds. Similarly in Indonesia and Malaysia associations exist to farm large tracts of coastal land suitable for mollusc culture (mussel and cockle); also for cage culture in publicly-owned lakes and reservoirs.
The formation of cooperatives and other associations has not always been as profitable as desired. For example, in Malaysia cooperatives and fishermen's groups have not been successful, according to reports of the agricultural banks which have supplied credit.
There is no information about producer organizations in Burma, Kampuchea, and Singapore.
In Pakistan the Karachi Fishermen's Cooperative Society is the largest organization for boat owners and traditional fishermen; however, it also exerts authority over the daily operation of the fish markets. A unique association is the Karachi fish merchants (moleholders) who represent many boat owners in the sale of shrimp and fish.
In Thailand there are over 30 aquaculture groups with more than 2 000 members between them. The groups main activities are the purchase of inputs for and the provision of credit to members. There are also 38 fisheries associations but these are open to anyone in the fishing industry, including individuals from the aquaculture sector.
2.6 Financial investment by public and private enterprises
In the West Asia region it is difficult to make an estimate of the level of investment in aquaculture production, both by public and private entities. However, it is evident from the number and scale of existing and proposed projects chat there has been an increase in investment in this sector since a decade ago by both the public and the private sectors.
Investment by the public sector has involved mainly the construction and operation of selected production centres or facilities which have served to stimulate interest of the private sector in similar ventures. For example, governments in the region have invested in demonstration farms for both finfish or shrimp/prawns. In most cases, however, public investment in aquaculture production comes mainly in the form of financial assistance to the private sector in capital investment. Financial assistance is largely by way of providing loan/credit facilities to fish farmers for the development and operation of fish ponds, fish pens and cages, and related support facilities.
The majority of farming operations in Asia are in the hands of the private sector. In general most of the production facilities in the various countries in the greater Asian region have been constructed with private capital, or through loans to private individuals and/or corporations from commercial banks or Government financial institutions.
In the West Asia countries financial support to the sector through the agricultural development banks has been of utmost importance for aquaculture growth throughout the last two decades. In the region there are many national banks which have supplied credit to farmers, as well as international bank-supported production projects which account for the considerable financial investment in the sector, in addition to the different national development agencies.
In India the government continues to invest funds in the sector through the National Bank for Agricultural and Rural Development (NABARD). This Bank provides credit to all commercial banks, state land development banks, regional rural banks, and state cooperation banks for aquacultural and rural development purposes. The National Bank has so far supported over 2 000 fisheries and aquaculture schemes with a total project outlay exceeding more than I.Rs. 260 crores. The National Bank normally provides financing of up to 75-90% of the total investment. The present lending to fisheries is now more toward the inland sub-sector (70%) than to marine fisheries. With the change in policies of the Government the Bank gives priority to aquaculture projects, and brackishwater farming is getting maximum attention from the central Government.
The following investments have received funds from the Government of India and private resources: a number of freshwater aquaculture projects under the International Development Association (IDA) Inland Fisheries Project; brackishwater farms producing shrimps and fish in coastal regions (Marine Products Export Development Authority (MPEDA) subsidy); the construction of fish hatcheries by private enterprise with subsidies from local state governments; the construction of shrimp hatcheries in coastal areas through a subsidy from local state governments (MPEDA); and the Bundh breeding of carps for commercial production of seed (local state government's subsidy).
In Indonesia the ADB provided credit, under the first Brackishwater Aquaculture Development Project, to rehabilitate and construct 280 km of primary and secondary canals for tambak culture of shrimp and fish in West, Central, and East Java. The project also supplied credit to support pond operations. Under a World Bank Loan project (called Fisheries Support Services Project) credit was extended to invest in canal rehabilitation in Aceh and South Sulawesi (185 km of canals) and South-East Sulawesi (415 km of canals). The project also included the construction of a shrimp hatchery and the establishment of a feed factory. Another project (Shrimp and Fish Culture Development Project) in Java, North and South Sumatra, and South Sulawesi invested money in the rehabilitation of canals, the establishment of a feed factory, and the construction of a brackishwater shrimp and fish hatchery.
In Burma the Asian Development Bank loaned US$ 20 million for the Inland Fisheries Development Project, which has two shrimp components. Freshwater and marine shrimp farms will be constructed with ADB funds; also new collection stations will be constructed and investment will be made in expanding a fishery processing plant in Rangoon to process aquaculture products.
In Thailand the Government's 6th National Economic and Social Development Plan (October 1986 to September 1991) included a shrimp farming development project. The US$ 84 million project will include investments to upgrade existing Government-owned hatcheries and to build five more Government-owned hatcheries, each with a capacity of 30 million shrimp fry per year. Also, credits for financing shrimp farming and building hatcheries will be extended through the Government-owned Bank for Agriculture and Agricultural Cooperatives to private investors. Of this credit component, some is only for the financing of 15 privately-owned shrimp hatcheries, with a collective total capacity of 270 million shrimp fry a year.
In Sri Lanka the ADB funded the Brackishwater Aquaculture Development Project in 1986. The US$ 17.3 million project will include the construction of a penaeid shrimp hatchery capable of producing 1.7 million marine shrimp post-larvae per month. Brackishwater demonstration ponds and 200 ha of grow-out ponds will also be constructed with the ADB funding. Carson's Construction Ltd. completed the first phase of their shrimp farm on the west coast of Sri Lanka. The farm has been harvesting shrimp since January 1987 and has produced a total of 170 t to date. Carson's Construction Ltd. is a 50/50 joint venture between a Sri Lankan company, Carson's Cumberbatch & Co. Ltd., and a British company, Hasted Satre & Co. The company's foreign shares are for sale.
In Pakistan the ADB has provided funds to the Agricultural Development Bank of Pakistan for developing four fishery projects, including one on aquaculture which includes construction of production facilities.
It is now increasingly common to find aquaculture projects owned or operated by private joint ventures involving local and foreign partners, with the foreign investor usually providing part of the development and operating costs and the local partner providing the land/site and part of the operating cost as equity.
More often than not governments of the region do not compete with the private sector in commercial aquaculture production. The burden is therefore borne by the private sector. In most countries aquaculture has developed to its high level mainly through private interest and initiative, and sometimes despite the lack of government support. The scale of private investment varies with the scope and magnitude of each project, the level of technology employed, and the type of entity (individual or corporate, national or multinational) involved, among others.
2.7 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
The development of the aquaculture industry in the region has been greatly aided by the provision of technical assistance at the level of producers by major multilateral and bilateral institutions operating in West Asia. Funding organizations include the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the Asian Development Bank (ADB), the United States Agency for International Development (USAID), the Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA), and the British Overseas Development Administration (ODA), among others. Many of these projects have been executed by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), or by non-Governmental organizations.
Technical assistance, as distinct from capital assistance which refers to the provision of funds for capital infrastructure, refers to the provision of funds for the conduct of investment studies for production, demonstration projects, or production-support activities. There are a number of technical assistance projects in the production sub-sector.
In Bangladesh the ODA funded a freshwater fish culture project, whilst the Second Aquaculture Development Project (mainly carps) was financed by the ADB. A project on integrated freshwater prawn farming received assistance from the Intermediate Technology Development Group in the UK. Fish pond construction and fish culture were included in a small-scale fisheries development project in Bangladesh, which was funded by the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD).
In Burma the ADB assisted with funds for an inland fisheries development project, which included carp farming and marine Crustacea culture.
The Swedish based International Foundation for Science (IFS) provided assistance to India for small projects dealing with: formulation of diets for carps; growth of carps; evaluation of Artemia as a food for shrimp and prawns; and mass culture of freshwater shrimp. UNDP funded two projects in India dealing with the development of coastal aquaculture and with freshwater fish culture. The Tilapia International Foundation in the Netherlands assisted with a rural community development project in Kerala, South India, which included farming of tilapia. IFAD funded a project for fish pond construction and fingerling production.
In Indonesia a number of small aquaculture projects have been supported by IFS, including growth and feeding of tilapia; growth and feeding of Macrobrachium; production of 'lablab'; pond culture of marine shrimp; freshwater fish diseases; and freshwater fish production in floating cages. UNDP funded a large seafarming development project (mainly marine Crustacea and fish). The Netherlands government supported a shrimp culture feasibility study in Indonesia; the ODA assisted with the development of shrimp culture in ponds and raceways in Java. USAID funded a large fisheries research and development project which included freshwater fish culture.
In Malaysia the IFS has assisted with three projects; integrated freshwater fish farming, catfish reproduction, and oyster culture.
The ADB provided funding for the Second Aquaculture Development Project in Nepal, which was mainly for carp farming. Freshwater fish culture, nutrition and larval rearing studies were supported by the Swedish based IFS. UNDP also funded carp culture in Nepal.
The ADB in 1988 approved a US$ 15 million loan to Pakistan to help finance the Second Aquaculture Development Project. Designed to continue the efforts initiated under the Bank's first Aquaculture Development Project approved in 1979, this project will carry out development activities to help the government utilize inland water resources and facilitate technology transfer which will support private sector initiatives in fish production. FAO assisted with two freshwater fish culture projects: fish farming in reservoirs and the introduction of low-cost fish farming in rural areas.
In Sri Lanka the IFS assisted with three projects; freshwater fish culture using cheap feeds, mussel culture, and a feasibility study of freshwater fish culture in swamp areas. The Norwegian Agency for International Development (NORAD) funded a feasibility study on freshwater fish culture in the southeastern part of the island. As part of the huge Mahaweli Authority irrigation (dam) scheme, CIDA and ODA assisted in freshwater fish culture projects.
In Thailand a number of aquaculture projects have received technical assistance. Freshwater fish farming projects have been supported by CIDA, the Overseas Economic Cooperation Fund (Japan), ODA, ADB, and IFS. Japan also provided a loan for marine and freshwater crustacean culture. The ADB funded two projects dealing with brackishwater prawn culture. The IFS assisted with projects on fish diseases and brine shrimp production in semi-flow-through systems. UNDP/FAO supported a Macrobrachium culture project.
In December 1988 Aquatic Farms Ltd. finalized a contract with the World Bank (WB) to carry out an Asia-Wide Agro-Industry Sector Study. Under this US$ 200 000 contract, a 5-member team will assess the potential for expanded shrimp culture in Bangladesh, China, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Philippines, and Thailand.
2.8 Capital assistance projects in the sub-sector
Funding for the construction of production facilities in the region has been provided largely by multilateral organizations like ADB, WB, IFAD, and the World Food Programme (WFP). Most of the projects provide credit facilities to either the respective government, or to the private sector through government banks and lending institutions. In most cases credit assistance is also accompanied by components of training and extension, and institutional strengthening, which ensures that the loans are ultimately repaid by the sub-borrowers.
A number of such capital assistance projects exist in the region at the present time. In Bangladesh the Rajendrapur carp hatchery was constructed with part of a loan from ADB. CIDA funded the materials to construct six fish ponds in Burma, as part of a UNDP/United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (Unesco) marine biology project which included brackishwater aquaculture. ADB funding was used in Indonesia to construct a number of small marine shrimp hatcheries and grow-out ponds. In Sri Lanka ADB funds are being used to construct a demonstration marine shrimp hatchery and 25 ha of demonstration grow-out ponds. In fact, usually in large ADB aquaculture projects (and most West Asian countries have received ADB loans) some of the funds are for capital assistance, i.e. hatcheries, ponds, and canals.
<section>5</section>
3. LOCAL INFRASTRUCTURE
3.1 Extension services in the region
3.2 Training of extension agents
3.3 Seed production facilities in the region
3.4 Manufacturers of feed and fertilizers in the region
3.5 Manufacturers of equipment for the industry
3.6 Other services for the industry
3.7 Local credit programmes
3.8 Trade publications for producers
3.9 Technical assistance in the sub-sector
3.1 Extension services in the region
Fisheries extension has been recognized as a vital link between the scientific community and the local fish farmers for many years. Internally, the governments of most of the countries within the region have worked diligently to expand and improve the network of field staff to assist the industry. External help has also been provided through various international development groups. In almost every instance the federal government provides the framework for the extension services. The capabilities vary greatly from country to country.
Thailand has one of the larger extension services in the region. The Department of Fisheries is the lead agency, providing approximately 100 trained extension specialists.
In Singapore the Primary Production Department of the Government has two fisheries stations which provide both technical training for farmers and extension services. The Changi Fisheries Complex focuses on marine species, primarily cage culture of grouper and sea bass. The Sembawang Field Station emphasizes freshwater culture.
There are eight Central Fisheries Research Institutes under the Indian Council of Agricultural Research (ICAR) which have as their primary function research and technology transfer through training courses and extension services to farmers. They are widely distributed throughout the country.
In Indonesia aquaculture extension services are provided jointly at the regional and provincial levels and are under the responsibility of the Agency for Agricultural Education, Training and Extension (AAETE) and the Directorate General for Fisheries. In 1988, there were 839 aquaculture extension workers. Each province has at least one aquaculture specialist assigned to a group of field extension workers. In addition, there are two aquaculture demonstration centres focusing on fresh and brackishwater culture.
In Pakistan the four provincial Directorates of Fisheries are responsible for extension as well as a variety of other support activities. Other countries in the region similarly have established extension programmes as follows: Bangladesh through the Directorate of Fisheries; Sri Lanka through the Inland Division of the Ministry of Fisheries, and the Division of Fisheries Development in Nepal.
Aquaculture extension in Malaysia is a major support service provided by the Department of Fisheries through the Extension Branch, with its headquarters located at the Department's headquarters in Kuala Lumpur, and its field personnel stationed at State and District levels in various parts of the country. Extension services provided to the target group include technical advice and assistance covering all aspects of aquaculture, including site selection, project planning and implementation, and in the supply of fish seeds and other requirements.
3.2 Training of extension agents
Training of manpower at the local level for extension and technology transfer is a priority with many international agencies such as FAO, which provides training courses at vocational and postgraduate levels through many of its in-country and regional aquaculture and fishery projects. The IDRC, Commonwealth Secretariat, CIDA, Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA), and other donor agencies also provide fellowships to aquaculture staff in the region to participate in specialized training programmes.
In addition several of the national governments in the region have taken an active involvement in providing training from their extension officers. The Government of Indonesia through the Department of Fisheries has established 5 Fisheries Development Centres which provide training for extension agents. Two of them are focused on coastal aquaculture. Through AAETE under the Ministry of Agriculture, there are several training institutions including a fishery academy, 3 junior and 4 senior fisheries high schools, 3 adult training centres and fisheries departments within six universities. All extension specialists are graduates of colleges and universities.
In Sri Lanka information on latest technologies is disseminated to fishery field officers and field extension agents through short-term training courses, documentary films, seminars, etc. Refresher courses are also organized.
A number of regional organizations provide opportunities in specialized aquaculture practices. The SEAFDEC Aquaculture Department (SEAFDEC-AQD) at Tigbauan in the Philippines trains national and international extension agents in various production methods and techniques, such as shrimp hatchery and culture operations, and freshwater fish farming, among others. SEAFDEC-AQD also offers trainers' training courses for extension workers, and there are some private non-stock, non-profit corporations, some with foreign funding, which provide extension training services. Since 1974 SEAFDEC-AQD has trained some 6 776 participants in various national (5 471), international (1 074) non-degree programmes, and international (231) degree programmes. The ASEAN/FAO/UNDP Small-Scale Coastal Fisheries Development Project organizes training activities for fisheries extension workers. In 1988, for example, the project sponsored training courses on fisheries extension methodology in Indonesia
and Malaysia.
The Network of Aquaculture Centres in Asia (NACA) provides short-term international training for aquaculture extension workers. On return to their respective countries, these trainees are expected to transfer the technologies through in-country programmes to other extension workers who, in turn, conduct on-site sessions for the fish farmers.
Transfer of aquaculture technology and training of field workers in their own countries, is also effected under the NACA programme of inter-country exchange of expertise. National experts assist other lead centres as well as other countries by visiting and training technicians and field workers on site. Since 1981 NACA has organized some 15 international training courses for specialized aquaculture practices with over 350 participants. Although the majority of participants have been from countries in Asia (19) and the Pacific (7), some have come from countries in Africa (12) and Latin America (7), and from Europe (1).
A database for fisheries and aquaculture training opportunities has been established by ICLARM/FAO at the ICLARM offices in the Philippines. Currently the database lists 316 long- and short-term courses in fisheries and aquaculture world-wide. More than half (54%) of the 110 institutions listed under Asia offer formal institutionalized programmes in aquaculture, of these 76% grant degrees. Short courses, mostly on aquaculture, are offered by 49 institutions. In the West Asia region these include: Burma (1), India (6), Indonesia (6), Malaysia (6), Nepal (1), Pakistan (1), Singapore (1), Sri Lanka (2), and Thailand (4). In the East Asia region these are: Brunei (1), China (6), Hong Kong (1), Japan (1), Republic of Korea (2), Philippines (8), and Taiwan PC (2).
3.3 Seed production facilities in the region
Along with growth of aquaculture in the region has been the development of fish seed hatcheries by both the public and private sectors. Through these producers, quality seed of a wide variety of species is made available. However, it is reported that supplies of commercially important species have not kept pace with demand and the supply of seed in the region is a major hindrance to large-scale fisheries development programmes. One of the reasons may be financial, as it is reported that many government-owned seed hatcheries, such as in Bangladesh, India, Nepal, and Pakistan sell to farmers at subsidized rates.
One of the countries with a well established hatchery network is Bangladesh. Over 200 fish seed farms reportedly are in operation by both the public and private sectors. In 1986, carp hatcheries produced 2 452 million fry. The ADB is also financing the construction of a Macrobrachium hatchery.
Nepal has two Government-owned carp hatcheries producing over 10 million fingerlings annually. The 13 fishery development stations in the country apparently have seed production capability as well.
In Malaysia there are 30 marine shrimp hatcheries, producing about 400 million fry annually. Hatchery production of Macrobrachium fry is about 20-25 million juveniles per year. The breeding centres and hatcheries operated by the Department of Fisheries provide seed of the common carp, common silver carp, tilapia, catfish, and the giant sea perch.
In Pakistan there are six existing hatcheries with an annual production of 14 million fingerlings. By 1988 new hatcheries are expected to be completed which will increase capacity to 25 million annually.
In Thailand marine shrimp farming has gained considerable importance. However, 98% of the farmers must rely upon wild stocks which are seasonal and inconsistent. In 1984, it was reported that the Government-operated shrimp hatcheries which produced 17 million Penaeus monodon post-larvae. The estimated demand at that time was 180 million. In 1988 there were 5 internationally-funded aid projects in Thailand which included seed production components - primarily for freshwater fish and Macrobrachium. The Government has been producing sea bass fry for over 40 years. Annual production is over 30 million fry. The Government's role is minor (less than 10% of production in 1984) compared with the private sector for Macrobrachium. There were 100 private hatcheries in 1984 producing 200 million post-larvae.
Seed of Chinese and Indian carps are produced in 13 government breeding stations in Sri Lanka. In 1986 over 9 million carp fingerlings were produced for stocking purposes. Marine shrimp seed are produced by four private hatcheries and two government stations. An ADB-funded shrimp hatchery, with an annual capacity of 24 million post-larvae, will soon be completed and put into production.
In 1985 Indonesia had 724 government and private hatcheries for freshwater species such as common carp, Java carp, giant gouramy, tilapias, and catfishes. There were 93 marine shrimp hatcheries operating in 1985, and by 1987 the hatcheries produced around 1 400 million fry annually. The production was around 25% of the potential of the hatcheries in 1987. The freshwater hatcheries, by 1987, produced about 5 000 million fish fry for stocking. By 1988 shrimp hatcheries had increased to 101, with a capacity of 3 037 million fry.
In India 14 modern hatcheries are being developed in 5 states through the Inland Fisheries Project Programmes. These are designed to produce 150 million fish seed annually. Several hatcheries have been constructed by the private sector, as well, during the last 5 years. These include corporate investments such as Tata Oil Co. (Tomco), Tata Iron and Steel Company (TSSCO), and Hidustan Levers.
Also in the region are the following reports of fishery stations with seed production capabilities: Burma (22), Malaysia (14), Singapore (2), and Sri Lanka (17). CIDA is sponsoring development of a carp hatchery programme in Sri Lanka as well.
In Singapore there are three commercial marine/brackishwater hatcheries operating: one specializes in sea bass fry and the other two in marine prawn (Penaeid) fry.
3.4 Manufacturers of feed and fertilizers in the region
In October 1988 the AustAsia Aquaculture Magazine published a 1988/89 Trade Directory for producers and suppliers of goods and services in the Australasia, Indo-Pacific, and South-East Asian regions. The Directory lists live products (breeders, juveniles, eggs, etc.), farm equipment, feedstuffs, additives, services and consultants, sources of aquaculture information, technical organizations, research centres, etc., with complete contact addresses.
Shortages of feed and fertilizers are apparent throughout the region. In 1986 FAO reported two feed mills producing shrimp feeds in Thailand. There are a number of current research programmes on nutrition and formulations of diets for carp, shrimp, tilapia, and Macrobrachium. However, data on actual production capacity are not available.
3.5 Manufacturers of equipment for the industry
Information on availability and recent technological developments in equipment design is not readily accessible in the region, other than at major libraries and governmental centres. The AustAsia Aquaculture Trade Directory is a good source of information (see 3.4). In the rural areas, where fish production occurs, the high level of illiteracy makes access to information difficult except through direct contact between the farmers and manufacturers' representatives and sales people. Conventions and trade shows which attract foreign as well as domestic manufacturers of equipment and supplies for the industry are not as common in this region as they are in other parts of the world. When they do occur, many are at an international level and are not perceived as being accessible by the average fish farmer - particularly those who have received little formal education and operate on a small scale.
3.6 Other services for the industry
The AustAsia Aquaculture Trade Directory is a good source of information. Consulting services in the region are available in such areas as water quality, engineering, and disease diagnostics. The majority of available consultants are not specifically trained in aquaculture, but have skills which are applicable, such as architecture, engineering, surveying, etc. In addition to consultants in the private sector, staff of various research organizations and universities provide specialized services to the industry. The internationally-financed development programmes in the region are the largest single source of specialized consultants as the majority of these projects include expatriate specialists in a variety of fields.
The Fisheries Development Corporation (BFDC) in Bangladesh provides specialized services in that country relating to promotion and commercial aspects of aquaculture products. In Singapore the Primary Production Department provides disease diagnostic and advisory services to fish and shrimp farmers.
3.7 Local credit programmes
Typical of the aquaculture industry in many places in the world, credit for capital improvements and operations is often difficult to obtain in the region. There are four major avenues for accessing credit when it is available; normal lending channels of commercial banks, special programmes established by the government, internationally-financed project linked lines of credit, and non-institutional private lenders.
Institutional lending in the form of long-term credit for aquaculture projects through commercial banks is often lacking as a result of the perception that aquaculture is a poor credit risk. This is often due to the inadequacy of trained staff at the financial institutions to assess projects. Two of the countries where the banks have had considerable experience in lending to fish farm projects are Bangladesh and India. There is approximately a 20-year history in India of providing credit for all aspects of the aquaculture industry including seed production, enhancement schemes, pond construction, etc. Over 2 000 projects have been financed at a cost of I.Rs. 2 138 million. Terms are determined on the basis of the activity and expected revenues. NABARD provides 75-90% of the credit to this sector. Funds for commercial lending in India have been made available through the IDA and NABARD Credit programmes. In Bangladesh, the Krishi Bank is the main source of commercial credit.
A maximum of 70% of total project cost is eligible at terms in the range of 4 years at 16% interest.
An example of a government directed programme is the Special Agricultural Credit Scheme set up by the Government of Bangladesh in 1977. Through the Bangladesh Bank, it has provided short-term working capital for aquaculture, including pond rehabilitation, and the purchase of seed, feed, and fertilizers. The Government guarantees the loans. The terms are 5 years with an 18-month grace period and annual interest rate of 16%. This programme has assisted local banks in becoming familiar with the industry and, as a result, one local bank, the Agrani Bank, has allocated some of its own financial resources to support aquaculture.
The major sources of credit in the region are from external sources, primarily international lending agencies. For example, the ADB has provided funds to the Agricultural Development Bank of Pakistan for the development of four fishery projects and one aquaculture project. More specifically, the ADB has provided loans to Bangladesh, Burma, Indonesia, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, and Thailand, for shrimp farming programmes. Another example of the linked line of credit programme is the IFAD Fish Tank Rehabilitation Project in Bangladesh which, in 1980, financed the rehabilitation of 625 ha of fish ponds at an interest rate of 13% repayable over a 10-year period.
In addition to institutional credit, informal credit is also available in the region from the traditional village money lenders as well as fish wholesalers, traders, and merchants in the form of advances against future production and as mortgages on real property. Indonesia and Pakistan both have many examples of such forms of short-term financing. In Indonesia it is reported that only non-institutional credit is available.
It is not known how many countries other than India provide subsidies for construction of infrastructure and purchase of equipment and inputs for aquaculture.
3.8 Trade publications for producers
There are several publications which provide information on topics of interest to fish producers and industry participants on a local level. In addition, regional and international publications frequently contain articles and data pertinent to the producers. The local publications are often more timely and directly applicable to local production situations in addition to being far more easily accessible to the average producer. India reports eight such publications ranging from fishery extension pamphlets published by NABARD to "Indian Sea Foods", which addresses marketing related issues. Thailand publishes the IPFC Newsletter for its local industry.
At a regional level the major publications of interest which contain practical information for farmers include both regular and special publications from SEAFDEC and ICLARM in the Philippines, and NACA in Thailand. In addition to providing information on recent development in technology, these publications include useful information on the levels of aquaculture development in neighbouring countries and regions, market information, and notices on courses and meetings of interest.
International trade papers and magazines obtainable by subscription are AustAsia Aquaculture Magazine (Australia), Aquaculture Magazine (USA), Aquaculture Digest (USA), Fish Farming International (UK), and Fish Farmer (UK). The Quarterly Newsletter of the European Aquaculture Society (EAS) in Belgium contains relevant information for producers at times and is obtainable through membership of the Society (see 4.6).
There are three Trade Directories of aquaculture products which are published at regular intervals. One is available through subscription to Aquaculture Magazine (USA), another through the EAS (Belgium), and the third available from AustAsia Aquaculture Magazine.
3.9 Technical assistance in the sub-sector
There are 52 technical assistance projects financed by international aid groups in the region. While many of these are research-oriented, their aim is to provide practical information and infrastructure to facilitate the growth of the local aquaculture industry. The breakdown of projects by country is as follows: Bangladesh 5, Burma 1, India 7, Indonesia 12, Malaysia 3, Nepal 3, Pakistan 3, Sri Lanka 7, and Thailand 11.
Some of the most active agencies providing technical assistance in the region through project sponsorship and technical support are: Asian Institute of Technology (AIT) (Thailand), Asian and Pacific Development Centre (Japan), the Asian Development Bank (Philippines), FAO, International Center for Living Aquatic Resources Management (Philippines), International Development Research Centre (Canada), US Agency for International Development (USA), Indo-Pacific Fisheries Commission (Thailand), and Network of Aquaculture Centres in Asia (Thailand).
NACA is a UNDP/FAO regional project which provides assistance in training of fisheries technicians and field workers from 12 member countries in the region. The four lead centres established under this project (China, India, Philippines, and Thailand) conduct regular long- and short-term training courses for fisheries personnel and extension agents. Bilateral agencies and organizations such as IDRC (Canada) finance many participants of the courses. As an adjunct to this project UNDP is financing a number of marine farming demonstration centres.
The Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN)/FAO/UNDP Small-Scale Coastal Fisheries Development Project, jointly funded by ASEAN and UNDP and executed by FAO, is also a regional project which includes among its components the provision of training courses for fisheries extension personnel from the different member countries.
Through SEAFDEC-AQD various multilateral and bilateral agencies provide assistance for training fisheries and aquaculture extension workers from various countries in West Asia. SEAFDEC itself sponsors study tours for extension agents to different countries to observe various aquaculture methods and extension techniques.
<section>6</section>
4. NATIONAL INFRASTRUCTURE
4.1 Manpower training in aquaculture technologies
4.2 Manpower training in management
4.3 Aquaculture research in the region
4.4 Management of credit
4.5 Associations of professionals in the region
4.6 Information for professionals
4.7 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
4.8 Capital assistance projects in the sub-sector
4.1 Manpower training in aquaculture technologies
There are many facilities in the West Asia region for training and education in aquaculture at specialist and advanced levels. Most technical institutions conduct both long- and short-term training courses for nationals as part of graduate education programmes and as special courses for technicians. Some participate in international training funded by regional organizations and programmes.
In May 1987 the Asian Fisheries Society published proceedings of a workshop to review fisheries (including aquaculture) education and training in Asia, which concluded the following:
The major educational issues confronting fisheries development in Asia are: (1) inadequate appropriate technical manpower, (2) lack of significant contributions to fisheries development by fisheries professionals in general; and (3) deficiencies in the fisheries education systems. Five courses of action are put forward toward improving the situation: development of a policy which incorporates fisheries education and training into fisheries manpower development strategies; regular review of fisheries education programmes in line with development trends in the industry; upgrading the fisheries training capabilities; a network of fisheries educational institutions with areas of excellence; stronger linkages among fisheries educational professionals in government, universities and the private sector, and steps to improve the image and status of fisheries professionals.
In Thailand six universities offer courses at an undergraduate level. Approximately 4 undergraduate degrees in fisheries are given annually. The universities include: Kasetsart University (aquaculture, fisheries biology, marine science, resource management) and Culalongkorn University (marine science), in addition to post-graduate research. There are also degree programmes at the Prince of Songkhla University (food sciences and agriculture), Srinikarin Viraj University (aquatic sciences), Chiang Mai University and Bang Saen University (biological sciences) and Phuket Community College (aquaculture). Technical courses for short-term specialist training are carried out by the National Inland Fisheries Institute (NIFI). Topics include culture of freshwater fish, molluscs, and freshwater prawns (Macrobrachium spp.). The National Institute of Coastal Aquaculture offers post-graduate degree courses in aquaculture at the Master's level. AIT offers tertiary education (M.Sc. and
Ph.D.) and international training courses in a number of aquaculture specialities, particularly integrated farming.
In India the Central Institute for Fisheries Education (CIFE) offers freshwater aquaculture training particularly for the culture of the Indian major carps. CIFE also offers Masters degrees and diplomas in Fishery Sciences. The Institute has three sub-centres in Andhra Pradesh, Uttar Pradesh and West Bengal. The Central Institute of Freshwater Aquaculture (CIFA) offers courses on composite fish culture (polyculture systems), and the Central Marine Fisheries Research Institute (CMFRI) offers parallel courses in marine culture practices.
In addition to these federal institutes, each state in India has its own training centre for courses in general aquaculture, farm management, and aquaculture engineering. Some of the principal state institutes are the Central Institute of Coastal Aquaculture Engineering (CICAE) in Bangalore, the Central Institute of Fishery Nautical Engineering Trade (CIFNET) in Cochin, the Trainer's Training Centre in Orissa, the Marine Products Export Development Authority (MPEDA) in Cochin. There are also two demonstration centres at Sukabumi and Jepara.
Higher education at graduate and post-graduate levels, usually associated with fisheries as a whole, is offered at CIFE; the National Institute of Oceanography; the College of Fisheries, Bangalore Agricultural University; the Faculty of Fisheries, Konkan Agricultural University; the University of Kalyani; the College of Fisheries, Kerala Agricultural University; Tamil Nadu Agricultural University; the Andhra Pradesh Agricultural University; the Orissa University of Agriculture and Technology; the University of Agricultural Sciences at Mangalore; Mangalore University; University of Kerala; the Cochin University of Science and Technology. In addition to education, most of the above centres offer specialized training courses for farm management, aquaculture, disease control, hatchery management and operations, seed packing and transportation, manpower development, etc.
There are several academic institutions in Burma which provide education in fisheries and related subjects. These include: the University of Moulmein, University of Rangoon, Mandalay University and the Rangoon Institute of Technology. The University of Moulmein is the main training centre in the country in aquaculture and coastal fisheries. Both B.Sc. and M.Sc. degrees are offered.
In Indonesia aquaculture is included in the graduate and post-graduate fisheries programmes of the Universitas Rio, the Diponegoro University, the Universitas Islam Riou, the Brawijaya University, the Hasanuddin University, Bogor Agricultural University, and the Universitas Sam Ratulangi. Special courses are held by several of these institutions together with the TOC Aquaculture Development Project at Kaltim at a vocational level and the Southeast Asian Regional Center for Tropical Biology (BIOTROP) at Bogor on certain assay procedures.
In Malaysia the Department of Fisheries organizes vocational courses. The principal universities which conduct aquaculture courses in their degree programmes are the University Pertanian Malaysis, University Sains Malaysia, and Pajadjaran University. In addition special courses are held by Ebor Research on fish production in ponds at rubber plantations.
In Pakistan the Faisalabad University has a department of Zoology and Fisheries. In addition specialized fisheries training and education are available through the Fisheries Research and Training Institute which is operated as part of the Punjab University. Students are given preparation for Master's degrees in fisheries as well as vocational training.
In Sri Lanka the National Aquatic Resource Agency (NARA) organizes training programmes for aquaculture. The Ruhuna University, the University of Kelaniya, and the University of Colombo all include aquaculture in the zoological programmes, and the University of Kelaniya holds short courses.
In Singapore aquaculture is included in the zoological courses at the National University of Singapore.
Several of the other countries in the region offer aquaculture education as part of more traditional degree and training programmes. In Nepal aquaculture is taught in zoology graduate courses at the Tribhuvan University.
There are also regional centres offering specialized aquaculture education. A large number of training opportunities are offered through the Network of Aquaculture Centres in Asia (NACA) from its headquarters in Thailand. NACA, through its associated lead centre in the Philippines at SEAFDEC-AQD, contributes to the production of trained personnel with an annual course leading to a post-graduate degree (Master of Aquaculture Technology, M. Aqua.) awarded by the University of the Philippines in the Visayas. About 20 individuals graduate from the programme each year. Since its inception there have been graduates from Bangladesh (7), Burma (1), India (8), Indonesia (14), Malaysia (10), Nepal (2), Pakistan (5), Singapore (2), Sri Lanka (12), and Thailand (14).
NACA also offers special short-term courses. Each year a four-month course on integrated farming is offered at the Integrated Fish Farming Centre at Wuxi in China. Successful participants from this course have come from Bangladesh (7), Burma (7), India (10), Indonesia (5), Malaysia (12), Nepal (8), Pakistan (5), Sri Lanka (12), and Thailand (19). In addition there have been other special courses at which some 194 individuals from all the above countries, plus Bhutan (1), have participated.
The UNDP/FAO Regional Sea Farming Development and Demonstration Project (based in Thailand) organizes a variety of short-term training in aquaculture specialities for the region. Although not held on a regular basis, the training includes aquaculture practices in net pens and cages, technology and propagation of regional species.
4.2 Manpower training in management
Manpower development in management credit and business areas is taking place primarily within banking institutions. Projects requiring credit from rural banks must be evaluated both economically and technically. Many aquaculture and fishery graduates have joined banks as specialists to appraise, monitor, coordinate, and evaluate projects. In addition to their technical expertise banks now participate in conducting training courses through their training institutions.
In India most of the commercial banks (and the parent institution the National Bank) organize rural project development courses and short-term courses on fisheries financing for loan officers and civil servants involved in these procedures. District level training courses, seminars, workshops, etc., are also arranged by banks in India to improve the quality of lending. The Asian Institute of Commercial Aquaculture in Malaysia carries out short courses in technical and business management, including aquaculture. It also operates field facilities for demonstration.
The training of loan officers and other staff in aquaculture has had a significant effect in improving the credit situation for the industry. For example, the Agrani Bank in Bangladesh has financed the training of bank staff in aquaculture and as a result has had close to a 100% recovery rate of its loans.
The ADB runs short workshops on project management for managers of ADB projects, including fisheries and aquaculture. Such workshops focus on ADB procedures but also Couch on fund management/disbursement and related subjects.
4.3 Aquaculture research in the region
Research in aquaculture is primarily carried out through established university and research centres operated by the respective departments of fisheries in the countries of this region. There are numerous individual projects sponsored through international programmes. Two research stations in Bangladesh, the Aquaculture Experiment Station at Mymensingh and the Mariculture and Coastal Aquaculture Research Station at Cox's Bazaar, are responsible for carrying out government sponsored research. In addition, the Chittagong University of Bangladesh has a Department of Marine Biology which maintains an active marine research programme.
Burma operates the Thakata Fishery Research Centre specifically to carry out research on Macrobrachium. The Centre is financed by the People's Pearls and Fisheries Corporation. The Aquaculture Research Centre is operated by the University of Moulmein. There are running seawater facilities and laboratories in support of applied culture work with Crustacea, mollusca, and various fish species. Six experimental fish ponds are used for on-growing work.
In India the principal research centres are the federal institutes. These include the Central Inland Capture Fisheries Resource Institute for capture fishing and reservoir development and management; the Central Marine Fisheries Research Institute at Cochin for marine culture, particularly shrimps; the Aquaculture Engineering Department of the Indian Institute of Technology (ITT) at Kharagpur for farm engineering; the Central Institute of Freshwater Aquaculture (CIFA) at Dhauli for freshwater fish culture and propagation; the Central Institute of Brackishwater Aquaculture (CIBA) at Madras for brackishwater fish and shellfish culture; the Central Cold Water Fisheries Research Institute (CCFRI) for cold water fish; the Central Institute of Fisheries Education (CIFE) at Bombay for freshwater fish culture and hatchery technology; the National Bureau of Fish Genetic Resources Center for fish genetics; the National Institute of Oceanography at Goa for marine fish and shellfish
culture. In addition there is the Fisheries Research Institute at Bhavaneger for both freshwater and marine culture. Most state agricultural universities carry out a variety of research projects according to their state needs.
Other centres of research in the region include: the Research Institute for Freshwater Fisheries (RIFF) and the Research Institute for Coastal Aquaculture Fisheries (RICAF) in Indonesia; the Fisheries Research Institute, specializing in freshwater prawns and the Batu Berendum Freshwater Fish Culture Station, emphasizing Chinese carps and integrated farming in Malaysia; the Fisheries Research Division Punjab of the Agricultural Research Council and the Fisheries Research Institute, Punjab in Pakistan; the Changi Fisheries Research Station, studying fish propagation and the cage culture of sea bass, and aquarium fish research at the Freshwater Fish Research Station at Sembairang in Singapore; Marine Shrimp and Fish Research at the National Aquatic Resource Agency (NARA) in Sri Lanka; and in Thailand the National Inland Fisheries Institute (NIFI) works on freshwater fish breeding and the National Institute of Coastal Aquaculture (NICA) develops technologies in producing
brackishwater fish and shellfish.
USAID is supporting the Pond Dynamics/Aquaculture Collaborative Research Support Program (CRSP) in Thailand.
ICLARM conducts research on specific aquaculture problems through collaboration with other research and/or academic institutions in the region. It has no research facilities of its own other than resource information. Through multilateral and bilateral agencies it obtains grants and contracts for collaborative research and provides senior specialists for joint research teams. ICLARM now has a Coastal Aquaculture Centre in the Solomon Islands and is planning to develop a Genetics Unit in the Philippines and an Integrated Farming Unit in Thailand. ICLARM's tilapia genetics research has been with CLSU and the Marine Science Institute of the University of the Philippines at Diliman. ICLARM is linked with SEAFDEC for the Asian Fisheries Social Science Research Network, of which SEAFDEC is a member. ICLARM, like SEAFDEC-AQD, publishes research results and findings in newsletters for circulation throughout the region, and in reports and books. Newest among these is the Asian
Fisheries Society's Journal "Asian Fisheries Science" which includes aquaculture.
4.4 Management of credit
Almost all the countries in the region provide credit to the aquaculture sector through their financial institutions. In India, for example, the central and state governments have provided large sums for local and national infrastructure creating extension services, research support, education and training facilities, export promotion agencies, fisheries development corporations, fish farmer's development agencies, fisheries cooperatives, and fishermen's federations. The importance of the sector in the overall development of the country has been realized by the Government's injection of some I.Rs. 50 000 million during the Cusseur 7th plan (1985-90).
In India there are 14 nationalized commercial banks, state cooperation banks, land development banks, or regional rural banks. These banks operate under the parent National Bank for Agriculture and Rural Development and provide loans to the industry on easy repayment instalments and minimal rates. The repayment schedule is decided on the basis of internal rates of return. The banks provide both medium- and long-term loans to small farmers, marginal farmers, and others. Loans to individuals and companies are available to a limit of 75-90% of the total project cost; the balance of 10-25% is considered the borrower's contribution as margin. The rate of interest is 10-12.5% depending on circumstances.
Other development finance organizations in India include: Agricultural Finance Corporation Ltd., which assists member banks through technical assistance including provision of consulting services; the Credit Guarantee Corporation of India, Ltd., which guarantees loans by commercial banks; and the Industrial Development Bank of India which promotes and finances industrial development.
Until the 1970's credit lending in India was more toward the marine sector (about 75% of the total disbursement in the fisheries sector) but lately this has changed and more loans are given to the schemes coming from the inland fisheries sector. The 1986 data show that the credit ratio between the inland and marine sectors from the National Bank was 3:1.
There are a host of banking institutions within other countries in the region, as well. Many of these focus on more traditional types of agriculture and rural development, but do have within their charters sufficient leeway to provide credit to aquaculture.
There are four development finance organizations in Burma. The Bangladesh Krishi Bank provides credit facilities for agricultural and rural development. The Bangladesh Samabaya Bank provides credit to agricultural cooperatives. Credit to the landless rural poor is available through Grameen Bank. Finally, the Investment Corporation of Bangladesh provides development financing. Two State Banks, Myanma Agricultural Bank and Myanma Economic Bank provide agricultural credit to farmers, cooperatives, state economic organizations, and municipalities.
The Bank Pembanguan Indonesia is the development bank of Indonesia and provides medium- and long-term loans to new and existing business enterprises. The National Bank of Kampuchea provides loans through credits given by international organizations. There are two development banks in Malaysia, the Development Bank of Malaysia and the Sabah Development Bank.
The Agricultural Development Bank in Nepal provides credit to agriculture cooperatives, individual farmers, and associations. In addition to a network of offices it operates 3 zonal training centres and 2 demonstration centres for agriculture. The Nepal Industrial Development Corporation (NIDC) is a state-owned bank which offers financial and technical assistance to private sector industries.
In Pakistan the Federal Bank for Cooperatives provides credit facilities to each of four provincial cooperative banks and regulates their operation. Credit to individual cooperatives is available through this organization. The Agricultural Development Bank of Pakistan provides credit to individual borrowers and cottage industries.
The Development Bank of Singapore, Ltd. provides credit and takes equity positions in a variety of projects.
There are four state development banks in Sri Lanka which provide short-to long-term credit. These are: the Agricultural and Industrial Credit Corporation of Ceylon; Development Finance Corporation of Ceylon; Investment and Credit Bank, Ltd.; and the National Development Bank of Sri Lanka.
In Thailand development finance is provided through the Bank for Agriculture and Agricultural Cooperatives, and the Board of Investment. In addition the Industrial Finance Corporation of Thailand and the Small Industries Finance Office assist in the establishment, expansion, and modernization of industries. The former organizes the pooling of funds to provide credit which might otherwise be difficult to obtain.
4.5 Associations of professionals in the region
There are several professional societies in the region which fishery scientists, administrators, farm managers, and hatchery managers can join. Most of these societies organize annual meetings, workshops, seminars, conferences, and lectures of guest speakers, for updating the knowledge of their members.
The Asian Fisheries Society which was organized in 1987 is based at the ICLARM offices in Manila in the Philippines. It is open to all fisheries professionals in Asia. The Society had its first large scientific meeting in Manila in 1987 which was attended by fisheries professionals, including a significant number of aquaculturists. Also based at the ICLARM offices is the newly established Network of Tropical Aquaculture Scientists, which includes many members from West Asian countries.
Many professionals in Asia are members of the World Aquaculture Society (WAS). This society is based in the USA and disseminates scientific research information and arranges annual conferences. An affiliate of WAS is the EAS, based in Belgium; this society also has members from the region and arranges conferences in which the development of aquaculture in Asia is often discussed. Membership is individual or commercial, and materials can also be obtained through library membership. Many of these professionals obtained their post-graduate education or training abroad and joined the aquaculture societies in the regions where they studied.
4.6 Information for professionals
Aquaculture professionals in the region have access to a rich variety of information sources in the form of published material of all kinds (technical/scientific, semi-technical journals, newsletters, magazines, agency annual and progress reports, hand-outs, brochures, among others); audio-visual aids (e.g. slides, film strips); data bases (e.g. ASFIS); and even workshops, seminars, and various conferences.
Most of the technical and scientific journals published within the region by SEAFDEC-AQD, ICLARM, IDRC, FAO/UNDP, and ESCAP, to name a few, are available in the main libraries within each country. These libraries also have the international journals like "Aquaculture" on their shelves and professionals can have their own copies through subscription.
SEAFDEC publications include those produced by the Secretariat in Thailand and those published by the three different departments. The former include a quarterly newsletter; Fishery Statistical Bulletins for the South China Sea Area (which include statistics on aquaculture production volumes and values); and a directory of scientists and technologists in the fields of fisheries research, development, and management in the Southeast Asian region. The SEAFDEC-AQD produces research papers, technical reports, extension manuals, a newsletter, and "Aqua Farm News". The SEAFDEC-AQD library maintains a good collection of scientific literature as well as other published materials in the fields of aquaculture. The library maintains over 250 subscriptions to journals in fisheries and aquaculture, and has over 8 000 volumes. It also has audio-visual materials (film strips) on various aquaculture production methods and systems.
ICLARM has a well-developed Information Programme comprising a special library, publications unit, and research projects. ICLARM has 7 technical publications series: (i) Studies and Reviews, (ii) Conference Proceedings, (iii) Technical Reports, (iv) Bibliographies, (v) Translations, (vi) Education, (vii) Software, as well as six Newsletters, and the quarterly magazine NAGA. A Selective Fisheries Information Service provides in-depth answers to enquiries from researchers. The ICLARM library maintains an up-to-date collection of material relating to fisheries and aquaculture in tropical countries. Its book and monograph holdings exceed 8 000 volumes; there are 650 serial titles and 3 400 reprints. A microfiche reader/printer is available. Databases from other organizations such as FAO, US National Agricultural Library, and Commonwealth Agricultural Bureau, can be searched online by the library's modern link. Two electronic mail services are used to facilitate overseas
retrieval. The CD-ROM version of the major aquaculture database, FAO's ASFA, is also available.
Aquabyte, the newsletter of the Network of Tropical Aquaculture Scientists (c/o ICLARM), links aquaculture scientists, especially Chose engaged in research in the genetics of fish cultured in the tropics, tropical integrated agriculture-aquaculture farming systems, and coastal aquaculture of tropical molluscs.
IDRC in Singapore publishes scientific monographs and technical reports as well as more general materials on aquaculture and aquaculture research. There are also printed and audio-visual materials, including films and slides, relating to IDRC projects in developing countries.
There are a number of smaller libraries in the Asia region to which professionals have access. For example, the FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, and the NACA office, both in Thailand, as well as the BIOTROP library in Bogor, Indonesia, all provide fisheries scientists with information. The National Inland Fisheries Institute in Thailand has a collection of papers on aquaculture but many are written in Thai with abstracts in English.
The libraries in the important fisheries academies and research institutes in China and Japan are rich sources of information on aquaculture but much is in Chinese and Japanese.
Professionals have access to a considerable volume of information about aquaculture outside the region because of good communications with the Mediterranean and European regions, and also with North America. These are usually through library membership, individual membership, or personal subscription to journals and societies.
The EAS based in Belgium publishes a regular Newsletter for members which also contains the contents of some abstracts of the more important aquaculture journals. It also publishes special volumes on aquaculture technology available at reduced rates to members. The EAS is an affiliate of the WAS which is based in the USA, and members have reciprocal benefits. The WAS produces the Journal of the World Aquaculture Society which is free to members.
The other specialist journals on aquaculture are obtained on subscription. These are Aquaculture (the Netherlands), Aquaculture and Fisheries Management (UK), Aquaculture Engineering (UK), Bamidgeh/Journal of Aquaculture (Israel), Bulletin Français de la Pêche et de la Pisciculture (France), Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences (Canada), Diseases of Aquatic Organisms (Germany, Fed. Rep.), Journal of Fish Biology (UK), Journal of Fish Diseases (UK), Progressive Fish Culturist (USA), Transactions of the American Fisheries Society (USA), etc.
The largest resource of information for scientists and technical professionals in the sector is FAO in Rome, Italy. FAO produces a series of publications many of which are specific to aquaculture. These are FAO Fisheries Reports, FAO Fisheries Technical Papers, and FAO Fisheries Synopses, All titles are categorized and lists are regularly produced. Some documents are free and others are sold at cost. It maintains a large serial collection on all subjects related to fish and fisheries received from fisheries institutes, government departments, and commercial publishers throughout the world, together with a special collection of documents on a country basis, and subject files.
FAO maintains a database in which aquaculture information can be found. ASFA is an international bibliographic database providing comprehensive coverage of publications on the science, technology, and management of marine and freshwater environments. The database can be searched via terminals and personal computers to retrieval systems in Europe and North America; the database is also available on compact disc. Aquaculture Abstracts from ASFA are available in printed form through subscription.
ICLARM and SEAFDEC-AQD maintain ASFA-I (Aquatic Sciences and Fisheries Abstracts), BRAIS (Brackishwater Aquaculture Information System), and SEAFIS (Southeast-Asian Fisheries Information Service).
At ICLARM the DIALOG system of over 120 databases can be searched interactively through a teletype facility. The SEAFDEC Secretariat in Thailand has established a Fisheries Information Service which is a clearing house for extension materials for small-scale fishermen and fish farmers in Southeast Asia.
4.7 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
There has been a long list of technical assistance projects in the region. These have been directly funded by many countries as well as indirectly funded through regional aquaculture and fisheries development centres. Some of the principal sources of technical assistance and the countries in the region which have benefited are: Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research (Indonesia); Asian Institute of Technology (AIT) (Malaysia, Sri Lanka, Thailand); Asian and Pacific Development Centre; Asian Development Bank (Burma, Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand); Bay of Bengal Project (Bangladesh, India, Malaysia, Sri Lanka, Thailand); Canadian International Development Project (Thailand); Danish International Development Agency (Bangladesh, Burma, India); Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (Indonesia); Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO); International Centre for Living Aquatic Resource Management (ICLARM); International
Development and Research Centre (India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Nepal, Sri Lanka, Thailand); Indo-Pacific Fishery Commission; Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) (Indonesia, Malaysia, Thailand); Network of Aquaculture Centres in Asia (India and Thailand); and the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (Unesco) (Burma, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Sri Lanka, and Thailand).
Bilateral agreements between countries in the region and various foreign countries and institutions have been established to assist in manpower development, training, guidance, etc. Some of the countries and organizations which have agreed to provide facilities and technical assistance are: Oceanic Institute (USA), Pacific Science Association, SEAFDEC, Swedish International Development Authority, South Pacific Commission, Tropical Development and Research Institute, USAID, World Bank, Unesco, the Netherlands, and UK.
Many donors, now numbering 21 in all, support the collaborative research of ICLARM. The Centre's aquaculture research programme, one of three programme areas of ICLARM, focuses on coastal aquaculture (specifically bivalve molluscs), genetics (specifically tilapias and carps), and integrated farming systems. While ICLARM's aquaculture programme has been centred in Southeast Asia, with particularly strong links with institutions in the Philippines and Thailand, it has now expanded to the South Pacific and to southern Africa. ICLARM also coordinates two aquaculture-related networks - the Asian Fisheries Social Science Research Network and the Network of Tropical Aquaculture Scientists.
4.8 Capital assistance projects in the sub-sector
A wide range of research, management and national infrastructure development projects has been funded within the region. Some of them have been on a local level with the intention that they would serve as demonstration centres and models for similar projects elsewhere in the region. Others clearly were intended to assist in overall sector development. In 1988, Government fish farms were being developed in both Bangladesh and Sri Lanka. A pilot farm programme was under development in Thailand. Twenty-six research projects, including work in genetics, fish growth, larval rearing, nutrition, pond dynamics, and reproduction are currently funded in Bangladesh, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Nepal, Sri Lanka, and Thailand.
<section>7</section>
5. NATIONAL SECTOR MANAGEMENT
5.1 Government policy in the region
5.2 Government organization in the region
5.3 Aquaculture legislation
5.4 Trade and business associations
5.5 Information resources for management
5.6 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
5.1 Government policy in the region
In the West Asia region, most of the countries have realized the significant role aquaculture can play in the national economy and it is reflected in their overall planning. For example, in India all the 25 states and 5 union territories have taken up programmes on aquaculture. The methodologies vary from place to place but the thrust remains on aquaculture. It is not possible to detail the policies of all the countries, but the following are the common goals of the governments within the region.
(i) Increase aquaculture production and productivity per unit area to meet increasing demands of local consumers as well as export markets;
(ii) improve technology and cost efficiency of different culture techniques;
(iii) optimize effectiveness of manpower;
(iv) provide job opportunities to rural unemployed youths in general and fishermen in particular;
(v) maintain, preserve and improve ecosystems by supplementing fish production through aquaculture;
(vi) improve per caput consumption of fish by providing adequate quantities at reasonable prices;
(vii) provide better returns to the farmer, and
(viii) provide technical, financial, and managerial support for aquaculture development.
5.2 Government organization in the region
Government organization varies within the region in respect to aquaculture.
In Indonesia the Director-General of Fisheries, under the Ministry of Agriculture, is primarily the chief administrator for management and development of the fisheries sector. He is head of administration at the provincial, district, and sub-district levels and is responsible for policies, planning, execution, development, research, training, etc. In Pakistan however, fisheries developments are greatly decentralized and are considered as a state subject. Provincial Directorates of Fisheries are responsible for development within their regions. The Federal Fisheries Board, an advisory body, determines the National Fisheries Policy in Pakistan. The Pakistan Agricultural Research Council (PARC), Federal Water and Power Development Authority (WAPDA), National Institute of Oceanography (NIO), Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (PCSIR), Zoological Survey Department, and various agricultural universities also contribute toward fisheries development.
In Thailand the Department of Fisheries is under the Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives (MOAC). It was formed under the Fisheries Act of 1947 and deals with all the activities of fisheries development, including aquaculture. The DOF is headed by the Director-General of Fisheries assisted by the Deputy Director-General who is responsible for development within five divisions. Besides the DOF, the country also has a National Institute for Coastal Aquaculture, Brackishwater Fisheries Division, and a Fisheries Marketing Organization.
The entire economy of the Maldives is dependent upon fisheries activities and so the sector has priority in terms of government structure. About 44% of the entire population is engaged in fisheries activities, almost exclusively capture fisheries. The Fishery Advisory Board, created in 1979 under the Ministry of Fisheries, advises the government on fishery policies. The Department of Tourism and Foreign Investment, the Department of Finance and Planning, the Department of Public Safety, the State Trading Organization, the Ministry of Transport and local governments of island chiefs, also contribute toward fisheries development. The Malaysian Fisheries Departments are under the Ministry of Agriculture. Malaysia has both marine and inland divisions, and also recognizes aquaculture separately.
Nepal and Sri Lanka have a Minister of Fisheries and a Secretary of Fisheries. There is a special post of aquaculturist under the Permanent Secretary of Fisheries and aquaculture has a prominent role to play in both these countries.
The responsible agency for fisheries development in Sri Lanka is the Department of Fisheries which has under it the following agencies: Marine Fisheries Division; Training, Education, Planning and Programme Division; the Inland Fisheries Division and Coastal Conservation. The Ceylon Fisheries Corporation, Ceylon Fishery Harbours Corporation, and the National Aquatic Resources Agency also are involved in various aspects of the country's aquaculture industry.
Since fisheries in India is a state subject, each state has its own fisheries department, either under a separate ministry or under some other ministries, for example. Animal Husbandry and Dairy, Agriculture, Forestry, and Conservation, etc. The Department of Fisheries in most of the states is headed by an administrative or technical director with additional directors, joint directors, deputy directors, and fisheries officers posted at the district levels. Besides fully dedicated Fisheries Departments, there are semi-governmental organizations such as Fishery Development Corporations and Fish Seed Development Corporations in almost every state.
In many states Fish Farmers' Development Agencies (FFDAs) have been active since 1980. These FFDAs are under the chairmanship of the Deputy Commissioner of the district and a Chief Executive Officer (CEO). FFDAs help farmers in identifying areas, selecting sites, formulating projects, obtaining government subsidies and loans and training. The FFDAs have been so successful that Brackishwater Fish Farmers' Development Agencies are now being formed.
In addition to fisheries agencies at state level, there is a Department of Fisheries in the Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperation under a Joint Secretary of Fisheries and the Commissioner of Fisheries Development. There are several deputy commissioners, one for each sector, who provide guidance to State governments in the implementation of the Fisheries Development programmes. Aquaculture is being looked after by the Deputy Commissioner, Inland Fisheries.
5.3 Aquaculture legislation
In most countries within the region, aquaculture is encouraged and licenses are not required for utilizing one's own property. Permission and lease rights are required for government-owned water bodies, lands, etc. In some parts of Asia, sales tax is levied on the sale of production and seed and at the time of purchase of equipment, oil and lubricants, and other farm inputs.
Subsidies in the form of cash and kind ranging from 10% to 50% of project cost are available to fish farmers in some countries like Bangladesh, India, Nepal, and Thailand. Besides usual subsidies given by the Department of Fisheries, the Marine Products Export Development Authority of India gives special subsidies for shrimp farm development, and shrimp seed hatcheries and supply.
Bans on the importation of non-indigenous species are not uncommon within the region, although policies are not always clearly established.
5.4 Trade and business associations
Many trade and business associations of traders, producers, exporters, suppliers, and service specialists, exist in the different countries at a national level. For example, there are national associations of shrimp producers, shrimp exporters, fish and shrimp processors, feed millers, equipment manufacturers and suppliers, and feed distributors and dealers, etc., who unite to promote their products and services collectively.
These various associations are invariably members of the larger national Chamber of Commerce and Industry in their respective countries. These Chambers may, in turn, have representatives at the ASEAN Chamber of Commerce and Industry.
5.5 Information resources for management
Sources of aquaculture information useful for administrators and managers are available in the region in the form of published materials, and workshops and seminars.
Many of the publications available to aquaculture producers (see 3.8) and professionals (see 4.6) are also used by management. For example, ADB and the World Bank publish monthly information on the status of their projects which invariably includes something on aquaculture. ADB publishes its monthly Operational Information on Proposed Projects, and regular newsletters and announcements on approved loans or technical assistance grants in the region. The latter summarize the scope of the approved projects, including the cost and the services to be required by either the Government agency, in the case of loans, or the Bank (in the case of technical assistance grants).
The World Bank publishes a monthly International Business Opportunities sheet, which summarizes information on the scope and status of approved projects as well as on contracts which have been awarded. These publications are available on a subscription basis only, except for the ADB circular announcements.
Other published material useful to aquaculture managers includes some FAO/ADCP publications (e.g. guideline documents for planning and development, and the newsletter "Aquaculture Minutes"), the INFOFISH "Trade News", and "INFOFISH International". These provide valuable information to aquaculture managers who need current information on supply and demand situations, prices, etc., for both export and import purposes.
There are a number of short-term courses and orientation workshops and seminars conducted specifically for managers. One example is the Aquaculture Project Development and Management course offered by SEAFDEC-AQD jointly with the Southeast Asian Regional Center for Agriculture in the Philippines. This is open only to professional managers with several years of experience in a managerial position. The course puts emphasis on the financial and management aspects of aquaculture enterprises. In the Philippines there are also short-term courses for managers which focus on the preparation and evaluation of feasibility studies, particularly on financial investment.
5.6 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
Technical assistance in sector management and programme development is frequently included as part of specific development projects in the region. Strengthening of capabilities at the management levels and budgets to assist in implementing policies and programmes are often identified as needs within sector studies. Even projects with very specific aims often examine the overall context of the aquaculture industry in the region or country, thereby identifying and often funding technical assistance in management and policy development. No specific activities have been identified, although there is undoubtedly some activity.
<section>8</section>
6. REGIONAL SECTOR MANAGEMENT
6.1 United Nations organizations in the region
6.2 Other organizations in the region
6.3 Economic communities in the region
6.4 Regional and global aquaculture development projects
6.1 United Nations organizations in the region
In the West Asia region, as described, all 12 countries are members of the United Nations. Most of these same countries participate in the specialized agencies and bodies of the UN system which are actively represented in the region.
Of the many UN specialized agencies and bodies represented in Asia the following are actively involved in aquaculture development in some form: the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the World Bank. On a more limited coverage, the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP) is concerned mainly with the Mekong Committee which works in countries in the Mekong Delta.
Other UN agencies have had lesser participation in aquaculture development in the region. These include the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), the United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization (Unesco), and the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), which provide mainly technical assistance in the conduct of teaching and research studies on special areas of concern. UNDP and Unesco collaborate closely in activities dealing with university education and training in the region. UNEP established the Global Resource Information Database (GRID) which collates, integrates, and analyses all information received for purposes of environmental planning and management. Unesco has been actively involved in the conduct of coastal zone management activities in the region, including research and training in coastal zone planning and development.
The Indo-Pacific Fisheries Commission (IPFC) of FAO (Bangladesh, Burma, India, Indonesia, Kampuchea, Malaysia, Nepal, Pakistan, Sri Lanka and Thailand are members) assists in aquaculture development through technical advice to member Governments on pertinent problems and issues. These are topics in the biennial meetings of the IPFC Working Party on Aquaculture, and the IPFC Working Party of Experts in Inland Fisheries.
The IPFC Working Party on Aquaculture assists in the collection and dissemination of information on aquaculture research; promotes and coordinates surveys on aquaculture and its potential for future development; promotes and coordinates studies on aquaculture socio-economics; coordinates the FAO/IPFC Cooperative Programme of Research on Aquaculture; and liaises with appropriate working parties on environmental problems affecting aquaculture. The IPFC Working Party on Inland Fisheries assists in the development and management of inland fisheries in the region, and assists the Working Party on Aquaculture in identifying problems of aquaculture and its interrelationships with inland capture fisheries.
The above UN agencies provide mainly technical assistance in the form of project funding, expert services, procurement of equipment and supplies, and fellowship training to the UN member countries in the region.
6.2 Other organizations in the region
The Asian Development Bank, raises funds from private and public sources for development purposes in the entire region, to assist member states in coordinating economic policies, and to give technical assistance in development projects. There are 47 members of the ADB, including all 12 countries of West Asia covered by this review. Among its many sectoral activities, agriculture and agro-industry receive the largest part (41%) of loans approved (1986), and the bank supported over 129 technical assistance projects. The ADB has been the prime source of International funding for aquaculture sectoral development in the West Asia region.
Of the countries in the region, Indonesia, Malaysia, Singapore, and Thailand are members of the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), which is based in Indonesia (see below).
The Colombo Plan for Cooperative Economic and Social Development in Asia and the Pacific has 26 members. It is based in Sri Lanka. Among its many activities the Colombo Plan provides capital aid and technical cooperation between members. Training is one of its principal features and there have been many scholarships for education and training in agriculture and fisheries, and some in aquaculture.
There are a number of smaller organizations in the region which are specific to agriculture, fisheries, and aquaculture.
The Southeast Asian Fisheries Development Center (SEAFDEC) is the most important regional organization with interests in aquaculture development. It was established in December 1967 following a proposal of the Ministerial Conference for the Economic Development of Southeast Asia. It is a non-governmental treaty organization composed of Japan, Malaysia, Philippines, Singapore and Thailand. The policy-making body of the Center is the Council of Directors composed of representatives from the member countries, usually Directors of Fisheries. The SEAFDEC Council meets annually to discuss, review, and approve programmes of activity of the three Departments, viz., the Training Department in Thailand, the Marine Fisheries Research Department in Singapore, and the Aquaculture Department in the Philippines.
SEAFDEC activities range from developing skilled manpower resources for the fisheries industry to conducting research leading to rational utilization of fish resources of the region and the development of aquaculture.
SEAFDEC collaborates with the governments of its member countries as well as those of several non-member countries. It also cooperates with regional and interregional organizations concerned with fisheries and aquaculture development, and is the recipient of external funding support from multilateral and bilateral agencies for its various activities.
The International Research and Development Centre (IDRC) has its Asia and Pacific office in Singapore. IDRC is a corporation created by the Government of Canada to stimulate and support scientific and technical research by developing countries for their own benefit. Among the many fields of investigation for which IDRC provides financial and professional support are aquaculture and fisheries. For many years IDRC has supported research and training in aquaculture either directly or through other regional organizations, such as ICLARM, and SEAFDEC.
The International Centre for Living Aquatic Resources Management (ICLARM) is a non-profit organization For charitable, educational, and scientific purposes. Aquaculture is one of its prime fields of interest, and it undertakes research and other activities through collaborative projects with research institutes in the Asian region funded by a third party, invariably a multilateral or bilateral donor. ICLARM is currently applying for financial support under the umbrella of the Consultative Group for International Agricultural Research.
The Network of Aquaculture Centres in Asia (NACA), based in Bangkok, Thailand, is a regional project funded by UNDP and executed by FAO, and supported by its member countries (see 6.4). In 1990 it is due to become an independent inter-governmental body.
The Commonwealth is also active in West Asia, mainly in the provision of training and fellowships. The Commonwealth is composed of the United Kingdom and 48 of its former dependencies, including (from West Asia) Bangladesh, India, Malaysia, the Maldives, Singapore, and Sri Lanka.
INFOFISH is now an inter-governmental organization based in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. It has nine regional members, including Bangladesh, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, the Maldives and Sri Lanka from West Asia. It was initiated by FAO with funds from the Norwegian Agency for International Development (NORAD).
6.3 Economic communities in the region
The most important economic community in the region is the Association of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN), a regional organization formed by the Governments of Indonesia, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand, and subsequently joined by Brunei. ASEAN was established by the Bangkok Declaration signed by the Foreign Ministers of the ASEAN countries on 8 August 1967. Among its principal objectives is the acceleration of economic growth, social progress, and cultural development in conjunction with the members' efforts to promote active collaboration and provision of assistance to each other on all matters of common interest in the economic, social, cultural, technical, scientific, and administrative fields. ASEAN has eight functional committees. The Committee on Food, Agriculture and Forestry (COFAF) is concerned with fisheries development. A coordinating group on fisheries was established under COFAF in March 1979.
In the Fifth ASEAN Ministerial Meeting in 1983 the ASEAN Ministerial Understanding on Fisheries Cooperation was signed, wherein it was agreed that necessary action shall be taken toward closer cooperation in fisheries development and management. As a result a number of fisheries projects have been prepared for implementation. Among these the Regional Small-Scale Coastal Fisheries Development Project and the Post-Harvest Technology Project have been implemented - the former with UNDP/FAO assistance and the latter with CIDA support.
Another important economic community dealing with the Asian countries is the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP). All 12 West Asian countries discussed in this review are members of ESCAP.
6.4 Regional and global aquaculture development projects
The Network of Aquaculture Centres in Asia (NACA) initially had twelve member governments, including Brunei, China, Hong Kong, the Philippines, (under East Asia) and Bangladesh, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Nepal, Singapore, Sri Lanka, and Thailand from West Asia. NACA was created in 1980 and was designed to operate within the framework of Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries (TCDC). Under this scheme members pooled their resources and collaborated in the development of aquaculture technologies.
Four Lead Centres in China, India, the Philippines and Thailand (see 4.1 and 4.3) were identified for specific technologies for transfer among the various countries. Manpower training is the main focus of TCDC activities as is the coordination of implementation of regional projects.
NACA has two ongoing sub-regional projects on fish pathology and seafarming involving only eight governments.
NACA has been reorganized into an inter-governmental institution in the Asia-Pacific region. A recent meeting of plenipotentiaries in Thailand marked the signing of the agreement which will make NACA an Asia-Pacific network managed and operated by member governments by 1990. Other countries in the region are expected to join the network.
The ASEAN/UNDP/FAO Small-scale Coastal Fisheries Development Project is a regional project which includes some aquaculture activities. It is an action-oriented programme for inter-country cooperation and mutual assistance among ASEAN countries through institutional linkage of the fisheries departments. It also provides assistance in training and extension, and project formulation.
ASEAN in association with EEC has initiated a new aquaculture project twinning research institutes in the region and in Europe to work on specific activities. The project is based in Bangkok, Thailand.
The UNDP created the Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (ADCP) in support of global initiatives in aquaculture. Its activities have extended into Africa, Asia, Latin America and the Mediterranean regions. Advisory and guideline publications deal with both administration of the sector, such as technical assistance, economic development, planning, engineering and marketing, and in technology. As part of this Programme the ADCP has prepared the regional Sector Surveys on Aquaculture.
Within the FAO-executed Bay of Bengal Programme for Fisheries Development (BOBP) a number of aquaculture development activities have been undertaken: shrimp farming in Bangladesh, India, and Sri Lanka; seaweed culture in India and Sri Lanka; molluscan and fish culture. BOBP is a regional project and is based in India. It is jointly sponsored by FAO, ODA, SIDA and DANIDA.
<section>9</section>
ANNEXES
ANNEX I - Supporting data, figures tables
ANNEX II - Bibliography
ANNEX III - Abbreviations
ANNEX IV - List of ADCP Reports
ANNEX I - Supporting data, figures tables
Table 1: Nominal Fishery Catches by West Asian Countries (metric tonnes)
Bangladesh
Burma
India
Indonesia
Kampuchea Dem.
Malaysia
Maldives
Nepal
Pakistan
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Thailand
Total
Change from previous year
Source: 1987 FAO Yearbook of Fishery Statistics: Catches and Landings. Vol. 64. 1989.
Table 2: Food Balance Sheet, Average (t) 1984-86
Catch
Non-Food Uses
Imports
Exports
Food Supply
Population
('000s)
Average per caput
Supply kg/year
Bangladesh
Burma
India
Indonesia
Kampuchea Dem.
Malaysia
Maldives
Nepal
Pakistan
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Thailand
Totals West Asia
Totals World
^1^/ Average
Source: 1987 FAO Yearbook of Fishery Statistics: Commodities, Vol. 65. 1989.
- = data not available
Table 3: Gross National Product Statistics and Population Data for West Asia
GNP
(US$ 000 000)
GNP Growth
Population
Population Growth Rate
GNP per caput
(US$)
GNP Growth Rate
Bangladesh
Burma
India
Indonesia
Kampuchea Dem.
Malaysia
Maldives
Nepal
Pakistan
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Thailand
Source: The 1988 update of the World Bank Atlas, 20th edition. 1988.
- = data not available
Table 4: Basic data of Asia (West) (based on 1985 information (+ inclusive latest data wherever available))
Countries
Area (km^2)
Total fish production (t)
Inland fish production (t)
Inland water resource available
Bangladesh
Rivers, streams and canals: 830 080 ha^2
Ox bow lakes: 985 ha
Reservoirs: 90 648 ha
Freshwater ponds: 146 890 ha
Burma
Riverine stretch: 4 367 km
Lakes: 33 130 ha
Reservoirs: 80 000 ha
Floodplains: 6 million ha (seasonal)
India
Riverine stretch: 27 359 km
Canals and irrigation channels: 112 645
Lakes: 0.72 million ha
Reservoirs: 3.0 million ha
Ponds: 1.6 million ha
Paddy fields: 2.3 million ha
Brackishwater ponds: 1.71 million ha
Indonesia
Riverine stretch: 4 900 km
Lakes: 17 million ha
Reservoirs: 27 000 ha
Brackishwater area: 2 390 000 ha
Freshwater ponds: 39 785
Brackishwater ponds: 249 000 ha
Paddy fields: 135 000 ha
Kampuchea
1 major river: length N.A.
Lakes: 10 000 km^2
Malaysia
Riverine stretch: 2 700 km
10 000 km^2
Freshwater ponds: 7 000 ha
Brackishwater ponds: 500 ha
Maldives
Nil
N.A.
No inland waters on the 1 190 small islands
Nepal
Riverine stretch: 11 800 km
Lakes: 5 000 ha
Reservoirs: 1 380 ha
Fish ponds: 5 000 ha
Pakistan
Riverine stretch: 2 900 km
Reservoirs: 80 613 ha
Ponds: 30 000 ha
Brackishwater area: 385 000 ha
Singapore
Freshwater ponds: 100 ha
Brackishwater ponds: 210 ha
Sri Lanka
Riverine stretch: 800 km
Tanks for irrigation: 100 000 ha
Brackishwater ponds: 1 450 ha
Brackishwater area: 12 000 ha
Thailand
Rivers and canals: 119 200 ha
Lakes: 300 000 ha
Reservoirs: 255 000 ha
Freshwater ponds: 6 000 ha
Brackishwater area: 30 792 ha
Paddy area: 31 000 km^2
Floodplains: 18 000 km^2
Source: Inland Fisheries of Indo-Pacific countries. FAO Circular No. 794 FIRI/C794, 1986.
Table 5: West Asian aquaculture production by country and by species groups in 1986 (t)
Country
Finfish
Crustacea
Mollusca
Seaweeds
Others
Totals
Bangladesh
Burma
5 044R
India
Indonesia
255 805F
86 000F
Kampuchea Dem.
Malaysia
6 604F
Nepal
Pakistan
10 000F
Singapore
Sri Lanka
Thailand
73 636F
8 829F
39 450F
7R
Grand Totals
Source: FAO Fisheries Circular No. 815, 1989
R = Repetition of data previously reported by the country
F = FAO estimate from available sources of information
Table 6: Main Groups Cultured in West Asian Countries
Marine shrimps
All countries except Nepal
Freshwater prawns
Malaysia, Indonesia, Thailand, India, Pakistan, Singapore, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka
Groupers
Malaysia, Thailand, Singapore
Chinese carps
Nepal, Sri Lanka, India, Bangladesh, Kampuchea, Malaysia
Common carps
Malaysia, India, Bangladesh, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, Singapore, Kampuchea, Nepal
Indian carps
India, Bangladesh, Burma, Nepal, Pakistan
Rohu (Labeo sp.)
Sri Lanka
Thai silver carp (Puntius sp.)
Malaysia
Goramis
Malaysia, Thailand, Malaysia, Indonesia
Catfish (Clarias sp.)
Malaysia, Thailand, Indonesia, India, Bangladesh, Kampuchea
Snakehead
Malaysia, India, Bangladesh, Sri Lanka
Tilapias
Sri Lanka, Thailand, Indonesia, Kampuchea, Bangladesh, Malaysia
Mullets
Sri Lanka, India, Pakistan, Bangladesh
Milkfish
Pakistan, India, Sri Lanka, Thailand, Malaysia
Sea bass
Malaysia, India, Bangladesh, Singapore, Thailand
Cockles
Thailand, Malaysia
Mussels
Thailand
Mud crab
Singapore, Malaysia, Indonesia, Thailand
ANNEX II - Bibliography
ADCP, 1988. Aquaculture Aid Profiles. February 1988. ADCP/AP/87/9:44 pp.
ADCP, 1989. Aquaculture Aid Profiles. February 1989. ADCP/AP/89/10:62 pp.
Anon., 1987. Fishing industry in Malaysia, LKIM, pp. 1-9
Asian Development Bank, 1983. Indonesia fisheries sector study. Asian Development Bank Report. December 1983:168 pp.
Asian Development Bank, 1985. Thailand fisheries sector study. Asian Development Bank Report. April 1985:232 pp.
Asian Development Bank, 1987. Pakistan Fisheries Sector Study. Asian Development Bank Report, 1987:168 pp.
Asian Fisheries Society, 1988. Fisheries Education and Training in Asia: Workshop Proceedings. Asian Fish. Soc. Spec. Publ. 2, 162 p. Asian Fisheries Society, Manila, Philippines
Brown, E.E., 1983. World fish farming cultivation and economics. 2nd ed., AVI Publishing Co., 516 pp.
Chen, F.Y., 1988. Progress of NACA in enhancing regional cooperation in aquaculture development. Seventh session of the IPFC Working Party of Experts on Aquaculture. IPFC WPA/WP 16:27
Cheong, L.J., 1988. Review of the status of aquaculture in Singapore. Seventh session of the IPFC Working Party of Experts on Aquaculture. IPFC WPA/WP 9:9
Cholik, F., 1988. Review of the status of aquaculture in Indonesia. Seventh session of the IPFC Working Party of Experts on Aquaculture. IPFC WPA/WP 4:36
Chong, L.P., 1988. Review of the status of aquaculture in Singapore. Seventh session of the IPFC Working Party of Experts on Aquaculture. IPFC WPA/WP 6:16
Christy, F.T., et al., 1981. FAO, EEZ Programme. A report prepared for the Ministry of Fisheries of the Government of Maldives. 1-99
Chua Thia Eng. 1987. Aquaculture training needs in developing Asia. IDRC-MR 145 e. 35 p. + annex
Csavas, I., 1986. Problems of inland fisheries and aquaculture. Symposium on Fishing Industry, 12-18 November 1985, Tokyo
Csavas, I. 1988. Shrimp farming in Asia. Seventh session of the IPFC Working Party of Experts on Aquaculture. IPFC WPA/WP 11:74
De Silva, Sena S., 1986. Inland fishery of Sri Lanka, FAO Fish. Rep., 371:145-65
FAO, 1973. Singapore Country Development Brief. FAO Circular No. DDF/CDB/7. pp. 1-7.
FAO, 1980. Report of the Fifth Session of the IPFC Working Party on Aquaculture and Environment. Jakarta, Indonesia, 22-26 January, 1980. FAO Fish. Rep., (241):12 p.
FAO, 1986a. Inland fisheries of Indo-Pacific countries. FAO Fish. Cir. (794):1-59
FAO, 1986b. Progress and problems of aquacultural development. Eighteenth FAO Regional Conference for Asia and the Pacific, Colombo, Sri Lanka, APRC 86/7, 1-17
FAO, 1988a. Report of the seventh session of the IPFC Working Party of Experts on Aquaculture. IPFC WPA/WP 22/1:28
FAO, 1988b. Trends and prospects for capture fisheries and aquaculture in the next 25 years and the role of FAO. Committee on Fisheries 18th session, Rome. COFI/89/2:14
FAO, 1988c. Review of developments in aquaculture. Committee on Fisheries 18th session, Rome, COFI/89/Inf. 5:15
FAO, 1989a. Country statement: Coastal aquaculture in Indonesia. Indian Ocean Fishery Commission, Committee for the Development and Management of Fisheries in the Bay of Bengal: IOFC: DM/BB/89/CS 7: 19 p.
FAO, 1989b. Recent developments in coastal aquaculture. Indian Ocean Fishery Commission, Committee for the Development and Management of Fisheries in the Bay of Bengal. IOFC: DM/BB/89/CS5: 22 p.
Hirasawa, Y., 1988. Shrimp culture economics in Asia. Seventh session of the IPFC Working Party of Experts on Aquaculture. IPFC WPA/WP 16:27
Josupeit, H., 1985. External assistance to the fisheries sector in developing countries. INFOFISH Marketing Digest, 2:17-21
Khondaker, H.R., 1988. Review of the status of aquaculture in Bangladesh. Seventh session of the IPFC Working Party of Experts on Aquaculture. IPFC WPA/WP 20:29
Loayza, E., 1984. The World Bank and Fisheries Development. INFOFISH Marketing Digest, 4:24-28
Mammen, T.A., 1987. Indian fisheries. An analysis of products inputs and costs. Paper presented at the National Seminar on Indian Marine Fisheries, New Delhi
Poblete, R., 1984. India's fisheries. Country profile. INFOFISH Marketing Digest, 2:14-15
Samarakoon, J.I., 1988. Review of the status of aquaculture in Sri Lanka. Seventh session of the IPFC Working Party of Experts on Aquaculture. IPFC WPA/WP 8:24
Shahabuddin, M., 1986. Fisheries development in Bangladesh, CIFE report.
Shang, Y.C., 1986. Coastal aquaculture development in selected Asian countries: status, potential and constraints. FAO Fish. Cir., 799:1-63
Singholka, S., 1988. Review of the status of aquaculture in Thailand. Seventh session of the IPFC Working Party of Experts on Aquaculture. IPFC WPA/WP 21:6
Srivastava, U.K., et al., 1985. Inland fish marketing in India. Vol. 1-8, IIM Concept Publishing Co., 1985
ANNEX III - Abbreviations
AAETE
Agency for Agricultural Education, Training and Extension, Indonesia
ACTIM
Agence pour la Coopération Technique, Industrielle et Economique, France
ADB
Asian Development Bank
ADCP
Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme
AIT
Asian Institute of Technology
ASEAN
Association of Southeast Asian Nations
BIOTROP
Southeast Asian Regional Center for Tropical Biology
BFDC
Bangladesh Fisheries Development Corporation
CCFRI
Central Cold Water Fisheries Research Institute, India
CIBA
Central Institute of Brackishwater Aquaculture, India
CIDA
Canadian International Development Agency
CIFA
Central Institute of Freshwater Aquaculture, India
CIFE
Central Institute for Fisheries Education, India
CIFNET
Central Institute of Fishery Nautical Engineering Trade, India
CICAE
Central Institute of Coastal Aquaculture Engineering, India
CLSU
Central Luzon State University, Philippines
CMFRI
Central Marine Fisheries Research Institute, India
COFAF
Committee of Food, Agriculture and Forestry (ASEAN)
CRSP
Collaborative Research Support Program (USAID)
EAS
European Aquaculture Society
ESCAP
Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
FEDA
Fish Farmers' Development Agencies, India
GNP
Gross National Product
ICAR
Indian Council of Agricultural Research
ICLARM
International Centre for Living Aquatic Resources Management
IDA
International Development Association
IFREMER
Institut français de recherche pour l'exploitation de la Mer, France
IFAD
International Fund for Agricultural Development
IFS
International Foundation for Science
IPFC
Indo-Pacific Fisheries Commission
ITT
Indian Institute of Technology
JETRO
Japanese External Trade Organization
JICA
Japan International Cooperation Agency
MOAC
Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives, Thailand
MPEDA
Marine Products Export Development Authority, India
NABARD
National Bank for Agricultural and Rural Development
NACA
Network of Aquaculture Centres in Asia
NARA
National Aquatic Resource Agency, Sri Lanka
NICA
National Institute of Coastal Aquaculture, Thailand
NIDC
Nepal Industrial Development Corporation
NIFI
National Inland Fisheries Institute, Thailand
NIO
National Institute of Oceanography, Pakistan
NORAD
Norwegian Agency for International Development
ODA
Overseas Development Administration, UK
PARC
Pakistan Agricultural Research Council
PCSIR
Pakistan Council of Scientific and Industrial Research
RICAF
Research Institute for Coastal Aquaculture Fisheries, Indonesia
RIFF
Research Institute for Freshwater Fisheries, Indonesia
SEAFDEC
Southeast Asian Fisheries Development Center
SEAFDEC-AQD
SEAFDEC, Aquaculture Department, Philippines
TCDC
Technical Cooperation among Developing Countries
UN
United Nations
UNDP
United Nations Development Programme
UNEP
United Nations Environment Programme
Unesco
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
USAID
United States Agency for International Development
WAPDA
Federal Water and Power Development Authority, Pakistan
WAS
World Aquaculture Society
WFP
World Food Programme
WB
World Bank
Abbreviations of Databases and other Terminology
ASFIS
Aquatic Sciences and Fisheries Information Service
ASFA
Aquatic Sciences and Fisheries Abstracts
CD-ROM
Compact Disc - Read only Memory
DIALOG
Central Service for Accessing Databases
BRAIS
Brackishwater Aquaculture Information System
GLOBEFISH
FAO Computerized System of Fish Marketing Information
FISHDAB
FAO Yearly Statistics
GRID
Global Resource Information Database
SEAFIS
Southeast Asian Fisheries Information Service
ANNEX IV - List of ADCP Reports
ADCP/REP/75/1
Aquaculture Planning in Africa
ADCP/REP/76/2
Aquaculture Planning in Asia
ADCP/REP/76/3
Aquaculture Planning in Latin America
ADCP/REP/76/3A FI/R188
Kyoto Conference
ADCP/REP/78/4
Aid for Aquaculture Development
ADCP/REP/78/5
Outline of an Applied Research and Experimental Development Programme for the Latin American Regional Centre for Aquaculture
ADCP/REP/78/6
Curriculum for the Training of Aquaculturists in the Latin American Regional Centre for Aquaculture
ADCP/REP/79/7
Curriculum for the Training of Aquaculturists in the African Regional Centre for Aquaculture
ADCP/REP/79/8
Training in Fish Feed Technology. Report of the FAO/UNDP Training Course in Fish Feed Technology held in the University of Washington, Seattle, 9 October-15 December 1978
ADCP/REP/79/9
Aquaculture Information - Report of the Meeting of an Aquaculture Information Group held in Rome, 25-28 April 1979
ADCP/REP/79/10
Aquaculture Development in China - Report of a FAO/UNDP Aquaculture Study Tour to the People's Republic of China, 2 May - 1 June 1978
ADCP/REP/80/11
Fish Feed Technology - Lectures presented at the FAO/UNDP Training Course in Fish Feed Technology, held at the College of Fisheries, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, 9 October-15 December 1978
ADCP/REP/80/12 ADCP/REP/80/13
Outline Research Programme for the African Regional Aquaculture Centre, Port Harcourt, Rivers State, Nigeria. Curriculum for the Training of Aquaculturists in the Asian Aquaculture Network
ADCP/REP/80/14
Outline Research Programmes for the Regional Aquaculture Lead Centres in Asia - Parts I and II
ADCP/REP/80/15
Outline Research Programmes for the Regional Aquaculture Lead Centres in Asia - Part III
ADCP/REP/81/16 (out of print)
Reproductive Physiology of Teleost Fishes - A Review of Present Knowledge and Needs for Future Research
ADCP/REP/82/17
Aid for Aquaculture Development in the Third World
ADCP/REP/83/18
Fish Feeds and Feeding in Developing Countries - An Interim Report on the ADCP Feed Development Programme
ADCP/REP/83/19 Rev. 1
AQUIS Aquaculture Information System - Users' Manual
ADCP/REP/83/20
Planificación del Desarrollo de la Acuicultura - Guía Preliminar (An Introductory Guide to Aquaculture Development)
ADCP/REP/84/21
Inland Aquaculture Engineering - Lectures presented at the ADCP Interregional Training Course in Inland Aquaculture Engineering, Budapest
ADCP/REP/85/22
Nutritional Fish Pathology - Morphological Signs of Nutrient Deficiency and Toxicity in Farmed Fish
ADCP/REP/86/23
Observations on International Technical Assistance to Aquaculture
ADCP/REP/86/24
Planning an Aquaculture Facility - Guidelines for Bioprogramming and Design
ADCP/REP/87/25
Future Economic Outlook for Aquaculture and Related Assistance Needs
ADCP/REP/87/26
Feed and Feeding of Fish and Shrimp - A Manual on the Preparation and Presentation of Compound Feeds for Shrimp and Fish in Aquaculture
ADCP/REP/87/27
Aquaculture Sector Development - A Guideline for the Preparation of a National Plan
ADCP/REP/87/28
Women in Aquaculture - Proceedings of the ADCP/NORAD Workshop on Women in Aquaculture. Rome, FAO, 13-16 April 1987
ADCP/REP/87/29
The Markets for the Prime Mediterranean Species - Sea Bass, Sea Bream, Mullets and Eel - and their links with investment
ADCP/REP/88/30
A Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in Eleven Middle East Countries
ADCP/REP/88/31
A Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in East Asia
ADCP/REP/88/32
A Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in the Pacific
ADCP/REP/89/33
Planning for Aquaculture Development - Report of an Expert Consultation held in Policoro, Italy, 26 July-2 August 1988
ADCP/REP/89/34
A Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in the Mediterranean Region
ADCP/REP/89/35
A Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in West Asia
ADCP/REP/89/36
A Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in Africa South of the Sahara
