<title>ADCP/REP/89/37 - A Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in North America</title>
<section>1</section>
FOREWORD
Aquaculture continues to grow in economic importance. The main reason for this is the quantifiable contribution aquaculture is making in many countries to fill the growing gap between supply and demand for fisheries products. This gap continues to widen because of increasing human populations and the static growth rates of capture fisheries brought about by declines in stocks and the increasing cost of obtaining fish through conventional methods. Although this gap can (and in some cases is already) being met by alternatives, such as inexpensive poultry and white meats, aquaculture particularly provides consumers with a choice of fresh products.
Aquaculture is also evident in earning foreign exchange for many countries through the export of high-value products. It also creates employment, particularly in economically depressed coastal and remote regions, and contributes to the household economy of rural farmers.
This seventh regional survey prepared by the Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (ADCP) covers the existing aquaculture sector in countries of the North America region, namely Canada, Greenland and the United States of America. Mexico, although geographically in North America, is not included in the present survey. Mexico is included in the ADCP regional survey of aquaculture in Latin America.
This present survey is not exhaustive. It has been prepared by Craig B. Kensler in a relatively brief desk study. The ADCP apologizes for any omissions and errors which may exist in the survey, and hopes that these can be corrected in an up-dated survey. New information and notification of changes and errors should be indicated to the ADCP in the Fisheries Department, FAO, Rome. The detailed Table of Contents illustrates the range of information which, hopefully, will be assembled in due course for all regions.
The survey is directed toward administrators, executives, and managers who require broad overviews, rather than for scientists and technologists who require detailed information about species and practices. It is the seventh of a series of regional surveys. To this end, the ADCP hopes that the reader will find the information described here useful.
Colin E. Nash
Craig B. Kensler
Rome, 1989
<section>2</section>
INTRODUCTION
This regional survey of the aquaculture sector in North America is part of the global survey currently being undertaken by the UNDP/FAO Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (ADCP). In this survey North America includes Canada, Greenland, and the United States of America (USA). Most information and data for the survey were obtained from the Fisheries Branch Library and the Fishery Statistics Service of FAO in Rome.
The main characteristics of the North American region include high standards of living and high gross national product (GNP) per caput, especially in Canada (US$ 14 100) and the USA (US$ 17 500). All three countries have huge land masses: Greenland is the largest island in the world, Canada is the second largest country, and the USA is the fourth. Each country has extensive coastlines and in Canada and the USA there are many freshwater areas.
Canada is the largest exporter of fish and fishery products in the world. Over 95% of the annual fish catch in Greenland is exported, and the majority of this is shrimp. The USA is traditionally the first or second largest importer (market) in the world for high quality fish and fishery products, especially luxury items such as marine shrimp, shellfish, tuna and salmon.
Production from aquaculture in Canada has been limited, although the country has considerable potential. The aquaculture industry has been developing in all regions of Canada; notably with salmon, rainbow trout and oysters in British Columbia; trout in the Prairie Provinces, Ontario and Quebec; and salmon, trout, mussels and oysters in the Maritime Provinces.
Greenland has no reported aquaculture production at present, or in past years. However, salmon culture in Greenland has been mentioned as a possibility, mainly to supplement natural stocks.
Although fish farming has taken place in the USA for a long time, only in recent years has production increased substantially. The USA is now the fifth leading aquaculture producer in the world. Production is based mainly on channel catfish, American cupped oyster and freshwater crawfish farming in the south and southeast; rainbow trout, pink salmon and Pacific cupped oyster farming in the north and northwest.
<section>3</section>
1. CONSUMPTION OF FISH AND SHELLFISH AND THE REGIONAL MARKETS
1.1 Nutritional benefits of fish and shellfish
1.2 Characteristics of consumption in the region
1.3 Annual comsumptionof fish and shellfish
1.4 Gross market data
1.5 Specific market data
1.6 Information for the trade
1.1 Nutritional benefits of fish and shellfish
First and foremost, increasing the per caput consumption of fish and shellfish in any country benefits health. Aquatic animals contain a high level of protein (17-20%), with an amino-acid profile similar Co that of the meat of land animals. The flesh of fish can therefore be readily digested and immediately utilized by the human body. Compared with land animals (with some exceptions, such as shellfish), aquatic animals have a far higher percentage of edible flesh, and there is little wastage. Aquatic animals are a source of minerals, such as calcium, iron, and phosphorus, as well as trace elements and vitamins. Marine species are particularly rich in iodine. The fatty-acid content is high in polyunsaturates, and particularly those which are attributed to reduce blood cholesterol.
1.2 Characteristics of consumption in the region
Canada and the USA have very high standards of living and their inhabitants generally enjoy a high protein diet. The consumption of meat is very much higher than fish in both countries. According to the FAO Food Balance Sheets (see Tables 1 and 2), the 1984-86 average annual combined meat plus fish per caput consumption was:
116 kg/caput in Canada
133 kg/caput in the USA
In Canada present annual per caput consumption of meat, eggs and poultry is: pork 28 kg, beef 40 kg, eggs 12 kg and poultry 24 kg. Per caput consumption of the same commodities in the USA is: pork 29 kg, beef 49 kg, eggs 15 kg and poultry 32 kg. During the period 1960-85, consumption patterns of eggs, meat, fish and poultry products in the USA showed eggs declined by 22%, pork increased slightly less than 3%, beef increased by 16%, fish increased by nearly 20%, and poultry increased over 100%.
These changes reflect the general public's awareness of the health attributes of the various products. In the case of poultry, its ready availability and competitive price were also important factors in its increased consumption. Shifts have also been noted in the demand for various products as Government research institutions in both countries have called for increased consumption of cereals, chicken, fish and fruits, and a relative decrease in amounts of red meat and dairy products with high fat contents. In general, demand for fish and fishery products in Canada and the USA is expected to grow as consumers' disposable income increases and consumers realize the nutritional benefits of seafood.
No data are available for annual meat consumption in Greenland. However, during the winter months smoked mutton is frequently consumed. Consumption of fish and fishery products in Greenland has changed little over the years. Fresh fish is consumed during the main fishing seasons, whereas salted and dried fish make up the bulk of the consumption during the rest of the year.
1.3 Annual comsumptionof fish and shellfish
The 1984-86 average annual consumption of fish and fishery products in the region was: Canada 23.2 kg per caput, Greenland 85.5 kg per caput (1987 figure), and the USA 21.7 kg per caput. The 23.2 kg per caput of fish and shellfish consumed in Canada was made up of 2.8 kg of freshwater fish, 13.5 kg of marine fish (7.0 kg of demersal, 5.5 kg of pelagic and 1.0 kg of other marine fish), 4.3 kg of crustaceans and 2.6 kg of molluscs. The 21.7 kg per caput of fish and shellfish consumed in the USA was composed of 1.1 kg of freshwater fish, 12.2 kg of marine fish (8.6 kg of demersal, 3.5 kg of pelagic and 0.2 kg of other marine fish), 2.7 kg of crustaceans and 5.8 kg of molluscs.
In 1986 only 0.7% of all edible fish and shellfish in Canada came from aquaculture, whereas in the USA the figure was 27% (up from 12% in 1984). Most Canadian farmed rainbow trout, blue mussels and oysters are consumed domestically. Consumption of farmed catfish, trout, salmon and shrimp has increased annually in the USA and the demand remains strong.
1.4 Gross market data
Data from the World Bank Atlas (1988) showed the 1986 GNP in US$ per caput (with % real growth for 1985-86) was Canada, US$ 14 100 (+ 1.8%); Greenland, US$ 8 790 (+ 8.4%); and the USA, US$ 17 500 (+ 1.9%).
The population of Canada increased from 25 379 000 to 25 655 000 between 1985 and 1986, representing a + 1.2% growth rate between 1973-86.
From 1985 to 1986 the population of Greenland remained stable at about 53 000, but showed a + 0.7% growth rate between 1973-86.
The population of the USA increased from 239 283 000 to 241 252 000 between 1985 and 1986, representing a + 1.0% growth rate between 1973-86.
1.5 Specific market data
Canadian fish landings in 1986 totalled 1.53 million metric tonnes (t) , valued at Can.$ 1.35 thousand million. Of the total, 1.40 million t were sold for human consumption. Approximately 19% of the catch was marketed as fresh fish and as frozen products. Included in the landings were about 11 396 t of Canadian farmed production, valued at about Can.$ 32 million (in value 50% trout, 21% oysters, 20% salmon and about 9% blue mussels).
Commercial landings in Greenland in 1986 totalled 100 000 t. The catch was marketed as fish (fresh, chilled or frozen), 19%; fish (dried, salted or smoked), 3%; Crustacea (fresh, chilled or frozen), 62%; fish products and preparations, 0.8%; crustacean products and preparations, 15%; and fish meals, 0.2%. A large part of domestic demand is supplied by part-time and hobby fishermen. Greenland has no reported aquaculture production.
Commercial fish landings (edible) in the USA were 1.5 million t in 1986, a decrease compared with 1985 landings. Approximately 63% of the 1986 catch was marketed as fresh and frozen (39% finfish and 24% shellfish), and 37% was marketed as canned fish products. Included in the edible landings were about 417 084 t of aquaculture production, valued at US$ 520 million (in value 44% catfish, 11% trout, 9% freshwater crawfish, 9% golden shiner and 6% American oyster). Landings of industrial (non-edible) fish were 1.2 million t in 1986.
Canada is a net exporter of fish, shellfish and fishery products. Fish is its second largest food export after grains. In 1986, the volume of Canadian fish and fishery products exports increased by 6% to 590 855 t, representing 73% of total fish production. The value of fish exports increased 30% in 1986 to a total of Can.$ 2.4 thousand million. Canada is the world's leading exporter of fish and fishery products.
The main fishery products exported from Canada continue to be salmon (including 75% of farmed production) and herring products from the Pacific fishery; and cod, flatfish, crab, lobster and scallop products from the Atlantic fishery. The USA continues to be the most important export market for Canadian fish and fishery products, receiving 59% volume of its fish exports in 1986. The European Economic Community (EEC) received 13% of Canadian fish exports, other European countries 6%, Central and South America 6%, and Japan 13%.
The fishing industry plays a central role in Greenland. About a quarter of the actively employed population is within the sector and fish and fish products account for two-thirds of the total value of all exports. Traditionally Greenland is a net exporter of fish and fishery products. Over 97% of the total 1986 fish production, including imports for the year, was exported. Exports of fish and fishery products from Greenland in 1986 totalled 95 800 t, valued at US$ 211 million. The main export for the past few years has been prawns and prawn products and preparations, which accounted for 79% of total fish exports in 1986. Denmark is the major market for Greenland's fish exports; in 1985 it received 99% of the exports.
Total USA exports of edible fishery products of domestic origin in 1986 were a record 334 000 t, valued at a record US$ 1.3 thousand million. The main export was salmon (fresh/frozen and canned). A partial reason for increased USA exports of fishery products was the decline in the value of the US dollar relative to most other currencies. For example, the value of the US dollar dropped 30% against the Japanese yen between 1985 and 1986, increasing the competitiveness of US fishery products in the Japanese market.
Canada's fish imports in 1986 increased to 152 371 t, valued at Can.$ 616 million. Increases occurred primarily in fresh and frozen fish, canned tuna and fresh or frozen shrimp or prawns. The largest supplier of fish product imports to Canada in 1986 was the USA (60% of volume and 51% of value), followed by the EEC (33% volume), Japan, Central and South America, and other European countries.
Fish imports to Greenland are minor and in 1986 totalled only 426 t, valued at US$ 1.1 million. Overall, imports represented less than 1% of total domestic fish landings in Greenland.
The USA is a net importer of fish and fishery products. Imports of edible fishery products in 1986 totalled 1.4 million t, valued at a record US$ 4.8 thousand million. The US is the second largest market in the world for fish and fishery products. Shrimp and tuna were the major species imported. The quantity of shrimp imported in 1986 established a record with 182 000 t, which included farmed shrimp from Latin America and S.E. Asia. Valued at US$ 1.4 thousand million, shrimp imports accounted for 30% of the value of total US edible imports.
1.6 Information for the trade
Information for the commercial aquaculture fish trade is available for Canada, Greenland and the USA in the form of various monthly and quarterly magazines and news-sheets, such as: Seafood Business, Seafood Leader, FAO GLOBEFISH Highlights, Greensheets (NMFS), and the Seafood International Directory 1988 (see Bibliography of Resource Materials).
Also, two annual directories - Canadian Aquaculture Magazine 1988 Buyer's Guide, and Aquaculture Magazine Buyer's Guide for 1988 - (see Bibliography) provide a range of information and addresses dealing with (a) consumer and market publications, (b) fish processors, brokers and buyers, (c) exporters and importers, and (d) wholesalers of seafood and fish products. Market information and contact addresses for aquaculture products in Canada and the USA are also available from the North American Directory of Aquaculture 1988/89 (published by Kevgor Aquasystems, Vancouver, Canada).
Detailed trade information for fish and fish products in Greenland is limited. A list of 18 fish processors and exporters in Greenland is given in The Danish Fisheries (1980), along with a brief description of the fishing industry in Greenland.
<section>4</section>
2. PRODUCTION OF FISH AND SHELLFISH IN REGION
2.1 Characteristics of production in the region
2.2 Regional production data
2.3 Production systems and practices in the region
2.4 Producers in the region
2.5 Organizations of producers
2.6 Financial investment by public and private enterprises
2.1 Characteristics of production in the region
Production from aquaculture in Canada has been limited, although the country has considerable potential. The aquaculture industry has been developing in all regions of Canada; notably with salmon, rainbow trout and oysters in British Columbia (B.C.); trout in the Prairie Provinces, Ontario and Quebec; and salmon, trout, mussels and oysters in the Maritime Provinces. Regional differences in climate and in freshwater and marine environments have created significant variations in the type and scope of aquacultural production across Canada. However, one element is common in all regions: aquaculture is a high-growth industry.
Greenland has no reported aquaculture production at present, or in past years (pers.comm., FAO Fishery Statistics Unit, Rome). However, salmon aquaculture in Greenland has been mentioned as a possibility, mainly to supplement natural stocks (which are subject to heavy international exploitation). An alternative suggestion has focused on sea-ranching of salmon using existing streams. Through stream enhancement and smolt-release programmes, leading to sea-ranching, an interest could develop in the salmon as a resource to be managed, not only harvested. A similar aquaculture effort with Arctic char (Salvelinus alpinus) might likewise yield benefits.
In the USA, aquaculture production has increased greatly in the past few years. In 1984, about 12% of all edible fish and shellfish in the USA came from aquaculture, whereas by 1986 the percentage had increased to about 27% (meat weights only calculated for oysters and clams). Salmon production has grown steadily in importance since the early eighties. Freshwater crawfish (Procambarus spp.) production increased 39% between 1984 and 1986. However, the most exciting aquaculture growth has been with the freshwater channel catfish (Ictalurus punctatus), which increased about 27% in volume between 1984 and 1986. Catfish farming since 1984 has annually represented about 35% of the total volume of production from aquaculture in the USA.
2.2 Regional production data
Total aquaculture production for the region (Canada, Greenland and the USA) in 1986 was 428 480 C (FAO, 1989). Canada's production was 11 396 t, or about 2.7% of the regional total. Greenland had no reported aquaculture production. The USA aquaculture harvest in 1986 was 417 084 t, or 97.3% of the regional production. Overall, the freshwater environment accounted for 56.4%, and the marine environment for 43.6%, of the total aquaculture production of the region. No production was reported from the brackishwater environment (FAO, 1988a). The common and scientific names of species/groups cultured commercially in North America are given in Table 3 (as used by FAO).
Canadian aquaculture production data for the years 1984, 1985 and 1986 are summarized in Table 4 (FAO, 1989), by species or group. Production increased about 10% (878 t) from 1984 to 1985, and about 24% (2 798 t) from 1985 to 1986. Fish represented about 30% (3 439 t) of the 1986 harvest, and molluscs about 70% (7 957 t). Production in 1984 and 1985 was similar with fish representing about 20-23% of total volume. During 1984-86 the freshwater environment produced an average of about 20% and the marine environment about 80% of annual production. No production was reported from the brackishwater environment.
Over 90% of the total volume of the 1986 harvest was from four species: Pacific cupped oyster = 3 700 t (32.4% of 1986 production); American cupped oyster = 2 400 t (21.0%); rainbow trout = 2 384 t (20.9%); and blue mussel = 1 845 t (16.1%). Few data are available from FAO for total value of Canadian production by group or species during 1984-86. However, information from the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD), (1988a) is available and shows that the total value of 1986 aquaculture production was Can.$ 32.2 million; the main groups being as follows:
Rainbow trout
Can.$ 16 193 000
Atlantic salmon
American cupped oyster
Pacific cupped oyster
Blue mussel
Pacific salmon
Provisional figures for 1987 indicate that Canada's aquaculture production was approximately Can.$ 50 million, a considerable increase from the Can.$ 32 million recorded in 1986. Salmon constituted about one-half of the total Canadian aquaculture production value in 1987.
By 1989 the Canadian Federal Department of Fisheries and Oceans (DFO) may be well on its way to a national, computerized system for aquaculture statistics. The planned system would record cultured production figures, sales and prices, species, culture methods and operations, and employment numbers from all ten provinces.
USA aquaculture production data for the years 1984, 1985 and 1986 are summarized in Table 5 (FAO, 1989), by species or group. Production increased about 5.6% (20 459 t) from 1984 to 1985, and about 12.3% (51 654 t) from 1985 to 1986. Production in 1986 was 417 084 t; fish represented about 56% (234 033 t) of the total harvest, crustacea about 11% (45 014 t) and molluscs about 33% (138 037 t). The trend in production in 1984 and 1985 was similar with fish representing over 50% of total volume, followed by molluscs and then crustacea.
During 1986 the freshwater environment produced about 57% and the marine environment about 43% of the USA aquaculture harvest. No production was reported from the brackishwater environment. Over 87% of the total volume of the 1986 harvest was from six species, which are listed below along with production figures and percentage of the total harvest.
(t)
Channel catfish
American cupped oyster
Red swamp crawfish
Pacific cupped oyster
Rainbow trout
Golden shiner
The six most expensive species per kilo in 1986 were:
(US$/kg)
Giant river prawn
Atlantic salmon
Abalone
Golden shiner
Olympia flat oyster
Whiteleg shrimp
The total value of the 1986 aquaculture harvest in the USA was about US$ 519 489 630 (FAO, 1988a). Five major species accounted for 79% of the value. They are listed below, along with their commercial value and percentage of the total 1986 harvest.
(US$)
Channel catfish
Rainbow trout
Red swamp crawfish
Golden shiner
American cupped oyster
Not normally included in the aquaculture statistics for the USA is the production of hundreds of millions of juvenile fish per year to support the nation's valuable recreational fishing industry. The fish are produced in 75 facilities of the US Fish and Wildlife Service's National Fish Hatchery System, by more than 1 000 private hatcheries across the US, and by the hundreds of state hatcheries that produce game fish for stocking primarily in public waters. Without fish culture, a number of these fisheries would collapse. The main fish stocked by federal, state and private hatcheries in 1980 to support US sport fisheries (primarily recreational) are given below by species and by numbers.
Species
Number
Walleye and sauger
Salmon
Trout
Striped bass and hybrids
Northern pike
Catfish
Steelhead
Bluegill
Largemouth bass
Muskie and tiger
Sunfish
Smallmouth bass
Total
Source: U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service
2.3 Production systems and practices in the region
Details on the culture systems used to produce the bulk of Canada's aquaculture production can be summarized as follows:
Spat (seed) of the Pacific cupped oyster is either collected from the wild in British Columbia waters or obtained from local hatcheries. Some seed is imported from Japan and the USA. The main on-growing method is extensive bottom culture (1 741 ha under lease in B.C. in 1987), although there is some production from suspended culture. Approximately 75% of production is from the Gulf of Georgia, in southern B.C. American cupped oysters are cultivated in all three Maritime Provinces, mainly by extensive bottom culture. In Prince Edward Island (PEI) most oyster production is from harvesting from public beds and on-growing on privately leased beds, whilst in New Brunswick 75% of oyster production in 1987 was from public beds. Most oyster spat is collected from the wild, although locally produced hatchery spat is available.
The European flat oyster is cultured on trays, in lantern nets and by extensive bottom fanning. Most of the seed used is hatchery produced; there is limited wild seed collection. Seed of the blue mussel is collected from the wild on the Atlantic coast and is cultured on long lines. There is only experimental culture of the blue mussel on the Pacific coast of Canada. Clams are grown by bottom culture (extensive), using seed collected from the wild.
Atlantic salmon are intensively cultured in sea cages, using smolts produced in local private hatcheries. Pacific salmon are grown mainly in net pens in sheltered marine bays or inlets (178 operating farms totalling 940 ha in 1988) using intensive culture practices. The smolts are all hatchery produced. Rainbow trout production varies with the region of Canada although all fry are hatchery produced. On the Pacific coast trout are grown in freshwater ponds and raceways, using intensive methods. There is some experimental sea cage culture. In central Canada the main method is intensive freshwater pond culture, with some production coming from semi-intensive pothole culture in Manitoba. Most of the production in Quebec comes from freshwater ponds, although some raceways are also used. On the Atlantic coast rainbow trout are intensively cultured in raceways, ponds and in sea cages. The 50 t of northern bluefin tuna cultured in Atlantic Canada in 1984 came from tuna that had been
wild caught and then semi-intensively on-grown for four months in large impoundment nets anchored to the sea floor, before being harvested.
Since 79% of the value of USA production in 1986 was accounted for by only five species, their production systems are now briefly described.
The bulk of channel catfish production is semi-intensive and intensive pond culture in the Lower Mississippi Valley. Small amounts in 1986 came from intensive raceway culture (1 100 t) and from intensive cage culture (527 t). Mississippi catfish farmers, who produce about 80% of the US catfish, had 29 800 ha in commercial production in 1985. By the end of 1986 the amount of total area had increased by 10%, to 32 800 ha, and was expected to reach about 36 400 ha by the end of 1987.
Most rainbow trout farming takes place in freshwater raceway systems, although 10% of the 1985 harvest was produced in sea cages. Trout culture in the USA is usually intensive. The state of Idaho is the leading producer.
In 1986 red swamp crawfish were cultured for food on about 52 600 ha in Louisiana, Texas, Mississippi and South Carolina. Crawfish are cultured in several types of ponds. Wooded ponds may produce 225-338 kg/ha under extensive practices. Ponds constructed solely for crawfish culture, and rice fields used in rice/crawfish double-cropping, usually average about 900 kg/ha. Intensively cultured ponds can produce 2 800-3 360 kg/ha if managed well. A major trend in crawfish culture involves double-cropping of rice and crawfish. The USA grows rice on 1.01-1.13 million ha of farms that possess the major ingredients for growing crawfish, i.e. water, levees, and a source of food (decaying rice stubble).
Golden shiner is a freshwater species produced solely as baitfish for the sport and commercial fishery industry. Most golden shiners are cultured in enclosed ponds supplied with water from underground sources. Yields as high as 1 570 kg/ha have been achieved in well managed ponds, under semi-intensive conditions. Arkansas is the main producer of golden shiner (and other baitfish) and in 1982 had 22 800 ha devoted to baitfish production; Minnesota reported 731 baitfish ponds totalling about 6 500 ha. The states of Kansas, Louisiana, Mississippi and Missouri each had a minimum of 400 ha of ponds devoted to baitfish culture.
The majority of American cupped oyster seed (spat) is collected from the wild and on-grown extensively in suitable inshore areas. Commercial oyster hatcheries provide seed mainly in the Pacific area of the USA. With very well managed bottom culture (such as in Long Island Sound, New York) it is possible Co produce 5 000 kg/ha (of meat) per year. Public grounds, with little or no management, produce only 10-100 kg/ha (of meat) per year. Studies of off-bottom culture have indicated that 0.1 ha covered by rack culture could yield 2.6 t of meat per year. The size of an oyster culture operation varies from 1-1.2 ha in Maryland, to 4-6 ha in Virginia, to 80 940 ha in Long Island Sound. In the Gulf Coast area, over 93 000 ha of leased tracts were in production in the early eighties. No data are available for total area under oyster production in the USA.
2.4 Producers in the region
In 1986 there was a total of approximately 3 101 licensed aquaculture establishments in Canada. Of these licensed establishments, 2% were for the purpose of culturing Atlantic salmon, 3% for Pacific salmon, 29% for trout, 55% for oysters and 11% for blue mussels.
As many as 7 000 people were involved in aquaculture production in Canada in 1987, but many were 'seasonal', part-time workers or private fish farmers licensed to rear trout for their own use (mainly in Central Canada). Some general figures are available and are summarized as follows:
Maritime Provinces:
1 000 seasonal jobs in oyster farming, 500 people in blue mussel culture and 220 people in the salmon farming industry in 1987.
Quebec:
about 500 people directly involved with trout culture.
British Columbia:
1 400 people directly employed in aquaculture in 1987 (118 salmon farming sites, 154 trout farming operations, and 249 oyster growers operating 385 leased sites).
Ontario:
500 jobs directly associated with trout farming.
Central Canada:
about 100-150 commercial fish farm operators and about 1 000 private fish farmers licensed to rear trout for their own use.
Saskatchewan:
120 commercial fish farmers (trout) in 1987 and about 2 300 private licensed fish farmers.
The private aquaculture industry in the USA employs tens of thousands of people, some as full-time producers and many as part-time or 'seasonal' workers. Estimates of numbers of producers are available for only a few of the main groups/species being commercially cultured.
Channel catfish:
In 1980, over 3 800 operators were reported involved in catfish farming. Not known how many employed on average farm. Since then production has expanded over 400%.
Rainbow trout:
653 growers of all types (egg producers, fingerling producers, market fish producers and grow-out producers); 1 086 operators of trout for fish-out ponds.
Freshwater crawfish:
40 processing plants operating in south Louisiana in 1982 and 100 'soft-shell' producers in 1988.
Golden shiner:
1 544 baitfish farms in 1978. Not known how many employed on average per farm.
American cupped oyster:
1 424 individual (private) lease tracts in Louisiana; 247 oyster businesses were identified from Maine to Virginia.
The private sector involvement in USA aquaculture in 1980 was summarized as follows: the US aquaculture industry is represented by 1 100 catfish farms; 250 trout farms; 400 crawfish farms; 25 commercial salmon farms; over 500 oyster culture firms; 30 firms culturing clams, mussels and abalone; 15 US-owned shrimp farming firms operating in Latin America and the USA; 20 freshwater prawn firms concentrated in Hawaii; and a number of individuals and firms who are culturing other species.
Between 1980-86, USA aquaculture production increased about 445%; therefore the total number of producers and people working in production would have expanded greatly as well.
2.5 Organizations of producers
At least 31 associations are active in promoting commercial fish and shellfish farming development in Canada. Associations represent various scopes of interest: species specific, geographically specific (within a province), provincial species specific, and provincial (representing all aquaculturists in a province). Membership size varies with the respective industries, and some associations are much more established and active than others.
In British Columbia there are 10 main associations: the Aquaculture Association of B.C., the B.C. Oyster Board, the B.C. Oyster Growers' Association, the B.C. Oyster Marketing Board, the B.C. Salmon Farmers' Association, the Barkley Sound Growers' Association, the Campbell River Aquaculture Association, the North Island Mariculture Association, the Sunshine Coast Aquaculture Association, and the Western Trout Farmers' Association.
In Manitoba there is the Manitoba Rainbow Trout Farmers' Association. In Saskatchewan there are two groups: the North Saskatchewan Rainbow Trout Farmers' Association, and the Saskatchewan Aquaculture Association.
Ontario has two main producers groups: the Ontario Trout Farmers' Association and the Ontario Trout Producers' Cooperative Ltd. Nova Scotia has one main group: the Aquaculture Association of Nova Scotia. Two main associations are active in Newfoundland; the Bay d'Espoir Salmon Growers' Cooperative and the Newfoundland Aquaculture Association.
New Brunswick (N.B.) has seven groups: l'Association des Aquaculteurs de la Bale de Caraquet, l'Association des Aquaculteurs de Pigeon Hill, the Atlantic Salmon Federation, Atlantic Silver Ltd., l'Association des Pêcheurs d'huitres de la Baie de Caraquet, l'Association des producteurs d'huitres de Lameque, and the New Brunswick Salmon Growers' Association.
There are four main producers' associations in Prince Edward Island (PEI): the PEI Cultured Mussel Growers' Association, the PEI Trout Growers' Association, the Prince County Shellfish Association, and the Queens County Oystermen's Association.,
Two large national organizations exist in Canada: the Aquaculture Association of Canada, and the Canadian Aquaculture Producers Council (CAPC). The Aquaculture Association of Canada was created in 1983 to foster the development of aquaculture in Canada by promoting research, communication and education. Membership in the association is open to everyone: producers, academics, government officials, and anyone with an interest in aquaculture. CAPC was formed in January 1987 to provide a unified, Canada-wide voice for the aquaculture industry and to promote communication with governments and other relevant groups. The CAPC executive is comprised of executives from various provincial associations as well as individual aquaculturists. The association meets regularly with officials of the federal Department of Fisheries and Oceans.
In the USA 10 very large organizations, representing thousands of members, are active in promoting commercial fish and shellfish farming development at the national level. They are: (1) American Catfish Institute, (2) Catfish Farmers of America, (3) National Ornamental Goldfish Growers' Association, (4) Shellfish Institute of North America, (5) Pacific Coast Oyster Growers' Association, (6) US Trout Farmers' Association, (7) National Shellfisheries Association, (8) International Association of Astacology, (9) American Sport Fish Institute, and (10) the American Alligator Farmers' Association.
At the state level in the USA there are at least 40 associations active in promoting aquaculture and commercial fish farming. Such associations are in the states of Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, California, Florida, Georgia, Kansas, Louisiana, Maine, Michigan, Mississippi, Missouri, Nebraska, New York, Oklahoma, Rhode Island, South Carolina, Texas and Washington. As an example of how many smaller associations there are in the USA (either species oriented or of a regional interest within one state), the state of Alaska, with a total population of only about 500 000, had seven regional aquaculture associations in 1987.
Therefore, at present, about 50 national and state associations serve the aquaculture industry across the USA. By mid-1989, plans will be finalized to establish a "National Aquaculture Association" to represent the entire American fish farming industry. The new association is being set up to provide the US aquaculture industry with a central voice in such matters as water regulations, predator control, foreign imports/competition, and US government legislation and permits.
2.6 Financial investment by public and private enterprises
The investment in the plus 100 federal and provincial salmon and trout hatcheries across Canada totals in the hundreds of millions of dollars. In British Columbia alone, as of 1988, the 120 active private salmon farm sites on the provincial coast represented approximately Can.$ 200 million in investments. Sea Farm Canada in New Brunswick, completed in December 1987 as a salmon hatchery/nursery, was constructed at a cost of Can.$ 2.5 million. Also in 1987, a Can.$ 3.5 million tank farm (Sea Springs Farm) for rearing salmon trout was completed in PEI. Government assistance (Can.$ 1.3 million) under the Canada-New Brunswick Economic Regional Development Agreement (ERDA) was provided in 1986 to help a dozen existing Bay of Fundy salmon farmers expand their operations and assist nine new salmon farmers to start their operations. Several other examples of investment programmes specifically targeted at aquaculture include: Prince Edward Island's five-year Can.$ 2.25 million
Aquaculture Development Program, Newfoundland's Mussel Culture Incentive Program, and Quebec's recently announced programme to assist aquaculture development.
The Canadian federal government is also investing in the construction of aquaculture research and development facilities, demonstration farms, and university research laboratories. For example, the B.C. Aquaculture Centre is presently being constructed with Can.$ 6 million government funding, as a research and development facility. During 1985 government invested in establishing a Salmonid Demonstration and Development Farm in New Brunswick to meet the needs of the developing salmonid aquaculture industry. In late 1988, construction finished on the University of Guelph's Alma Research Station, which has expanded facilities for research in the fields of fish nutrition, genetics, aquaculture engineering, reproduction and basic physiology.
Investments in aquaculture in the USA in just the past few years total thousands of millions of dollars. In 1983 (National Aquaculture Development Plan) it was calculated that over US$ 100 million was invested in baitfish growing enterprises; more than US$ 400 million in catfish farming; over US$ 100 million in freshwater crawfish; about US$ 25 million in freshwater prawns; about US$ 10 million in largemouth bass cultivation; up to US$ 430 million in trout production; US$ 715 million in capital investment in salmon culture and US$ 20 million for annual operating costs (about one-third of this investment was spent on hatcheries); US$ 50 million for ocean-ranching of salmon; US$ 27 million for pen-rearing operations with salmon; about US$ 44 million for penaeid shrimp culture; millions of dollars for tropical aquarium fish production; and millions invested in production of fry of various fish for stocking/enhancement programmes, to name but a few of the major investments up to
<section>5</section>
3. LOCAL INFRASTRUCTURE
3.1 Extension services in the region
3.2 Training of extension agents
3.3 Seed production facilities in the region
3.4 Manufacture of feed in the region
3.5 Manufacturers of equipment for the industry
3.6 Other services for the industry
3.7 Local credit programmes
3.8 Trade publications for producers
3.1 Extension services in the region
Five years ago there were very few extension workers involved in aquaculture in Canada at the provincial or even federal level. Since then the situation has changed and, although there are still not enough facilities or trained specialists to keep pace with growth in the sector, the need for a strong extension service in Canada has been recognized. The extension workers presently available are usually assigned to federal or provincial fisheries or natural resources agencies, and at educational institutions. Most extension workers are university trained.
In British Columbia extension services and specialists are provided by the federal Aquaculture and Commercial Fisheries Branch (Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries). Extension services and specialists are also located in Malaspina College, University of British Columbia's Department of Bio-Resources Engineering, University of Victoria (in association with Bamfield Marine Station) and Simon Fraser University's Institute for Aquaculture Research (workshops and short courses).
In Manitoba limited extension services and specialists are available from the Department of Natural Resources (Fisheries Branch) and from the Freshwater Institute of the Department of Fisheries and Oceans.
In Saskatchewan limited extension services and specialists are available in the Saskachewan Research Council.
Extension services and specialists in Ontario are located in the Fish Culture Section of the Ministry of Natural Resources, as well as within the University of Guelph's Departments of Nutrition, Zoology, Pathology, and School of Continuing Education. A Fish Farmers' Extension Centre opened in late 1988 at the University of Guelph; it provides a focus of expertise for commercial fish growers in Ontario, and helps governments and researchers to better understand the needs of the industry. Sir Sandford Fleming College also has limited services and specialists in aquaculture extension.
In Quebec the Ministry of Recreation, Wildlife and Fisheries has limited extension services and specialists in fish culture.
Extension services and specialists in Nova Scotia are provided by the Scotia-Fundy Regional Office and the Fish Health Laboratory (both of the federal Department of Fisheries and Oceans), and the provincial Aquaculture and Inland Fisheries Office in Halifax. The University of Dalhousie and the Technical University of Nova Scotia also have expertise and services in aquaculture extension. In Newfoundland limited extension services and personnel are available through the federal and provincial offices of the Departments of Fisheries.
New Brunswick is much better supplied with aquaculture extension services and specialists. The Department of Fisheries and Oceans provides such services and personnel through its Gulf Region Office and its Salmonid Demonstration and Development Farm. The purpose of the farm is to facilitate the transfer of salmonid sea cage culture technology to the developing aquaculture industry in the Bay of Fundy. Atlantic salmon are used in a variety of performance tests and in evaluations of new equipment, management strategies, feeds and stocks. The farm provides demonstrations of workable practices and techniques and gives salmonid farmers hands-on experience in new technology. Aquaculture extension is also offered through the University of New Brunswick's Department of Biology and the Marine Research Group.
Extension services and specialists in Prince Edward Island are available through the PEI Department of Fisheries, the Aquaculture Technology Programme of Holland College, and the University of Prince Edward Island. In May 1987 the University opened its Atlantic Veterinary College which offers excellent extension personnel and services for the fish farmers of the four Atlantic provinces (PEI, Nova Scotia, Newfoundland, and New Brunswick).
In the USA aquaculture extension services and specialists are provided to the industry as part of the Extension Service of the US Department of Agriculture. The Extension Service provides educational programmes through the State Cooperative Extension offices nation-wide. Extension workers interpret new aquaculture research, adapt the technology to local needs, and make the information available to all users. They inform scientists of research needs as identified by aquaculturists at the local level. Ongoing extension educational programmes in aquaculture include: economics; water management; stocking; feeding; disease identification, prevention, and control; weed control; predator control; hatchery, pond, and reservoir management; harvesting; transportation; marketing and processing; on-site pilot testing and demonstrations; workshops and in-service training of professional and technical aquaculturists; and consumer education on the nutritional value of aquaculture products.
State extension specialists are usually university graduates and most are attached to fisheries departments of state organizations or to university departments. In 1986 there were at least 400 State Extension Specialists throughout all 50 states, designed to receive and provide aquaculture information.
3.2 Training of extension agents
Extension specialists in Canada and the USA are usually university graduates in a biological science (including food technology). A number of Canadian and US universities and institutions offer specialized aquaculture courses and training where extension agents can receive short- and long-term training (see 4.1).
3.3 Seed production facilities in the region
At least a hundred private/commercial seed production facilities are operational in Canada, mainly for trout and to a much lesser extent for salmon and oysters (see Canadian Aquaculture Buyer's Guide 1988 for full details).
There are over a hundred federal and provincial hatcheries across Canada, producing hundreds of millions of eggs and juvenile fish for stocking and enhancement programmes.
For most of the major commercially farmed species in the USA it is possible to obtain hatchery produced 'seed' as required. Over a thousand commercial facilities (hatcheries, farms, dealers and companies) produce and sell eggs, seed, fingerlings, fry, juveniles, post larvae and broodstock for the entire range of farmed species in the USA (see Aquaculture Magazine Buyer's Guide, 1988 for full details).
In addition, state and federal hatcheries number in the hundreds and are found in all 50 states. Most of their production is for stocking/enhancement programmes, both for commercial and recreational fishermen.
3.4 Manufacture of feed in the region
Manufacturers and suppliers of feed for the Canadian aquaculture industry are few but they are actively involved. They mainly serve the trout and salmon production industries.
The main ones in B.C. are C.D.N. Bio-Aquatics, Ewos Canada, Innovative Aquaculture Products Ltd., Moore-Clark Co. Inc., Murex, Scantech Resources Ltd., Trend Feed and White Crest Mills Ltd.; in Alberta there in Martin Feed Mills Ltd. In Quebec province the main feed manufacturers are Les Products Martin, Nutribec and Baie des Chaleurs Aquaculture; in New Brunswick they are Connors Bros. Ltd., Corey Feed Mills Ltd.; Ralston Purina Canada Feed Inc. is located in Ontario, as is Martin Feed Mills Ltd.; in Nova Scotia there is William A. Flemming. Feeds are also readily available and imported from the USA.
There are several hundred manufacturers, suppliers and dealers of feed for the USA aquaculture industry, providing feed for a wide range of cultured species (see Aquaculture Magazine Buyer's Guide 1988 for full details). The US aquaculture industry is very well supplied in the sub-sector.
3.5 Manufacturers of equipment for the industry
Lists were published in Canadian Aquaculture Buyer's Guide, 1988 and in Aquaculture Magazine Buyer's Guide, 1988 of several thousand manufacturers, suppliers and dealers of the entire range of products and equipment for the aquaculture industry in Canada and the USA, with the majority being in the USA. The Canadian Aquaculture Suppliers' Association was also recently established to assist the industry.
The region is therefore well supplied in the aquaculture equipment sub-sector.
3.6 Other services for the industry
Expertise, consultants and services in nutrition, disease diagnosis and control, engineering and in water chemistry for the commercial aquaculture industry in Canada are of very good quality but thin on a national scale. The required human services are not concentrated either geographically or by discipline. Expertise and consultants tend to be adapted to aquaculture rather than directed toward aquaculture.
However, disease diagnosis and fish health management services on a regional level in Canada have improved greatly with the formation of the Association of Aquaculture Veterinarians of British Columbia and with the opening of the new Atlantic Veterinary College at the University of Prince Edward Island. The college is the fourth such facility in Canada and one of 31 in North America. Canadian fish health services are now being sold on international markets. For example, in 1986, vaccines from one Canadian company were used to vaccinate 115 million fish in Canada, the USA, Europe and field trials with new vaccines are ongoing.
The USA aquaculture industry is very well served by a wide range of expertise, consultants and services in nutrition, disease diagnosis and control, engineering, water chemistry and culture/farming systems. Extension agents and aquaculture support services at the local level usually exist and are of high quality.
3.7 Local credit programmes
The federal and provincial governments of Canada continue to provide various forms of assistance to small businesses. While there is a wide range of advisory and financial programmes available, the trend has been to encourage the investment of private sector funds rather than providing direct government funding. The Federal Business Development Bank (FBDB), which is a crown corporation of the federal government, provides some direct equity capital through its Venture Capital Division for small businesses. The FBDB also provides a broad range of training vehicles, management counselling, a financial planning programme and an extensive information service.
In addition to the FBDB, the federal government is a source of loan guarantees such as those provided under the Small Business Loans Act of the Department of Regional Industrial Expansion. The provincial governments are also sources of guarantees to the aquaculture industry through the Agricultural Credit Act. On the west coast, for instance, the B.C. Development Corporation has provided low-interest financing to the aquaculture industry through the Low-Interest Loan Assistance programme for manufacturing, processing and directly-related service industries. Some governments in Atlantic Canada offer similar incentive programmes and a number of East Coast aquaculture companies have also made use of funds provided under the federal Topping Up Assistance Program.
The Aquaculture Incentive Program is another programme that was created to encourage the establishment and expansion of firms engaged in B.C. aquaculture production. Interest free, repayable loans are available for up to 50% of eligible costs to a maximum of Can$ 100 000. A publication entitled "Financing and Incentives for Aquaculture Production in British Columbia" is available from the B.C. Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries. This publication provides a good summary of the many provincial and federal assistance programmes available and how to qualify. Price Waterhouse has a publication called "Government Financial Assistance Programs in Canada" which is available to the public at no charge. The Department of Fisheries and Oceans published "Aquaculture Development in Canada: A Guide to Federal Programs" (see Bibliography), which includes detailed information on economic development, business development and tax incentives.
Funds for both capital equipment and working capital are available to small businesses/aquaculture producers. However, a major problem has been whether the grower/processor could fit the working criteria of the review boards who pass judgement on credit/loan proposals.
The local aquaculture producer in the USA qualifies for credit from the main federal supported institutions, i.e. The Small Business Administration;
The Farmers Home Administration (PHA), The Farm Credit Administration (also see section 4.4). The above institutions make loans on commercial terms to farmers, ranchers, producers, and harvesters of aquatic products, and to their cooperatives.
The FHA is of particular interest to local fish farmers in that it has several aquaculture loans available: Farm Ownership Loans; Operating Loans;
Emergency Loans; Economic Emergency Loans; Soil and Water Loans; Recreational Loans; Business and Industrial Loans; Resource Conservation and Development, and Farm Labour Housing Loans.
3.8 Trade publications for producers
The main trade publications for producers are:
Canadian Aquaculture
Canadian Aquaculture Buyer's Guide, 1988
Atlantic Aquaculture (Canada)
Carolina Aquaculture News
Farm Pond Management
Aquaculture Magazine
Buyer's Guide '88 and Industry Directory (Aquaculture Magazine)
Seafood International
Seafood Leader (plus Buyer's Guide)
Seafood Business
<section>6</section>
4. NATIONAL INFRASTRUCTURE
4.1 Manpower training in aquaculture technologies
4.2 Manpower training in management
4.3 Aquaculture research in the region
4.4 Management of credit
4.5 Associations of professionals in the region
4.6 Information for professionals
4.7 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
4.1 Manpower training in aquaculture technologies
In general the background required in aquaculture technology includes education and training at various levels from undergraduate to graduate university education, and from technical schools to extension and continuing education functions for producers.
At present undergraduate programmes at Canadian universities are not designed to produce graduates in aquaculture. However, that will change in September 1989 when the University of British Columbia (Faculty of Agricultural Sciences) will offer a four year programme leading to a B.Aqua.Sc. degree. Universities and technical colleges presently offering undergraduate courses and training in aquaculture are University of British Columbia (Departments of Animal Science and Bio-Resources Engineering), University of Victoria, Simon Eraser University, Bamfield Marine Station, University of Alberta, University of New Brunswick (Department of Biology and the Marine Research Group), University of Moncton, Memorial University, Technical University of Nova Scotia, Dalhousie University, University of Prince Edward Island (Atlantic Veterinary College), University of Guelph (Departments of Nutrition, Pathology, Zoology, and School of Continuing Education), University of Montreal,
University of Quebec at Chicoutimi, University of Quebec at Trois Rivieres, and the University of Quebec at Rimouski.
Across the USA, at least 50 universities and colleges offer courses and training in various aspects of aquaculture. Such courses and training form part of the traditional fisheries and wildlife curricula, which US institutions have been offering for many years. The main institutions with specialized courses or training in aquaculture include: Auburn University, Clemson University, Texas A & M University, Louisiana State University, University of California at Davis, Florida Institute of Technology, University of Hawaii at Manoa, University of Washington, Rutgers State University, University of Delaware, Virginia Institute of Marine Science, Southern Illinois University at Carbondale, Oregon State University, Hofstra University, Colorado State University, and the University of South Carolina. Also, the Consortium for International Fisheries and Aquaculture Development offers short courses in aquaculture held at the various member universities. The Consortium includes the
University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff, University of Hawaii, University of Michigan, Michigan State University, and Oregon State University, where it is based.
Post-graduate training in Canada is usually limited in scope to the interest of the professor and the university facilities available. However a few opportunities do exist to receive specialized aquaculture training at the M.Sc. and Ph.D. levels at most of the Canadian universities mentioned previously.
Aquaculture training in the USA at the post-graduate level is very good. Many universities offer specialized M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees in aquaculture and have excellent research and experimental facilities. Land grant colleges and universities have a tradition of freshwater aquaculture (mainly biology) and good extension and continuing education services. The Sea Grant-funded universities and colleges deal mainly with brackishwater and marine aquaculture. Again, facilities are usually very good and research in specialized aquaculture fields - or with particular species/groups - is possible.
A number of practical aquaculture training courses and programmes are available in North America, some for as long as one to two years, leading to an aquaculture technician's qualification.
In Canada such courses and programmes are offered at the Aquaculture Resource Centre of Capilano College (Sechelt Campus), Northwest Community College in Prince Rupert (12 month course in aquaculture), Malaspina College in Nanaimo (two year aquaculture technician training programme). Harbour City Trade School, Huntsman Marine Laboratory in N.B. (aquaculture technician training programme, 23 weeks classroom/laboratory and 25 weeks practical work), Newfoundland and Labrador Institute of Fisheries and Marine Technology (technician training), Holland College in PEI (aquaculture technician training, 48 weeks). Sir Sandford Fleming College (technician training), and St. Felicien CEGEP (network of community colleges offering aquaculture training) in Quebec (technician training).
In the USA practical courses and one and two year aquaculture training programmes for technicians are available from a number of junior or community colleges. The Lummi Indian College of Fisheries in Washington has a two-year programme leading to an associate degree in aquaculture. The Windward Community College in Hawaii offers a two-year programme in Small Scale Aquaculture (technician training). Grays Harbor College in Washington and Haywood Technical College in North Carolina both offer two-year training programmes leading to technical degrees (aquaculture technician training).
Each year, short term aquaculture courses and workshops offer specialized training in Canada. For example, in 1988 a few examples were: Malaspina College's Aquaculture Extension Department (Nanaimo, B.C.) gave practical training courses in (1) Culture of salmon and trout, (2) Farm fish processing and marketing, (3) Fish health, (4) Trout culture, (5) Culture of molluscs (oysters, clams, mussels, scallops and abalone), (6) Computer applications in aquaculture, and (7) Fish feed technology. Also in B.C. during the summer of 1988 Bamfield Marine Station gave a six week course for technical level aquaculturists on (1) Principals of aquaculture, (2) Biology of marine molluscs, (3) Marine phycology, and (4) Larval biology. A few examples from the USA are: Financing Aquaculture and Mariculture Projects (Virginia); Culturing of Striped Bass and its Hybrids (Virginia), Marine Shrimp Farming (Florida); Seafood Foreign Market Development (Virginia); AquaVet (Mass.); Aquaculture
Economics (South Carolina); Marine Shrimp Culture (Hawaii); Pathology in Marine Aquaculture (Virginia).
4.2 Manpower training in management
During the last few years in North America training opportunities in the broad field of management have been made available. For example, the short courses and workshops in aquaculture mentioned in the above paragraph are excellent sources of information for managers involved in business, farming, credit, and research. Other examples of opportunities include the University of British Columbia home-study course "Salmonid Culture: Fundamentals and Practice for British Columbia". It provides a comprehensive, technical grounding with some scientific background for current and potential aquaculturists and managers of fish farming operations.
Both in Canada and the USA some universities with aquaculture courses and training also have departments of Continuing Education and of Aquaculture Extension, where management training is available. For example, the University of British Columbia has an active Department of Continuing Education within the Faculty of Agricultural Sciences. In 1988 a Fish Farmers' Extension Centre opened in the University of Guelph. In the USA the University of Georgia has an Aquaculture and Fisheries Extension Department. The Waddell Mariculture Research and Development Center, in South Carolina, works closely with Clemson University's Cooperative Extension Service and the Clemson Sea Grant Marine Extension Program to provide aquaculture management training. Also, the national Sea Grant Program, in addition to supporting 100 aquaculture projects at 30 US academic institutions, expends major funding for aquaculture education, training, advisory/extension services, and planning activities.
Training in the broad field of aquaculture management is covered.
4.3 Aquaculture research in the region
At the national level the main federal agency responsible for aquaculture research in Canada is the Department of Fisheries and Oceans, which has well equipped and staffed research centres in Nanaimo and Vancouver, B.C. (including the Pacific Salmon Enhancement Project); in Winnipeg, Manitoba; in St. Andrews and Halifax in Nova Scotia; and in St. Johns, Newfoundland. Within the DFO headquarters in Ottawa, is the Aquaculture and Resource Development Branch, part of the Fisheries Research Directorate. The Aquaculture and Resource Development Branch is therefore directly responsible for aquaculture research in Canada. Research in less commercial aspects of aquaculture is also undertaken by Canadian universities. The Prime Minister of Canada announced in early 1988 Chat the federal government would provide Can$ 1.3 thousand million to Canadian universities for scientific research during the next five years. Some of this funding will support aquaculture research and technology.
It should be noted that the focus of science and technology policy in Canada has shifted from "science" to the related but different dominion of "technology", to be closely integrated with other policies for promoting economic growth. Governments in Canada are committed to work in partnership with business, universities and labour to: encourage the commercialization of technology by promoting technology diffusion and strengthening applied research and industrial innovation; develop technologies strategic to the growth of manufacturing, service and natural resource-based sectors; ensure the availability of the necessary highly-qualified people; encourage the basic and applied research and development fundamental to Canada's scientific capability; ensure all Canadians share in the benefits and opportunities of science and technology; and ensure science and technology become an integral part of Canadian culture. Recognition was thus imperative of the private business sector
role in initiating innovation and new investment, at the same time seeking collaborative mechanisms with other governments and university sectors.
Canada's programmes of research in aquaculture have been responsive to these policies, indeed are models to other technological developments, and the Canadian aquaculture industry has been the beneficiary. This was possible in part because Canada has had a fisheries research community which has been first rate and world recognized, with results disseminated widely. There remained a solid core of researchers who recognized as inevitable the growth of multi-disciplined science, including socio-economics and physical sciences as well as biology; also the trends toward applied systems approaches for holistic use of the aquatic environment, strategic rather than tactical planning, and the integration of the research planning process with development.
No aquaculture research is in progress in Greenland. However, marine biological research is undertaken by Greenland Fishery Investigation in Copenhagen and through membership of the North Atlantic Fisheries Organization, the North-East Atlantic Fisheries Commission, and the North Atlantic Salmon Conservation Organization. Economic and social research dealing with fisheries is carried out at the Innit Institute of Nuuk and the Danish University Centre of Roskilde.
Most of the aquaculture research in the USA is undertaken by three large departments of the Federal Government: the US Department of the Interior, the US Department of Commerce, and the US Department of Agriculture.
The bulk of the Department of the Interior's (USDI) aquaculture-related programmes are conducted by the Fish and Wildlife Service (FWS). The FWS has a comprehensive programme of research, development, extension, and training in many areas of freshwater fish production. .Most funding is appropriated by Congress with the ultimate objective being the enhancement of sport fishing. However, many of the activities and research results are applicable to commercial aquaculture. The Service has strong programmes in fish health and nutrition and many other areas of importance to aquaculture.
FWS aquaculture and related research is conducted at the National Fisheries Center (Leetown, West Virginia), eight laboratories and field stations, and five fish culture development centres. Major subjects under study include: fish disease control methods, biology of fish production, nutrition and diet, registration of fishery drugs and chemicals, improvement of cultural methods, genetics and breeding, re-use and treatment of wastewater, and evaluation of non-indigenous species for aquaculture.
All of the 25 Cooperative Fishery Research Units have the capability to conduct aquaculture research in cooperation with their host universities and state agencies. Currently, 11 of the units are conducting 16 aquaculture research projects. Much of their other research produces information that can also be used by aquaculturists.
National Fish Hatcheries produce and distribute five species of trout, seven species of anadromous salmonids, and several species of warmwater and coolwater fishes. The FWS has 16 hatchery biologists at 12 locations who provide fish disease diagnostic services, disease inspections, and certification inspections to federal, state, Indian and private hatcheries.
Also within the USDI is the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA). The BIA provides funding for the construction of Indian tribal hatcheries and other aquaculture related projects. Tribal aquaculture activities include the operation of approximately 13 salmon hatcheries and commercial pilot projects. Most of the Indian aquaculture projects are in the Pacific Northwest.
Most of the Department of Commerce's aquaculture research and development activities are the responsibility of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA). NOAA conducts aquaculture research and development through the National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS) and the Office of Sea Grant (OSG). Research supported by NMFS is conducted primarily by laboratories and field stations. OSG supports research through grants to universities and other entities. The technology gained from this research is utilized by private industry for commercial purposes and by public agencies for augmenting natural stocks through enhancement programmes.
In 1982, NMFS conducted aquaculture research programmes at six main laboratories and field stations. These programmes included research on development of salmon diets utilizing fish by-products as feed ingredients in diets and improved broodstock fecundity through dietary control (Seattle, Washington); monitoring smoltification enzyme activities for determination of best procedures for conditioning hatchery produced salmon for their migration into the sea, identifying diseases in salmon and developing control measures, developing biochemical and genetic techniques to identify stocks of hatchery and wild salmonids, and improved husbandry techniques for Atlantic salmon broodstock and subsequent egg production for stocking New England streams (Manchester, Washington); development of high quality salmon fry and smolts for release into the ocean, and bio-environmental estuarine and marine studies to determine the causes of fluctuations in juvenile-to-adult stage survival of both
hatchery and wild salmon stocks (Auke Bay, Alaska); maturation and spawning of marine shrimp indigenous to the Gulf of Mexico, and head-start techniques for marine turtles (Galveston, Texas); diagnosis of diseases of shellfish (Oxford, Maryland); and a variety of molluscan studies on natural diets, genetics, culture methods, disinfection techniques for contaminated hatchery water for oysters, and the development of methodology for the culture of bay scallops and surf clams (Milford, Connecticut).
During 1982-83, 100 aquaculture projects were supported by the OSG, involving scientists in 30 USA academic institutions. Major centres of Sea Grant-sponsored work on aquaculture exist in all coastal and Great Lakes regions of the United States with the research generally focused on one or two species. These centres are: University of Hawaii (Malaysian prawn (Macrobrachium), and seaweeds), University of Alaska (salmon), University of Washington (salmon, bivalve molluscs, and seaweeds), Oregon State University (salmon and oysters), University of California (abalone, shrimp, lobster, and seaweeds), Texas A & M University (shrimp), South Carolina Marine Science Consortium (Macrobrachium), North Carolina (finfish), Virginia Graduate Marine Science Consortium (oysters), University of Delaware (oysters), State University of New York (finfish and bivalve molluscs), Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution (bivalve molluscs), University of New Hampshire (seaweeds), and University of
Wisconsin (finfish). In addition, OSG expends major funding for aquaculture education, training, advisory/extension services, and planning activities.
In 1982, over 500 aquaculture-related research activities or projects (including extension, production and marketing of aquacultural food species and products) were being undertaken or sponsored by 75 agencies and institutions within the US Department of Agriculture (USDA) - State agricultural research system. Components of the USDA-State system were chiefly USDA research agencies, the state agricultural experiment stations and land-grant colleges, Tuskegee Institute, state forestry schools and other cooperating state institutions.
Hawaii expects by 1991 to have one of the most advanced tropical aquaculture research establishments in the world. Named the Applied Aquaculture Research Center, the yet to be built facility is scheduled to draw some US$ 25 million annually in aquaculture research contracts alone. The Center will be an outgrowth of the present Oceanic Institute, which has already received US$ 6.3 million in federal funds for the project. A total matching commitment of US$ 6 million is expected from the state of Hawaii. The US Congress will provide a further US$ 4 million for equipment. The research centre will employ a staff of about 250, according to the Oceanic Institute. The institute itself is presently receiving federal funding to investigate the feasibility of shrimp farming in the United States.
4.4 Management of credit
In Canada the main government assistance in credit, loans and incentives for commercial aquaculture operators is through (1) the Department of Industry, Trade and Commerce, (2) the Federal Business Development Bank, (3) Department of Regional Economic Expansion and Agriculture, and (4) the Industrial Development Bank.
Credit is also available and managed through the federal-provincial Economic Regional Development Agreement. In New Brunswick, for example, the Can$ 500 000 annual ERDA budget supports aquaculture projects involving trout, salmon, oysters and mussels.
Many of the major national banks in Canada now have some in-house expertise on aquaculture which they use to establish policy guidelines and to assess loan/credit applications. The Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce in 1988 established an Aquaculture Section (and appointed a well qualified manager) to provide specialized financial services to the sub-sector. However, because aquaculture is a new industry, banks have been quite cautious in their involvement.
In the private sector, International Aquaculture Capital Corporation (Aqua Capital) was formed in 1987 to provide equity funding to smaller owner-operated aquaculture ventures in Canada.
Going public is not for everyone, but several aquaculture enterprises have successfully gone through this process to list their shares on the exchange. The Vancouver Stock Exchange (VSE) for instance has provided much assistance to companies which have needed funding but have not always had debt capital available to them. Many companies, following a successful launch, reach a stage where additional funding, beyond that available from private sources and lending institutions, is required to achieve additional growth or to pursue new goals. For Chose emerging companies the sale of shares to the public can be a good choice.
In 1987 five new aquaculture issues were listed on the Vancouver Stock Exchange: Abalone Resources, Aquarius Seafarms, Eagle Mountain Trout Farms, Royal Pacific Seafarms, and Wonder Marine Resources. This brings to 10 the number of aquaculture-related companies trading on the VSE, with several more operations considering the public financing option.
At the national level in the USA several Government-supported institutions provide loans and credit to commercial aquaculture operators.
The Small Business Administration (SBA) makes guaranteed, immediate participation, and direct loans to aquaculture operators. SBA loans may be used for purchase and improvement of land or buildings, construction, machinery and equipment, operating expenses and refinancing of debts. SBA also provides disaster loans in authorized areas. Since SBA does not separate its loan funds according to enterprise, there are no means to assess current levels of aquaculture loans.
The Farmers Home Administration (FHA) extends credit to aquaculture operators. Direct or guaranteed loans for aquacultural purposes may be used for production of aquatic organisms under controlled conditions. This involves feeding, tending, harvesting, and other activities necessary to raise and market the products. Economic emergency loans to aquaculture producers are also available from FHA.
The Farm Credit Administration (FCA) supervises and examines the banks and associations that make up the Farm Credit System. These FCA institutions make loans on commercial terms to farmers, ranchers, producers, and harvesters of aquatic products and to their cooperatives. Aquatic loans are defined as those supporting the production or harvesting of species under controlled conditions, primarily the fishing industry. The FCA considers aquaculture under controlled conditions to be a form of agriculture.
The Farm Credit System makes funds available to deserving aquacultural production applicants on the same basis as agricultural and marine fishery (vessel) loans. Loans have been made to catfish farmers in Arkansas, Mississippi, and other southern states. Several small oyster and clam operations have also been financed in the northwest and the middle Atlantic coastal areas.
4.5 Associations of professionals in the region
The Aquaculture Association of Canada was established in 1983 and at present has 650 members representing all sectors of aquaculture in Canada. The purpose of the Association is to foster the development of aquaculture in Canada by promoting research, communication and education. An annual meeting and trade exhibition are held.
In 1988 the Association of Aquaculture Veterinarians of British Columbia (AAVBC) was established. The AAVBC is committed to serving the aquaculture industry of B.C. through the promotion of fish health management. AAVBC members have advanced knowledge and experience in one or more areas of research, diagnosis, treatment and management and are located throughout the province.
Two other national associations are (1) the Canadian Aquaculture Producers' Council, which is the umbrella organization for most of the regional and provincial aquaculture associations in the country; and (2) the Canadian Aquaculture Suppliers' Association.
The World Aquaculture Society is the main association in the USA for people concerned with any sector of aquaculture. It was formed in 1970, has a world-wide membership of over 2 000 (the majority of whom are in the USA), and holds an annual meeting and trade show.
Associations of professionals in more specialized sectors of commercial aquaculture are: (1) American Catfish Institute, (2) American Fisheries Society (Fish Culture Section), (3) Catfish Farmers of America, (4) National Ornamental Goldfish Growers' Association, (5) US Trout Farmers' Association, (6) National Shellfisheries Association, and (7) Pacific Coast Oyster Growers' Association.
Other aquaculture meetings of interest to the region include: the Aquaculture International Congress and Exposition (in Vancouver, Canada, in 1988 and 1990); the Annual Louisiana Aquaculture Conference (in Baton Rouge in 1988); the Shrimp Technology and Export Trading Show (in Florida in 1988); St. Andrews Aquaculture Fair (Canada in 1988); Aquaculture '89 (in Los Angeles in January 1989), Atlantic Aquaculture Fair (Canada in June 1989); Aquaculture Association of Canada annual meeting and trade exhibition (July 1989); World Aquaculture Business (September 1989 in New York), and Fish Farming Expo III aquaculture conference and exhibition (December 1989 in New Orleans), to name only a few of the main ones.
4.6 Information for professionals
A wide range of international publications, journals and books dealing with aquaculture is freely available in Canada and the USA for professionals. Current copies and back issues are available at libraries of state, provincial and federal fishery and aquaculture research centres, as well as at libraries of universities and colleges having departments of aquaculture, fisheries and/or biological sciences.
The monthly Fish Farming International is popular in Canada and the USA and is easily obtained, as is Aquaculture Digest, a monthly international report on fish and shellfish farming. National magazines dealing with many aspects of aquaculture of interest to professionals are (1) Canadian Aquaculture, and (2) Aquaculture Magazine (with much news for the USA). State and federal research centres also publish aquaculture papers in their own journals.
The Aquatic Sciences and Fisheries Information System (ASFIS) is an international information system for the science, technology and management of marine and freshwater environments, including their socio-economic and legal aspects. The system's information outputs currently include: (1) the computer searchable ASFA database and its print product derivatives, Aquatic Sciences and Fisheries Abstracts (ASFA) and ASFA Aquaculture Abstracts; (2) Marine Science Contents Tables; (3) Freshwater and Aquaculture Contents Tables; (4) the ASFIS Meetings Register; and (5) the World List of Serial Titles in Aquatic Sciences and Fisheries.
For Canada and the USA the main international databases that include aquaculture are:
(1) ASFA-I (Aquatic Sciences and Fisheries Abstracts).
(2) Biosis Previews (BioSciences Information Service publications).
(3) ICLARM (International Center for Living Aquatic Resources Management).
(4) CAB Abstracts (Commonwealth Agricultural Bureau International).
(5) AGRIS International (Agricultural Sciences and Technology).
(6) Clearing House for Fisheries Advisory Services (FAO/UNDP project).
The National Agricultural Library (NAL) in the USA compiled and published two directories in 1983 for wide use in the aquaculture community:
(1) a listing of primary contacts at federal, state and county levels for assistance and information on programmes for aquaculturists, and
(2) a directory of major informational resources with inquiry, literature, and datafile holdings and capabilities within the USA.
Two additional publications were being worked on in NAL: (1) an aquaculture bibliography, and (2) a comprehensive directory of major aquaculture associations, education and research resources in the USA.
Also, NAL has responsibility to operate the Aquaculture Information Center, which was established in 1985 for the purpose of collecting, analyzing and disseminating literature and other aquaculture-related materials to the aquaculture community. The National Aquaculture Improvement Act of 1985 (included in Title XVII of the Food and Security Act of 1985), authorized the establishment of this Center within the US Department of Agriculture.
The "AquaRef system" for information was developed by the Aquaculture Information Center staff as a means to improve USA aquaculture information transfer. Other activities include: representation within the Joint Subcommittee on Aquaculture; creation of bibliographies and other resource tools on aquaculture for aquaculturists, extension personnel, and researchers; exploration of new computer technologies for storing full-text aquaculture publications; and networking with other libraries/information facilities to enhance the exchange of information.
The US Departments of Agriculture, Commerce, Interior, and others inform NAL of the aquaculture research information and related literature in their data banks. NAL is responsible for providing access by all user groups to aquaculture information maintained in these agency data systems. Dissemination of information is conducted through existing delivery systems and commercial trade magazines.
In 1989, NAL/ADCP/FAO cooperated to develop REGIS - a new information system using hypermedia and expert system software to provide information on aquaculture in an easy-to-use form for administrators. The first region covered by the REGIS prototype was sub-Saharan Africa; other regions may follow, including North America.
Other national databases in the USA and Canada include (1) AQUACULTURE (produced by NOAA but stopped in 1980; back records are available for searching), and (2) AGRICOLA (Agricultural Online Access, produced by the US Department of Agriculture).
4.7 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
There are no foreign-funded technical assistance projects in the sub-sector in North America. However, both Canada and the USA provide technical assistance - mainly to developing countries - in many sub-sectors of aquaculture. Most of the assistance is provided through their government- funded development agencies. In Canada they are the Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA), the International Development Research Centre (IDRC), and the International Centre for Ocean Development (ICOD). The Agency for International Development (AID) serves as the principal foreign assistance arm of the US Government. Technical assistance with agriculture and food production includes fishery development. The fisheries staff of AID's Science and Technology Bureau handle development of both commercial fisheries and aquaculture activities. The US Peace Corps is also involved in basic level aquaculture projects in developing countries.
<section>7</section>
5. NATIONAL SECTOR MANAGEMENT
5.1 Government policy in the region
5.2 Government organizations in the region
5.3 Aquaculture legislation
5.4 Trade and business associations
5.5 Information resources for management
5.6 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
5.1 Government policy in the region
Canadian federal and provincial governments share jurisdiction over the aquaculture industry. Both levels of governments have agreed that the lead development role for Canadian aquaculture rests with the private sector, but that governments can provide the appropriate investment climate and regulatory framework to foster industry growth.
In response to industry representation, Canada's Fisheries Ministers agreed that increased federal-provincial coordination was required to ensure orderly development of the Canadian aquaculture industry. The Fisheries Ministers agreed (and their proposals were later endorsed by the First Ministers in 1986) to negotiate, between the federal government and each provincial government, Memoranda of Understanding (MOUs) concerning aquacultural development.
A MOU is meant to serve two purposes. Firstly, it establishes a joint agreement and understanding of federal and provincial administrative responsibilities for regulation, while reducing the overall administrative and legal burden on the industry. Of particular interest is the move to establish "one stop" licensing and leasing of commercial aquacultural ventures. Secondly, it sets out a coordinated and cooperative approach to government support for the industry. This approach is important, given the concerns of certain interests with respect to aquacultural development. A MOU outlines the respective roles of the federal and the provincial government in areas such as research and development, education, training, leasing and licensing, fish health, stocks and statistics. The MOU is not meant to be a funding mechanism; it therefore contains no provisions for financial resource allocation. The federal government has, to date, signed a MOU with the Northwest Territories, Nova
Scotia, Quebec, Prince Edward Island, British Columbia and Newfoundland.
In 1984 the Science Council of Canada published "Aquaculture: A Development Plan for Canada". The Plan reviewed new technologies and ways of managing the natural resources of Canada to maximize economic and social benefits. It identified aquaculture as an undeveloped area of biotechnology with considerable potential for Canada. A year later the Science Council of Canada recommended that federal and provincial governments state clearly their intention to develop a commercial aquaculture industry in Canada. Also, in consultation with industry, specified production targets for identified species should be set. Governments should take concerted action to ensure that aquaculture is made an attractive area for investment and create lead agencies Co coordinate the development strategy for the emerging science-based aquaculture industry.
The Federal Government expended approximately Can$ 3 million in suport of commercial aquaculture in 1985, most of which was allocated for scientific research. The Prime Minister announced in early 1988 that the federal government would provide Can$ 1.3 thousand million to Canadian universities for scientific research during the next five years. Some of this funding would be used to support aquaculture research and technology.
The US National Aquaculture Act of 1980 states that it is national policy "to encourage the development of aquaculture in the USA", and it further states that "the principal responsibility for the development of aquaculture in the United States must rest with the private sector". It recognizes US aquaculture as a viable approach to helping meet food needs and contributing to the solution of world resource problems and that aquaculture development will result from initiatives and actions taken within the private sector. The general role of government is to provide encouragement and support through programmes and services that cannot reasonably be expected from private sources.
The government will act as a catalyst for private sector initiatives. Such action will help encourage the growth of a vigorous, self-sustaining industry that will benefit the economy and reduce or eventually reverse the trade deficit in fish and fishery products.
In 1983 The National Aquaculture Development Plan for the USA was published, as required by the National Aquaculture Act of 1980 (Public Law 96-362). The Plan describes technologies, problems, existing government, state and university aquaculture programmes, and opportunities associated with aquaculture in the US and its territories. The Plan recommends actions to solve problems and analyzes the social, environmental and economic impacts of growth in aquaculture. The Plan contains in-depth information and discussions of the most important species being cultured in the US, as well as a brief description of a variety of promising species for aquaculture.
In 1985 the US Congress amended the National Aquaculture Act of 1980 and also renamed it the National Aquaculture Improvement Act of 1985. The objective of the Act of 1985 was to further stimulate development of a domestic aquaculture industry in the USA. The expectations were that, in time, the Act would help create new jobs, replenish depleted fisheries, and reduce the trade deficit in fishery products.
5.2 Government organizations in the region
Many Federal Government departments in Canada are involved in aquaculture. The main agencies and their activities as related to aquaculture are:
Department of Fisheries and Oceans
- management of fisheries resources
Department of Agriculture
- registration of feeds and vaccines
Department of Health and Welfare
- registration of drugs; feed additives
National Research Council
- funding of R&D projects
Department of Trade and Commerce
- funding support and business development
Department of Indian and Northern Affairs
- sponsors projects by native people
Department of Supply and Services
- provides incentives for R&D funding
Department of Energy, Mines and Resources
- supports research on energy conservation
Department of Environment
- pollution control and shellfish sanitation
Canada Employment and Immigration Commission
- job creation and training incentives
Department of Transport
- impacts on navigation
Department of Regional Industrial Expansion
- provides funding in fisheries sector
The Department of Fisheries and Oceans is recognized as the 'lead' federal department for aquaculture in Canada. The DFO is pursuing a dual strategy: undertaking joint and coordinated action with provincial governments to ensure orderly development of the industry, and carrying out programmes and activities supportive of aquaculture. To this end, aquaculture coordinators have been appointed to all DFO regions. These coordinators are responsible for acting as the principal departmental points of contact in the region with industry, the provincial government and the academic community on aquaculture matters. The coordinators are also responsible for advising DFO on the needs of the industry, and on policies and activities in support of the industry. The DFO aquaculture coordinators are located in Newfoundland (St. John's), Scotia-Fundy (Halifax, two people). Gulf (Moncton), Quebec (Quebec City and Mont Joli), Central-Arctic (Winnipeg), and Pacific (Vancouver).
Since aquaculture activities involve so many Goverment departments and agencies in the USA, a high level Joint Subcommittee on Aquaculture (JSA) was established by the Government. The JSA was created in the late 1970s to increase the overall effectiveness and productivity of federal aquaculture programmes by improving coordination and communication among federal agencies involved in such programmes. The JSA is composed of (1) the Secretaries of the Departments of Agriculture, Commerce, Interior, Energy, and Health and Human Services; (2) the Administrators of the Environmental Protection Agency, the Small Business Administration and the Agency for International Development; (3) the Chief of Engineers of the US Army Corps of Engineers; (4) the Chairman of the Tennessee Valley Authority; (5) the Governor of the Farm Credit Administration; and (6) other federal agencies as appropriate.
In 1981, three panels were established by the JSA: the Panel on Science, Technology, and Engineering; the Panel on Economics; and the Panel on Education and Technical Assistance. The panels are important operating, coordinating, and monitoring units of the JSA.
In 1987 the US Congress began implementation of the National Aquaculture Development Plan by creating five regional aquaculture centres to target aquaculture problems. The objective of the centres is to develop a commercial aquaculture industry coordinating producers, consumers and the domestic economy. The centres (administered by the USDA) are intended to coordinate and integrate institutional resources to promote commercial aquaculture within a given region. The five Regional Aquaculture Centers (RAC) are: North Central RAC, based at Michigan State University; Northeastern RAC, based at the University of Rhode Island; Southern RAC (also includes Puerto Rico and the US Virgin Islands), based at Delta Branch Experiment Station in Mississippi; Western RAC (also includes Alaska), based at the University of Washington; and the Tropical and Subtropical RAC, based at the Oceanic Institute in Hawaii. It serves Hawaii and the American Insular Pacific.
The Oceanic Institute is also the site of the US Department of Agriculture's Tropical Aquaculture Research Unit, the first of its kind in the USA. The objective of the Unit is to develop culture systems and feed technologies leading to the reliable and economic production of aquatic organisms.
5.3 Aquaculture legislation
Most, if not all, aquaculture activities in Canada are touched by various federal and provincial government regulations. Under the provision of the British North America Act, the Federal Government has jurisdiction over the primary aspects of the fisheries resource, with the exception of oysters and marine plants which are a provincial responsibility. The Department of Fisheries and Oceans is the Canadian Federal Agency charged with the management and preservation of coastal fisheries. Federal regulations require all persons engaged in the breeding, holding or rearing of fish (all marine fish, shellfish, except oysters, crustaceans and marine animals), for commercial sale to have a mariculture licence issued by the Department of Fisheries and Oceans.
An Aquaculture Permit is required to culture salmon or trout in marine locations or for the culture of salmon in freshwater in British Columbia. An application for the permit must be accompanied by a proposal for operations and an outline of the aquaculturist's qualifications.
The Federal/Provincial Transplant Committee for Fish and Invertebrates controls the movement of all marine fishes and invertebrates. All requests for broodstock or seed stock transfers are screened for review by the Committee. If approved a Transfer Licence is granted.
All 10 provinces of Canada have laws regarding commercial aquaculture. In 1980-81 a model legislative framework was prepared for Nova Scotia (An Act Respecting the Promotion and Regulation of Aquaculture) for introduction into the provincial House of Assembly.
Measures have been taken to streamline existing administrative procedures affecting the issuance of licenses, permits and lease indentures for the aquaculture industry.
In 1985 a draft National Aquaculture Act was published in Canada, mainly as a discussion document to plan the development of aquaculture on a national basis. The draft Act suggested an appropriate federal aquaculture role and legislative base.
In the USA there are about 120 federal laws, scores of state and municipal laws, and hundreds of regulations which have an impact on aquaculture.
Federal aquaculture laws generally fall into two categories: Chose that apply to waters located beyond state jurisdiction (e.g., the Fisheries Conservation and Management Act of 1976) and those that authorize the conduct of research and development programmes and the establishment of federal hatcheries. None of these federal laws or regulations apply directly to private farming of fish, shellfish or marine plants. However, other federal laws related to land and water use, environmental protection, health or safety, affect private aquaculture ventures.
Many of the laws and regulations that specifically authorize, permit, control, or prevent aquaculture are at the state level. State laws concerning aquaculture are usually closely related to state authorities charged with management of fisheries resources. Hatchery programmes are therefore usually administered by state fish and game or conservation agencies.
The procedures required to obtain permits and licenses have been a severe deterrent to aquaculture. Because aquaculture operations deal with food production, water supply, the use of navigable waters, and effluent discharge, they are regulated by agencies concerned with wholesomeness of food, public health, water purity, land use and pollution control. These regulations sometimes occur at all three levels of government: federal, state and local.
5.4 Trade and business associations
In addition to the various associations listed in sections 2.5 and 4.5, Canada and the USA are involved in and host a number of national and international aquaculture trade fairs and exhibitions (usually in association with aquaculture conferences), which bring together thousands of trade and business associates.
The main examples for 1988-90 are: The World Aquaculture Society Conference and Exhibition (Hawaii in January 1988 and Los Angeles in January 1989); the Annual Sunshine Coast International Aquaculture Conference and Trade Show (British Columbia in 1988 and 1989) and the Aquaculture International Congress and Exposition (Vancouver in September 1988 and 1990).
An official USA Trade Delegation usually attends most large international aquaculture trade fairs and expositions.
5.5 Information resources for management
Compared to most other regions of the world, Canada and the USA have a wealth of published aquaculture-related materials and aquaculture statistics from government and university departments. Most of the published material is biotechnical in nature. However, information resources specifically for management are limited. Aquaculture Digest is a good source of information, as are the NMFS Shrimp Newsletters and Greensheets. INFOFISH Trade News is a fortnightly report on major fishery commodity markets and prices, published by INFOFISH, an FAO marketing information and advisory service, specializing in Asian/Pacific fisheries.
Although directed more to aquaculture in developing countries, there is some UNDP/FAO management information available. The UNDP/FAO Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (ADCP) has produced at least 63 publications related to aquaculture in (1) Africa, (2) Asia, (3) Latin America, (4) the Caribbean, (5) the Mediterranean/Near East, (6) Planning, (7) Research, (8) Training, (9) Feeds, (10) Information Systems, (11) Development Aid, (12) Engineering, (13) Economics, (14) Marketing, (15) Socio-Economics, (16) Seed Production, and (17) Women in Aquaculture.
ADCP also publishes AQUACULTURE MINUTES, a quarterly newsletter of information for administrators, executives and managers. A report on "Planning for Aquaculture Development", published by ADCP in 1989, has information of interest to management. The target audiences of the report are predominantly government administrators in developing countries where aquaculture is recognized as a sector of increasing economic importance, and the donor community which has supported aquaculture development. It is intended to assist in guiding and coordinating their collective efforts in aquaculture development and management. In addition, the report is also intended for Non-Governmental Organizations (NGOs) and the private sector.
During 1985-86 the Inland Water Resources and Aquaculture Service of FAO produced four circulars giving selected lists of publications, serials, newsletters, bibliographies, directories and glossaries dealing with aquaculture in marine and fresh waters. Each FAO circular contains a number of references dealing broadly with information for management. The circulars are: (1) A list of selected FAO publications related to aquaculture, 1966-1985, (2) Selected aquaculture publications: serials, newsletters, meeting proceedings and bibliographies/directories/glossaries, (3) Aquaculture in marine waters. A list of selected reference books and monographs, 1961-1987, and (4) Aquaculture in fresh waters. A list of selected reference books and monographs, 1951-1987.
In 1987, UNDP/NORAD/FAO published "Thematic Evaluation of Aquaculture" which presents the findings, conclusions and recommendations of an evaluation of UNDP/FAO technical assistance to aquaculture during the period 1974-1984. Specifically, the purpose of the evaluation was to identify recurring issues and to extract lessons of use for accelerating the introduction and/or improvement of aquaculture in developing countries, in particular by improving the selection, formulation and execution of aquaculture projects supported by UNDP and FAO.
5.6 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
There are no foreign-funded technical assistance projects in the sub-sector in North America. However, both Canada and the USA provide substantial technical assistance - mainly to developing countries - in many sub-sectors of aquaculture (see section 4.7).
<section>8</section>
6. REGIONAL SECTOR MANAGEMENT
6.1 United Nations organizations in the region
6.2 Other organizations in the region
6.3 Economic communities of the region
6.1 United Nations organizations in the region
Canada and the USA are both founder members of the United Nations (UN) and actively participate in its work. Greenland is not a member of the UN.
Canada is a member of all 17 UN specialized agencies, whereas the USA is a member of 16 agencies, having withdrawn from the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (Unesco) in January 1985.
Both Canada and the USA are very active in a number of UN specialized agencies in which aquaculture has been recognized as a sector - either individually or as a component of a larger sector, such as fisheries or agriculture - and which has received support in some form. Both countries participate as donors, providing funding for technical assistance, rather than as recipients of assistance. The main UN specialized agencies that have received Canadian and US funding and support for aquaculture and/or related activities are: the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations; the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD, commonly called the World Bank); the International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD); the United Nations Development Programme; Unesco; the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (of Unesco); the United Nations Environment Programme; and the various UN Regional Economic Commissions.
6.2 Other organizations in the region
Canada and the USA are members of several regional organizations which are involved in supporting and funding aquaculture development and training. Both countries belong to the Economic Commission for Europe (ECE); the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC); the Colombo Plan for Cooperative Economic and Social Development in Asia and the Pacific (called the Colombo Plan); the Inter-American Development Bank; and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
Canada also belongs to the Commonwealth which funds fisheries/aquaculture and training/fellowships. The USA, in addition, plays an active role in three other main regional organizations which fund, support and cooperate in aquaculture. They are the Asian Development Bank, the Organization of American States and the South Pacific Commission.
6.3 Economic communities of the region
Both Canada and the USA are members of three regional economic groups:
(1) the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development, (2) the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean, and (3) the Economic Commission for Europe. The latter two are UN Regional Economic Commissions.
The USA is also a member of the UN Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP).
In February 1982 Greenland voted to end its membership of the ECE, entered into when under full Danish rule. Greenland's withdrawal took effect from February 1985. Greenland also withdrew from the European Economic Community in 1985.
<section>9</section>
ANNEXES
ANNEX I - Tables of supporting data
ANNEX II - Bibliography of resource materials
ANNEX III - List of abbreviations
ANNEX IV - List of ADCP reports
ANNEX I - Tables of supporting data
Table 1. Food Balance Sheet for Canada: Average (in '000 t) 1984-86
Population 25 379 000
Domestic Supply
Per caput supply
Products
Production
Imports
Stock Changes
Exports
Total
Food Supply
Per year Kilograms
Per day
Calories No.
Protein Grams
Fat Grams
GRAND TOTAL
Vegetable products
Animal products
Meat
Meat, Bovine
Meat, Sheep and Goat
Meat, Pig
Meat, Poultry
Meat, Other animals
Fish and Shellfish
Freshwater fish
Demersal fish
Pelagic fish
Marine fish. Other
Crustaceans
Molluscs, Other
Aquatic Products, Other
Aquatic plants
Source: FAO, Fisheries Statistics, Commodities, 1988
Table 2. Food Balance Sheet for the United States of America: Average (in '000 t) 1984-86
Population 238 789 000
Domestic Supply
Per caput supply
Products
Production
Imports
Stock Changes
Exports
Total
Food Supply
Per year Kilograms
Per day
Calories No.
Protein Grams
Fat Grams
GRAND TOTAL
Vegetable products
Animal products
Meat
Meat, Bovine
Meat, Sheep and Goat
Meat, Pig
Meat, Poultry
Meat, Other animals
Fish and Shellfish
Freshwater fish
Demersal fish
Pelagic fish
Marine fish. Other
Crustaceans
Cephalopods
Molluscs, Other
Aquatic Products, Other
Aquatic Animals, Other
Aquatic Plants
Source: FAO, Fisheries Statistics, Commodities, 1988
Table 3. Common and scientific names of species/groups cultured commercially in North America*
Common Name
Scientific Name
Fish
Golden shiner
Notemigonus crysoleucas
Channel catfish
Ictalurus punctatus
Cyprinids or carps
Cyprinidae
Tilapias
Oreochromis/Sarotherodon spp.
Torpedo-shaped catfishes
Clarias spp.
Freshwater fishes
Osteichthyes
Pink salmon
Oncorhynchus gorbuscha
Chum salmon
Oncorhynchus keta
Coho salmon
Oncorhynchus kisutch
Sockeye salmon
Oncorhynchus nerka
Chinook salmon
Oncorhynchus tshawytscha
Pacific salmons
Oncorhynchus spp.
Rainbow trout
Salmo gairdneri
Atlantic salmon
Salmo salar
Northern bluefin tuna
Thunnus thynnus
Crustaceans
Giant river prawn
Macrobrachium rosenbergii
Red swamp crawfish
Procambarus clarkii
Northern brown shrimp
Penaeus aztecus
Northern white shrimp
Penaeus setiferus
Whiteleg shrimp
Penaeus vannamei
Molluscs
Abalones
Haliotis spp.
Pacific cupped oyster
Crassostrea gigas
American cupped oyster
Crassostrea virginica
European flat oyster
Ostrea edulis
Olympia flat oyster
Ostrea lurida
Blue mussel
Mytilus edulis
Ocean quahog
Arctica islandica
Clams
Bivalvia
Hard clam
Mercenaria mercenaria
Soft clam
Mya arenaria
Geoduck clam
Panopea generosa
Pacific littleneck clam
Protothaca staminea
Butter clam
Saxidomus giganteus
Japanese/Manila clam
Venerupis japonica
Aquatic plants
Algae
* As used in FAO, 1989. Aquaculture Production (1984-1986). Fisheries Circular No. 815, 106 pp.
Table 4. Aquaculture Production in Canada (in tonnes)
Species/Group
Coho salmon
Chinook salmon
Rainbow trout
Atlantic salmon
Pacific salmons
N.A.
N.A.
Northern bluefin tuna
N.A.
N.A.
Pacific cupped oyster
American cupped oyster
European flat oyster
N.A.
N.A.
Blue mussel
Clams
N.A.
N.A.
Total
N.A. = Data not available or data not separately available but included in another category.
Source: FAO Fisheries Circular No. 815, 1989
Table 5. Aquaculture Production in the USA (in tonnes)
Species/Group
Carps
Golden shiner
Tilapias
N.A.
N.A.
Catfishes
N.A.
N.A.
Channel cat fish
Freshwater fishes
Pink salmon
Chum salmon
Coho salmon
Sockeye salmon
Chinook salmon
Rainbow trout
Atlantic salmon
N.A.
N.A.
Giant river prawn
Red swamp crawfish
Northern brown shrimp
N.A.
N.A.
Northern white shrimp
N.A.
N.A.
Whiteleg shrimp
Abalones
N.A.
Pacific cupped oyster
American cupped oyster
European flat oyster
Olympia flat oyster
Blue mussel
Ocean quahog
N.A.
Clams
N.A.
Hard clam
N.A.
Soft clam
Geoduck clam
N.A.
N.A.
Pacific littleneck clam
Butter clam
Japanese clam
Aquatic plants
N.A.
N.A.
Total
N.A. = Data not available or data not separately available but included in another category.
Source: FAO Fisheries Circular No. 815, 1989
ANNEX II - Bibliography of resource materials
Aiken, D.E., 1984. Aquaculture in Atlantic Canada. In G.I. Pritchard (ed.), Proceedings of the National Aquaculture Conference - strategies for aquaculture development in Canada. Can.Spec.Publ.Fish.Aquat.Sci., 75:6-15
Aquaculture Magazine and the annual Buyer's Guide '88 and Industry Directory. P.O. Box 2329, Asheville, NC 28802, USA
Boulanger, Y. and L.E. Hansen, 1984. Survey of aquacultural practices in Quebec. In G.I. Pritchard (ed.). Proceedings of the National Aquaculture Conference - strategies for aquaculture development in Canada. Can.Spec.Publ.Fish.Aquat.Sci., 75:16-24
Bourne, N., and J.R. Brett, 1984. Aquaculture in British Columbia. In G.I. Pritchard (ed.). Proceedings of the National Aquaculture Conference - strategies for aquaculture development in Canada. Can.Spec.Publ.Fish.Aquat.Sci., 75:25-41
Canadian Aquaculture Magazine and the annual Buyer's Guide, 1988. 4611 William Head Road, Victoria, BC V8X 3W9, Canada
Canadian Fisheries and Ocean Industries Directory, 1981. Maritime Ocean Resources Limited, Halifax, N.B., Canada, 442 p
Canadian Government, 1986. Directory of Canadian Fish and Shellfish Exporters. Department of External Affairs, 52 p
Carigma, M.A. and R.G. Morales (comp.), 1989. Directory of Educational and Training Opportunities in Fisheries and Aquaculture. 46 p. Fisheries Department, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome, Italy, and the International Center for Living Aquatic Resources Management, Manila, Philippines
Coche, A.G. (comp.), 1985. A list of selected FAO publications related to aquaculture, 1966-1985. FAO Fish.Circ., (744)Rev.1:40 p
Coche, A.G. (comp.), 1987. Selected aquaculture publications: serials, newsletters, meeting proceedings and bibliographies/directories/glossaries. FAO Fish.Circ., (808):108 p
Coche, A.G. (comp.), 1988a. Aquaculture in marine waters. A list of selected reference books and monographs, 1961-1987. FAO Fish.Circ., (723)Rev.3:35 p
Coche, A.G. (comp.), 1988b. Aquaculture in fresh waters. A list of selected reference books and monographs, 1951-1987. FAO Fish.Circ., (724)Rev.3:37 p
Cook, R.H. and R.E. Drinnan, 1984. Planning for aquaculture development in Canada: A Maritimes perspective. In G.I. Pritchard (ed.), Proceedings of the National Aquaculture Conference - strategies for aquaculture development in Canada. Can.Spec.Publ.Fish.Aquat.Sci., 75:78-87
Department of Fisheries and Oceans, 1986. Catalogue of Training Courses Available to the Atlantic Fishing Industry. General Education Series 3, Ottawa, 169 p
Department of Fisheries and Oceans, 1987. Canadian Fisheries - Statistical Highlights, 1986. Economic and Commercial Analysis Series. Surveys and Statistics Report 8: 25 p
Department of Fisheries and Oceans, 1988a. Aquaculture Development in Canada: A Guide to Federal Government Programs. 83 p
Department of Fisheries and Oceans, 1988b. Commercial Aquaculture in Canada. 30 p
Europa Publications Ltd., 1987a. The Europa Year Book 1987. A World Survey. Volume I. Part One: International Organizations, Part Two: Afghanistan-Jordan, 1-1616
Europa Publications Ltd., 1987b. The Europa Year Book 1987. A World Survey. Volume II. Kampuchea-Zimbabwe, 1617-3225
European Aquaculture Society, 1986. Realism in Aquaculture: Achievements, Constraints, Perspectives. Review papers from World Conference on Aquaculture, Venice, Italy, September 1981, 585 p
FAO, 1985a. Fishery Country Profile: Canada, FI/CP/CAN, 4 p
FAO, 1985b. Fishery Country Profile: United States of America, FI/CP/USA, Rev. 3, 6 p
FAO, 1987a. Fishery Country Profile: Greenland, FID/CP/GRL, 4 p
FAO, 1987b. Aquaculture Development. COFI/87/Inf.6, March 1987: 10 p
FAO, 1988a. Yearbook of Fishery Statistics
FAO, 1988b. Fisheries Trade and Production Statistics. Production of Greenland
FAO, 1989. Aquaculture Production (1984-1986). Fisheries Circular No. 815, 106 p
FAO/GLOBEFISH Highlights, 1987. A quarterly update based on the GLOBEFISH Databank. FAO/GLOBEFISH Highlights
Hougart, B. and R.D. Wildman, 1988. Development of a national aquaculture plan in the United States. OECD Extended Meeting on Aquaculture, FI/290/3:4 p
International Aquaculture Foundation, 1985. The Future of Aquaculture: Profile of a Global Growth Industry. Arlington, Virginia, 61 p
International Trade Centre UNCTAD/GATT, 1983. Shrimps: A Survey of the World Market. Geneva, xvi, 273 p
Joint Subcommittee on Aquaculture, 1983a. National Aquaculture Development Plan, Vol. 1, Washington, D.C., 67 p
Joint Subcommittee on Aquaculture, 1983b. National Aquaculture Development Plan, Vol. II, Washington, D.C., 196 p
Kevgor Aquasystems, 1988. The North American Directory of Aquaculture 1988/89. P.O. Box 48851 Vancouver, BC V7X 1A8, Canada
Kreiberg, H. (comp.), 1980. Report of the Joint Greenland Expedition. Atlantic Salmon Trust and the International Atlantic Salmon Foundation, St. Andrews, N.B., Canada, 47 p
Larkin, P.A., 1981. Aquaculture in North America: an assessment of future prospects. Can.J.Fish.Aquat.Sci., 39:151-4
MacCrimmon, H.R., 1984. An overview of aquaculture in central Canada. In G.I. Pritchard (ed.), Proceedings of the National Aquaculture Conference - strategies for aquaculture development in Canada. Can.Spec.Publ.Fish.Aquat.Sci., 75:42-55
MacNeil, T.S., 1984. The human side of aquaculture. In G.I. Pritchard (ed.), Proceedings of the National Aquaculture Conference - strategies for aquaculture development in Canada. Can.Spec.Publ.Fish.Aquat.Sci., 75:119-22
MacPherson, C.R., 1988. A co-ordinated approach to aquaculture in Canada. OECD Extended Meeting on Aquaculture, FI/290/4:9 p
National Fishery Statistics Program, 1987. Fisheries of the United States, 1986. Current Fishery Statistics No. 8385. US Department of Commerce, 119 p
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, 1986. Review of Fisheries in OECD Member Countries, 1985. The Committee for Fisheries, Paris, 338 p
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, 1988a. Study on Aquaculture: Canada. Committee for Fisheries. FI/276 (1st Rev.): 17-22
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, 1988b. Study on Aquaculture: United States. Committee for Fisheries. FI/276 (1st Rev.): 122-126
Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, 1989. Aquaculture: Developing a New Industry. Paris, 126 p
Pierce, Brad, 1987. Aquaculture in Alaska. Alaska State Legislature. House Research Agency Report 87-B. 109 p
Pritchard, G.I. (ed.), 1984. Proceedings of the National Aquaculture Conference - strategies for aquaculture development in Canada. Can.Spec.Publ.Fish.Aquat.Sci., 75:131 p
Pritchard, G.I. (ed.), 1988. Performance of aquaculture systems in Canada. OECD Extended Meeting on Aquaculture. FI/289/1-.6 p
Saxby, D.J., 1984. Aquaculture - "a monetary black hole?" (Economic perspectives in developing an aquaculture industry). In G.I. Pritchard (ed.), Proceedings of the National Aquaculture Conference - strategies for aquaculture development in Canada. Can.Spec.Publ.Fish.Aquat.Sci., 75:123-31
Science Council of Canada, 1984. Aquaculture: A Development Plan for Canada. Ontario, 34 p
Seafood Business (The Magazine of Seafood Marketing and Management). 21 Elm Street, Camden, Maine 04843, USA
Seafood International Magazine. A.G.B. Heighway Ltd., 24 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU, England
Seafood International Directory, 1988. A.G.B. Heighway Ltd., 24 Farringdon Lane, London EC1R 3AU, England
Seafood Leader Magazine. Waterfront Press Co., 1115 N.W. 46th Street, Seattle, WA 98107, USA
State of Hawaii, 1977. Permits and Environmental Requirements for Aquaculture in Hawaii. Hawaii, Department of Planning and Economic Development, 69 p
State of Hawaii, 1978. Aquaculture Development for Hawaii. Hawaii, Department of Planning and Economic Development, 222 p
The Danish Fisheries, 1980. Directory and Reference Book 1980/81. Scandinavian Fishing Yearbook. Hedehusene, Denmark, 116 p
Thomson, R.G., 1984. The human resources for aquaculture in Canada. In G.I. Pritchard (ed.). Proceedings of the National Aquaculture Conference - strategies for aquaculture development in Canada. Can.Spec.Publ.Fish.Aquat.Sci., 75:88-103
Tillapaugh, D.L. and J.C. Edwards, 1980. A permit and licence guide for the prospective aquaculturist. British Columbia, Ministry of Environment, Marine Resources Branch, 23 p
US Department of Agriculture, 1982. Directory of Aquaculture Information Resources. National Agricultural Library. Bibliographies and Literature of Agriculture Number 25, 53 p
US Department of Agriculture, 1983. Aquaculture Research: A Directory of USDA and State Projects. Miscellaneous Publication 1432, National Agricultural Library, 357 p
US Department of Commerce, 1977. NOAA Aquaculture Plan, edited by J.B. Glude, Washington, D.C., National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 41 p
Webber, H.H., 1980. Investible Aquaculture in the United States. Paper presented at the Sixth Food and Drug Administration Science Symposium on "Aquaculture - Public Health, Regulatory and Management Aspects", 12-14 February 1980, New Orleans, Louisiana
Wildsmith, B.H., 1982. Aquaculture: The Legal Framework. Emond-Montgomery Limited, Toronto, Canada, 313 p
Wildsmith, B.H., 1984a. Federal aquaculture regulation. Can.Tech.Rep.Fish.Aquat. Sci., 1252:89 p
Wildsmith, B.H., 1984b. Federal, provincial, and municipal government roles in aquaculture. In G.I. Pritchard (ed.). Proceedings of the National Aquaculture Conference - strategies for aquaculture development in Canada. Can.Spec.Publ.Fish.Aquat.Sci., 75:104-112
Wildsmith, B.H., 1985. Toward an Appropriate Federal Aquaculture Role and Legislative Base. Can.Tech.Rep.Fish.Aquat.Sci., 1419:88 p
World Aquaculture Society, 1986. Membership Directory 1986-87. 46 p World Bank, 1988. The 1988 Update of the 1987 World Bank Atlas
ANNEX III - List of abbreviations
AAVBC
Association of Aquaculture Veterinarians of British Columbia (Canada)
ADCP
Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (UNDP/FAO)
AGRICOLA
Agricultural Online Access (USA)
AGRIS
Agricultural Sciences and Technology
AID
Agency for International Development (USA)
ASFA
Aquatic Sciences and Fisheries Abstracts
ASFIS
Aquatic Sciences and Fisheries Information System
BC
British Columbia (Canada)
BIA
Bureau of Indian Affairs (USA)
CAB
Commonwealth Agricultural Bureau International
CAPC
Canadian Aquaculture Producers Council
CIDA
Canadian International Development Agency
DFO
Department of Fisheries and Oceans (Canada)
ECE
Economic Commission for Europe (UN)
ECLAC
Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (UN)
EEC
European Economic Community
ERDA
Economic Regional Development Agreement (Canada)
ESCAP
Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (UN)
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
FBDB
Federal Business Development Bank (Canada)
FCA
Farm Credit Administration (USA)
FHA
Farmers Home Administration (USA)
FWS
Fish and Wildlife Service (USA)
GLOBEFISH
FAO Computerized System of Fish Marketing Information
GNP
Gross National Product
IBRD
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (UN)
ICLARM
International Center for Living Aquatic Resources Management
ICOD
International Centre for Ocean Development (Canada)
IDRC
International Development Research Centre (Canada)
IFAD
International Fund for Agricultural Development (UN)
INFOFISH
FAO Marketing Information and Advisory Service
JSA
Joint Subcommittee on Aquaculture (USA)
MOU
Memoranda of Understanding
NAL
National Agricultural Library (USA)
NB
New Brunswick (Canada)
NGO
Non-Governmental Organization
NMFS
National Marine Fisheries Service (USA)
NOAA
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration (USA)
NORAD
Norwegian Agency for International Development
OECD
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
OSG
Office of Sea Grant (USA)
PEI
Prince Edward Island (Canada)
RAC
Regional Aquaculture Center (USA)
REGIS
Regional Information System
SBA
Small Business Administration (USA)
UN
United Nations
UNDP
United Nations Development Programme
Unesco
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization
USA
United States of America
USDA
United States Department of Agriculture
USDI
United States Department of the Interior
VSE
Vancouver Stock Exchange (Canada)
ANNEX IV - List of ADCP reports
ADCP/REP/75/1
Aquaculture Planning in Africa
ADCP/REP/76/2
Aquaculture Planning in Asia
ADCP/REP/76/3
Aquaculture Planning in Latin America
FI/R188
Kyoto Conference
ADCP/REP/78/4
Aid for Aquaculture Development
ADCP/REP/78/5
Outline of an Applied Research and Experimental Development Programme for the Latin American Regional Centre for Aquaculture
ADCP/REP/78/6
Curriculum for the Training of Aquaculturists in the Latin American Regional Centre for Aquaculture
ADCP/REP/79/7
Curriculum for the Training of Aquaculturists in the African Regional Centre for Aquaculture
ADCP/REP/79/8
Training in Fish Feed Technology. Report of the FAO/UNDP Training Course in Fish Feed Technology held in the University of Washington, Seattle, 9 October-15 December 1978
ADCP/REP/79/9
Aquaculture Information - Report of the Meeting of an Aquaculture Information Group held in Rome, 25-28 April 1979
ADCP/REP/79/10
Aquaculture Development in China - Report of a FAO/UNDP Aquaculture Study Tour Co the People's Republic of China, 2 May-1 June 1978
ADCP/REP/80/11
Fish Feed Technology - Lectures presented at the FAO/UNDP Training Course in Fish Feed Technology, held at the College of Fisheries, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, 9 October-15 December 1978
ADCP/REP/80/12
Outline Research Programme for the African Regional Aquaculture Centre, Port Harcourt, Rivers State, Nigeria.
ADCP/REP/80/13
Curriculum for the Training of Aquaculturists in the Asian Aquaculture Network
ADCP/REP/80/14
Outline Research Programmes for the Regional Aquaculture Lead Centres in Asia - Parts I and II
ADCP/REP/80/15
Outline Research Programmes for the Regional Aquaculture Lead Centres in Asia - Part III
ADCP/REP/81/16
(out of print)
Reproductive Physiology of Teleost Fishes - A Review of Present Knowledge and Needs for Future Research
ADCP/REP/82/17
Aid for Aquaculture Development in the Third World
ADCP/REP/83/18
Fish Feeds and Feeding in Developing Countries - An Interim Report on the ADCP Feed Development Programme
ADCP/REP/83/19
Rev. 1
AQUIS Aquaculture Information System - Users' Manual
ADCP/REP/83/20
Planification del Desarrollo de la Acuicultura - Guia Preliminar (An Introductory Guide to Aquaculture Development)
ADCP/REP/84/21
Inland Aquaculture Engineering - Lectures presented at the ADCP Interregional Training Course in Inland Aquaculture Engineering, Budapest
ADCP/REP/85/22
Nutritional Fish Pathology - Morphological Signs of Nutrient Deficiency and Toxicity in Farmed Fish
ADCP/REP/86/23
Observations on International Technical Assistance to Aquaculture
ADCP/REP/86/24
Planning an Aquaculture Facility - Guidelines for Bioprogramming and Design
ADCP/REP/87/25
Future Economic Outlook for Aquaculture and Related Assistance Needs
ADCP/REP/87/26
Feed and Feeding of Fish and Shrimp - A Manual on the Preparation and Presentation of Compound Feeds for Shrimp and Fish in Aquaculture
ADCP/REP/87/27
Aquaculture Sector Development - A Guideline for the Preparation of a National Plan
ADCP/REP/87/28
Women in Aquaculture - Proceedings of the ADCP/NORAD Workshop on Women in Aquaculture. Rome, FAO, 13-16 April 1987
ADCP/REP/87/29
The Markets for the Prime Mediterranean Species - Sea Bass, Sea Bream, Mullets and Eel - and their links with investment
ADCP/REP/88/30
A Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in Eleven Middle East Countries
ADCP/REP/88/31
A Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in East Asia
ADCP/REP/88/32
A Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in the Pacific
ADCP/REP/89/33
Planning for Aquaculture Development - Report of an Expert Consultation held in Policoro, Italy, 26 July-2 August 1988
ADCP/REP/89/34
A Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in the Mediterranean Region
ADCP/REP/89/35
A Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in West Asia
ADCP/REP/89/36
A Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in Africa South of the Sahara
ADCP/REP/89/37
A Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in North America
