<title>ADCP/REP/89/38 - A Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in Eastern and Northwestern Europe</title>
<section>1</section>
FOREWORD
Aquaculture continues to grow in economic importance. The main reason for this is the quantifiable contribution aquaculture is making in many countries to fill the growing gap between supply and demand for fisheries products. This gap continues to widen because of increasing human populations and the static growth rates of capture fisheries brought about by declines in stocks and the increasing cost of obtaining fish through conventional methods. Although this gap can (and in some cases is already) being met by alternatives, such as inexpensive poultry and white meats, aquaculture particularly provides consumers with a choice of fresh products.
Aquaculture is also evident in earning foreign exchange for many countries through the export of high-value products. It also creates employment, particularly in economically depressed coastal and remote regions, and contributes to the household economy of rural farmers.
This eighth regional survey prepared by the Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (ADCP) covers the existing aquaculture sector in the countries of Eastern Europe (namely Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, German Democratic Republic, Hungary, Poland, Romania, and the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) and Northwestern Europe (namely Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Faeroes, Finland, the Federal Republic of Germany, Iceland, Ireland, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, and the United Kingdom). Certain other countries which might normally be associated with these sub-regions (namely Albania, France, Italy, Portugal, Spain, Yugoslavia) have been included in the Regional Survey of the Mediterranean (ADCP/REP/89/34).
This present survey is not exhaustive. It has been prepared by Hans Ackefors in a relatively brief desk study. For some countries of these developed aquaculture sub-regions detailed information is still difficult to obtain. The ADCP apologizes for any omissions and errors which may exist in the survey, and hopes that these can be corrected in an up-dated survey. New information and notification of changes and errors should be indicated to the ADCP in the Fisheries Department, FAO, Rome. The detailed Table of Contents illustrates the range of information which, hopefully, will be assembled in due course for all regions.
The survey is directed toward administrators, executives, and managers who require broad overviews, rather than for scientists and technologists who require detailed information about species and practices. It is the eighth of a series of regional surveys. To this end, the ADCP hopes that the reader will find the information described here useful.
Colin E. Nash
Craig B. Kensler
Rome, 1989
<section>2</section>
INTRODUCTION
This regional survey describes current aquaculture sectors in countries of Eastern Europe (including the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics) and Northwestern Europe. The countries considered are:
Eastern Europe
Bulgaria
Czechoslovakia
German Democratic Republic (GDR)
Hungary
Poland
Romania
Union of Soviet Socialist Republics (USSR)
Northwestern Europe
Austria
Belgium
Denmark
Faeroes
Finland
Federal Republic of Germany (FRG)
Iceland
Ireland
Netherlands
Norway
Sweden
Switzerland
United Kingdom (UK)
The population of Eastern Europe is 389.6 million, of which the USSR has 277.6 million inhabitants. The annual average growth rate for the period 1973-85 is 0.8-0.9% for Poland, Romania, and the USSR; for the others it is smaller, and even zero in the GDR. The countries of Eastern Europe belong to the Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (CMEA or COMECON).
The population of Northwestern Europe is 182.3 million. The countries of this region belong to two different economic groups, namely the European Free Trade Association (EFTA), which includes Austria, Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden, and Switzerland, with a combined population of 31.6 million; and the European Economic Community (EEC), which includes Belgium, Denmark, Faeroes, FRG, Ireland, the Netherlands, and the UK, with a combined population of 150.7 million. The population growth rate is about 1% in the Faeroes, Iceland and Ireland. It is smaller in the other countries, and even zero in the FRG.
Only two countries in the Eastern block report their gross national products (GNP). In 1985 the GNP per caput was US$ 1 940 in Hungary and US$ 2 120 in Poland. In the Northwestern countries the GNP per caput is 5-8 times higher, with the exception of Ireland where it is US$ 4 840. The highest GNP per caput is in Switzerland (US$ 16 380), and Norway (US$ 13 890), while most of the other countries are in the order of US$ 8 000-12 000.
<section>3</section>
1. CONSUMPTION OF FISH AND SHELLFISH AND THE REGIONAL MARKETS
1.1 Nutritional benefits of fish and shellfish
1.2 Characteristics of consumption in the region
1.3 Annual consumption of fish and shellfish
1.4 Gross market data
1.5 Specific market, data
1.6 Information for the trade
1.7 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
1.1 Nutritional benefits of fish and shellfish
The health aspects of fish are not widely considered by the majority of people in the region, except in the mostly highly developed western countries where the imbalance between meat and fish consumption and the correlation with health are being increasingly pointed out. In these countries more and more people are becoming aware of eating a diet composed of a suitable balance between two kinds of polyunsaturated fatty acids, namely the linoleate types (n-6) the linoleate types (n-3). The latter are a group of fatty acids which are characteristic of sea foods, such as fish, shrimp, and seaweed.
A well balanced diet with fish and shellfish products prevents an over production of the hormone-like eicosanoids from the essential fatty acid arachidonate. An unbalanced production of eicosanoids in the human body can lead to arteriosclerosis, thrombosis, arthritis, and asthma.
Even the 'fat' fish species, such as salmon, eel, and mackerel (which have a fat content of up to 20%), have valuable fatty acids to meet human nutritional requirements. In spite of their high fat content these species have less fat than most cured meats and dairy products. Fish are also an important source of vitamins A and D, and contain important dietary trace elements such as zinc, fluorine, selenium, and iodine.
In European countries as a whole, most people obtain sufficient protein in their diets, and the contribution of protein from fish and fishery products is comparatively small in many areas. However, the amino acid composition in fish is very favourable compared with many other food products. Aquatic animals contain a high level of protein (17-20%). The flesh of fish is therefore readily digestible and immediately utilizable by the human body.
Another favourable aspect of aquatic animals, including certain species of shellfish, compared with land animals is that they have a higher percentage of edible flesh. Hence there is little wastage.
1.2 Characteristics of consumption in the region
The consumption patterns of fish and shellfish products differ greatly between the Northwestern and Eastern countries of the region. About 48% of the fishery resources is utilized as non-food products (mainly as feed for chicken, pigs, and other animals) in the Northwestern countries, and only 22% in the Eastern countries.
The average per caput consumption of fish and fishery products is 15 kg and 22 kg for Northwestern and Eastern sub-regions respectively. In the latter the higher per caput consumption absorbs about 76% of the total available catch, but in the former it is only 36%. As a result, the Northwestern sub-region has a surplus supply of fish and shellfish, which is about 16% of the catch.
The ratio of fish to meat consumption varies considerably within the two sub-regions. In general the ratio is lower in the Eastern countries, as certain countries, such as the GDR and Hungary, are extreme in their low production of fish and high consumption of meat. The latter is higher than all countries of the Northwest. In the Eastern sub-region the lowest ratios of fish to meat consumption (0.04-0.05) are in Czechoslovakia, the GDR, and Hungary, and the highest (0.49) is in the USSR.
The Nordic countries, Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway, and Sweden have the highest fish to meat ratios (0.50-1.26) in the Northwestern group. In the others it is only 0.07-0.28. The reason is partly a lower meat consumption in the former countries, especially in Finland, Norway and Sweden. Iceland has a high meat consumption, and therefore the highest ratio.
The range of meat consumption varies from 63-109 kg per caput/year in the Eastern countries, and 49-98 kg per caput/year in the Northwest. Recent trends in some countries of the Northwest and elsewhere are toward less meat and more fish in the diet. For example, in the USA, the per caput consumption of beef has decreased continuously since 1976, and fish consumption has increased steadily since 1982.
The net export of fishery products is 1.3 million tonnes (t) from the Northwestern countries of Europe to other regions, while the net export from the Eastern countries (including USSR) is insignificant. Six of the Northwestern group, Denmark, Iceland, Ireland, the Netherlands, Norway, and the UK have a net export of 2.4 million t, of which half is exported to countries inside the region and half to countries outside the region. The net importers are Austria, Belgium, Finland, the FRG, Sweden, and Switzerland, which together have a deficit of 0.7 million t in the trade balance of fishery products. Some countries, like Sweden, export low value fish and import high value fish and shellfish products. Sweden has an annual trade deficit of S.Kr. 1-2 thousand million because of its imported fishery products.
1.3 Annual consumption of fish and shellfish
The average annual consumption of fish and fishery products during 1982-84 varied from 11.4 kg per caput in the Eastern European countries, 15.4 kg per caput in the Northwestern European countries, to 27.3 kg per caput in the USSR. Within each sub-region there are considerable differences. The high consumers are Iceland (88.4 kg), Norway (46.0 kg), Finland (34.3 kg) and Sweden (29.4 kg); the low consumers are Czechoslovakia (4.6 kg), Hungary (4.7 kg), Austria (6.5 kg), Bulgaria (8.6 kg), Romania (9.2 kg), and the FRG (9.3 kg). The rest of the countries in the two groups consume 11-22 kg per caput.
In almost all countries of the region the traditional species preferred and consumed are herring, cod, and the flatfish. With regard to species which are of prime importance to aquaculture, such as eel, carp, salmon, rainbow trout, whitefish, prime flatfish (halibut, sole, and turbot), the molluscs, such as oysters, mussels, and scallops, and the crustaceans, such as freshwater crayfish, crabs, shrimps and lobsters, there are wide differences in consumer patterns, for many reasons.
Most of the Northwestern countries eat salmon and rainbow trout. Belgium, Denmark, the FRG, the Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland, and the UK have the highest consumption per caput of salmon. The consumption of canned salmon is also particularly high in Belgium, the Netherlands, and the UK. In Belgium, Finland, FRG, and the UK there is a high consumption of rainbow trout. The marine flatfish are consumed in most countries. It is difficult to distinguish any pattern from available statistics except that Denmark, the FRG, the Netherlands, and the UK are the largest net importers. Eel is mainly consumed in Belgium, the FRG, the Netherlands, and Sweden.
Belgium and the Netherlands consume more molluscs (mussels and oysters) than the others, but are closely followed by the FRG and the UK. In Switzerland oysters are consumed in considerable quantity, while scallops are preferred in Belgium, the FRG, and the Netherlands, although a number of countries have recently increased their imports of scallops.
The consumption of freshwater crayfish is highest in the FRG, Finland, and Sweden. Almost all countries consume the popular marine crustaceans, such as crabs, shrimp and prawns, and European lobsters.
Among the species which are produced through aquaculture in the Eastern countries, including the USSR, the carps, rainbow trout, and whitefish - and to a lesser extent catfish and eels - are consumed locally.
1.4 Gross market data
The total population of the region, as described by the survey, was 571.9 million in 1985. There were 182.3 million people in Northwestern Europe (31.6 million in the EFTA countries and 150.7 million in the EEC countries), 112.0 million people in Eastern Europe, and 277.6 million in the USSR.
Among the Northwestern countries the population sizes are:
- below 0.3 million for Faeroes and Iceland,
- 3.5 to 10 million for Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, Ireland, Norway, Sweden, and Switzerland,
- about 15 million for the Netherlands,
- 57 to 61 million for UK and the FRG.
In Eastern Europe, populations range from 9 to 37 million (Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, the GDR, Hungary, Poland, and Romania), and 277.6 million in the USSR.
The population growth rate in all countries is below +1.2%, and in Austria, the FRG, the GDR, and the UK it is about zero.
The cumulated GNP for Northwestern Europe in 1985 was US$ 1 820.2 thousand million, with:
- GNP below US$ 3 thousand million for Faeroes and Iceland,
- GNP US$ 17.3 thousand million for Ireland,
- GNP of US$ 50 to below 100 thousand million for Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, Norway, and Sweden,
- GNP US$ 105.2 thousand million for Switzerland,
- GNP US$ 132.9 thousand million for the Netherlands,
- GNP US$ 474.2 thousand million for the UK,
- GNP US$ 668.0 thousand million for the FRG.
The highest GNP per caput are US$ 16 380 for Switzerland and US$ 13 890 for Norway. Denmark, Faeroes, Finland, the FRG, Iceland, and Sweden are in the range of US$ 10 000 to 12 000; the rest are US$ 9 150 (Austria), US$ 8 450 (Belgium). US$ 4 840 (Ireland), US$ 9 180 (the Netherlands) and US$ 8 390 (UK).
Growth rates during 1973-1985 were + 0.7-1.4% in Belgium, Denmark, Iceland, Ireland, the Netherlands, Sweden, Switzerland, and the UK, and + 2.1-3.1% in Austria, Faeroes, Finland, the FRG, and Norway.
GNP data are only available for two Eastern European countries. The GNP for Hungary was US$ 20.7 thousand million, and for Poland US$ 79.0 thousand million. The corresponding per caput values were US$ 1 940 and US$ 2 120 respectively. These figures were far lower than those for the Western countries, where the average was US$ 10 528 in 1985.
1.5 Specific market, data
The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) Fishery Statistics Unit groups the various fish and shellfish (or potential) aquaculture species produced and/or traded in this region as follows:
- Group B11, carps and other cyprinids (carps, barbels, etc.),
- Group B12, tilapias (tilapias and other cichlids),
- Group B13, largemouth blackbass, northern pike, catfish, and other freshwater fish (miscellaneous freshwater fishes),
- Group B21, sturgeons,
- Group B22, European eel (river eels),
- Group B23, salmon and trout (salmonids, trout, and smelts),
- Group B31, sole and turbot (flounders, halibuts, and soles),
- Group B41, giant freshwater prawn (freshwater crustaceans),
- Group B45, penaeid shrimps (shrimps and prawns),
- Group B53, flat and cupped oysters (oysters),
- Group B54, mussels,
- Group B55, scallops,
- Group B56, clams (clams, cockles, and arkshells)
The cumulative world landings of these 13 statistical groups were 16.7% of the total fishery landings in 1985, including aquaculture. Within the region described by the survey the Cumulative landings of these same groups were 1 846 921 t (about 10% of the world total). Of the cumulative landings in the Northwestern, Eastern, and USSR sub-regions these same groups totalled 11.4%, 15.6%, and 8.3% of the total yields respectively.
FAO fish trade statistics provide data about the import and export of most aquaculture groups or species. Currently there is no information about groups B11, B12, B13 and B21. The primary groups or species described by the survey are only fresh, chilled, or frozen eels, salmon, trout, flatfish (all species), oysters, mussels, scallops, and canned salmon. Finland is not included in the statistics with regard to trout, although it produced more than 11 000 t of rainbow trout in 1986 and part was exported. There is no information from the eastern countries, and only a little from the USSR.
The trades between products from capture fisheries and aquaculture are not separated. Aquaculture products are an important part of the trade as a whole, and contribute to commercial production.
In 1985 there were exports of 246 573 t and imports of 266 897 t of these specific products for the countries of Northwestern Europe. The value of exports was US$ 373.7 million, and imports US$ 609.6 million. There were net imports of 20 324 t from other regions, with a value of US$ 236.2 million. This situation changed in 1986 when the exports of salmon increased by nearly 18 000 t, and the export value increased by about US$ 100 million. Therefore, in 1986 the trade deficit for these groups in the region was much less than US$ 236.2 million reported in 1985. The trade of those commodities between the Northwestern European countries in 1985 is summarized in Table 1.
The main importing and exporting countries of the different commodity groups are summarized in Table 2, according to the FAO trade statistics for 1985. These are summarized as follows:
The main importers of river eels were the FRG (4 337 t), the Netherlands (4 212 t). Belgium (1 495 t), Denmark (1 370 t), the UK (386 t), and Sweden (245 t). The main exporters were Denmark (2 051 t), the Netherlands (1 720 t), UK (1 106 t), and Sweden (1 025 t).
The main importers of fresh, chilled, and frozen salmon were Denmark (10 218 t), Sweden (7 225 t), the UK (7 092 t), the FRG (5 981 t), Belgium (3 596 t), Switzerland (2 297 t), and the Netherlands (1 659 t). The exporters were Norway (24 390 t increasing to 39 197 t in 1986), Denmark (3 791 t), UK (3 403 t), Finland (2 252 t), and Ireland (1 177 t).
Canned salmon was imported in large quantities by UK (18 888 t), the Netherlands (4 853 t), Belgium (2 803 t), and Ireland (941 t).
The main trout importers were the FRG (16 501 t), UK (6 413 t), Belgium (5 209 t), Switzerland (2 090 t), and the Netherlands (1 028 t). The main exporters were Denmark (12 983 t), Norway (1 392 t), and Belgium (1 112 t).
Flatfish were imported by most countries. The biggest quantities were bought by the UK (20 291 t), Denmark (14 689 t), FRG (14 244 t), and the Netherlands (13 485 t). The main exporters were the Netherlands (33 619 t), Denmark (15 472 t), and Belgium (7 764 t).
The main oyster importers were Belgium (1 163 t), the FRG (466 t), Switzerland (333 t), UK (234 t), and the Netherlands (110 t). The exporters were the Netherlands (1 007 t), UK (759 t), and Ireland (411 t).
Mussels were mainly imported by the Netherlands (35 495 t), Belgium (30 544 t), and the FRG (12 691 t). The main exporters were the Netherlands (54 370 t), Denmark (32 357 t), the FRG (6 233 t), and Ireland (6 106 t).
Scallops were imported by Belgium (630 t), Ireland (250 t), the FRG (197 t), Denmark (1 135 t), and the Netherlands (122 t). The main exporters were Iceland (2 127 t), Ireland (242 t), and the Faeroes (191 t).
It is clear from the trade data that large quantities of these products are supplied from other countries, particularly from outside the region. In summary, these are:
Species
Net Import (t)
Main suppliers outside the region
Eel
China, France, and Italy
Salmon
Canada and USA
Salmon (canned)
Canada and USA
Trout
France and Italy
Oyster
France and Italy
1.6 Information for the trade
A valuable source of marketing information for the trade is "Eurofish Report", published by Agra Europe. This is a fortnightly information newsletter on trade and production activities in Europe. It is of interest to all European countries dealing commonly with fisheries and aquaculture products, and relevant EEC legislation.
Many national producers' associations (such as the associations of trout farmers, oyster farmers, mussel farmers, etc., detailed in section 2.5) provide specific information for the trade, collected with the particular interests of their members in mind.
The FAO Yearbooks of Fisheries Statistics and Fisheries Trade Products provide records of national and international fisheries trade as a whole. Annual fisheries statistics are also stored on an FAO database, called FISHDAB. As yet, aquaculture statistics are not separated.
One international marketing information service available to the region is INFOFISH, although it does not differentiate aquaculture products as yet. INFOFISH assists the fishing industry and governments by establishing contacts between buyers and sellers of fish products, and providing technical information and advice on post-harvest aspects of fisheries, such as handling, processing, equipment selection, and quality assurance. INFOFISH is based in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, and its working language is English.
INFOFISH is one of four regional services, the others being in Africa (called INFOPECHE), the Arab Countries (INFOSAMAK), and Latin America (INFOPESCA). This network of services produces a fortnightly news bulletin called "Trade News", in English, French, Spanish and Arabic. This deals with prices, cold storage holdings, short-term market trends, and business opportunities. The network also publishes a two-monthly magazine called "INFOFISH International" (incorporating Marketing Digest) in English, which contains articles on market analysis, new products, processing, packaging, equipment, and other aspects of fisheries, including aquaculture, with summaries in the other three languages. Again, as yet, little information is relevant to aquaculture in the region.
A fifth member of the service is the FAO computerized system of fish marketing called GLOBEFISH. This database stores original information collected by INFOFISH and the other regional services on such things as production and trade statistics, price series, the supply and demand situation, information on aquaculture, investment, joint ventures, and general economic data relevant to fisheries. Specific searches are made on request. FAO also produces "Globefish Highlights", which is a quarterly analysis of medium trends. It is based on the information in the databank and is distributed as a supplement to the "Trade News" (above) in four languages.
The public has access to information on national tonnages and price statistics from auction markets at most of the landing harbours and on the leading national markets of all the EEC countries. Such information is not always available or readily accessible in the other countries. Also, periodically, the national trade commissions make reviews of importers, exporters, and fish trade in the other countries of major importance to the national trade.
Specific advertizing of products through the media, and quality labelling and brochures for consumers, with presentation of products, recipes, etc., exist to a limited extent for salmon, trout, and molluscs. Again, these are usually published by producers' associations, often with financial assistance from government fisheries marketing authorities. For example, in the UK the Sea Fisheries Industry Authority has a fish marketing sector, and carries out market trials on behalf of the fishing industry as a whole, and also there are the Trout Producers' Association and Salmon Producers' Association. In Norway there is Fiskoppdretternes Salgslag A.L., which is a strong marketing organization for all kinds of fish and shellfish produced by aquaculture in the country. These three producer organizations charge both sellers and buyers for the product to finance their activities. Other products are marketed throughout the region without any specific information.
Strict rules for hygiene and sanitary control are enforced by all the fishery authorities in the region involved in the trade of live fish products, including sanitary labelling and compulsory depuration for all products imported from non-sanitary safe areas, and from all non-EEC countries.
At the local level there are several special bulletins and newsletters to be found in the major production centres, as well as articles in local and regional journals on a wide range of events in the aquaculture sector. Countries also have access to data provided by a private company in France, Stratege Telematique. In 1986 the company began to advertize for electronic information on product prices, buying and selling of farms, and seed collection. The information is available on the national telephone network through the widely distributed "MINITEL" terminals.
Typical trade publications available in the region are Sea Food International (UK), and from outside the region there are Sea Business (USA), Seafood Leader (USA), and Il Pesce (Italy).
1.7 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
There are no technical assistance projects in the region as described which deal with the consumption and marketing of aquaculture products.
<section>4</section>
2. PRODUCTION OF FISH AND SHELLFISH IN THE REGION
2.1 Characteristics of production in the region
2.2 Regional production data
2.3 Production systems and practices in the region
2.4 Producers in the region
2.5 Organizations of producers
2.6 Financial investment by public and private enterprises
2.7 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
2.8 Capital assistance projects in the sub-sector
2.1 Characteristics of production in the region
Aquaculture in this large region is characterized by its diversity with regard to its production and the many practices used. On the other hand production continues to focus on comparatively few species, most of which have been important in the fisheries of the region for centuries.
In the Eastern countries and the USSR, many of which are land-locked or have little coastal water, production is centred on the traditional freshwater food fishes, such as the carps. These are highly desirable and marketable, and provide a popular alternative to meat. The production of common carp is carried out mainly in earthen ponds, but almost all countries active in carp production have extensive programmes for restocking natural and artificial waters. Furthermore, the interest in these warm water fishes, and the success with a simple technology which fitted well with rural animal husbandry, has encouraged the integration of fish farming with the production of land animals and poultry. Integrated farming is highly skilled and established in a number of Eastern countries, but it attracts little attention in the Northwest.
The extensive freshwater resources throughout the region have been exploited for the production of trout for over a hundred years. Every country practices some trout culture to some degree in a range of facilities, including earthen ponds, raceways, and small water bodies.
As a whole, the region has a significant interest in the use of aquaculture for culture-based fisheries, and more recently for ranching. The enhancement of natural fisheries in large inland water bodies is mainly practised in some way in almost all countries of the region. In the Northwest, the most common species produced and released are the salmonids (salmon, brown trout and whitefish) and other coarse species (pike and pike-perch) primarily for supporting recreational fisheries. In Eastern Europe, the most common species are the carps and whitefish, salmonids (trout), and sturgeons, which are all used to annually restock inland water bodies, primarily for commercial production, but also for recreation. In addition, particularly in the Nordic region, there are programmes of enhancement to compensate for the loss of aquatic resources through human interventions, such as the construction of hydro-electric stations and dams. Most of the compensatory programmes concern the
migratory species, such as the salmonids.
Although the Northwestern countries do not have the same traditions of fish culture which are characteristic of the Eastern countries, they are now all highly active in commercial production. Because of the many natural resources of sheltered coastal bays and estuaries, their interest in aquaculture has centred on high-valued and commercial marine and brackishwater species, such as Atlantic salmon and rainbow trout (reared in saltwater), the flatfish species, the molluscs (oysters and mussels) and the crustaceans (marine lobster). In freshwater, the interest has been in rainbow trout and crustaceans (prawns and crayfish).
Many of the production practices in the Northwest are technically advanced. For example, Atlantic salmon and rainbow trout are cultivated in cages in the sea, and there are now a number of types of floating and submersible cages for both sheltered and offshore environments. Large land-based operations have recently been established using geothermal energy in Iceland.
Aquaculture of molluscs has rejuvenated traditional farming in brackishwater coastal areas of the Northwest. Many of these natural fisheries have been in decline for decades because of pollution.
Although there is a small industry in Northwestern countries for the collection of edible marine algae, there has been no interest in their commercial cultivation.
2.2 Regional production data
A summary of production data for the region in 1986 has been published by FAO in 1989. The species of importance for aquaculture in the two regions of Europe (Eastern and Northwestern countries) are few (Table 3). The total production in 1986 was 703 000 t, of which 82.5% was finfish and 17.5% molluscs. This is about 9% of the total world production of fish and shellfish. From the data it is clear that production in the Eastern countries is 61.9% of the total production in the region.
Finfish production is dominated by the carp species, mainly common carp (Cyprinus carpio), and the rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss). These are followed by the Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar), farmed in seawater after the juvenile stage, which takes place in freshwater. After these three there are only about 10 finfish species which are produced, and in comparatively small production quantities. Some of them, however, are of local or national importance.
Few species of molluscs are produced in the region. There are only three species of commercial interest, namely the flat oyster (Ostrea edulis), the Pacific cupped oyster (Crassostrea gigas), and the blue mussel (Mytilus edulis). Most mussels are cultured in the Northwestern countries, although Bulgaria reports mussel production in the Black Sea.
National production data for the Eastern European countries in 1985 are given in Table 4. The USSR reports the largest production, namely a total of 305 000 t of finfish. The other Eastern countries together produced 130 397 t. The largest producer was Romania with 38 000 t. The total production and production per caput are summarized as follows:
Total production
(t)
Production per caput
(kg)
USSR
Romania
Czechoslovakia
GDR
Poland
Hungary
Bulgaria
National production data for the Northwestern countries in 1986 are given in Table 5. The Netherlands has the highest production, with 89 250 t, followed by Norway with 50 162 t. There are some countries which annually produce in the range of 10 000 to 45 000 t (Denmark, Finland, the FRG, Ireland, and the UK). The countries with production less than 10 000 t are Austria, Belgium, Faeroes, Iceland, Sweden, and Switzerland. In some countries (especially Norway) the production is expected to increase due to the present expansion of salmon culture. In 1989 Norway expects to produce about 120 000 t of salmon, and in 1990 more is forecast.
Production per caput (kg) ranged from 0.04 to 2.2 for the (in ascending order) the UK, Belgium, Sweden, Austria, Switzerland, Iceland, the FRG, and Finland; from 3.6 to 4.0 for Ireland and Denmark; from 6.2 to 12.1 for the Netherlands and Norway; and 54.8 for the Faeroes, due to its small population.
The farming of carp has a long tradition in Europe and dates back many centuries. Production is estimated to have doubled during the last decade and now totals about 370 000 t. Accurate numbers are not available as the FRG and the USSR do nor distinguish between different cultured species. The common carp (Cyprinus carpio) is the principal species farmed, with Chinese carps (bighead and silver carps, Hypophthalmichthys spp.) and grass carp (Ctenopharyngodon idella) less important.
The production of salmonids is dominated by the culture of rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) and Atlantic salmon (Salmo salar). In every country of Europe rainbow trout, a species introduced in the nineteenth century from North America, is farmed. Most trout production is in freshwater. The main production occurs in Denmark (20 500 t), Finland (11 000 t), the FRG (7 900 t), and Norway (5 142 t). In 1986 the total production in the region was 57 338 t, and this has remained reasonably constant each year. Most trout are grown to 200-350 g pan size but there is now a trend to raise 1-4 kg fish for both fresh and smoked products.
The rapidly increasing amount of farmed Atlantic salmon is the most conspicuous feature of the latest development of the European aquaculture industry. During the 1960s British and Norwegian researchers first raised Atlantic salmon in sea cages. In 1986 the total production in Europe was 58 981 t, of which Norway produced 45 675 t, and the UK, about 10 000 t. The production in 1988 in Norway was 80 000 t. The UK, Iceland, Ireland and the Faeroes are increasing their production, the 1987 figure was above 60 000 t, which is about five times the wild catch in the North Atlantic. The preliminary figures for 1988 indicate a production of almost 110 000 t, and the forecast for 1989 is almost 175 000 t.
Other finfish produced, although in comparatively small quantities, are eel (Anguilla anguilla), turbot (Scophthalmus maximus) cod (Gadus morhua), mullet (Mugil spp.), European catfish (Silurus glanis), African catfish (Clarias batrachus), channel catfish (Ictalurus punctatus), tilapia (Sarotherodon sp.), pike-perch (Stizostedion lucioperca), pike (Esox lucius), and various salmonids such as sea trout (Salmo trutta), brook trout (Salvelinus fontinalis) and Arctic char (Salvelinus alpinus). The various species of whitefish (Coregonus spp.) are mainly produced for stocking natural waters.
The cultivation of molluscs is a substantial part of European aquaculture. There is a large production of bivalves in the Netherlands, although less than the production in neighbouring France and Spain. The production of blue mussels (Mytilus edulis) was 121 367 t in the region, of which the Netherlands produced 85 896 t, the FRG 24 000 t, and Ireland 10 615 t. There is also a small production of European flat oyster, Ostrea edulis, in the Netherlands and Ireland, and of Pacific cupped oyster, Crassostrea gigas, in Ireland and the UK.
2.3 Production systems and practices in the region
In the last century most finfish was produced in freshwater earthen ponds. The extensive system was generally used, with no supplementary feeding. In the 1930s and 1940s fish farming in the Northwestern countries began to adopt more intensive systems, and in the 1960s the first sea cages were used. By the late 1970s, the volume of fish produced in both marine and freshwater cages exceeded that produced in ponds in many countries in the west. However, Denmark, which has the largest production of trout, continues to produce the largest part in ponds.
The most important practice in Eastern Europe, as well as some Northwestern countries, like Denmark, is production in earthen ponds. Recently there have been developments toward more intensive systems and mechanization, and toward polyculture by increasing natural production in ponds through the use of organic manures. Integrated fish-cum-duck culture technology has been elaborated and successfully applied, especially in Czechoslovakia, Hungary, and the GDR.
One variation has been the utilization of geothermal waters for fish farming to accelerate growth. The use of waste heat water has become very important in both sub-regions.
Production in cages now dominates in Western countries, and is an important part of all fish culture in the GDR and the USSR. However, according to FAO statistics which are received from governments, only pond culture is used in the GDR.
Traditional raceways are reported to be in wide use in Austria, Denmark, Finland, and Hungary. In some cases this is no more than a rapid flow-through system in earthen ponds, but in others the practice is to use concrete channels and troughs.
Many production trials have tried a recirculating system for fish in Europe. In Sweden, for example, three systems have been tried by commercial companies, but without commercial success. Only smaller operations in eel culture are still operating intensive recirculating units.
The latest developments in salmon culture are highly intensive, with variations in technical applications. Principally these are individual floating cage units, in sizes ranging from 100 m^3 to several thousand m^3, some of which are constructed as floating complexes or platforms. A number of such systems are now being used in offshore waters, together with units using converted oil platforms.
In many countries, such as Norway and the UK (Scotland), the sites for cage complexes are limited by legislation, rather than geography. There is thus a tendency to locate the fish farm in offshore waters using seaworthy constructions capable of withstanding rough weather.
One country with large areas of land available for producing salmon is Iceland. Many of the farms have large outdoor tanks with continuous water flow. Seawater is pumped from wells close to the shore and filtered through sand and gravel to avoid bacteria and toxic producing micro-algae in the units. The production capacity of land-based fish farms in Iceland is 2 100 t (volume 84 000 m^1) compared to offshore farms with a production of 5 500 t (volume 366 000 m^3), totalling 77 farms (1989).
The present area of fish ponds in Europe is difficult to estimate. For Eastern Europe it was estimated in 1984 to be:
(ha)
Bulgaria
Czechoslovakia
Hungary
Poland
Romania
Additional data (1988) include:
FRG
Finland
Enhancement, by definition, is the extensive farming of natural or artificial water bodies by stocking juveniles followed by harvesting through communal fishing. In inland waters, fishery enhancement has been a common form of fisheries management for a long time. A variation of natural enhancement is ranching, usually with migratory species, where harvesting of adults is conducted where the juveniles were earlier released.
In Europe the stocking of juvenile fish, molluscs, and crustacean species occurs both in fresh and marine waters. The artificial rearing of salmon smolts for restocking rivers flowing into the Baltic is the most important fishery enhancement project in Europe. Originally the rivers around the Baltic produced about 10 million smolts annually. The building of several hydroelectric stations and dams in the 1940s-1960's made natural spawning impossible.
Sweden was the first country in the 1960s to enforce legislation to compensate for the loss of natural resources through the building of hatcheries and release of young salmon and sea trout smolts. About 1.5 million smolts were released every year. Gradually the other countries (mainly Finland) increased their share, and since 1984 they have released more smolts than Sweden. In 1987 their total was 3.2 million and Sweden's was 2.3 million smolts. The large number of hatchery-reared smolts is now considered a threat to the remaining wild salmon which still spawn in about 20 rivers around the Baltic. The reason is that the increasing numbers of salmon in the Baltic have produced higher fishing intensity at sea, with now more than 50% of salmon in the area taken by fishermen. The higher fishing intensity has greatly influenced the number of spawning fish returning to their home rivers. Consequently there is a threat to the remaining gene pool of wild salmon in the Baltic.
Three more countries, the Faeroes, Iceland, and Ireland, are presently producing large numbers of salmon smolts. These are used partly for improving the salmon fisheries. In Iceland there are 15 registered salmon ranching stations. In 1988 a total of 180 t of salmon returned to the release sites. No salmon fishing at sea is permitted.
Stocking juvenile cod (Gadus morhua) along the coast of Norway, and juvenile lobster (Homarus vulgaris) along the coasts of Norway and the UK (and France) has been carried out in recent years. Both activities are experiments in sea ranching and are not yet proven to be economically viable.
In some countries of the region the stocking of freshwater fish is for both commercial and sport fisheries. In Finland, for example, more than 20 species of reared juveniles are stocked in rivers and lakes to enhance the native stocks. Nearly 39 million young fish were released in 1983. Six different species of coregonids (32 million), two species of salmon (1.8 million), two species of trout (2.5 million), and pike (2.1 million) were stocked. Other important species were grayling, lake trout, pike-perch and rainbow trout. Hungary produces and releases both 1-year and 2-year old carps for its large recreational fishery.
In the USSR the sturgeon fishery is of great importance. About 20 000 t are caught in the Caspian Sea, which is more than 70% of the world catch. The building of hydroelectric dams on the Don and Volga rivers, as well as pollution problems, has increased emphasis on enhancement. By the year 2000 production is planned to increase from 20 000 t in the Caspian Sea to 50 000 t. In order to achieve this goal, the planned annual release of young fish is 10 to 15 million Huso huso, 130-135 million Acipenser sturio, and 290-300 million Acipenser stellatus.
Enhancement for commercial and recreational fisheries is an important effort in many other countries. For example, in Sweden river eel, trout, Arctic char, grayling, brook trout, and pike-perch are released, although on a smaller scale than in Finland. Switzerland, and to a lesser extent Austria, both release many tens of millions of cultured juvenile coregonids to support the small but useful fisheries of the alpine lakes.
The production of bivalves in the region is predominantly carried out in an intensive system, although the animals utilize naturally produced feed. There are two principal practices, namely on-bottom culture and off-bottom culture. The blue mussel is cultivated mainly on-bottom, as practised in the Netherlands, although some countries like Norway, Sweden, and the UK report off-bottom culture. Sweden has developed a hanging technique using longlines, which is labour-saving and highly mechanized. In several countries juvenile mussels are transported from areas which favour initial settlement to areas which favour growth.
Scallops and oysters are normally produced on-bottom, but again the UK reports some off-bottom culture. The enhancement of the scallop fishery is an important joint aquaculture-fishery programme in France to increase production and establish a basic methodology for the region. It is based on spat production in a hatchery, or the importation of spat from Ireland and the UK, cultured up to 3 cm in size in baskets, and seeded in appropriate areas where subsequent growth occurs.
In some countries of Northwestern Europe new techniques are being used to rear freshwater crayfish. The main interest is focused on the native species, Astacus astacus, and an introduced species, Pacifastacus leniusculus. As the climate is cold in this sub-region for rapid growth, heated water is sometimes used for hatching the eggs and rearing the juveniles. Hatching takes place from February to June depending on the technique, and in May or June the juveniles are stocked in ponds, tanks, and lakes. This is about 1-2 months earlier than the natural hatching time. With this technique it is possible to reach the commercial size (9 cm) in ponds after a period of 1½-2 years.
2.4 Producers in the region
In 1988 the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development (OECD) carried out a survey of aquaculture among its member countries, including the numbers of producers and facilities. The interpretation of the numbers collected by the survey is not always clear. Many businesses operate more than one farm; some countries require a license to farm a specific species only, and others require a license for each farm. The same farm often produces several related species, specifically the salmonids and the molluscs. Similarly employment figures may include the owner-operator himself and his hired staff. Some numbers obviously include part-time staff, while others obviously do not.
In Belgium there are 36 production farms, 22 for trout and 14 producing mainly carp but also some mixed species, such as tilapia, tench, and roach. Between 100 and 200 persons are employed in aquaculture production. Denmark has about 603 farms producing trout, of which 575 are in freshwater; 32 farms produce eels. About 640 people are employed in the industry. In the FGR there are about 13 000 people employed in the industry, but only about 10% are employed full time. There are 1 946 farms producing trout, 2 for eels, 5 538 for carps, 4 for oysters, 11 for mussels, and 2 for cockles. The Netherlands has 12 farms producing trout, 13 producing eels, about 45 for catfish, 26 for oysters, 77 for mussels, 25 for cockles, and a number reported to be producing shrimp. Some 338 persons are employed in the industry.
Finland now has over 176 marine fish farms, mostly producing salmonids, and 285 freshwater farms producing whitefish, salmonids, pike, grayling, carp, and crayfish. Between 1 000 and 3 000 persons are employed in the sector. In Norway 728 licenses have been issued for farming of salmon and trout, and 782 licenses for mussels and oysters, but not all license-holders are in production. About 2 550 persons are directly employed in the industry. There are over 500 license-holders in Sweden, but not all are active. There are 13 farms producing salmon, 241 for trout, 5 for eels, 4 for oysters, 5 for mussels, 18 producing other species of fish and 3 producing other species of shellfish. About 320 persons are fully employed in the industry.
The industry in Iceland employs about 182 persons, working on 106 salmon farms, 19 trout farms, and a mussel farm.
The 145 farms in Ireland directly employ 566 persons in the production of salmon (50 farms), trout (19), eel (1), oysters (48), mussels (41), clams (1), and other species of fish (5). There are also 10 other farms only producing salmon smolts. In the UK there are currently some 900 fish farming businesses operating some 1 400 sites, and employing about 3 000 persons. Of these businesses there are 323 for salmon, 484 for trout, 3 for eel, 92 for carp, and the rest involved in the production of oysters, mussels, and clams.
In Hungary there are 22 State farms producing the primary carps, trout and eels. There are 15 leasehold Fishery Cooperatives and 18 Agricultural Cooperatives active in fish production. The National Anglers Union (MOHOSZ) also has its own production facilities.
2.5 Organizations of producers
There are many national organizations for aquaculture producers in the Northwestern countries for the marketing of products. In Norway there is just one national organization for all farmed fish and shellfish products. This is the Fiskeoppdretternes Salgslag which has a monopoly to handle all farmed products. In the other countries the associations are independent with respect to the commodity. For example, in the UK there is the British Trout Farmers' Association, and in Finland the Lohikunta Cooperative has been successful in marketing rainbow trout within and outside the country. In some cases private companies compete with each other for markets.
In most countries the farmers have associations which are designed to take care of all producers' interests, such as the Finnish Trout Farmers' Association. In Sweden there is the Vattenbrukarnas Riksförbund for the producers, but the marketing of cultured fish and shellfish products is handled by many competing companies. Consequently the volume of products handled by each company is comparatively small.
There is one international organization of producers active in the region. This is the Fédération Européenne des Salmoniculteurs (FES), and it includes all the national salmonid culturists' federations. It assists members in dealing with differences in national legislation, and in regional trade of salmonids (in which the trade in live fish is an essential component).
In most of the Eastern European countries aquaculture is under the auspices of the appropriate government departments, usually the Ministries of Agriculture and Food, with the exception of the USSR where it is in a separate Ministry of Fisheries. All rights to aquaculture production and marketing of the products are controlled and invariably conveyed to agricultural cooperatives. State farms, sport fishing societies, and other bodies. Cooperatives, for the most part, have the most latitude in independent organization and marketing, but the prices of fish are invariably regulated.
2.6 Financial investment by public and private enterprises
A considerable variety of approaches to financial investment is evident in the region because of the range of government social organizations and legal systems. Public investment is evident in the Eastern European sub-region and the USSR to some degree where production projects are financed entirely by the government and operated within a public institution. This investment is an important component of aquaculture in the entire region, as the combined contribution of Eastern Europe and the USSR is over 60% of total production. It comes through the State Farm and Cooperative systems organized in the countries concerned, and in the public institutions which operate facilities, such as hatcheries and research centres. The existence, organization, and financing of cooperatives are entirely controlled by governments, although in some countries, such as Hungary, the cooperatives have some independence in financial development decisions.
In the Northwestern sub-region public involvement plays an important role through the semi-public sector. Invariably it is in the form of equity in the hands of government agencies, in facilities built and operated by private investors. This is a common practice for new ventures in the region not producing salmon, for example, marine fish and bivalve farming offshore.
Governmental and international subsidies in one form or another, either non-reimbursable investment grants, or soft loans for both investment and operating capital, have been the principal support to aquaculture development in the region. This is because aquaculture is recognized by many national and regional authorities as a small-business opportunity for fishermen and family entrepreneurs, and it creates employment and industry in areas which are economically depressed and remote. This has secondary benefits in the form of tourism. These small entrepreneurs do not have the capital or capacity to invest alone, particularly in risky new ventures, and therefore financial aid is needed to help them create business and employment on site.
Such subsidies are arranged both at the international and national levels. One particular example is that of EEC countries, where investors have to apply first for a national subsidy before they have access (as a second step) to direct EEC subsidies. Amounts vary according to the country and region. In areas where aquaculture is already doing well, the accumulated effects of grants, soft loans, and premiums for job creation can remain less than 20% of the structural investment of plant. In high priority areas, such as hatcheries, it can be as high as 70%. Council Regulation No. 4028/86, on Community Actions for Improvement of Structures in the Fishing and Aquaculture Sectors, contains an improved plan for aquaculture investment which provides grants of 25-40% of the investment cost.
In 1987 a total of 137 aquaculture structural projects were granted financial aid by the EEC. The FRG received 8, the Netherlands 2, Ireland 9, and the UK 6. Approval varied from construction of hatcheries to farms for salmon, sea bream, eels, clams, and oysters. In 1989 there were 21 grants valued at ECU 2.19 million. These went to Denmark (3), the FRG (3), Ireland (4), the Netherlands (3) and the UK (8).
Investment in the sector has also been encouraged by public funds as part of regional economic development programmes for remote and economically depressed areas of certain countries, such as Norway, Sweden, and the UK (Scotland).
In Scotland the Highlands and Islands Development Board has been responsible for assisting farmers with grants for planning and construction. In addition, the Board takes a position of equity through direct assistance packages to farms, and subsequently sells back the shareholding to the company once profitability has been established.
The Irish Sea Fisheries Board operates an aquaculture grant scheme providing aid for both pilot projects and commercial projects. Pilot projects are eligible for grants of 50% of the cost of fixed assets and commercial projects up to 10% within a certain limit. Projects can also qualify for a 40% EEC grant.
2.7 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
There are no technical assistance projects for producers in the region supported by international organizations.
2.8 Capital assistance projects in the sub-sector
There are no capital assistance projects for producers in the region supported by international organizations.
<section>5</section>
3. LOCAL INFRASTRUCTURE
3.1 Extension services in the region
3.2 Training of extension agents
3.3 Seed production facilities in the region
3.4 Manufacturers of feed and fertilizers in the region
3.5 Manufacturers of equipment for the industry
3.6 Other services for the industry
3.7 Local credit programmes
3.8 Trade publications for producers
3.9 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
3.1 Extension services in the region
In Eastern European countries extension work has become more of a cooperation between the government research institutions and the State Cooperatives and Farms than a traditional extension service. Representatives of State Cooperatives and Farms also advise and participate in the activities of the government department responsible for aquaculture, and in the preparation of short- and long-term plans for research institutions. Research is therefore very much applied work, responsive to the needs of the producers. A considerable part of research is carried out on the farms themselves, where the research workers provide advice and carry out typical functions of extension. In some cases the research institute is an integrated part of a large-scale production operation, or is integrated with several small fish farms which make up a cooperative. A typical example is the Fish Culture Research Institute at Szarvas in Hungary, which is a focal point for research and development, and
the extension of its R & D results to the national sector through the Ministry of Agriculture.
In most Northwestern European countries there is little organized extension, with some exceptions, such as Norway. In Norway extension workers are employed by regional organizations or through the county administration. In Sweden one county administration supports the development of freshwater crayfish production.
In the Northwestern countries extension is provided through both semi-public organizations (such as parastatal authorities and national universities) and private consultants. The Sea Fisheries Industry Authority in the UK, for example, has research and demonstration facilities, provides technical advice, and publishes technical information for the industry.
3.2 Training of extension agents
Biotechnical training in aquaculture is given in most countries of the region for farmers, extension workers, and technicians who operate hatcheries and other rearing facilities. In areas where aquaculture is particularly active, short courses are given in high schools, with special emphasis on practical training in the operation and management of farms. Special technical courses on breeding techniques, feed formulation, water chemistry, and many other subjects, are included.
Special courses for individuals who carry out the function of extension are given at universities, fisheries colleges, agricultural colleges, research institutes, and even by professional societies. These may be separate courses, or part of higher education for undergraduates or post-graduates. For example, typical universities providing technical training courses are Wageningen Agricultural University (the Netherlands), the University College of North Wales, Heriot-Watt University, and the University of Stirling (UK), Galway University's Shellfish Research Laboratory, and Cork University (Ireland); technical institutions include the Regional Technical College, Galway (Ireland), Inverness Technical College, Lews Castle College, Stornoway, Plymouth Polytechnic, and Portsmouth Polytechnic (UK), and Horsens Technical College (Denmark); agricultural colleges include the Sparsholt College in Hampshire, Barony Agricultural College in Scotland, and Bishop Burton Agricultural
College (UK).
Organizations which handle courses include the Highland Regional Council, Inverness (UK), Danish Aquaculture Centre (Denmark), the Irish Sea Fisheries Board (Ireland), and Artemia Reference Centre, State University of Ghent (Belgium). Some advanced courses are given by organizations such as the Council of Europe, and the European Communities Biologists' Association. Finally, private companies which hold courses include Clearwater Ltd., Isle of Man (UK).
Because of the large number of courses available, the trade papers often produce features and lists of institutions and organizations holding courses, as well as carry announcements and advertizements. There are also public and private clearing-houses for information on courses.
In the Eastern European countries practical and technical training courses are available from the farm level through to agricultural college and university level. Training is also given by secondary technical schools for fisheries and agriculture. In Czechoslovakia, for example, training is given at institutions and centres at Vodnany, Trebon, Brno, Nitra and Bratislava; in the GDR, at Potzdam, Rostock, Köningswarth, and Stoskow; in Hungary, at Tata, Debrecen, and Szarvas; in Poland at Olstyn, Krakow, and Sczecin; and in the USSR at Astrahany, Vladivostok, and Kaliningrad.
3.3 Seed production facilities in the region
In most of the Northwestern countries the production of seed is organized by private entrepreneurs, and the operations are relatively small. There are considerable numbers of producers who have their own facilities for the production of salmon and trout smolts. For example, the number of producers reported for Norway is 611, followed by Denmark (400), Finland (300) and Sweden (170).
In addition to private hatcheries there are government hatcheries for programmes to replenish natural salmon resources along the coasts of Finland and Sweden. They are usually located near hydroelectric power stations, and dams. These are usually large hatcheries for the production of 2-year old smolts.
The Northwestern region of Europe has many hundreds of hatcheries which vary in size. Resources of fingerlings are available for Atlantic salmon, brown trout, rainbow trout, Arctic char, whitefish, grayling, tilapia, sole, turbot, European eel, sturgeon, pike-perch, pike, common carp, European crayfish, signal crayfish. Pacific cupped oyster, flat oyster, and scallops. The following list of commercial hatcheries indicates the range of species available for producers.
In Belgium there is Artemia Systems which produces the eggs and nauplii of the brine shrimp (Artemia), and the Université Libre de Bruxelles which produces tilapia and trout. In Denmark there is Musholm Lax A/S, which produces salmon and trout. In the FRG there are Arno Knof KG for Artemia; Goetz Aquacultural-Agricultural Techniques and Engineering for Artemia, carps, and tilapia); Inter-Fish Export GmbH for carps and catfish; Staehler for carps, catfish, sturgeon, and tilapia; and Fischtechnik Fredelstoh for trout.
In Finland there is Laukaa Central Fish Culture Research Station, which produces salmon, sea trout, brown trout, and whitefish. In Norway there are Finnmark Akvakulturseutu A/S for Arctic char, salmon, and trout; Det Norske Osters Compagniet A/S for oysters; Nors Biotech A/S for salmon and turbot; Reinhartsen & Co. A/S for salmon and trout; and Sea Farm A/S for salmon and trout. In Sweden there are Scandinavian Silver Eel AB for eels; Vattenfall for salmon and brown trout; Vilhelmina Fish AB for salmon, brown trout, Arctic char, and trout; and Simontorp Akvatiska Avelslaboratorium for signal crayfish.
In Ireland there are Taighde Mara Teo., for clams, mussels, and oysters; Fish Farming Services Ltd., for oysters; and Manannan Marine Farm Ltd., for oysters and scallops. In the UK there are Aqua-Labs Shrimp Farms and Red Lion Farms for Artemia; Newhay Fisheries Ltd., for carps and ornamental fishes; Tewin Mill Fish Farm Fisheries for carps, ornamental fishes, tench, and trout; Howietown Fish Farm, University of Stirling, for carps and salmon; Clearwater Trout Ltd., for lobster, oysters, salmon, scallops, trout, and turbot; Eynort Seafood Company for mussels, oysters, and scallops; Guernsey Sea Farms Ltd., for oysters; Ardvar Fish Farmers for oysters and salmon; Golden Sea Produce for salmon and turbot; Heriot-Watt University for sole and turbot; Scott David for trout; Barony Agricultural College for trout; and Kames Fish Farming Ltd., for trout.
In Iceland there are 38 companies which produced 4.6 million smolts in 1987, of which Fjallalax HF, Sudurland, was the largest producer. The total production capacity in 1988 was 21.5 million smolts.
In the Eastern sub-region the production of fingerlings is carried out in large government hatcheries, which may be independent, or on the sites of State cooperatives and farms. Most of them have a capacity to produce 100-300 million larvae annually. In Hungary, for example, there are six well-equipped hatcheries which have a capacity of 100-200 million carps and other fish species. Hungary has also designed portable container units which can function as a fish hatchery for both marine and freshwater species. The containers have configurations which make up hatcheries of varying production capacities, and they can be transported easily to any site and installed within a short time.
The USSR, and some other Eastern countries, operate a number of ships designed as freshwater hatcheries. The Russian PRZ-01, for example, can produce about 24 million young fry of trout, sterlet, sturgeon, and pike. The ship has a displacement load of 640 t.
3.4 Manufacturers of feed and fertilizers in the region
In most Northwestern European countries there are many large and small manufacturers who produce feeds for the industry. These national producers usually satisfy the local demands for feed. Not all of them specialize in fish feeds, but they are prepared to process batches of fish feed between their primary outputs of animal and poultry feeds. For example, there are manufacturers who are prepared to supply fish feeds in Denmark (6), Norway (3), Sweden (4), and the UK (4). A number of the companies are international and manufacture their own brand feeds, or under license, in several countries of the region.
Among the specific or specialist feed producers for the industry are the following: in Belgium there is Artemia Systems specializing in hatchery feeds; in Denmark there is Dansk Ørredfoder A.S; and in the FRG there are Alma Futter Friedrich Botzenhardt KG and Inter-Fish Export GmbH.
In Finland there is Finnish Sugar Co. Ltd.; in Norway there are Norsildmel, Norsk Biofor A/S, Sjøfor A/S, Skrething T. A/S, and Feitsildfiskernes Salgslag; and in Sweden there are Ewos AB International, Lactamin, and Silver Cup.
In Ireland there is Escambia Ltd., and in the UK there is Frippak Feeds.
Because of the EEC economic trade agreements, other producers in EEC member countries are important. These include in France Aqualim, Aquarium Systems, Lorientaise des Produits de Pêche, and Syndicat des Produceurs de Levure-Aliment de France; and in Spain Agrupacion Biofer S.A.
In the Eastern European countries fish feed is also supplied by large local manufacturers who also produce feed for terrestrial animals and poultry. A number of special fish feed factories have been developed, for example, in the GDR and the USSR. The equipment used in many of these plants comes from both Eastern and Northwestern countries, and in the USSR there is a plant constructed with the assistance of a Japanese company.
3.5 Manufacturers of equipment for the industry
In most of the Northwestern countries there is a variety of small and large companies producing equipment for their own national aquaculture sectors, and for the region as a whole. Norway, for example, in a sales edition of the journal, Norsk Fiskopptrett, reported more than 500 Norwegian companies producing equipment for the national and international markets. The European Aquaculture Society (EAS) published a European Trade Directory of suppliers and manufacturers in 1984, and plans to publish an International Aquaculture Trade Directory in 1989. The EAS advertized that it circulated some 6 000 businesses for information for the Directory.
Most of the suppliers and manufacturers attend trade shows which may be separate events, or attached to regional technical conferences (see section 4.5). Each trade show usually publishes a catalogue of exhibitors, and typically their number may be about 100 at the smaller conferences to 500 or more at special events.
In summary, information on manufacturers and suppliers to the trade are well published and advertized in all trade papers and magazines. In the EAS Aquaculture Trade Directory the resources are listed by country for 76 categories of equipment and materials.
In addition a number of companies producing chemicals and additives, among which are anaesthetics, antifouling agents, artificial seawater, bacterins, disinfectants, drugs and pharmaceuticals, feed ingredients and additives, fertilizers, herbicides, hormone preparations, and laboratory chemicals.
In the Eastern countries there is a limited capacity for the production of farming equipment and materials. This is constraining development of the industry and not keeping pace with research results. In most countries, the State Cooperatives and Farms fabricate their own equipment and have their own technical development programmes which serve both themselves and other farms.
In the USSR different types of machines have been developed for the most labour-consuming operations, such as feeding and fish harvesting. Although the production of these machines is on a large-scale there is little or no export to other Eastern European countries.
A coordination programme has been started through COMECON among member countries for the standardization and manufacture of fish farming equipment.
3.6 Other services for the industry
Aquaculture health care services in Eastern countries are centrally controlled, generally under the authority of the Ministry of Agriculture. Often health care services are combined with quality control services, which are both responsibilities of a veterinary department within the Ministry. These services are well organized. This is not entirely the case in the GDR and the USSR, where all health-related problems are handled by specialized ichthyopathologists. However, all official regulations and authorizations are in the hands of the veterinary network.
In Northwestern countries disease diagnostics and control are handled by veterinarians and fish disease biologists. Such individuals are either attached to a university laboratory, a state fisheries institute, or a private consultanting company. There are often one or two principal centres in each country with, in some cases, provincial branches.
In the region as a whole, where the industry has developed rapidly within the last decade, the shortage of diagnostic services is constraining stability and further development. In some countries there is a move to train the farmer on disease diagnostics and control through short-term courses to reduce the number of visits by specialists.
The health of the farm animals is closely associated with product quality control. Most Northwestern countries adopt the standards and practices of the FAO/World Health Organization (WHO) Codex Alimentarius Commission. The Codex Committee on Fish and Fishery Products has decided to try to include a code for the quality and safety of aquaculture products. Components of the code will include product safety and quality, water quality, off-flavours, residues of veterinary drugs, and the public health significance of diseases and parasites.
There are many consultants and consulting companies offering services to the aquaculture Industry. They provide specialized services in water analyses, diagnostic services, design engineering, systems design, computer service, and other activities relevant to the industry.
3.7 Local credit programmes
Local credit is readily available throughout the Northwestern countries, as part of normal commerce. It is therefore handled by national and local banks. Credit is mostly for investment, rather than operational costs.
As most farms in the sub-region are small family enterprises, many have qualified for credit under national programmes promoting small business initiatives. For example, between 1984-87 the industry in Sweden received a total of about S.Kr. 90 million in economic aid as subsidies, loans and grants. In Norway grants of between 10-35% of capital costs are given for investment, as well as state guarantees for financial requirements.
In addition, international capital is available for the national sectors through subsidies, loans, and structural grants. Producers within EEC member countries are eligible for 25-40% of their investment costs (see section 2.6).
3.8 Trade publications for producers
There are many trade publications which are accessible to and useful for producers (and others) in the region, most of which contain international information. These include Fish Farming International (UK), Fish Farmer (UK), and Irish Aquaculture (Ireland). Published outside the region are Aquaculture Magazine, Aquaculture Digest, Progressive Fish Culturist, Water Farming Journal, and Aquaculture News, all published in the USA, and AustAsia Aquaculture Magazine (Australia). Technical information is periodically available in INFOFISH International published six times yearly, which has articles on aquaculture practices both within and outside the region (see 1.6). All are obtainable through subscription.
A number of other publications often contain relevant information to producers as well as professionals. These include the Quarterly Newsletter of the EAS (Belgium), which is obtainable through membership of the Society (see 4.6), as well as the publications of the World Aquaculture Society (WAS), and the American Fisheries Society (USA).
There are two Trade Directories of aquaculture products (Buyers' Guides) which are published annually. One is available through subscription to Aquaculture Magazine (USA), and the other through the European Aquaculture Society (Belgium).
There are several trade papers and magazines in languages other than English. For example, in Norway there are seven papers and journals for the industry, all in Norwegian.
3.9 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
There are no international technical assistance projects in the region which support local infrastructure for the sector.
<section>6</section>
4. NATIONAL INFRASTRUCTURE
4.1 Manpower training in aquaculture technologies
4.2 Manpower training in management
4.3 Aquaculture research in the region
4.4 Management of credit
4.5 Associations of professionals in the region
4.6 Information for professionals
4.1 Manpower training in aquaculture technologies
Because of the developed nature of both sub-regions, there are many opportunities for undergraduate and post-graduate education. Aquaculture courses may be part of general programmes in fisheries, or related fields, such as marine biology and ecology. Some academic institutions now conduct individual programmes in aquaculture, particularly at the post-graduate level. Several of these same institutions hold short and long-term technical training courses at an advanced level.
In Belgium the Free University of Brussels includes courses in its undergraduate programme in marine ecology, and the State University of Ghent conducts training courses at the Artemia Reference Center.
In Czechoslovakia aquaculture is included in post-graduate studies at the Czechoslovak Academy of Sciences.
In Denmark programmes in aquaculture and training courses are conducted by the Danish Institute for Fisheries and Marine Research, and training courses are held at Horsens Technical College.
The University of Agricultural Sciences in Hungary has undergraduate programmes in aquaculture, and both the Fish Culture Research Institute and the Szazhalombatta Fisheries Training Center conduct training.
In Ireland the Galway Regional Technical College offers undergraduate programmes and vocational training; and Cork University and Galway University both offer post-graduate programmes and vocational training. The Irish Sea Fisheries Board conducts training.
Wageningen Agricultural University in the Netherlands offers post-graduate programmes in aquaculture, and conducts training.
In Norway the University of Bergen includes aspects of aquaculture in its post-graduate programme in fisheries.
In the UK and undergraduate degree in aquaculture is offered only at the University of Stirling, Scotland. Courses in aquaculture as parts of other degree programmes in fisheries, marine and biological sciences, water resources management, etc., are available at Hatfield Polytechnic, Leicester Polytechnic, Sheffield City Polytechnic, Sunderland Polytechnic, Trent Polytechnic, Wolverhampton Polytechnic, University of Buckingham, University of Hull, University of Liverpool, University College of North Wales, University of Newcastle-upon-Tyne, University of St. Andrews, and the University of Swansea. Many of these institutions offer vacational training and training courses, in addition to Barony Agricultural College, Hampshire College of Agriculture, Inverness Technical College, Reading University, Sparsholt College, and the Sea Fisheries Industry Authority. Post-graduate programmes are available at Aston University, North East London Polytechnic, Plymouth Polytechnic, the
University of Stirling, and the University College of North Wales.
Undergraduate and post-graduate education in aquaculture is often influenced by the strengths of the particular national sectors, the geographic location of the universities toward sub-sectoral components, and the backgrounds and interests of faculty members. Agricultural universities frequently offer programmes on both animal husbandry, aquaculture, and water resources management, and veterinary institutes offer programmes in fish diseases as well as farm and domestic animals. Most universities give courses in aquaculture with a secondary focus, such as ecological aspects of aquaculture, engineering and technology, economics, environment, etc.
In addition to the institutes of education, many organizations offer training at a high level. These have been described in section 3.2.
4.2 Manpower training in management
Few of the institutions noted in section 4.1 offer training courses in non-biotechnical aspects of the industry, such as management, legislation, planning, and economics. In 1988 the Humberside International Fisheries Institute at the University of Hull (UK) included an aquaculture component in its annual course on Fisheries Planning and Management, and is offering a complete course for aquaculture in 1990. The programme has been developed in association with FAO/ADCP.
A number of private companies have begun to offer training courses for managers. The Aquacultural Insurance Service and its affiliate AWMACS (UK) offer a regular course in risk management for aquaculture.
4.3 Aquaculture research in the region
A considerable amount of research and development has been carried out throughout the region in the many biotechnical fields of aquaculture, predominantly building on the long-established infrastructure for fisheries biology, general aquatic biology, and the marine sciences.
The number of principal institutes and universities undertaking research and development in aquaculture in the region, as described, is probably about 100. There are between 80-90 of these in the Northwestern sub-region, and 20-30 in the Eastern sub-region and USSR.
Research in the Northwestern countries is very diversified. The two countries with the largest research budgets for aquaculture are Norway and the UK. The former spends about N.Kr. 190 million (US$ 32 million) on research annually, and the latter £.Stg. 3.7 million (US$ 7 million). This does not include private research.
In Austria research on traditional freshwater fisheries is carried out at the Institut für Zoologie, Innsbruck.
In Belgium there are research interests in all aspects of brine shrimp, and topics of tropical fisheries biology and aquaculture carried out in support of bilateral projects, particularly in Africa. Among the research institutes are the State University of Ghent, the Catholic University of Luvain, Université Libre de Bruxelles, Unité d'Ecologie des Eaux Douces, Namur, the University of Liège, Institut Provincial d'Enseignement Technique, Waremme, and the Laboratoire de Morphologie Animale, Louvain-la-Neuve.
In Denmark most of the research is oriented toward the management and farming of important commercial species, particularly trout and marine fish. Leading institutions are the Vandkvalitets Institute, Hörsholm, the Danish Aquaculture Institute, Hörsholm, the Danish Institute for Fisheries and Marine Research, Charlottenlund and Hirtshals, Forsøgsdamburget Brøns, Skaerbaek, and Ferskvandsfiskerilaboratoriet, Silkeborg.
In Finland there are the Finnish Game and Fisheries Research Institutes at Valkola and Helsinki. Research in the country is mostly on the indigenous salmon species, and the freshwater crayfish.
In the FRG there are several research areas, particularly on the culture of carps, eels, and other freshwater species, and also on engineering of aquaculture systems. Leading institutions are the University of Heidelberg, Biologische Anstalt Helgoland, Hamburg, Universität Hamburg, Institut für Seenforschung und Fischereiwesen, Langenargen, the Institut für Küsten- und Birmenfischerei, Hamburg and the Institut für Meereskunde, Hamburg.
In Iceland there are the Institute of Freshwater Fisheries and the Marine Research Institute at Reykjavik which are concerned with research on salmon, halibut, abalone, and production systems, including geothermal use.
In Ireland the University College Cork, and the Shellfish Research Laboratory, University College Galway, conduct research on important commercial species such as the salmonids and molluscs, particularly oysters and mussels.
In the Netherlands research is carried out on mussels and species of indigenous marine fish, together with programmes on African catfish and other tropical species in support of the country's bilateral programmes in Africa and Asia. Leading institutions are the Netherlands Institute for Fishery Investigations, Ijmuiden, the Agricultural Economics Research Institute, Den Haag, Trouw International BV, Boxmeer, the Netherlands Institute for Sea Research, Texel, the Organization for the Improvement of Inland Fisheries, Mieuwegein, Aquafish, Venhorst, and Wageningen Agricultural University.
In Norway research is directed toward support of the salmon industry, with some recent activities in cod, halibut, turbot, wolf fish (Anarchicas lupus) and lobster. This work is carried out by several public institutions and private companies, among which are the Flødevigen Biological Station, Arendel, the Veterinary College of Norway, Oslo, the Norwegian Institute of Water Research, Oslo, NTH-SINTEF, Trondheim, Marintek A/S, Trondheim, Institute of Marine Research, Bergen, the Institute of Marine Research, Austevoll, Mowi A/S, Fyllingsdalen, Nordland Research Institute, Mörkued, Directorate for Nature Management, Trondheim, University of Oslo, Aquateam, Rodeløkka, Oslo, Noraqua A/S, Oslo, Institute of Aquaculture Research, Sunndalsøra, University of Tromsø, Finnmark Akvakultur-senter A/S, Hammerfast, Nordland College, Bodö, Norsk Biotech A/S, Sandnes, and Akvaforsk NLH, A/S.
In Sweden research is carried out in support of the salmon industry, including the offshore salmon fishery in the Baltic Sea. In addition there are interests in other native marine and freshwater species, including the crayfish. Among the leading institutions are the Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences, Umea and Uppsala, the Universities of Stockholm, Uppsala and Göteborg; Tjärnö Marine Biology Laboratory, Strömstad, Kristineberg Marinbiological Station, Fiskebäckskil, Institute of Freshwater Research, Drottningholm, Institute of Marine Research, Lysekil, the Salmon Research Institute, Alokarleby, the Swedish Hydropower Board, Stockholm, the National Environment Protection Board, Stockholm, and the Fishery Board of Sweden, Göteborg. The International Foundation of Science, Stockholm, has a major programme of supporting aquaculture research in developing countries through individual fellowships.
In the UK there are many institutions active in aquaculture research, including the Plymouth Polytechnic, the University of Stirling, the University of Aston at Birmingham, University College of North Wales, Bangor, the Fisheries Laboratory, Lowestoft, Heriot-Watt University, Edinburgh, University College of Swansea, University of Southampton, Aquaculture Engineering Research Group, Edinburgh, Freshwater Fisheries Laboratory, Pitlochry, Glasgow University, the Marine Laboratory, Aberdeen, and the Institute of Marine Biochemistry, Aberdeen. Most of them work in support of the national industries for the salmonids, but there are also interests in indigenous marine fish, particularly flatfish, lobster and molluscs, together with engineering of production systems. Several of the institutions are involved in research in support of national bilateral programmes in Africa, Asia, and Latin America on tropical fish.
In the Eastern countries the investment in research is much less. This is justified to a large extent as the opportunities for useful research and development are less. Many of the countries are landlocked, or only have freshwater resources. Aquaculture activities are traditional and much fundamental research in support of the sector has already been carried out. The main emphasis is now reproduction of key species, genetics, pathology, and nutrition. The sub-region is also beginning to direct more research toward intensifying its existing production systems, probably influenced by its geographic affinity with Asia.
In Bulgaria research on the main warmwater species is carried out at the Fisheries Institute, Burgas.
In Czechoslovakia most of the work is on inland fisheries which have been traditional for many centuries. Among the leading institutions are the Agriculture Universities at Bratislava, Brno, Budejovice, Ceske, Kassa, Nitra, and Prague.
In the GDR the Institut für Meereskunde, Rostock-Warnemunde, University of Potzdam, University of Rostock, University of Köningswartha, and the University of Storkow carry out research in support of national programmes for the production of freshwater species, particularly carps.
In Hungary the principal research centre is the Fish Culture Research Institute, Szarvas, and its associated laboratories. The main research focus is on prime freshwater species, such as carps, and integrated farming systems with fish and poultry. Recently the centre began research on sturgeon, and the use of geothermal waters for culture. Research is also carried out on national recreational fisheries and commercial lake fisheries which are culture-based. The Institute also conducts research in support of bilateral projects in Latin America and Asia.
In Poland most of the research is directed toward traditional freshwater farming practices for carp species. This is carried out at the Inland Fisheries Institute, Zukowo, Institute of Aquaculture, Szczecin, University of Olstyn, University of Krakow, and the University of Szczecin.
There are many research institutions in the USSR active in support of salmon fisheries in the northern seas, and sturgeon fisheries of the Black and Caspian Seas. There is also interest in other freshwater fishes which have been cultured traditionally. Among the leading institutions are the All-Union Research Institute, Moscow, University of Astrahany, University of Vladivostock, and the University of Kaliningrad.
There are many similarities in national research and development activities throughout the region. This is because of common interest in a few prime marketable species, specifically Atlantic salmon and trout, followed by marine finfish species like turbot, halibut, sole, and cod. Important molluscs are clams, mussels, oysters, and scallops; and there are a few crustaceans, such as freshwater crayfish, lobster, and some penaeid prawns. Specific research may cover all biotechnical areas for some species, but for the most part there are priorities which currently include non-biotechnical areas such as economics, and the growing concern for environmental impacts of aquaculture.
These priorities may be summarized as follows, particularly for the Northwestern countries.
(i) For salmonids, of particular concern are on-growing facilities, smolt production units, improving methods for controlling disease and parasites (especially furunculosis, pancreatic disease, and sea lice), overcoming early sexual maturity at sea, the environmental impact of cage farming, husbandry and production techniques, improving the genetic potential of stocks, and market research.
(ii) For other migratory freshwater fish species, including eels, controlling growth variability, utilizing low-cost sources of warm water for on-growing, and improving rearing systems.
(iii) For marine finfish, particularly flatfish, developing techniques for rearing strains or species at lower temperatures, improving rearing systems and techniques, the design of hatchery and nursery facilities, and the use of low-cost sources of warm water for on-growing.
(iv) For marine shellfish, developing hatchery, nursery, and on-growing facilities, diversification of species under production, efficient methods of intensive cultivation (including protection against predation), and increasing production from culture to above that from natural harvests.
4.4 Management of credit
In the Northwestern countries, because of their advanced economic development, almost all credit is channelled through the principal national banks and local banks. Countries which are members of the EEC have additional access to subsidies, loans, and grants. The credit patterns have been described in sections 2.6 and 3.7.
4.5 Associations of professionals in the region
The principal association for professionals in the region is the EAS. The EAS has members in most European countries, in addition Co members in other regions. It has national representatives in 17 countries, and the Secretariat is in Belgium. The EAS arranges biennial meetings (the Netherlands in 1987, and France in 1989). Through its network of national representatives and affiliated national societies, the EAS dissiminates information about aquaculture development in Europe and also world-wide. It issues a quarterly newsletter, with information about new literature, publications, meetings, courses, and technical data. The EAS issues special publications on biotechnical topics, and proceedings of the biennial conferences. In 1984 it published a European Trade Directory, and an International Aquaculture Trade Directory will be issued in 1989.
There are many national associations which promote aquaculture within their own countries, and which influence development in the region. In some countries there are several associations oriented around particular genera or species. For example, in Denmark there are the Danish Aquaculture Society, the Danish Eel Farmers' Association, and the Danish Marine Fish Farmers' Association; in the FGR there is the German Fisheries Association; in Ireland there is the Irish Aquaculture Association; in the Netherlands there are the Aquaculture Association of the Netherlands, the Dutch Aquaculture Society, and the Zeeland Molluscan Shellfish Growers; in Norway there are the Norwegian Aquaculture Society and the Association for Aquaculture Research; and in the UK there is the Shellfish Association of Great Britain.
In the Northwestern countries there are many meetings and/or trade shows for professionals. Among the most regular annual meetings are the 'Two Lakes' Fish Farming Conference at Sparsholt (UK), and Aqua Nor in Norway. EAS holds a biennial meeting which changes venue.
In the Eastern sub-region there are also conferences and exhibitions for professionals, among which are events in Szarvas (Hungary), Vroclav (Poland), and Baku and Leningrad (USSR).
Outside the region, but close enough to be attended widely by professionals, is the biennial conference and trade show at Verona (Italy) which has taken place regularly since 1982.
4.6 Information for professionals
At the regional level there are many sources of general aquaculture information for professionals, mostly in English.
There are a number of trade magazines directed at professionals as well as producers. One is the monthly trade paper Fish Farming International, published in the UK. The paper aims at a world-wide aquaculture audience, but still focuses on Northwestern European aquaculture. Similarly from the UK is Fish Farmer, which is also directed at producers but has technical articles of interest to professionals, and which recently introduced an international section.
From outside the region there is Aquaculture Magazine (USA). This is mostly directed toward the sector in the USA, but also has articles of wider interest. From France there is the two-monthly "Aquarevue", for distribution throughout the French-speaking countries world-wide. It devotes most of its attention to aquaculture in mainland France and French overseas territories.
For scientific information, in addition to seminars, symposia, and congresses, professionals in the region can consult a number of publications obtained on subscription. In the region these include Diseases of Aquatic Organisms (FRG); Aquaculture (the Netherlands); Aquaculture and Fisheries Management, Aquaculture Engineering, Journal of Fish Biology, and Journal of Fish Diseases (all UK). Seven journals are published in Norway, all in Norwegian.
From outside the region there are Bamidgeh/Journal of Aquaculture (Israel); Bulletin Français de la Pêche et de la Pisciculture (France); Canadian Journal of Fisheries and Aquatic Sciences (Canada); Progressive Fish Culturist and Transactions of the American Fisheries Society (USA); Rivista Italiana de Piscicoltura e Ittiopatologia (the journal of the Freshwater Fish Culture Association), Corriere della Pesca e dell'Acquacoltura (the two-monthly publication of the Federation of Fishermen's Cooperatives), and Il Pesce, all published in Italy in Italian.
Scientific publications on aquaculture are available in the journals and collected reprints of the major aquaculture institutions and professional societies (see section 4.3). For example, the EAS publishes a regular newsletter for members which also contains the contents of some abstracts of the more important aquaculture journals. It also publishes special volumes on aquaculture technology available at reduced rates to members. The WAS produces the Journal of the World Aquaculture Society and World Aquaculture which are free to members.
The largest resource of information for scientists and technical professionals in the sector is FAO in Rome, Italy. FAO produces a series of publications many of which are specific to aquaculture. These are FAO Fisheries Reports, FAO Fisheries Technical Papers, and FAO Fisheries Synopses. All titles are categorized and lists are regularly produced. Some documents are free and others are sold at cost. It maintains a large serial collection on all subjects related to fish and fisheries received from fisheries institutes, government departments, and commercial publishers throughout the world, together with a special collection of documents on a country basis, and subject files.
FAO maintains a database in which aquaculture information can be found. Aquatic Sciences and Fisheries Abstracts (ASFA) is an international bibliographic database providing comprehensive coverage of publications on the science, technology, and management of marine and freshwater environments. The database can be searched via terminals and personal computers to retrieval systems in Europe and North America; the database is also available on compact disc. Aquaculture Abstracts from ASFA are available in printed form through subscription.
In the Eastern countries there are also many aquaculture and fisheries oriented publications. Although information is difficult to obtain there is evidence that the USSR publishes about 15 relevant journals, magazines, and information papers; the GDR publishes 5; Hungary 16; Czechoslovakia 6; Bulgaria 3; Romania 1; arid Poland 4.
<section>7</section>
5. NATIONAL SECTOR MANAGEMENT
5.1 Government policy in the region
5.2 Government organization in the region
5.3 Aquaculture legislation
5.4 Trade and business associations
5.5 Information resources for management
5.6 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
5.1 Government policy in the region
In 1985 a survey of the Northwestern countries was made to identify the current national policies and interest in aquaculture. The results of the survey are summarized as follows:
In Denmark there was interest in the further development of aquaculture sites in the country, in association with regional planning, to support the Government's policy to increase employment and exports. Since 1980 the Government had increased the budget for research and development.
In the FRG the Government recognized the contribution of aquaculture products to national food resources. Research and development were supported, together with financial aid to aquaculture projects in developing countries through the national bilateral programmes.
The Government of the Netherlands actively supported national research and development, particularly that relevent to international assistance, and involved national personnel and resources in bilateral projects.
In Finland the Ministry of Trade and Industry supported aquaculture through public funding, particularly for development in sparsely populated rural areas. State hatcheries and farms produced seed and juveniles for stocking private farms, and conducted research and development.
Iceland had little interest in aquaculture until 1984, but since then the Government has been active in the support of research and development.
In Norway the Government had a firm policy toward aquaculture and provided the industry with considerable research and development support, and other services.
The Government of Sweden had a modest interest in aquaculture, and provided some support through the central authorities. The regional bodies were more active in the sector.
The Government of Ireland was especially favourable toward aquaculture and had identified priority species. It provided capital grants, extension, training, and research services in support of aquaculture.
In the UK the Government was generally supportive within the constraints that aquaculture was one of many sectors which used common resources, and therefore could not be recognized individually.
No policy or statement of interest was identified in Austria, Belgium, and Switzerland.
The survey concluded that most of these countries had continued to increase their interest in aquaculture as an industrial sector, having supported it modestly as a developing technology throughout the 1970s. Some countries, such as Norway and the UK, had been making public investments since the early 1960s.
A survey by OECD in 1988 showed significant developments. Many of the countries had promulgated legislation for aquaculture in support of its development. In particular there was support for national infrastructure, promotion of investment, greater emphasis on siting, and more support for research and development. As major developed countries active in bilateral assistance, most of the countries were including more aquaculture in their aid projects. However, there was also evidence of growing concern for the specific issues of aquaculture, in particular the environmental impact. These points are illustrated in sections 5.2 and 5.3.
5.2 Government organization in the region
National responsibility for aquaculture in all the countries of the region continues to be confused. Most aquaculture is aquatic animal husbandry, and therefore is closely associated with animal husbandry. Its products are almost entirely food for human consumption, and therefore distributed and sold through the same channels as meats and vegetables. In these terms aquaculture has considerable affinity with the agriculture sector. On the other hand, the products, many of which are of marine origin, are the same as those harvested by capture fisheries, and therefore there is an affinity with the fisheries sector. Finally, aquaculture is invariably carried out on land or in coastal areas and competes for national resources. From a government perspective, it has affinities with a number of other sectors which do the same, such as rural development, natural resources, environment, etc. Consequently aquaculture responsibilities can be vested in a variety of government
departments, some of which constrain its development. In many cases responsibilities can be vested in more than one department.
In a number of countries (e.g. UK) the Ministry of Agriculture has responsibilities for both agriculture and fisheries, and therefore includes aquaculture. In these cases aquaculture, as a new component of the economy and small by comparison with agriculture, invariably has difficulties defending its position for support. In other countries (such as Denmark and Norway), with a separate Ministry of Fisheries, aquaculture has been included. More active responsibilities are usually shown in the latter case, although there is often competition between fisheries and aquaculture departments for funding and development priorities.
Another factor influencing the priority of aquaculture in terms of government responsibilities is the strength of the ministerial department or authority responsible for environmental protection. The general government policy toward the sector may be different from the policies of environmental boards.
5.3 Aquaculture legislation
In Denmark responsibility for aquaculture is within the Ministry of Fisheries. The Ministry has enacted a programme for structural improvements in the sector (1987-1991), and particularly to take advantage of the grants and subsidies being provided by the EEC for fisheries and aquaculture. The Government regulates development through licenses for producers. It separates licenses for inland aquaculture, which are handled by local authorities, from those of offshore aquaculture, which are handled by the Ministry. There is also an Act on Fisheries in Offshore Waters, which regulates the types of construction and required safeguards, and also minimizes pollution.
In Finland the basic regulations which control aquaculture are in the 1961 Water Law, which prohibit activities which may change water quality or the natural migration of fish. Licenses for aquaculture are therefore issued by the Finnish Water Court, and enforcement is through the national Board of Waters.
The State Governments of the FRG, rather than the Federal Government, have responsibilities for inland fisheries, and hence aquaculture. The various state laws and regulations which affect the industry, concern animal protection, fish diseases, introduction of exotic species, and pollution. Research and development in aquaculture are financed in part by the Federal Ministry for Technology.
Production licenses in Iceland are approved by the Institute of Freshwater Fisheries and the National Centre for Hygiene, Food Control, and Environmental Protection. Consequently the emphasis of the rules and regulations for the producers is quality control, standards of hygiene, disease prevention, and pollution control.
In Ireland the Department of Marine is responsible for the formulation and implementation of policies and programmes for the management, conservation, development, protection, improvement, and commercial exploitation of aquaculture resources, under the Fisheries Act, 1980. Designated areas for lawful activities are under the authority of the Minister for the Marine. Enforcement of the licensing regulations and protection is the responsibility of the Regional Fisheries Boards. The Water Pollution Act of 1977 also affects the industry through measures to control and reduce water pollution, but it also functions to resolve competing uses for water resources by all sectors.
Inland aquaculture in the Netherlands is considered to be a branch of agriculture, and is therefore legal on land already designated for agricultural production. A number of laws and regulations affect the producers, including licenses for construction on agricultural land, the Nuisance Act, draining of farm effluents, the use of substrate water or public waters, and the legal size limits of marketable products (under the Fisheries Act, 1963).
A new law was established in 1985 in Norway governing the conditions under which farms operate. Predominantly this was to balance the sector and its regional distribution through the control of the number of sites and size of individual farms. The size was fixed at 8 000 m^3, but in 1989 this was increased to 12 000 m^3. This is controlled through licenses.
In Sweden the National Board of Fisheries was appointed the responsible authority for aquaculture in 1984. However, permits, production, and quality control are managed by different laws and regulations and several agencies are involved. In addition, the Board regulates practices with regard to potential disease problems, and the county administration regulates potential environmental issues.
In the UK the administrative responsibility for aquaculture rests with the Fisheries Departments of the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries, and Food, the Department of Agriculture for Scotland, the Welsh Office Agricultural Department, and the Department of Agriculture for Northern Ireland. The legislation varies between different part of the country and distinguishes between finfish farming and shellfish farming. All discharges from fish farms are subject to regulations under the Control of Pollution Act 1974, and disease control under the Diseases of Fish Acts 1937 and 1983. Shellfish, on the other hand, come under the Sea Fisheries (Shellfish) Act 1967. In addition, there are other Acts which concern planning, water use, pollution, fish diseases, wildlife and countryside protection, introduction of fish and shellfish, some of which are very specific to genera and species, such as molluscs, lobsters, and salmon.
Legislation which regulates aquaculture therefore varies from country to country. In many cases the legislation was written for other industries, such as agriculture and fisheries, or resources, such as water protection or wildlife conservation, and long before aquaculture was established. This type of legislation has been a major constraint to development in many countries.
Some governments impose many laws, regulations, and ordinances on the aquaculture sector and its associated components and activities, whilst other governments do not. Typical legislation can be concerned with:
- Planning and construction,
- Access to sites,
- Water utilization, drilling and extraction,
- Intake and effluent water quality,
- Wildlife conservation,
- Utilization of tidal areas, seabed, and coastal water resources,
- Diseases, and transmission,
- Introduction and transfer of natural and exotic species,
- Environmental impact,
- Use of chemical treatments and veterinary drugs, and their residues,
- Product quality control, and marketing standards.
Most countries regulate entry into the industry through licenses. The procedures for application in some cases are simple and cheap, and in others complicated, prolonged, and costly, and may differ within the same country. For example, in Sweden for farms larger than 10 t capacity of finfish (or above 20 000 m^2 of mussels) the investor must make full application to the authorities after first passing the regulations of the Environmental Application Act. For farms of below 10 t finfish capacity the investor is only obliged to notify the authorities of the operation. Applications from the investor proposing the larger farms must be evaluated under the regulations of the Fisheries Act and the Nature Conservancy Act (which regulates protection of the seashore).
Licenses are difficult to obtain in countries where there are many regulations concerning the environment and potential impacts. In Sweden, for example, there are 15-20 authorities, and the procedure is complicated by such things as estimation of future discharges of nutrients and organic materials in relation to the trophic level of the receiving waters. All information goes to the regional fishery officer and to the county administration. Applications are sent to 15-20 authorities and more than ten Acts are applicable.
The purpose of legislation, in addition to managing and regulating the sector, is principally to prevent the destruction of valuable natural resources, and to prevent a negative environmental impact by the discharge of waste materials. Farm effluents in particular are of major concern in most countries.
However, legal regulations may be interpreted quite broadly depending on the attitude of the authorities and the public toward aquaculture, For example, regulations regarding water quality might be for protection of the environment, or alternatively for the quality control of the end product which will be consumed.
There may also be very specific regulations. For example, many countries have recently banned the use of products containing tributylin (TBT). For some years these have been used by the aquaculture industry in antifouling paints used to protect marine facilities, particularly sea cages and nets.
In order to control and regulate the growing aquaculture industry the laws, regulations, and ordinances with regard to conservation can be divided into (i) those which impact production, and (it) those which impact the environment. For the former these are specifications which restrict the numbers of seed, cultivation volume, production capacity, feed delivery, and production units per farm, etc.; for the latter these are specifications which define the distances between farms, distances between production units, distances to natural shellfish beds, spawning areas, water depths, stock densities in relation to water quality (dissolved oxygen concentrations), etc.
Regulations for the production of high quality products for human consumption include water quality criteria, the use of veterinary medicines and drugs, the use of antibiotics, feed additives, and directions for the slaughter and handling of products. Most of these follow the standards and guidelines of international sanitary recommendations for food products, produced by the FAO/WHO Codex Alimentarius Commission. Many countries formally adopt these regulations and apply them through national legislation.
Finally, the EEC member countries within the region have agreed to a number of measures to protect the environment (Council Directive 76/464/EEC), and are supposed to change their national legislation to comply with these measures. For example, the UK is empowered to control discharges into estuaries and coastal waters and a full account is taken of the potential implications for fisheries. The offshore disposal of waste from ships is strictly controlled in accordance with the provisions of the Oslo Convention and the London Dumping Convention.
Similarly, the UK has designated 29 areas as conforming Co the European Community's quality standards for shellfish growing waters (Council Directive 79/923/EEC), and is reviewing possible additions.
Although not compulsory, recommendations and regulations proposed by the European Inland Fisheries Advisory Commission (EIFAC) and the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea (ICES) on the introduction and transfer of organisms have been developed for member countries. These include codes of practice and a manual of procedures for consideration of introductions and transfers of marine and freshwater organisms. In principle no organisms should be imported without quarantine.
5.4 Trade and business associations
There are no professional trade and business associations in the region at this level of the sector. In the interests of standards for the industry the idea of a professional association for consultants has been proposed and discussed at meetings of the EAS, but nothing further has developed. Many fisheries biologists who work and practice aquaculture are accredited members of the Institute of Biologists (UK).
In this highly developed region several general trade and business associations have been long established. Many producers, for example, are associated with their chambers of commerce. For information about opportunities for trade, which are not available from other sources (see sections I.6 and 3.8), most embassies have commercial attaches.
5.5 Information resources for management
Most information resources for management in the past have only dealt with site selection and appropriate technology. Through national financing or private investment most areas of the region with aquaculture potential have been surveyed to identify sites and to evaluate production potential using established technology. Some countries, such as Norway and Sweden, have reviewed and listed all sites with potential so that administrators in charge of land planning and development are aware of areas for aquaculture development, and can avoid conflicts between industrial sectors and pollution. Typical competing sectors are urban development, tourism, merchant marine, military (navy), heavy and light industry, fisheries, aquaculture, and agriculture. This information has also been invaluable for licensing and distribution of farms for both economic reasons and protection.
Besides information on site selection, there is considerable literature relevant to the countries of the region published about species, production techniques, and economic aspects of aquaculture development in national and international journals. This information comes in proceedings of conferences, seminars, symposia on aquaculture, and of course many books which are very specific to the region. Most of the published information is available in the library of the Fisheries Department of FAO in Rome.
Civil servants, investment bankers, and politicians concerned with aquaculture development lack general information and a view of aquaculture realities in the region. This situation results at times either in excessive hesitation about a logical and viable project, or in excessive confidence in a project of more doubtful interest. An example is the environmental impact of aquaculture on other activities, particularly the risk of water pollution by aquaculture discharge which may at times be completely forgotten or excessively emphasized.
The ADCP now produces an information newsletter called "Aquaculture Minutes" for decision-makers which responds to some of the needs for executives and administrators. There is still a great need at the resources management level for the production of more continuously updated information on species and techniques, sites and zoning of activities, prices and markets of aquaculture items, legislation, farm economy, and the socio-economic impact of aquaculture development. Regional reviews are needed to constitute a proper base for solid resources management, such as the ADCP reports and guideline documents. The ADCP has produced some 60 publications related to aquaculture in Africa, Asia, Latin America, the Caribbean, the Mediterranean, the Near East, the Pacific and North America, planning, research, training, feeds, information systems, development aid, engineering, economics, marketing, socio-economics, seed production, and women in aquaculture.
The private sector produces a number of leaflets of its own. For example, in U.K., the Aquacultural Insurance Service produces information on risk management and insurance; and Ernst and Whinney produce bulletins on financial investment, planning, taxation, and many other aspects of financial management.
5.6 Technical assistance projects in the sub-sector
There are no technical assistance projects related to national sector management in the region. The British Council (UK) funds the Fisheries Planning and Management Course at the Humberside International Fisheries Institute at the University of Hull (UK) and funds trainees from African, Caribbean and Pacific countries. An aquaculture planning course will be started in 1990.
<section>8</section>
6. REGIONAL SECTOR MANAGEMENT
6.1 United Nations organizations in the region
6.2 Other organizations in the region
6.3 Economic communities of the region
6.4 Regional and global aquaculture development projects
6.1 United Nations organizations in the region
The countries of the region are active members of a number of regional organizations in which aquaculture has been recognized as a sector, either individually or as a component of a larger sector such as fisheries or agriculture, and which has received support in some form. The majority of these countries, however, are not recipients of international assistance.
The principal regional organizations are those of the United Nations in which almost all the countries in the region actively participate as member states. Most of these same countries, but not all, participate in the individual organizations of the UN system, such as the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO), the World Bank (WB), International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), and the World Health Organization (WHO), all of which have a substantial record of providing technical and financial assistance to aquaculture in developing countries. Some specialized agencies of the UN which are also active in their support to the aquaculture sector directly or indirectly are the UN Children's Fund (UNICEF), and the UN Environment Programme (UNEP).
Of the countries in the region, the only ones eligible for international assistance through the UN system from their indicative planning figures (IPFs) are Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, Hungary, Poland, and Romania. However, the level of potential assistance is restricted by their high IPFs. Only Hungary has received international assistance from UNDP for aquaculture.
6.2 Other organizations in the region
There are many international organizations in the region, each differing in the composition of its members and its purpose. Of those which are important because of their relevance to the development and growth of the aquaculture sector (usually through activities in agriculture and fisheries) are the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe, the Nordic Council of Ministers, and the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
Several important international organizations are concerned with aquaculture through their activities in agriculture, food, forestry, and fisheries. A number of these are the Councils and Commissions of FAO, for example, the EIFAC and the FAO/WHO Codex Alimentarius Commission. EIFAC has several working groups involved in aspects of aquaculture, and Codex Alimentarius is currently attempting to apply standards of quality control for aquaculture products. Other organizations are involved in aquaculture through their interests in marine science. ICES, for example, which encourages biological and hydrographical investigations of marine resources, has a mariculture committee.
Within the ICES mariculture committee there are several working groups dealing with topics such as fish diseases, toxic algal blooms, mass rearing of juvenile marine finfish, environmental impacts of aquaculture, and the introduction and transfer of species. At its next meeting the committee will consider such topics as the withdrawal periods of drugs and veterinary medicines, the quality of salmonid fry and fingerlings, crayfish culture, fish nutrition, gas supersaturation, training in aquaculture, genetic broodstock management and breeding practices, prevention and control of bird predation, and eel culture.
In addition, there are several specific scientific organizations which now have working groups for the culture and production of farmed species, such as the International Association of Astacology (freshwater crustaceans), the European Association of Fish Pathologists, and the European Communities Biologists' Association.
6.3 Economic communities of the region
CMEA, or COMECON has among its ten members Bulgaria, Czechoslovakia, the GDR, Hungary, Poland, Romania, and the USSR from the region as described by the survey. Its purpose is to assist the economic development of its member states through the sharing of resources and the coordination of efforts. Among its main activities are the promotion of trade and cooperation in agriculture to improve the availability and nutritional quality of food supplies.
The EEC has 12 members of which Belgium, Denmark, the FRG, Ireland, Luxembourg, the Netherlands, and the UK are from the region. Its purpose is for the free movement of capital, goods, persons, and services between member countries, and common policies for agriculture and transport. Among its principal activities are agriculture and fisheries, which include aquaculture, and related activities of science and technology, education, and environment policy.
The third economic community important to the region as described is EFTA. Its six members are Austria, Finland, Iceland, Norway, Sweden, and Switzerland. The association promotes the expansion of trade in agricultural goods between members, and particularly in fisheries trade.
6.4 Regional and global aquaculture development projects
There are no regional development projects within the area.
The ADCP was created to support global initiatives and cooperation in aquaculture. Its prime activities have extended into Africa, Asia, Latin America, and the Mediterranean regions, but its efforts have also been of benefit to the European region. Advisory and guideline publications produced by ADCP deal with both administration of the sector, such as global statistics, policy and planning, management, economics, marketing, etc., and in biotechnology and engineering. The Programme is financed by UNDP, executed by FAO, and is based in Rome, Italy.
<section>9</section>
ANNEXES
I - Supporting data, figures, tables
II - References
III - Abbreviations
IV - List of ADCP Reports
I - Supporting data, figures, tables
Table 1: The trade of various commodity groups between European countries in 1985
Weight in tonnes (t)
Value in US$ '000
E
I
E-I
E
I
E-I
Eels
Salmon
Salmon (canned)
Trout
Flatfish
Oysters
Mussels
Scallops
Total
E = export; I = import
When calculating export and import the following values were used:
Export value
(US$ '000/t)
Import value
(US$ '000/t)
Eels
Salmon
Salmon (canned)
Trout
Flatfish
Oysters
Mussels
Scallops
Source: FAO, Fisheries Statistics, Commodities, 1988
Table 2: The main importing and exporting countries of various commodity groups in 1985
Main Importers
Eels
Salmon
Salmon
(canned)
Trout
Flatfish
Oysters
Mussels
Scallops
Austria
Belgium
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
Denmark
x
x
x
x
Faeroes
Finland
FRG
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
Iceland
Ireland
x
x
Netherlands
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
x
Norway
Sweden
x
x
Switzerland
x
x
x
UK
x
x
x
x
x
x
Main Exporters
Eels
Salmon
Salmon
(canned)
Trout
Flatfish
Oysters
Mussels
Scallops
Austria
Belgium
x
x
Denmark
x
x
x
x
x
Faeroes
x
Finland
x
FRG
x
Iceland
x
Ireland
x
x
x
x
Netherlands
x
x
x
x
x
Norway
x
x
Sweden
x
Switzerland
x
x
x
UK
x
x
x
x
x
Source: FAO, Fisheries Statistics, Commodities, 1988
Table 3: European aquaculture production of finfish and shellfish in the Northwestern countries and the Eastern countries (including the USSR) in 1986 (in metric tonnes)
Eastern countries
Northwestern countries
Total
Finfish
Carps
Trout
Salmon
Others
Subtotal
Subtotal crustaceans
Molluscs
Flat oyster
Pacific cupped oyster
Mussels
Pectinids
Subtotal
TOTAL
^1^/ The main part of this quantity is common carp
Source: FAO Fisheries Circular No. 815, 1989
Table 4: Aquaculture production in Eastern European countries in 1986 (in metric tonnes)
Bulgaria
Czechoslovakia
GDR
Hungary
Poland
Romania
USSR
Total
Common carp
Other carps and cyprinids
Freshwater fish nei
Rainbow trout
Salmo spp.
Osteichthyes
Subtotal finfish
Subtotal crustacean
Blue mussel
Subtotal molluscan
Grand total
Source: FAO Fisheries Circular No. 815, 1989
Table 5: Aquaculture production in the Northwestern European countries in 1986 (in metric tonnes)
Austria
Belgium
Denmark
Faeroes
Finland
FRG
Iceland
Ireland
Netherlands
Norway
Sweden
Switzerland
UK
Total
Common carp
Other carps and
cyprinids
Eel
Rainbow trout
Atlantic salmon
Salmo spp.
Osteichthyes
Sub-total finfish
Sub-total crustaceans
European flat oyster
Pacific cupped oyster
Blue mussel
Pectinids
Sub-total molluscan
Grand Total
Source: FAO Fisheries Circular No. 815, 1989
II - References
Ackefors H., B. Larsson and L. Nyman (ed.), 1983. Fish breeding and aquaculture. Swedish Council for Planning and Coordination of Research in cooperation with The National Marine Resource Commission, Report No. 83:6, 69 p
Ackefors, H., R. Fordham and C. Gelin, 1988. Experiences from an elver quarantine in Sweden. Paper given at the International Fish Farming Conference, 9-10 October 1986, Verona, Italy
EAS, 1984. European Trade Directory
EIFAC, 1985. Code of practice on introductions. Many different meetings together with ICES Working Group on Introductions and Transfers of Marine Organisms. See EIFAC/XIV/86/4
FAO, 1986. Development of aquaculture in Europe. Fifteenth FAO Regional Conference for Europe. ERC/86/4 (Prepared by H. Ackefors, A. Monroe, F. Müller and J. Querellou)
FAO, 1988. Yearbook of Fishery Statistics
FAO, 1989. Aquaculture Production (1984-1986). Fisheries Circular No. 815, 106 p
ICES, Code of practice for introductions and transfers of marine organisms (see Turner, 1987)
Müller, F., 1986. Draft report about Eastern Europe and USSR prepared for the report "Development of Aquaculture in Europe". See FAO, 1986
Nash, C., 1988. A global overview of aquaculture production. A plenary paper presented to the Annual Conference of the World Aquaculture Society in Honolulu, Hawaii, January 1988
OECD, 1987. Study on aquaculture. Report draft 20 January 1988
Rasmussen, F., 1988. Report on the working party on withdrawal period for drugs. EIFAC/XV/Int.13, March 1988
Rosenthal, H., et al., 1988. Report of the Ad hoc study group on 'Environmental Impact of Mariculture'. Cooperative Research Report, ICES, No. 154
Rosenthal, H., 1988. Mariculture committee. Activity Report 1987/88. ICES/CM 1988/F
Ryman, N., 1980. Fish gene pools. Preservation of Genetic Resources in Relation to Wild Fish Stocks. Ecological Bulletin 34, 111 p
Turner, G.E. (ed.), 1987. ICES codes of practice and manual of procedures for consideration of introductions and transfers of marine and freshwater organisms. ICES/CM F 35A
World Bank, 1987. The World Bank Atlas 1987
III - Abbreviations
ADCP
Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme
CMEA
Council for Mutual Economic Assistance (or COMECON)
EAS
European Aquaculture Society
EEC
European Economic Community
EFTA
European Free Trade Association
EIFAC
European Inland Fisheries Advisory Commission
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
FES
Fédération Européenne des Salmoniculteurs
ICES
International Council for the Exploration of the Sea
IFAD
International Fund for Agricultural Development
OECD
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
UNDP
United Nations Development Programme
UNEP
United Nations Environment Programme
UNICEF
United Nations Children's Fund
WAS
World Aquaculture Society
WB
World Bank
WHO
World Health Organization
Abbreviations of Databases and other Terminology
ASFIS
Aquatic Sciences and Fisheries Information Service
ASFA
Aquatic Sciences and Fisheries Abstracts
GLOBEFISH
FAO Computerized System of Fish Marketing Information
FISHDAB
FAO Yearly Statistics
IPF
Indicative Planning Figure
GNP
Gross National Product
IV - List of ADCP Reports
ADCP/REP/75/1
Aquaculture Planning in Africa
ADCP/REP/76/2
Aquaculture Planning in Asia
ADCP/REP/76/3
Aquaculture Planning in Latin America
FI/R188
Report of the FAO Technical Conference on Aquaculture, Kyoto
ADCP/REP/78/4
Aid for Aquaculture Development
ADCP/REP/78/5
Outline of an Applied Research and Experimental Development Programme for the Latin American Regional Centre for Aquaculture
ADCP/REP/78/6
Curriculum for the Training of Aquaculturists in the Latin American Regional Centre for Aquaculture
ADCP/REP/79/7
Curriculum for the Training of Aquaculturists in the African Regional Centre for Aquaculture
ADCP/REP/79/8
Training in Fish Feed Technology. Report of the FAO/UNDP Training Course in Fish Feed Technology held in the University of Washington, Seattle, 9 October-15 December 1978
ADCP/REP/79/9
Aquaculture Information - Report of the Meeting of an Aquaculture Information Group
ADCP/REP/79/10
Aquaculture Development in China - Report of a FAO/UNDP Aquaculture Study Tour to the People's Republic of China, 2 May-1 June 1978 ^\
ADCP/REP/80/11
Fish Feed Technology - Lectures presented at the FAO/UNDP Training Course in Fish Feed Technology, held at the College of Fisheries, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington,
ADCP/REP/80/12
Outline Research Programme for the African Regional Aquaculture Centre, Port Harcourt, Rivers State, Nigeria.
ADCP/REP/80/13
Curriculum for the Training of Aquaculturists in the Asian Aquaculture Network
ADCP/REP/80/14
Outline Research Programmes for the Regional Aquaculture Lead Centres in Asia - Parts I and II
ADCP/REP/80/15
Outline Research Programmes for the Regional Aquaculture Lead Centres in Asia - Part III
ADCP/REP/81/16 (out of print)
Reproductive Physiology of Teleost Fishes - A Review of Present Knowledge and Needs for Future Research
ADCP/REP/82/17
Aid for Aquaculture Development in the Third World
ADCP/REP/83/18
Fish Feeds and Feeding in Developing Countries - An Interim Report on the ADCP Feed Development Programme
ADCP/REP/83/19
AQUIS Aquaculture Information System - Users' Manual
ADCP/REP/83/20
Planification del Desarrollo de la Acuicultura - Guía Preliminar (An Introductory Guide to Aquaculture Development)
ADCP/REP/84/21
Inland Aquaculture Engineering - Lectures presented at the ADCP Interregional Training Course in Inland Aquaculture Engineering, Budapest
ADCP/REP/85/22
Nutritional Fish Pathology - Morphological Signs of Nutrient Deficiency and Toxicity in Farmed Fish
ADCP/REP/86/23
Observations on International Technical Assistance to Aquaculture
ADCP/REP/86/24
Planning an Aquaculture Facility - Guidelines for Bioprogramming and Design
ADCP/REP/87/25
Future Economic Outlook for Aquaculture and Related Assistance Needs
ADCP/REP/87/26
Feed and Feeding of Fish and Shrimp - A Manual on the Preparation and Presentation of Compound Feeds for Shrimp and Fish in Aquaculture
ADCP/REP/87/27
Aquaculture Sector Development - A Guideline for the Preparation of a National Plan
ADCP/REP/87/28 (Out of print)
Women in Aquaculture - Proceedings of the ADCP/NORAD Workshop on Women in Aquaculture.
ADCP/REP/87/29
The Markets for the Prime Mediterranean Species - Sea Bass, Sea Bream, Mullets and Eel - and their links with investment
ADCP/REP/88/30
A Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in Eleven Middle East Countries
ADCP/REP/88/31
A Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in East Asia
ADCP/REP/88/32
A Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in the Pacific
ADCP/REP/89/33
Planning for Aquaculture Development - Report of an Expert Consultation held in Policoro, Italy, 26 July-2 August 1988
ADCP/REP/89/34
A Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in the Mediterranean Region
ADCP/REP/89/35
A Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in West Asia
ADCP/REP/89/36
A Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in Africa South of the Sahara
ADCP/REP/89/37
A Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in North America
ADCP/REP/89/38
A Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in Eastern and Northeastern Europe
