<title>ADCP/REP/89/41 - Aquaculture and Risk Management</title>
<section>1</section>
FOREWORD
Risk Management is a practical technique for establishing and maintaining profitability of aquaculture enterprises.
Aquaculture, like all food producing industries, is a high risk business, not only because of its dependence on the survival of large numbers of living organisms in captivity (many of which are still only one or two generations from wild stocks), but also because of its dependence on the skills of man, the efficiency of machines, and the clemency of the physical forces of nature. However, like all high risk businesses, it is attractive to entrepreneurs because some practices can provide a quick and highly profitable return on investment.
For the last two decades, enterprises in aquaculture have been preoccupied with technology. Now chat the industry is rapidly becoming stabilized, and production of a number of important species has focussed on one or two practices, the next decade will become preoccupied with increasing farm efficiency through the application of modern management methods. Among these is risk management. The Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (ADCP) is producing this guideline document on risk management, which is not purported to be the definitive work on the subject, primarily for the benefit of producers to assist them in becoming more efficient and to reduce their risks.
However, the practice of risk management is not only beneficial to producers. It is equally important to government administrators who are responsible for the national sector. Appropriate actions on the part of administrators to avoid risks to the national industry include concern for a national policy, appropriate legislation, and the provision of information. Consequently, the ADCP is also directing this document to them in support of their growing aquaculture industries.
Colin E. Nash
Craig B. Kensler
Rome, 1989
<section>2</section>
1. INTRODUCTION
1.1 The Importance of Profitability
1.2 The Reality of Risks
1.3 The Concept of Risk Management
1.1 The Importance of Profitability
The purpose of all aquaculture enterprises is to produce aquatic animals or plants at a profit. All operational processes and management decisions are therefore directed to that end. If there are disruptions in production, through accidents, poor management decisions, or for any reason, then profitability is in jeopardy. The welfare of the saleable aquatic animals or plants produced on the farm is therefore the most important activity of all individual aquaculture enterprises, and the focal point of all attention by the farmer and his employees.
However, as in other agricultural industries, profitability is not only influenced by activities on the farm. Food producers as a whole recognize two additional processes which influence profitability of their enterprise. These are (i) post-harvest handling and marketing activities, and (ii) the preparation of the product by the consumer. Thus, in addition to their own personal responsibility for growing a healthy animal or plant on the farm, producers have a continuing vested interest in the responsibility of others to market quality fresh products and prepare popular dishes for the final consumers. Unfortunately both of these activities are also potentially vulnerable to risks which prevent their final objectives being achieved, and thus reduce potential profitability for the middlemen and the producers.
In summary, the economic survival and strength of the aquaculture industry as a whole is entirely dependent and subordinate to the principal tasks of producing, marketing, and preparing quality aquatic products profitably and without risk. Fortunately, good farmers and industrial "middlemen" know the likelihood of these risks occurring. Through their experience they select the appropriate management technique to avoid or minimize these risks, and to keep all three activities on the most profitable course. This is the essence of risk management.
1.2 The Reality of Risks
Any process, by definition, involves a change or a series of changes over time. A process can be natural or man-made. The degree of change from the beginning to the end of a process is dependent on many factors. In the case of man-made processes, such as those characteristic of manufacturing industries, the end is almost certainly predictable, but for the processes of nature there are many factors which make the end unpredictable.
Most natural physical and chemical processes take place slowly over extremely long periods and therefore have the appearance of stability and predictability; on the other hand, biological processes, which by definition deal with life, occur over short periods of time and are highly susceptible to change or misdirection.
It is not possible, with a high degree of statistical certainty, to expect that the simplest biological process will achieve its predicted end in its appropriate time. There are too many hazards or risks, even at the level of the lowest forms of life. Some of these risks are totally beyond the control of the process. Almost every life form is part of the dynamic food web of nature. It is estimated, for example, that in nature only one egg out of ten thousand from the female flatfish survives to become another breeding adult. The risks to any one biological process are therefore so numerous and varied that they are almost impossible to catalogue, or to describe their magnitude, or to predict their frequency of occurrence.
Aquaculture is an industry built on biological processes. As pointed out in Section 1.1, it is an industry entirely dependent on the welfare of aquatic animals and plants which have to be produced and sold to generate profit. Consequently, by deduction, it is an industry which must be classified among a group of high risk food producing industries, which include meat, poultry, and cereal production, and market gardening.
1.3 The Concept of Risk Management
A high risk industry is not necessarily one which must be avoided by investors. Invariably high risk Industries provide significant opportunities for high and/or rapid returns on investment. But it is obvious that the investment has to be carefully researched first, and the risks of the venture carefully weighed. Thereafter, the venture must be watched with constant vigilance. A technique for constantly monitoring and evaluating an investment, and its risks, is called "risk management".
Because of not one but three biologically-dependent activities (as identified in 1.1), which may occur between a farmer and his profits, aquaculture is recognized as a high risk industry. It is therefore important that the farmer is highly circumspect in his identification and management of the most likely risks to each of the three processes, and the commercial consequences. A grasp of the economic dimensions of potential risks which threaten each process is critical. The skill of the farmer in placing a value on each risk influences its priority and therefore the attention paid to its control. This is invariably the determining factor in the success or failure of any farming venture.
The "common sense" school of management recognizes that for every process there is a group of potential risks which can be identified individually and given priority. In many cases they can be avoided by careful attention; for example, fire is well known to be a major cause of death and injury, and the chances of escaping and saving property are greatly enhanced if early warning of fire is given. It is therefore sensible to have smoke detectors in the farm buildings.
There is another group of risks which also can be identified but which can be excluded from consideration, either because their incidence is beyond any reasonable human effort (or expense) to control, or because the chances of their occurrence are too statistically insignificant to consider. For example, in the fish farming world it is not worth a farmer analysing every bag of fish feed before use on the theory that it may be contaminated. The chances of contamination are so small that they are outweighed by the cost of testing and the loss of feed tested. Therefore, to lessen the risk more cheaply the farmer makes certain that the feed is purchased from a reliable manufacturer. Equally, the statistical chance chat an aeroplane will fall on a farm is so insignificant that the risk can be discarded.
It is relatively easy, at both the personal and the commercial levels, to identify those risks which are either beyond human control (and expense), or statistically insignificant. However, there remains a large "grey" area of potential risks. Some of them can be identified with care, and an attempt made to value them. The aquaculture producer can then attempt to manage them for the benefit of himself and his business.
The process of managing risk is based on the individual analyses of three fundamental activities, which are taken in sequence, and subsequent synthesis of the results into a programme of management action. The three activities are:
- Identification of risk, or discovering the source(s) from which a potential risk may arise,
- Measuring risk, or evaluating the impact on an individual or an organization in the event of a potential risk occurring, and
- Managing and controlling risk, or selecting the most effective method(s) to deal with a potential risk.
These three components have, in turn, many sub-components. These all must be reviewed and analysed when a risk management exercise is undertaken. Guiding the farmer in making a review and analysis, and formulating a risk management strategy, are the subjects of the following sections.
<section>3</section>
2. IDENTIFICATION OF RISK
2.1 Business Risks
2.2 Pure Risks
Aquaculture is an industry of great diversity. This is because there are a large number of species produced (almost 200 species of aquatic animals and plants are recorded by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) and there are many systems and farming practices which vary according to different resources in different parts of the world. Consequently any attempt to produce a simple framework for the identification of the most common risks is not easy, even within a genera of animal or plant species. For example, the risks of trout production in Denmark are substantially different from those in Italy; and the risks for cage farming salmon in Scotland are different from those in North America or in New Zealand. Similarly, in the Philippines the risks of onshore pond production of milkfish are different from those of shrimp production.
In addition, the exposure to different types of risk can change during the life cycle of a species. These differences may be subtle if the species has a simple life cycle, or they may be dramatic if the species has a complex life cycle with major metamorphoses. The pre-smolt production of young salmon in the freshwater hatchery stage, for example, has risks greatly different to those during grow-out in offshore marine cages. Consequently there is a range of differences in terms of risk between one species and another, and each with its own sub-set of associated risks.
Fortunately, despite all the complicating differences arising out of the peculiarities of species and life histories, there is a substantial number of components of production which are common from one practice to another. For example, moving water in a controlled way is a common denominator of many production practices; so too is the treatment of water in hatcheries, such as heating, filtration, and sterilization. The engineering associated with the mooring of structures in the sea is a common element of several practices in the industry, for example, sea cages used for marine fish farming or floating rafts for growing molluscs. Similarly, although all aquatic animals and plants have different life histories, many species are subjected to the same pathogens, fungal infections, and parasites which, for farming purposes, may often require the same biological and chemical treatments.
Finally, equally common to all production systems and practices, and which have no relationship to species or life history, are the pure risks, such as the climatic perils of high winds, unusual wave forces, floods, drought, abnormal temperature conditions, and natural hazards of earthquakes and volcanic activity.
The following framework summarizes the principal areas of risk faced by the farmer in the pursuit of profitability in the aquaculture industry. They are separated into (i) business risks, that is, risks directly related to the business of producing aquatic animals and plants; and (ii) pure risks, that is, the risks of life and business in general.
Business risks
1. Production risks
(i) Operational risks
Risks which interrupt the production cycle, such as mechanical failure, failure of technical processes, late delivery of supplies and services
(ii) Technological risks
Risks associated with lack of adequate technology, such as hatchery propagation, or lack of technical information and expertise
(iii) Financial risks
Risks due to government financial policies, use and dependence on government policy instruments, terms of credit, changes in operational costs
(iv) Social risks
Risks due to actions of special interest groups, such as environmentalists and conservationists
2. Market-related risks
Risks due to loss of product quality, lack of market information, actions of third party (the marketing middleman)
3. Consumer-related risks
Risks due to loss of consumer appeal, health regulations, actions of third party (the consumer)
Pure risks
(i) Physical risks of nature
Risks due to extreme climatic and meteorological conditions (wind, flood, drought, earthquake, volcanic action)
(ii) Social and political risks
Risks due to theft, malicious damage, and fraud
(iii) Liability
Risks due to legal actions against the farm
The examples are far from exhaustive but they indicate the principal types of risk for each process which are important for farmers in the aquaculture industry to consider. In their own right, each area is worthy of identification and should be given appropriate thought in the context of the particular operations of each individual farm, its location, the market system, and the target consumers of the product. To neglect this exercise possibly creates a third risk category, namely management risks, which would identify elements of poor planning and poor business control.
2.1 Business Risks
2.1.1 Production risks
2.1.2 Market-related risks
2.1.3 Consumer-related risks
The business risks are those directly related to the production of aquatic animals and plants, and the associated commercial business of the industry. The risks are conveniently sub-grouped into three activities or processes described earlier, namely production on the farm, marketing, and preparation for consumption.
2.1.1 Production risks
Production risks are the principal concern in the daily routine of the farmer, as the production process is his sole responsibility. There are many and varied risks in the production process which can reduce profitability, compared with those which may occur in the subsequent processes of marketing and consumption.
Production risks can be conveniently categorized into (i) operational, (ii) technological, (iii) financial, and (iv) social risks.
(i) Operational risks
A large number of farms have failed to attain profitability in one or more years because of accidents or major disruptions in the production process. A principal cause of disruption in daily operations is often mechanical failure of plant and equipment. Mechanical failure is an area of weakness which requires expert engineering assistance.
The most important plant and equipment on the farm are those maintaining life-support systems, for example, those which deliver water, or provide aeration and oxygen. Farms can be divided into two types depending on their systems for life-support, namely (a) those which depend, to some degree or other, on the natural movement of water bodies to deliver water (such as gravity flow, tidal movement, and wind-assisted circulation), and (b) those which require water delivered by mechanical means.
The former include the simple ongrowing practices which are located in natural water bodies and watersheds, and which do not require any mechanical or human intervention to deliver water. Among these operations are floating cages, submerged cages, floating rafts, net pen enclosures, and self-sustaining ponds. Although these practices have some specific risk management elements of their own, such as appropriate moorage systems and pollution, they are all considered relatively simple and uncomplicated in terms of their life support system.
The latter, those which require controlled water delivery, include operations relying on artificial ponds, tanks, raceways, and all hatchery complexes. All have inherent risks of mechanical failure. Failure may be with pumps, pipework, valves, any heaters or filters, or water treatment processes. It may be primary mechanical failure of components themselves, or mechanical failure due to a break in utility services (electricity, gas, and mains water), or fractures in the system due to accidents (caused by physical damage or sudden low temperatures). Risks associated with mechanical life support systems are significant for the farmer to a high degree.
A number of farming practices are not dependent on regular water delivery but function on water treatment and recirculation. A life support system is even more at risk of failure when there are a number of mechanical components. For example, recirculation systems are often constructed as "package" units, with all mechanical components having back-up components and safety systems. However, these only add to the mechanical complexity of the system and increase the risk of equipment failure almost exponentially.
Life support systems using mechanical recirculation have a use on farms, for example, in cases where water resources become suddenly and unexpectedly limited. They are also of use for "low-density" activities, such as quarantine tanks and broodstock tanks, and also in stock transportation. However, with life support systems for high-density production the risks of mechanical failure are high, and there are greatly increased biological risks associated with them. They are used invariably in locations where water resources are in short supply, and when the high-value of the product justifies the initial large capital investment and operating costs.
The risk of disruption in daily operations of the farm's life support system is alleviated to some degree by the automatic alarm system. However, automatic alarm systems are themselves mechanical devices capable of failure. Furthermore, they invariably only monitor a limited part of a site. Alarm systems also require a human response, and by the right individual capable of dealing with the problem quickly. Although useful to the mechanical operations on a farm, alarm systems often provide a false sense of security.
The alternative or supplement to the automatic alarm is the interested and well trained reliable watchman (who may have the secondary job of site security), with a telephone or radio link to the farmer or technical staff.
The life support system is the principal system of the farm, and must function constantly. The response to any mechanical failure of the system must be fast, and the action taken must be appropriate. Automatic alarms have a role to play but must be used judiciously. Watchmen and employees must be trained on the interpretation of each alarm, and the consequential actions required.
There are a number of routine activities in the daily operation of any farm which may be described as "hazardous" to the stock, and create risk. Typical hazards are those which expose the stock to a new environment, albeit temporary; for example, all handling activities required for such things as injection of veterinary medicines to treat pathogenic organisms, counting, weighing, measuring, or transferring stock around the farm, and also the use of chemical baths.
Finally, yet another potential breakdown in the smooth operation of the plant is the lack of supplies, particularly seed from hatcheries, and feed from manufacturers. It is vital that the farmer has prompt delivery of quality seed at the time required, and it is necessary that a farm has facilities for the proper storage of feed and other supplies.
Risks to lost production through disruption in the production process can be alleviated by livestock insurance. Insurance is a proven technique for the farmer to divert risk (see Section 4.3). However, as production risks are so diverse some underwriters will often only agree to share the risk, and often restrict the cover in various ways. The stock mortality insurance market which exists at the present time is relatively sophisticated, both at underwriting the risks to stock and applying the technique of risk management.
(ii) Technological risks
Aquaculture is a new technology, and the industry is still emerging. It cannot be assumed that the risks associated with aquaculture production are the same as other advanced and established businesses, such as agriculture, horticulture, or fishing. Comparisons are meaningless. However, it is interesting to compare man's level of knowledge of the natural history and biology of a few key aquatic species produced by aquaculture with those of certain domesticated land animals, cereals, or vegetables. For example, if it is assumed in relative terms that about 75% of the biology of the human is known, then probably about 50-60% of the biology of the major domestic land animals, poultry, and crops is known. But the knowledge of the biology of the aquatic animals and plants probably ranges from 20% (for such as the salmonids, and carps), down to 5%.
Even if this comparative quantification is only indicative of a relationship, it illustrates the lack of information which the farmer has about aquatic crops which are intended to give profits on his investment. His lack of information is compounded further by the dimension of water in which he has to work, and all its physical, chemical, and biological ramifications involved in the production equation.
The inadequacy of aquaculture technology is a significant risk to the industry at the present time. For example, the farmers themselves have the greatest need for information which will improve and guarantee farm production. Technological information is of prime importance to the future of the industry. It is up to the individual farmer to make certain that he is well informed about those technical developments which will help him reduce his risk. Production risks are increased where a high level of biotechnical skill is required, but is not readily available. In Japan, Taiwan Province of China (PC), and the USA, some years ago, it was remarkable to note how many new farms located themselves as close as possible to centres of research and development, thus reducing the risk of technical ignorance.
(iii) Financial risks
Many financial risks are common to all business enterprises and therefore might be considered "pure risks" (see Section 2.2). However, there are always some conditions which make them peculiar to the aquaculture industry, and therefore they must be considered by the farmer as factors which can influence the profitability of the enterprise.
Aquaculture farmers, like agricultural farmers, invariably require repeated loans. In addition to loans for capital construction, the farmer usually requires initial operational loans. These may be followed by short-term loans for annual supplies of seed, feed, new equipment, or expansion. Thus the government monetary policy is important (see Section 5.1). For example, government measures to control inflation or high interest rates on loans obviously have a bearing on the farm's profitability.
The government's policy toward a new industry, such as aquaculture, may include a number of non-fiscal incentives for the farmer. These may include grants for development, development infrastructure (such as industrial zones), government equity shareholding, government insurance, leasing of facilities, and even compensation schemes. There may also be subsidies for construction, equipment, and supplies, labour and manpower schemes, and price support. Finally there may be credit on advantageous terms through quasi-government credit schemes, special loans with deferred repayment schedules, and loan guarantees. One or all of these non-fiscal incentives may be available to the farmer and, where economically sensible, they should be used.
Similarly the government often implements a number of fiscal incentives for a new industry with a special policy toward duties, taxes, and quotas. Typical fiscal incentives include duties on physical inputs, import-export duties of products, corporate taxes and income taxes, including tax exemption on commodities earning foreign exchange, quotas, and levies on sales.
It is important for the farmer to determine continuously the extent to which these non-fiscal and fiscal incentives are making the farm operations profitable, as government incentives are usually removed once the industry is established.
Governments may also support the developing industry through a number of valuable services, such as market services (market information, intelligence, promotions, etc.), and technical services (research and development, extension, technical training schemes, etc.). Again, these are to be taken advantage of by the farmer, but with the recognition that these services will not necessarily be there for ever. A change of government, or changes in government policy, are risks to the utilization of capital by the farmer.
The farmer has also to be aware of changes in the industries which are peripheral to aquaculture, and which will influence his profitability. For example, changes in the prices of fish meal, a staple of the majority of animal feeds, will change the price of the feed he purchases. Increases in the price of fuel will increase not only his transportation costs, but also general energy costs for pumping water, and heating water in the hatchery. Changes in salaries and wages obviously alter the monthly balance sheet.
The profitability of any farm is closely tied to the farmer's management of capital and cash flow, but also to his overall financial awareness of other changes going on about him which have a direct or indirect effect on the profitability of the enterprise. The farmer will continue to need short-term credit to maintain the operation, and the lending institutions must make certain that credit is always available.
The lending institutions, to-date, have made little attempt to understand the intricacies of farm operations and their capital cycles, and invariably offer credit with terms they normally apply to land-based farmers, or fishermen. As a result, the lending institutions have made a number of inappropriate investments in the sector because of their conditions for the loans. In most instances these losses could have been avoided by a risk management assessment first. Risk management has a great deal to offer the well-informed farmer and the lending institutions in terms of the utilization and management of investment capital.
(iv) Social risks
National goals for the aquaculture sector in many countries, and the individual profitability of many farms, are invariably programmed through a series of development phases. This projected expansion, when considered in its entirety, is making considerable demands on natural resources. As a result, many other industries, equally important to the economies of countries and local areas, now compete openly and vigorously for the same resources.
The principal competitors of the aquaculture industry are those industries which also require water and adjacent space (such as electrical generation, agriculture, forestry). But aquaculture is also facing increasing competition for both inland and coastal waters and space from tourism and recreational industries. Furthermore, all are subject to the increasing demands of the environmentalists who want no industrial development at all around these natural resources.
Disorganized and ill-considered expansion often brings social resistance to any proposed development, as well as hostility from other economic competitors. For example, there is already evidence of social hostility against the aquaculture industry in parts of Europe and North America. Typical accusations are unsightliness and smell of farms, dangers to wildlife, and hazards to navigation. Social unacceptance is often exacerbated by the speed with which any new industry develops in its formative years, mainly because society does not readily embrace substantial short-term changes. The corollary, the impoundment of agricultural land, occurred over many hundreds of years and therefore caused no general social unrest.
In many European countries, at least, all "land" below high water lines belongs to the crown or state, and the general public has full right of access - a right regarded as sacrosanct. Any impoundment of tidal and offshore areas of the sea, or any restriction of the right of access to public coastal lands and inland water bodies, for the purposes of production of aquatic animals and plants is proving to be unacceptable and results in public outcry.
For the individual farmer social problems may result in the non-renewal of a lease (if he does not own the property), or limit important expansion plans. They may also lead to the loss of rights to take water for the farm, or to install costly water treatment to purify farm effluents. These are all risks to his business.
Social behaviour may also effect the individual farmer in other ways. For example, again mostly in the developed world, a zealous group of "animal rights" activists have caused damage by illegal actions, including the release of fish from cages. They have also been responsible for the release of minks from farms, for the release of dolphins from aquariums, and animals from zoos and medical research centres. Potentially such a group is local, and a small risk to farmers as a whole, but a risk none the less, particularly if there is an organized and concerted effort against, say, salmon farmers.
There are obvious risks to the future of the industry if farmers do not get reasonable access to the key natural resources of water and adjacent land. Once again these risks can be alleviated to some degree by better information. It is important that farmers as a group are well informed about other industries in the region, and programmes for development. However, it is also necessary for governments to be equally informed about the aquaculture industry, and allocate resources appropriately. A number of countries, for example, Hong Kong and Singapore, have zoned offshore areas solely for the use of the aquaculture industry, and in the USA a number of industrial marine parks have been developed where farmers have a reserved area for farming, and share communal water delivery systems with other farmers and other industries.
2.1.2 Market-related risks
In theory, once the production process has ended, and the healthy live animal has left the farm gate (or the on-farm processing plant), and payment has been made, the product is no longer the responsibility of the farmer. This, under normal circumstances, would be the end of his risk. In practice, unfortunately, this is not the case. The farmer is still exposed to risks which may change the quality of his product until purchased by the consumer. If the quality changes, then both the consumer and the marketing middleman will not make future purchases, and this obviously will have an influence on the profitability of the enterprise.
These risks the farmer now shares with the marketing middleman, as the middleman is also dependent on a satisfied consumer. Therefore, to avoid the risks of loss of quality of his product, and the loss of future consumers, it is important that the farmer works with a marketing system and middleman whom he can trust to handle his product correctly. Some farmers, of course, choose not to take this risk, and process and retail their product to the consumer directly, either at the farm gate or in local urban markets.
Aquaculture products, particularly those which are known to the market as "seafood", are gaining substantial ground in the world's food markets. It is highly probable that they can continue to increase their market share for some time to come, and to hold it. This is due to increasing world populations, increasing affluence, and static natural resources.
Identification of the market for the farm's product and forecasting of its growth trends by the farmer require considerable knowledge and skill. Basic market information and market intelligence are often provided through government services or active farmers' associations. However, using that knowledge to programme farm production, or to invest in new facilities, etc., is an individual decision. Furthermore, it is not always possible to know the plans of the farmer's competitors to increase their market share and attack the same markets.
For the farmer to compete in the market place it is important that once again he is well informed. In addition, his product must leave the farm for post-harvest handling (slaughtering, processing, packaging, and transportation) in perfect condition, and the quality must be maintained until purchased by the consumer. The flexibility of aquatic farming to harvest the product at the time of peak demand and optimal market prices is one of the advantages which aquaculture has over competing products supplied by capture fisheries. On the other hand, the farmer often has to deal with problems which are not evident in wild fish, such as diseased fish, malformations or unbalanced growth, "muddy" taste, and poor bone/shell-to-meat ratios.
Risks to product quality can often be avoided through processing cooperatives. These are invariably geared to large institutional markets, such as the catfish industry in the United States, and the processors apply stringent quality control methods to the benefit of all producers.
2.1.3 Consumer-related risks
Again, in theory, once the consumer has purchased the product in the market place, the responsibilities for the quality of the product by the farmer and the marketing middleman have ended. This, under normal circumstances, should be the end of their exposure to risks. Again, in practice, this is not the case. The farmer and the middleman are dependent for their individual profitabilities on repeated purchases by the consumer. Consequently the risks continue until the product has been consumed, and a verdict of approval has been given. The risks, however, are now shared by the farmer, the middleman, and the individual consumer.
The extent of the risks can be alleviated to some degree by selling a quality product to the same consumer (a franchise, or restaurant chain) who can be relied upon to handle it properly. The quality of aquatic animals and plants in particular is very susceptible to poor handling in the kitchen, and wrong cooking. For the individual consumer the risks can be reduced by information on short-term storage, cooking instructions, and even suggested recipe preparations. On a larger scale, the circle of consumers can be increased (to reduce the risk) by consumer programmes sponsored by the marketing and farmers' associations.
The greatest risk, not only to the individual producer and his marketing middleman but to the industry as a whole, is if the health of the consumer is endangered in any way. This may be the result of ignorance or the lack of attention by the farmer, for example, if his mollusc beds are directly affected by pollution, or if his shellfish accumulate the toxins which cause paralytic shellfish poisoning, or the fault of his middleman with unhygienic processing of the product, or poor storage. Any risks to public health invariably cause closure of the producer's farm and stringent examination of all neighbouring farms. Immediately all consumer faith in the product (and sometimes other farming products) is lost and, for all intents and purposes, the market is lost and may be irrecoverable.
2.2 Pure Risks
2.2.1 Physical risks of nature
2.2.2 Social and political risks
2.2.3 Liability
Pure risks describe a group of risks common to life and business in general, and are not specific to the aquaculture industry. Their occurrences are not selective, but the consequences of some of them have a priori relevance to the aquaculture industry compared with many other industries.
2.2.1 Physical risks of nature
Many pure risks are due to the uncontrollable physical forces of nature. Typical risks are damage to the farm through wind storms, floods, droughts, earthquakes, and even volcanic actions. Unfortunately many farm investors do not research the background meteorological conditions of the site of the farm, and only learn of the extremes of nature once the farm has been built and an incident has occurred.
Of all these risks, those which have specific relevance to the industry of aquaculture are those which concern water. All farms are obviously entirely dependent on water. Many are constructed in natural water bodies, such as cage farms in the sea or inland lakes, or net pen farms, or coastal enclosures; others are pond farms or tank farms on land adjacent to the coast or inland water bodies which rely on pumped water. Therefore the prime pure risks are flooding, drought, changes in salinity, and depositions of silts.
The consequences of flooding are not only physical damage to the farm structures, and consequential loss of fish. Floods invariably cause great changes in the quality of water which can damage the aquatic animals or plants of the farm. These may be a simple change of salinity, say from freshwater to brackishwater, or heavy depositions of silts, or more complex changes if the flood waters carry pesticide residues from nearby agricultural practices. Flood waters may also introduce predators into a farm, or new pathogens, and also provide an opportunity for farm animals to escape confinement.
Drought is equally serious. Water provides the aquatic animals and plants with oxygen for life, and the volume of water passing through the farm regulates the carrying capacity (or the biomass of life which the farm can support). As the water resources decline through drought, the carrying capacity drops below profitable levels, the growth rate decreases below optimum, and finally all the stock may die.
The success of the production process is therefore highly dependent on the volume and quality of water, and any changes to the norm through the consequences of climatic forces are extremely serious. It is therefore imperative that the farmer is well informed of the climate characteristic of his locale, and the chances of certain incidences, such as levels of 100-year flooding, abnormal high spring tides, and incidences of drought.
2.2.2 Social and political risks
The second sub-group of pure risks includes a number of common social risks and less common political risks. Of the former, these are typically theft, malicious damage, fraud, and of the latter riot, sabotage, and possibly war.
The social risks are obviously the most immediate concern to the farmer. Poaching, in particular, has been a major risk to farmers. Poaching is likely to continue and probably increase as such practices as cage farming increase, with large numbers of high-value species held in a compact and convenient enclosure. Similarly, some large farms may be 200-400 hectares in area, and almost impossible to patrol.
Random malicious damage is less of a concern to the farmer unless motivated by the special-interest groups of people described in Section 2.1.1. (iv), and any business enterprise must always give some regard to the possibility of fraud. Fraud can be external, from individuals and companies supplying goods and services, or internal, from employees bookkeeping or handling cash, or diverting the product.
2.2.3 Liability
Any business, not only that of aquaculture, is always at risk from the legal actions of employees, clients, and the general public. The origins of the actions are not always obvious. For example, the purposeful treatment of nets with a toxic TBT-based anti-fouling paint have resulted in a number of liability claims from the general public. Similarly the risks to public health from the production of aquatic animals and plants in polluted waters, or the poor handling of molluscs, have both resulted in bad publicity for the industry, and sometimes legal actions.
These examples give evidence of the vulnerability of the farmer's profitability, not only from total loss of sales but also liability actions. They illustrate how careful the industry must be to reduce its exposure to such risks, even though the technological information to guide the industry is lacking (see Section 2.1.1 (ii)).
The liability exposure of the industry will increase as the industry evolves. Certain areas in the production process (on the farm itself) have already indicated that they will require special attention. Among these may be listed the transmission of disease at all levels, damage to the environment by farm effluents, health and safety of workers, health hazards to the public, and the recent issue of genetic conservation of natural stocks.
In turn, the liability of the public and other industries will increase as the numbers of farmers increase. There is also evidence that certain areas will require special attention, such as improvement in the standards of performance by designers, contractors, and by equipment manufacturers, and also the protection for farmers against pollution from other industries.
Unfortunately, although attention in these areas will benefit the farmer, the incidences of liability themselves are invariably accompanied by a disruption of the production process, and hence the loss of short-term profitability. Consequently these liabilities are still direct risks to the enterprise.
<section>4</section>
3. MEASURING RISK
Quantifying risks is as important to the farmer and his enterprise as identifying risks. This is an important activity as it assists in placing risks in some order of priority and highlights decisions to be made.
There are two elements of each risk which need to be quantified before any assessment can be made of the cost and economics of controlling it reliably. These are:
- the frequency of the risk occurring, and
- the cost and economic consequences of it occurring.
This quantification of risk is fundamental to almost all the commercial decisions which may be taken about an enterprise. Such decisions may include cancellation of the investment altogether if the risks are too great in relation to the expected financial return. If the decision is to go ahead, then the initial investment capital must be sufficient to start and operate the business and to cover the risks it faces or to divert the costs of the risks elsewhere, for example, to insurance. Unfortunately the record of the aquaculture industry shows that many farmers did not make this type of analysis, or have the right level of risk capital available at the start of their projects.
The principal decisions facing the farmer, the investor, can be sub-divided into three categories, namely:
- Commercial decisions. These are the basic decisions about business, and are made through financial comparison of the anticipated return on investment with the cost of any risk if it occurs. In the worst case, of course, it may be decided that the risks and uncertainty of doing business in the way proposed are too great, and the investment is not made.
- Mitigation and control decisions. These are the decisions specific for each risk which must be made if its impact is to be reduced or eliminated altogether. If the risk is only to be reduced, then it is important to decide to what acceptable level, and at what cost.
- Financing decisions. These are the decisions which deal with ways of financing the risk (for example, by insurance), and their acceptability.
Unfortunately, at the present time in the emergent status of the aquaculture industry, the quantification of risks remains very individualistic for the farmer and his farm. The modern aquaculture industry has developed far within the last two decades, but with little in the way of standards and codes of practice. This includes not only standards and codes for buildings, and installation and operation of equipment, but also professional standards for producers, as well as in the support services of education, training, and even the qualifications of consultants.
Observing national standards and codes of practice for construction of the major farm buildings and installing the major utilities are usually the limit of professional inputs into any farm site. After that, any internal fabrication, the construction of special rooms, the erection of tanks and units, the water distribution system, the internal electrical and water systems, etc., are invariably constructed by the farmer and his employees. Consequently there is little in the way of basic information which has been built up and recorded over the years which makes quantification a simple matter of reference. Quantification has to be done the hard way, through research and analysis by the individual concerned.
However, no matter how good the reference resources it is still very necessary to make the quantification specific to the farm in question. As the risks to the farm operations are site related, it is necessary that the quantification of those risks is also site related. It is therefore important that as much information as possible is assembled for each particular farming enterprise, and its local environment.
There is also information which must be assembled which is not site related. This information includes scientific data about biological species, such as life history cycles, reproduction, physiology, and pathology, as well as engineering data about materials. Unfortunately this information is either in scientific literature not readily available, in archives of organizations not associated with the industry, or simply not available at all. Moreover, the data may not have been "processed" in a way readily comprehensible to the work in hand, namely quantifying risk.
However, in spite of all the difficulties at the present time, quantification of the risks can be estimated intelligently if the appropriate information is assembled.
A simple check-list of the type of information which must be assembled includes the following:
(i) Environmental data
- Climatology
Basic weather data, and incidences of extremes
- Hydrology
Basic physical data of waterbodies (range of tides, wave direction, pitch, etc.), water chemistry, and all seasonal changes
- Geology
Topography, soil composition, and chemistry
(ii) Biological data
- Species data
Life history cycle, basic physiology, reproduction
- Species pathology
Specific diseases, incidences, treatment, efficacy of treatment, known epidemics, regulations regarding diseases
- Aquatic biology
Plankton profile and seasonal blooms
(iii) Production data
- Carrying capacity
Stock densities, handling
- Feeding
Feeding rates, feeding behaviour
- Harvest
Size, methods, handling
(iv) Engineering data
- Site works
Standards and codes of practice for facility construction (tanks, cages, rafts), water systems, moorages
- Operations
Alarm systems
(v) Social data
- Employees
Regulations for health and safety, working conditions
- Non-employees
Local conditions, level of unemployment
(iv) Economic data
Costs of design services and construction, operating costs, marketing data, production profiles, internal rates of return
The list is not exhaustive, but it describes the principal areas of concern, and the type of information required.
<section>5</section>
4. MANAGING AND CONTROLLING RISK
4.1 Absorb the Risk
4.2 Organization, Industrial Standards, and Codes of Practice
4.3 Divert the Risk
The third activity in the risk management process, after identification and quantification of the business and pure risks, is managing and controlling the risks.
There are three main techniques for managing and controlling risk. These are:
- finance the farm and its operations to cater for risk, and absorb the consequences and cost of risk in its profitability,
- organize the farm and its operations in such a way as to eliminate risk as much as possible; and
- divert or spread the risk, for example, through insurance.
4.1 Absorb the Risk
Absorbing a risk is one management technique appropriate to certain types of risks. The financial investment behind a farming enterprise should therefore be sufficient to withstand the occurrence and financial consequences of most risks. Typical pure risks which fall into this category are the normal fluctuations in market prices of products, changes in international currency rates, and increases in labour costs, etc. There are also a number of business risks, such as increases in the price of feed due to (say) sudden shortages of fish meal, and breakdown of machinery.
However, absorbing risks requires positive action on the part of management and not simply acceptance that the enterprise can withstand the loss should it occur. This may require a certain level of financial liquidity by reserving a fixed percentage of the profits in a sinking fund, or strict regard to specific practices. Investors in the industry, and more by default than planned strategy, continue to absorb potential risks without maintaining the required liquidity, and pay the consequences. Others, so far, have been lucky.
In view of the high risk category of the aquaculture industry it is important to have a business plan and management strategy which anticipate absorbing certain risks.
4.2 Organization, Industrial Standards, and Codes of Practice
Managing and controlling risks are the responsibility of the industry as a whole. This is brought about by individuals recognizing the specific responsibilities within their own particular branch of the industry, and by professional associations and groups of individuals working together to improve organization, to set appropriate standards, and to adopt codes of practice.
The following examples illustrate only some of the issues currently of concern to the industry which can alleviate some of the high risks.
(i) Selection of the site
The basic organization of the farm and its subsequent operations begin with the selection of the site. Unfortunately there is considerable misconception about the site selection process, which is clearly very important. With almost certain probability, no site is perfect. The prospective farmer is not able to select a site which meets all the criteria which he or others might have assembled. The farmer has to compromise different criteria and, in practice, the farm site selects itself.
The location of the majority of farms is determined by the principal factors which govern the availability of appropriate land and access to suitable water. Land ownership or water rights are therefore the two main criteria. Consequently most farms are sited by Individuals who already own potentially suitable land, or have access to potentially suitable water; or, alternatively, are the only locations for which a sale or lease can be made.
By far the minority of farm sites were developed on the best sites and under the best conditions. Consequently the majority of farm sites are a compromise of factors. Depending on what those factors are introduces the first element of risk to the business. For example, the land might be flat and less costly to develop, and provides opportunity for expansion; however, it is not as close to the water as it should be. As a result, larger pumps have to be installed, the water delivery system is lengthier, and (possibly) the water line crosses a road requiring substantial protection. Although the costs might compensate each other, the risk of mechanical failure is increased, including an added risk of fracture of the life support system as it crosses the road.
(ii) Pilot scale projects
A procedure important to the development of a particular farm or enterprise, but not necessarily considered a standard procedure, is the pilot-scale project. If the investment is in a farming practice which has been well established and proven in the area, then a pilot-scale project is probably not economically justified as a number of the risks have been identified, reduced, or eliminated. On the other hand, if the investment is in a new technology, with little or no prior practice in the area, then the pilot project should be used to assist in identification of unknown risks, and to provide the real quantification of those risks. Expansion of the pilot-scale project does not take place until the risks are manageable and controlled economically, and farm operations are trouble-free to the trained employees.
There is always a considerable element of risk inherent in the process of expansion, no matter how well prepared the process might be. However, there is a considerable difference between the well-researched calculated risk, and pure chance. The farm designed around the built-in risk management approach has a far better chance of achieving organized and profitable expansion than one which expands on the strength of a good financial statement.
(iii) Engineering standards
Professional engineers have been slow in entering the business of aquaculture. Civil and mechanical engineers have rightly been used by many farmers for the design of facilities, but agricultural and marine engineers have not recognized the aquaculture field as one to which their backgrounds can readily be applied to the research and development needs of the industry. Consequently the industry has been slow in producing the fundamental engineering information from which standards and codes of practice are set.
A specific example is the marine engineering associated with the construction and moorage of floating cages and rafts, particularly in the open sea. The engineering principles and practices relevant to the construction of floating piers, floating breakwaters, buoys and navigational lights, etc., in the marine environment are well established. However, so far, this information is not readily accessible in the type of engineering databooks which are published for the agriculture industry.
Consequently the farmer has to call on experienced individuals in the maritime industry to give him specific guidance, or to advise where the appropriate data might be found. Typical individuals are master mariners, marine engineers, marine surveyors, coast guards, and meteorologists. As a last resort, the farmer may have to undertake experimental studies himself.
Under these circumstances, the risk management task for much of the relevant aquaculture engineering is one of research. It is research for specific experimental site studies, and research for information which must be pieced together.
In recent years, the manufacturers of large marine facilities, such as floating cages, rafts, and breakwaters, have taken the initiative to provide engineering services. They supply expert services to analyse the proposed location and to recommend the appropriate configuration of the facilities and the moorage system recommended. In doing so they accept the responsibility of the failure of the system, thus releasing the farmer from one small group of risks. It is therefore a valid risk management action on the part of the farmer to purchase his facilities from a manufacturer who provides these fundamental and probably repeated services.
In their own turn, of course, the manufacturers are taking a risk. This risk they will have analysed and costed, and will have decided that they can withstand the liability in the event of any occurrence, and indemnify the farmer for the loss of equipment and stock.
(iv) Professional standards
For many reasons, a farmer has inevitably to seek professional assistance either to plan the farm, or throughout its subsequent operations. Although not readily recognized as such, expert consultation is a risk to the farmer, and it is essential that this risk is managed like any more obvious one.
There are many professionals in the industry, predominantly technical people who provide professional services to the farmer either individually, or through companies. Most adopt high standards in the services they give to their clients, but there are also many who are totally unqualified to provide certain services. For example, the majority of professional experts have not been in the business themselves as farm owners and producers; the majority are scientists and technical individuals, who have probably worked on a government research farm at the most, yet many are quite prepared to sell services to a farmer which may include production programming, the recommendation of harvesting schedules, and even financial planning.
Although there are professional associations of scientists and engineers which maintain qualifications and standards, there are no such associations among the professional aquaculture experts. Few individuals, if any, carry liability insurance coverage. The exceptions are the large professional companies, usually in developed countries, which provide a range of services, such as design engineering. In some countries, design engineers are required to carry liability insurance by law. Other professionals in the company, similarly, should be insured.
Unfortunately many investments in the aquaculture sector have been lost as a result of professional individuals greatly overstepping their ability to provide the services required. Investments were therefore made in projects which were ill-conceived, inadequately researched and planned, and poorly implemented. However, the investor must share the responsibility as much as the incompetent professional. A sound risk management approach by the investor would have determined that the professional was not capable of giving the services required.
It is an important part of the risk management approach not only for the investor to research the background and experience of the professional thoroughly but, like the medical profession, obtain a second opinion of the recommendations being made by the professional.
The solution to competence and professionalism is not easy. Aquaculture, in many respects, is an "emotional" industry, with considerable pulling power for both producers and professionals. Many people enter the industry irrationally, deceived by its apparent simplicity as a result of shortcomings of many so-called experts. The investors are in many ways to blame. Although possibly anticipating a substantial loan for the construction and operation of the farm, the entrepreneur invariably has to pay from his own resources the cost of pre-feasibility and feasibility studies. The project might be substantial, but the investor spares little money of his own in preparation. Consequently he gets the preliminary services which he pays for.
The professionals are also to blame, particularly if they avoid responsibility for their mistakes. Enforcing liability, where it does exist, is not always practical or feasible. Some professionals do not carry liability insurance, but, when they do, it is probably unreachable as they are resident in other countries.
However, in the long term, it will be important for the professionals in the industry to police their ranks through accredited associations. The associations will be required to set standards and codes of practice for their members, and to ensure that each carries professional indemnity insurance. Such associations would be an attraction to the farmer as they would alleviate many of the risks of seeking professional help by offering him a chance of redress in the case of the professionals' malpractice.
(v) The treatment of disease
Disease of the stock is one of the main risks to the profitability of the farm. Diseased animals and plants are often unsaleable. Invariably they require costly treatment, and the costs are not always recoverable once the disease is eliminated. Moreover, the stock may still not be marketable until all residual chemicals have been cleaned from the body.
Many countries have laws and regulations regarding the movement, handling, and marketing of diseased stock to reduce the risk of spreading disease. Few, if any, compel total destruction of all stock on the farm as governments have no provision to pay compensation to the producers.
For some of the most common diseases, effective vaccines have been developed and are commercially available. This is the most prudent management option for the producers to avoid or minimize all the risks associated with disease on the farm. However, in view of the incidence and frequency of disease in the industry, government research remains equally important as part of its supporting services.
(vi) Workers' health and safety
Aquaculture is an industry which has attracted the participation of a large number of individuals, the majority of whom have never received any basic education or training in its systems or practices. Only in the last five years has there been a steady stream of trained individuals entering the industry to join those whose training was received "on the job". However, both groups are quite clearly dedicated to the emerging industry. The majority of the work force in the industry is comparatively young.
The low average age of the work force is probably fortunate. On the whole farming aquatic animals and plants, like agriculture, is a hard way of life, requiring attention seven days each week, fifty-two weeks of the year. Compared with agriculture, working conditions in the industry are not good. The work is hard, at times boring, and often dangerous. For example, operating complexes of floating cages in isolated coastal areas in winter is not appealing. Fortunately the "frontier spirit" of the industry makes many of these hardships endurable.
Of course the benefit of the frontier spirit will not go on for ever. Already, in fact, there is evidence that the production and profitability of farms have been reduced by social problems often associated with working in remote locations or on offshore sites. There is also evidence that lives of employees have been lost, both through accidents at sea with heavy lifting equipment, and in gun-fights with poachers (e.g. in the Philippines).
One of the priority tasks for the industry at the present time is a set of standards for the health and safety of its work force. From the point of view of the risk management process, there is the need for a group of professional individuals to set standards specifically for the aquaculture industry. It is not sufficient to rely on the standards of other industries (such as agriculture, or fisheries) to serve the industry. With new standards, the industry will develop a core of dedicated and disciplined men and women on whom the farmer can rely.
4.3 Divert the Risk
Most of the risks identified and analysed by a farmer for his enterprise can be reduced by varying degrees, yet few can be entirely eliminated. Thus they have the option to absorb these risks themselves (see 4.1) or to divert them.
An important option available to the farmer is to insure the welfare of his aquatic animals or plants against the risk. This is one of the most well-used and practical techniques for handling risk. Insurance provides the best option for the farmer to divert his risk, or to share it with others. It is a satisfactory and reliable means of managing risks.
There are a few risks, and parts of certain risks, which are not worth insuring. These are important for the farmer to know as it is not necessary to reduce the farm's profitability by paying premiums to an Insurance underwriter to cover risks which will Inevitably and frequently occur. Insurance underwriters level their premiums to cover the cost of ordinary losses, allowing also for a profit, and an "uncertainty" margin to enable them to establish a reserve for disasters and catastrophes which occur from time to time.
The role of insurance, as the principal method for diverting or sharing the farmer's risk exposure of his enterprise, is an important one which merits examination and explanation. Insurance is already the established mechanism for managing the risks of many existing enterprises. The presence of an active insurance industry in the aquaculture industry provides the lending institutions with the confidence to make loans to farmers, and it is important to the future of the industry that both continue. However, because of the high risk of the industry, and plenty of evidence that the industry lacks all the right technology, many underwriters are being extremely circumspect about providing insurance, or are severely restricting their cover. Unfortunately this is coincidental with a time of great need for capital investment in the industry, both privately and by lending institutions. The confidence of the insurance companies in the industry at this time is vital, as their role is
important.
Insurers are skilled risk assessors. Their attitude to the aquaculture industry is therefore indicative of the inherent risk level in farming at the present time, which should be taken by the collective aquaculture industry as a warning that many things are far from satisfactory.
<section>6</section>
5. THE ROLE OF GOVERNMENT IN RISK MANAGEMENT
5.1 Government Policy
5.2 Legislation
5.3 Production of Information
The policy and legislative actions of any government, at national, state, and local levels, have significant impacts on the management and control of risk in the aquaculture industry. Some of these impacts do not arise through actions directed toward the aquaculture industry itself, but through actions directed toward associated or competing industries, such as agriculture, tourism, or recreation. Unfortunately few governments at the present time consider or coordinate multi-sectoral development.
5.1 Government Policy
A national policy toward aquaculture development is important for the industry. This may be no more than including statements about the sector in a five-year economic development plan, or it may be a detailed development plan for aquaculture alone.
With the recognition of the aquaculture sector in any development plan, there invariably follows a number of policy instruments for government administrators to manage the sector and control individual private investments. The range and use of these policy instruments are usually in direct relationship to the status and strength of the sector. For example, in countries where investment in the sector is being encouraged, the government will stress incentives, such as grants, loans, and subsidies, and even fiscal incentives, such as exemptions from tax. In countries where the sector is well developed the government will invariably impose duties, taxes, and quotas.
In the formative years of a sector, a government will often provide services. These may include services for marketing, research and development, education, training, extension, and technical information. It will also often provide physical infrastructure for the industry (utilities, transportation, and coastal development), and institutional support (such as state farms, state hatcheries, and market organizations).
In summary, the government policy toward the industry through the use of available policy instruments can be considerable.
The majority of farmers obviously take advantage of a favourable government policy toward the sector. Many, in fact, in the formative years of their enterprise depend on government incentives, such as grants, loans, and subsidies, to be profitable.
The risk to the farmer is the period of transition, when the sector is developing well and reasonably independently, and the government is reducing its direct support to the industry. Incentives are being replaced by taxes and levies on sales, state farms and government hatcheries may be closed down, and institutional support is stopped.
These risks can be managed through a very detailed exchange of information by both parties. It is imperative chat the government has an excellent knowledge of the workings of the industry so that its objectives are appropriately phased. For example, there is no economic sense in closing down government hatcheries (which supplied seed for the farmers to get the industry established) if alternatives are not in place and have demonstrated that they can meet the seed requirements of the industry. Similarly, sudden high taxes on profits, which perhaps were made when national production was low and prices probably high, are not going to be practical if national (and international) production increases and the price drops, as has been the case of marine shrimp and salmon production.
On the other hand, it is also imperative that the farmers have good information about the short and long-term plans of the government toward the industry. With this information their investments can be directed toward the replacement of the government's previous contributions. For example, the investment in private hatcheries for seed production, the formation of farmers' associations, and other organizations, for marketing and product promotion, and even private research and development.
Invariably the burden of researching and publishing this information from both sides rests with the industry. Usually the responsibility is taken up by the farmers' associations, through their newsletters and publications, or by another invaluable component of the national aquaculture sector, the independent publishers of trade papers, magazines, and information bulletins.
5.2 Legislation
A government manages and controls the aquaculture sector through legislation. The type and degree of legislation obviously have a direct and significant impact on the sector as a whole, and on the individual enterprise and farmer, and therefore constitute risks to all of them.
Legislation is sub-divided into two areas, namely legislation dealing with resource utilization and resource management, and legislation dealing with farm management.
(i) For effective and economic resource utilization and management, the government has to be aware of the needs of the aquaculture sector. The sector's prime needs are water (inland, coastal, and offshore), land (on-shore, sub-tidal nearshore, and sub-tidal offshore), and all rights of access and protection. The government has also to be aware of the needs of other competing sectors (energy, agriculture, tourism, recreation), and for the general public's need for an acceptable environment (nature reserves, wildlife),
From the point of view of the aquaculture sector there are several approaches to resource utilization and management. These may include long-term leasing of sites, special development zones for aquaculture, and industrial zones for certain water-based industries which can be integrated together.
(ii) The majority of national, state, and local legislation concerns farm management. This is in the form of regulations and bye-laws directly concerning farm operations and production practices, and then indirectly concerning the manufacturing industries, suppliers, services, and marketing activities.
Typical legislation for the farm operations and production practices deals with such things as site and water access, water quality, negative and positive environmental impacts, labour, introduction and transfer of species, disease control, and product quality. That for the secondary level deals with the safety of human health, such as the use of herbicides, pesticides, antibiotics, and carcinogens in equipment and in operations, and environmental health.
For farm management purposes, acceptable solutions for the farmer are an efficient system for permits and licenses at reasonable cost, preferably permit-packaging (one permit for everything). In addition government quarantine stations should be provided if there are stringent regulations with regard to species introduction and transfer. Regulations at the secondary level are sensibly part of more far-reaching national legislation controlling the use of toxic chemicals in the environment.
The risks to the farmer from national legislation, particularly the regulations and bye-laws dealing with farm management and production, are many and varied. All have a direct or indirect affect on profitability. The most direct implication is the cost of permits and licenses to own and operate a farm, and the indirect costs associated with making applications to many different government agencies. In many developed countries, for example, the permits and licenses required to operate certain farms number over 20. Collectively, they may take over two years to obtain, and add up to a considerable cost. In extreme cases, such as a permit to use the heated effluent water from a nuclear electrical generating station, the permit process may take three years and involve lawyers.
The highest risk to the farmer centres on regulations regarding diseases and stock introduction. This is an area of considerable importance to the industry at the present time. There are a number of instances of government legislation which have exacerbated the problem; for example, one government issued permits but with restrictions on the water volume for each farm. The volume was in fact less than a calculated basic economic unit. This compelled the farmers to overcrowd their stock, exposing them to the risks of diseases. Yet another government, with the objective of protecting its industry from exotic diseases, regulated for the use of an indigenous but totally unsuitable local species incapable of acclimating to the marine environment where it was supposed to prosper. This effectively killed the industry, as few farmers were foolish enough to take such a risk.
Few if any governments have enacted legislation requiring total slaughter of all stock infected by certain diseases. Although this is primarily because they are unwilling to pay compensation to the producers it is useful in that few diseases justify this extreme action. None the less, some farmers disregard laws and regulations when it comes to the movement and handling of stocks, diseased or otherwise, thus endangering themselves, the industry, and the environment as a whole.
It is obviously the interest of both government and industry to have constructive legislation. However, constructive legislation can only be produced by both sides being well informed about the objectives and operational needs of the other. Well informed parties can accept even extreme legislative action, such as the compulsory slaughter of stock infected with a highly contagious and dangerous disease, or stock which are potentially a hazard to human health. These are acceptable risks to any industry. However, considerable information is required so that sensible regulations and bye-laws can be enacted which will allow, for example, the safe introduction of non-indigenous species, temporary quarantine of diseased stock, acceptable treatment of disease which will not impact subsequent product quality, the use of growth stimulants in feed, etc. Much of the information on which the right legislation can be made is still lacking.
5.3 Production of Information
All governments accept the responsibility of providing information services to the sector, particularly national statistics and data relevant to economic and development planning. For the development of a new sector, such as aquaculture, many governments accept the responsibility for additional information services, such as the adoption of international and national standards and codes of practice, and also biotechnical and non-biotechnical research.
(i) Standards and codes of practice
Standards and codes of practice for the industry are invaluable, not only to the economic strength of the industry as a whole, but also to the farmers and their suppliers to reduce their individual risks (see Section 4.2). For example, the international Codex Committee on Fish and Fishery Products recently (May 1988) decided to elaborate a code governing the quality and safety of aquaculture products. Typical aspects of the code will be product safety and quality, water quality, off-flavours, residues of veterinary drugs, and the public health significance of diseases and parasites. Where the code is adopted, the farmers have the opportunity to meet the standards required. Meeting strict standards will probably require increased investments, such as modern and hygienic processing plants, and this will reduce their profitability. On the other hand, meeting the standards will eliminate most of the risks currently associated with the "grey" areas of quality control, where the
products are rejected because there is no clean division between acceptability and unacceptability.
The only other code of practice indirectly relevant to aquaculture which can be adopted by certain countries at the present time is that dealing with the introduction and transfer of species. The prime reason for the code is conservation, but it has both positive and negative implications for the aquaculture industry.
No country, or group of countries, has yet established any standards specifically for the aquaculture industry. Invariably each country has its own standards and codes for construction of infrastructure and buildings which are used automatically by designers and contractors of large farms; but these are invariably ignored by the small farmers in the interests of saving investment capital. Unfortunately, as such standards have been developed without any reference to the aquaculture industry at all, the risks to the operations at both large and small farms remain. The large farm is probably over-engineered and highly mechanical (see Section 2.1.1 (i)), and the small farm is a hazard to the health and safety of the employees (see 4.2 (vi)).
(ii) Research information
Most governments support industrial-related research, either at government research centres or through contract research to the private sector. Although the topics of research clearly have some relevance to the industry, most governments do not specify research programmes within their policy which directly support the core of the industry, namely the producers. The majority of support is for scientists and technologists at universities and research centres who identify their own research objectives.
There has been little or no research organized to build up the information base on which standards and codes of practice are set. For example, government research support has been given to individuals to design production units, complete with heat exchangers, filters, and innumerable controls, but few if any research funds have been given to chemical engineers to specify the leaching rates and toxicity of plasticizers in water of varying salinities from all the plastic materials which are used or available to the manufacturers. If this were done, then the industry would have the factual evidence that specific plastic materials were safe at these salinities, and others were not. The risks of death or deformity to the stock from these highly toxic petro-chemicals would be removed.
There are many other cases which may be cited. For example, there is a need for the basic data of on-site conditions (wave amplitude, water exchange rates, etc.) for offshore cages Co match the design criteria. This not only includes the physical data (strengths, stresses, and strains) of materials, but also the same parameters for individual cages and complexes of cages under different conditions of sea state. There is a considerable need for information about the safe treatment of diseases, not only the efficacy of the treatment, but also the periodicity for the residues of the drugs.
In summary, the guidance for government-supported research should come from the farmers, who could indicate where they are most exposed to the risks of losing their stocks, and hence their profitabilities and livelihoods.
<section>7</section>
6. BIBLIOGRAPHY
FAO, 1981. Conservation of genetic resources of fish: problems and recommendations. Report of the Expert Consultation on the Genetic Resources of Fish. Rome, FAO, 9-13 June 1980. EIFAC Tech.Pap.(50):52p
FAO, 1986. Crop insurance: its place in development. Report on the Expert Consultation on Crop Insurance. Rome, FAO, 16-18 September 1988. (Un-numbered) 47p
Secretan, P.A.D., 1987. Risk management in aquaculture. Aquaculture Europe 87. Proceedings of the Biennial Meeting of the European Aquaculture Society, Amsterdam, The Netherlands. 2-5 June 1987. 18p
Secretan, P.A.D., 1988. Trends in aquaculture related to insurance. Proceedings of the Aquaculture International Congress and Exposition, Vancouver, Canada. 6-9 September 1988. 227-232p
UNCTAD, 1981. Crop insurance for developing countries. TD/B/C.3/163/Rev.1. United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, Geneva, Switzerland. 19p
<section>8</section>
ANNEX I. GLOSSARY
The following glossary with regard to risk management and aquaculture insurance terminology has been selected and adapted from the Report of the Second Expert Consultation on Crop Insurance, held in FAO, Rome, 18-20 April 1989.
Accident
An unplanned event, unexpected and undesigned, which occurs suddenly and at a definite place.
Act of God
An event arising out of natural causes with no human intervention which could not have been prevented by reasonable care or foresight, e.g. floods, earthquakes, wind storms.
Actuarial
Describes the calculations made by an actuary. Essentially this is a branch of statistics, dealing with the probabilities of an event occurring. Actuarial calculations, if they are to be at all accurate, require basic data over a sufficient period to permit likelihood of future events to be predicted with a certain degree of certainty.
Aquaculture Insurance
This is insurance applied to aquacultural enterprises, e.g. crop insurance. Livestock insurance, generally against death, sickness, or serious injury to the aquatic animals (and plants) concerned, is included in this class of business. The term is not normally used to describe insurance of farm buildings or equipment, though the same insurer may cover both aquaculture production and fire insurance for farm buildings.
Commission
That portion of the premium paid by the insurer to the agent as remuneration for services in procuring and servicing the policy-holder.
Crop Insurance
Provides protection against damage or loss to growing crops against specified or multiple perils, e.g. wind storms, floods, fire. Measurement of loss could be by "yield" basis, production costs basis, agreed value basis, or rehabilitation costs basis.
Indemnity
The amount payable by the insurer to the insured, either in the form of cash, repair, replacement, or reinstatement in the event of an insured loss which amount is measured by the extent of the insured's pecuniary loss, is termed the indemnity. It is set at a figure equal to but not more than the actual value of the subject matter insured just before the loss, subject to the adequacy of the sum insured.
Insurance
Is a financial mechanism which aims at reducing the uncertainty of loss by pooling a large number of uncertainties so that the burden of loss is distributed. Generally each policy-holder pays a contribution to a fund, in the form of a premium assessed by the insurer, commensurate with the risk he introduces, which is established and administered by the insurer and out of that fund are paid the losses suffered by any of the insured.
Insured peril
The cause of the loss which entitles the insured to recover under the policy; for example, hail, frost, wind, drought, excessive rain, and diseases.
Loss adjustment
Following a notification of a claim, the insurer must determine the extent to which loss has occurred and the amount which can be paid to the insured as indemnity. This process of gathering information and making a decision is called loss adjustment, or loss assessment.
Loss frequency
The rate of the occurrence of losses, often expressed in terms of the number of incidents over a period of time. It is one method used for measuring the effectiveness of loss prevention services.
Physical hazards
The risk or danger arising from the subject matter of insurance; for example, excessive flooding when the crop is about to be harvested.
Risk
Relates to an event which may or may not occur, the likelihood of which can be predicted with a certain degree of confidence.
Specific-risk insurance
A policy which describes and pre-establishes specifically the named perils to be covered, in contrast to a policy that covers "all-risks" subject to certain exclusions.
