<title>How good the Earth?</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
The earth's land surface could in theory feed many more people than now live on our planet. Yet global statistics must not blind us to local realities. Even today, over 20 developing countries are cultivating more land than is properly suited for agricultural production. Many more are over-exploiting their land. These countries are living on borrowed time, mining their agricultural resources, and degrading, in some cases irreversibly, the very basis of their future survival and prosperity.
It is more than a decade since FAO began its work on agro-ecological zones (AEZ). This investigation has now begun to assume extraordinary importance for the light that it sheds on the relationship between food and population in the developing countries. The AEZ project was one of the first to quantify systematically the extents of potentially cultivable land in the developing countries. It was the first study to provide estimates of the yields that can be expected for different crops in different parts of the developing world under varying levels of inputs. It also provided essential data for subsequent studies that assessed the population-supporting capacity of land in developing countries.
Today, it is possible to put this knowledge to practical and realistic use - a use which will enable us to reduce the numbers of people who are still hungry or starving. The AEZ technique makes it possible for developing countries to plan the future of their agriculture rationally.
AEZ studies inform planners about the land potential, which crops are best grown where, what they will yield, what levels of sustainable production may be expected under different levels of input use. Combined with FAO's Agriculture: Toward 2000 methodology the assessments quantify how much it will cost to conserve the soil, how much fertilizer, pesticide and power will be needed, and how to optimize the crop mix to maximize food production without damaging the environment. Above all, they will enable countries to undertake the balance sheet approach recommended in the Programme of Action for African Agriculture, and so ensure that agricultural plans are compatible with land resource potentials.
AEZ studies have thus been transformed from theoretical exercises into a vital weapon in the planner's armoury. The purpose of this publication is to explain how this weapon works and what questions it can answer. While the details may be complicated, the implications are clear. Some 450 to 500 million people are inadequately fed in the developing countries, where populations are still growing fast. In this situation, planners have no choice but to find out all they can about their countries' agricultural potential. The best possible use of every country's natural resources will go a long way toward solving the complex world food problems.
I hope that this publication will serve as yet another useful step in eliminating the anachronism of hunger and starvation from our planet.
Edouard Saouma
Director-General
Food and Agriculture Organization
of the United Nations
<section>2</section>
The problem
The developing countries (excluding China, Mongolia, Viet Nam, the Democratic People's Republic of Korea and the Republic of Korea) cover an area of nearly 6500 million hectares. Somewhat more than one-tenth of this is currently cultivated. This results in an average of 3.2 people living off every cultivated hectare of land.
In itself, this statistic is not alarming. Yet over the last 20 years of this century, the population of the developing countries is expected to increase by 50 percent. It is expected to triple before it stabilizes. What is the potential of the agricultural resource base that must support this population?
Much of the land in developing countries is not well suited to rainfed agriculture. Nearly four-fifths of it is covered by soils that limit crop production. Climatically, much of it is too dry, some too wet and some too cold for crop production. As a result, a maximum of about 2000 million ha of land in the developing countries is potentially cultivable - about three times the currently cultivated area.
Globally, this figure appears almost reassuring. It confirms that it might be possible to triple population without greatly increasing the number of people living off each cultivated hectare - but only if all suitable land is brought under cultivation.
The situation is much more alarming when analysed regionally or nationally. Little more than seven percent of land in Southwest Asia, for example, is suitable for rainfed agriculture. And more land is already being cultivated there than is theoretically suitable for cultivation. In Southeast Asia, the limits of rainfed agriculture are also close at hand. Only in parts of South America and Africa are there large reserves of agricultural resources. Even these resources may be difficult to exploit because they are often remote and difficult to manage.
This situation therefore demands careful land-use planning. Agriculture must be developed over the long term in such a way that all available land is put to its optimum but sustainable use. Unhappily, planning on this dimension is hampered by a long list of unknowns:
o Exactly how much potentially arable land is available, and where is it?
o What crops could be grown on it, and what would. they yield?
o What level of farming inputs is needed to produce required yields?
o What is the risk of degrading this land through cultivation, and how can the risk be minimized?
o Which areas and which crops would produce the highest returns given more resources?
o What would it cost to realize these returns?
o What are the maximum returns attainable?
o Where should future research be concentrated?
The growing population
Our inability to answer such questions has frequently led to disaster in the past. Millions of hectares of good land were destroyed in the United States of America in the 1930s when the soil was left exposed to wind erosion. Bad planning led to the groundnut disaster in East Africa in the 1950s, in the course of which huge sums were invested, and lost, in a cash crop which was grown under unsuitable conditions. In Africa today, some of the drier areas are being degraded at such a rate that the term 'desertification' has come into use. Yields here, as in other over-exploited areas, are declining.
The Agro-Ecological Zones (AEZ) study was conceived by the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) to help prevent this kind of disaster and answer these questions. With the help of computers and many man- and woman-years of painstaking work, details of the moisture, temperature and soil requirements of the major crops have been compiled, and the soil and climatic conditions that exist in most parts of the developing world have been quantified.
The AEZ Study views the developing countries' land area as a mosaic of about 650000 grid squares (10 x 10 km), each with a specific climate, growing period and association of soils. From these the area of each soil within each climate and length-of-growing-period zone has been calculated for each country. These defined agro-ecological cells constitute the data base which is stored on computer.
This data base can then be used by a series of computer programs to answer questions about potential cultivation on a regional or national level. The first regional studies were completed in 1978. More detailed studies, particularly at the country level, have been continuing since.
The methodology has now reached the stage where it can be of practical assistance in long-term planning at the subregional, national or district level. This publication is designed to explain the technique, and its potential, to those charged with this responsibility.
How soil limits crop production (percentage of total area)
Small-scale farmers breaking up clods of earth in an attempt to raise a crop under difficult conditions. Land such as this is often suitable for cultivation only with irrigation and the appropriate use of fertilizer.
Each hectare of the world's cropland has to support an average of 3.3 people. Bangladesh, with about 10 people/hectare, uses land extremely intensively whereas Zaire and Venezuela could increase their outputs considerably before putting any pressure on cropland.
<section>3</section>
The solution
The conditions that restrict crop growth on the earth's surface are complex but limited in number. They include the species and cultivar of the crop being grown, the nature of the climate, the kind of land on which the crop is grown, and the use of inputs such as fertilizers and pesticides applied to the land. The purpose of the AEZ study was to model the interaction of these factors to provide an estimate of how successfully specific crops could be grown in the different areas of the developing world.
The first, and by far the most important, step (Step 1 in the diagram below) was to analyse the needs of the crop in terms of both climate and soil - a process which was done in great detail for many crops by panels of experts. The accuracy with which crop requirements can be determined is one of the keys to the whole study. Inventories of climate and soil are useful only to the extent that they can be matched with crop requirements.
Next, 11 of the crops most widely grown were selected for the study. The temperatures needed by these crops for growth were then used to help define 14 major climates and thermal regimes. These are specific temperature regimes during the periods when moisture is available for the growth of the crops. Because the temperature needs of the crops had already been defined, and matched with the major climates, it was then easy to specify which crops could be grown in which climate.
The study then analysed information on climate from meteorological stations with long-term records. This information was used to map the location of the thermal regimes (major climates) and of the length-of-growing-period zones. These zones were defined in terms of the number of days in a year in which there was adequate moisture for crop growth. Information on the locations of the thermal regimes and the length-of-growing-period zones were then combined on to a further map, the climatic inventory (Step 2a).
The next step (2b) was to include data on soils. The study would not have been possible without more than a decade of earlier work by FAO and Unesco, in collaboration with many national and international bodies, which resulted in the FAO-Unesco Soil Map of the World. This provided both the actual map on which the AEZ study is based and the information on soils that is essential to it.
The climatic inventory was then combined with the soil map to produce the land inventory (Step 3). Grid lines 10 km apart were drawn over the land inventory, and the number of 10-km squares in each agro-ecological cell (i.e. areas with identical soil, climate and growing-period zones) were then counted in each developing country. This provided estimates of the area of each agro-ecological cell in each country. Undertaken before the availability of modern automated geographic information systems, this was a laborious task.
Five steps to potential land productivity
Calculations were then made of the maximum potential yields of each crop in each length-of-growing-period zone. These yields were then modified to take account of agroclimatic constraints in each zone for each crop, including rainfall variability, pests, diseases and the difficulties of harvest.
These modified yield potentials were then compared with the maximum attainable. On the basis of this comparison, an assessment was made of the suitability of each length-of-growing-period zone in each thermal regime for each of the crops. They were defined as very suitable for a crop if this would produce more than 80 percent of maximum yield; as suitable if yield potential was 40 to 80 percent of maximum; as marginally suitable if 20 to 40 percent of maximum; and as unsuitable if less than 20 percent of maximum. This was the agroclimatic suitability rating (Step 4).
The soil needs of each crop were then matched with the soil conditions prevailing in each agro-ecological cell, and the agroclimatic ratings further downgraded if soil conditions were less than ideal. The result was the land suitability assessment (Step 5) which, in final form, gives the area in each length-of-growing-period zone in each climate variously suited to the production of each of the 11 crops in terms of very suitable, suitable, marginally suitable, or not suitable.
All these calculations were carried out for two different levels of farming inputs - the high and low input levels summarized below. How crops are farmed (the amount of fertilizer used, the degree of mechanization and efforts made to conserve the soil, for example) has an important bearing on both crop yield and the total area over which a crop can be grown. Obviously, more plant nutrients and better pest control will increase yield. In the AEZ study, it was estimated that crop yields with low inputs would be only 25 percent of those attainable with a high level of inputs.
The ways in which farming techniques affect the area of potentially cultivable land are more complex. Obviously, some very heavy soils cannot be worked by hand while tractors can do the job easily. Yet some sloping or very stony land that can be worked with hand tools may be impossible to work with tractors. All these subtleties are taken account of in the AEZ study. Later studies, particularly those at the national level, make even more sophisticated use of the input variables.
Two levels of input are considered in the AEZ study of crop potentials. Low off-farm inputs as practiced in subsistence agriculture, high inputs as in many farms of commercial agriculture. Farming in nearly all developing countries is still a long way from using high inputs. In the AEZ study, low input yields were calculated as one-quarter of those possible with high inputs.
<section>4</section>
The crops
The AEZ study methodology is capable of estimating the production potential of any crop in any part of the world. Initially, crop adaptability, the range of climatic conditions required by a crop, was analysed for more than 70 crops. These crops were divided into five groups according to their photosynthetic requirements. Each group responds to solar radiation and temperature in different ways, and these responses determine productivity. (Group V, a rather special group that includes pineapple and sisal, is not considered further in this publication because it does not include any of the major crops considered in the study.)
The 11 major crops in the developing world in 1988
The information gathered was used to help define the temperature regimes of the 14 major climates used in the study. Thus almost from the start of the study, the crops and climates were matched, and it was possible to determine which crops could be grown in which climates, and which could not. For example groups I and IV, which include wheat and potato, cannot be grown in the warm tropics (see diagrams below).
Photosynthesis and temperature requirements:
Crops that photosynthesize better at lower temperatures produce three-carbon molecules as the first photosynthetic step: C[3] 3-phosphoglyceric acid
Crops that photosynthesize better at higher temperatures produce four-carbon molecules as the first photosynthetic step: C[4] aspartic acid
optimum temperature for photosynthesis (°C)
Because the AEZ study could not conveniently handle as many as 70 crops, 20 were initially selected for study on the basis of the area of the crop harvested in the developing world. Crops not commonly grown throughout the developing countries, such as barley, oats, groundnuts, rye, peas, chickpeas, grapes and rapeseed, were then dropped from the list. Sugar cane was also dropped because its production potential is highly dependent on factory management. This left 11 crops:
o five grain crops (wheat, rice, maize, pearl millet and sorghum);
o three root crops (white potato, sweet potato and cassava);
o two legumes (phaseolus bean and soybean); and
o one cash crop (cotton).
The AEZ study thus analysed 22 alternative land uses-production with low or high farming inputs for each of 11 major crops.
The soil requirements of the 11 crops were analysed in terms of factors such as soil drainage, fertility, acidity, salinity, stoniness, texture and slope.
The way in which these climatic and soil factors are applied in the AEZ study are described on pages 16/17.
STEP 1
Selecting the crops
<section>5</section>
The climatic inventory
Crops will not grow in climates that are too hot, too cold or too dry. Temperature and moisture are thus the two fundamental factors that govern crop production. In conjunction with solar radiation, they determine a crop's potential yield.
The first basis of the AEZ climatic inventory is a division of land in the developing countries into 14 major thermal regimes, determined by the average temperature during the period when there is sufficient moisture for crop growth. The temperature divisions were chosen to correspond with the temperature needs of the crops under study.
Calculating length of growing period
In terms of major climates alone, areas where monthly mean temperature at sea level is greater than 18°C in every month were designated tropical; those where it falls below 18°C but remains above 5°C were designated subtropical; and those where it falls below 5°C in any month were designated temperate. The subtropical areas were further divided into those with summer or winter rainfall. All these areas, were then divided into warm, cool and cold, making 14 thermal regimes (see page 7).
1: Length of growing periods - Africa
Providing temperature requirements are met, a crop's potential yield is determined by how well its growth cycle meshes with the period when sufficient moisture is available for growth. Length of growing period, the number of days in which temperature and water permit crop growth, was therefore used as the other major factor determining crop growth. This was a new approach.
The AEZ study defined the growing period to include two parts. First the number of days when precipitation exceeds half the potential water loss from evaporation and plant transpiration, a condition which allows water to build up in the soil. This period is then extended to include a further period during which 10 cm of water assumed to be stored in the soil are evaporated or transpired. Various amounts of water storage can of course be included in the model.
Finally, the lengths of growing period are adjusted to allow for periods when mean temperature falls below the minimum needed for crop growth - about 6.5°C in the case of wheat in North Africa, for example. Thus, although water may be available for crop growth for 150 days, if the temperature is too low during 30 of those days, the length of growing period is defined as 120 days.
STEP 2a
2: Major climates and thermal regimes
3: The climatic inventory
The climatic inventory is assembled by overlaying the map of the major climates and thermal regimes with a map showing length of growing periods. This overlay is necessary in order to compute the extent of each agro-ecological cell at a later stage in the study (see pages 12/13).
The growing period begins with the start of the rainy period and ends some time after it stops, when an assumed 10 cm of stored moisture (if available) in the soil have been used up. The methodology also takes account of irregularities in both rainfall and temperature during the period.
The climatic inventory (3) is prepared by overlaying the map showing length-of-growing-period zones (1) on the map of the major climates and thermal regimes (2). The overlay, shown here for Africa only, is carried out for each of the developing regions.
Only six aggregated length-of-growing-period zones are included in the map shown here. In the AEZ study, the zones were eventually drawn at 30-day intervals; in drier areas a zone of 75 to 90 days was drawn to accommodate moisture requirements for millet and sorghum production. In total, 21 different growing-period zones were distinguished.
The working scale was 1:5 million, fifteen times larger than the simplified maps reproduced here.
<section>6</section>
The soil inventory
The FAO-Unesco Soil Map of the World was published, in 19 separate sheets, in 1974. It took 15 years of intensive work to produce, and was published at a 1:5 million scale. The map was based on information contained in some 11000 separate larger-scale maps. The existence of the soil map was the catalyst which made the AEZ study possible.
Four basic variables are included on the soil map. The soils themselves are divided into 26 major groups and further subdivided to give a total of 106 individual soil units. The map also specifies three categories of texture and of slope. Finally, information is included on 12 different soil phases, such as stoniness and salinity, attributes of the land that are particularly important to land management.
The map is composed of some 5000 soil associations, each of which may include up to eight soil units. In each association, the dominant soil is indicated by a capital letter and a lower case letter; a figure then indicates the associated and included soils - associated soils occupy at least 20 percent of the area, inclusions at least 10 percent. These letters and figures are explained in a key on the back of each map sheet. Texture and slope are indicated by another figure and another lower case letter. Phases are shown on the map by overprinting.
The world soil map
The FAO-Unesco Soil Map of the World was produced in 19 sheets and took 15 years to prepare. The level of detail included is shown in the reproduction on the right of a small part of the soil map for West Africa, covering an area measuring about 300 x 550 km.
This information was used in later stages of the AEZ study in two ways. First, on the basis of the assessment of soil requirements of crops undertaken earlier, the soil units were rated (for each input level) as suitable, marginally suitable or not suitable for growing each of the 11 crops in the study. Similar constraints about phase, slope and texture were also introduced.
Second, the extent of each soil association is known from the soil map but the extent of each soil unit must be calculated. Rules were therefore devised for estimating the extent of each soil unit within each soil association, according to the number of associated and included soils in each association. All this information was fed into the computer, and then listed by country. Information obtained from the grid square count was used by subsequent programs to estimate the extent of each soil unit in each major climate, in each length-of-growing-period zone, in each country, by phase, slope and texture (see pages 16/17).
STEP 2b
Key to labels on soil map
Composition of mapping unit Fo36 dominant soil: orthic Ferralsol (60%) associated soil: plinthic Ferralsol (30%) inclusion: Lithosol (10%)
Codes used to represent a soil association on the soil map are explained far left. This particular soil association might appear on the ground in the form shown near left.
<section>7</section>
The land inventory
The AEZ land inventory was prepared by overlaying the climatic and soil inventories. The two maps were superimposed to provide a key map which contains all the inherent data on climate, thermal regime, length-of-growing-period zones, soil associations, slope, phase and texture.
A: Climatic inventory
This map is the information base of the whole study. The information it contains then had to be processed by computer. A 10 x 10 km grid was placed on the land inventory, dividing the developing world up into some 650000 squares (an illustration of the result appears on the back cover). Researchers then counted, for each country, the number of squares that fell within the same climate, thermal regime, length of growing period and soil association.
B: Soil inventory
This information was entered into the computer, and the composition rules for the soil associations were applied. For example, an association with a dominant soil, one associated soil and one inclusion is considered to be composed of 60 percent (by area) of the dominant soil, 30 percent of the associated soil and 10 percent of the included soil. In the most complicated case, where there is a dominant soil, three associated soils and four inclusions, each occupies 24, 20 and 4 percent of the area respectively.
C: Land inventory
This information enables the computer to calculate the areas of each soil unit in each soil association, by slope, texture and phase, as they occur in each climate and thermal regime and in each length-of-growing-period zone in each country.
The final stage of the computer program lists the total area of each soil unit, broken down by texture, slope and phase, in each climate, thermal regime and in each length-of-growing-period zone for each country (see diagram below). This is the data base for the AEZ study; it is used to provide the final estimates of the area of land suited for growing the 11 major crops in each country.
This data base can also be used to compute the total area of potentially cultivable land in each country. This is done by asking the computer to add the extents of land in each country that are suitable for growing one of the major crops. The results are shown on pages 32/33; of 99 countries studied, more than 20 are already cultivating as much land as is theoretically suitable for cultivation.
STEP 3
D: 10-km grid overlay
E: Final computer print- out
COUNTRY A
MAJOR CLIMATE B
and thermal
regime
n
soil unit, slope, texture, phase
total extent (thousand ha)
extent by LGP
X a 2
X a 3
X b 1
X b 2
Xh a 1
Xh a 1
lithic 67
Xh a 2
Xh a 2
lithic 66
Xh a 3
Xh b 1
Xh b 1
lithic 67
The land inventory (C) is prepared by superimposing the climatic inventory (Al on the soil inventory (B). A 10 x 10 km (2-mm-square actual size) grid overlay is then placed over the land inventory (D). The area of each agro-ecological zone (areas with the same soil association, thermal regime and length of growing period) can men be counted. These data are computed, and the area of each soil unit is listed by slope texture, phase, climate, length of growing period and country (E).
A Climatic inventory includes information on three major climates, 14 thermal regimes and 21 growing period zones.
B Soil inventory includes information on soil associations, and associated slope, texture and phase.
C land inventory includes all me information contained in A and B.
D The 10-km grid overlay divides me developing regions into about 650000 squares, each containing detailed information on climate, growing period, soils and associated soil characteristics.
E Computer produces printout of me extent of each soil unit by slope, texture and phase, for each country by major climate, thermal regime and growing period.
<section>8</section>
Assessing agroclimatic suitability
The next stage is to assess the potential productivity of the crops themselves. This, of course, varies with the growing conditions which prevail and hence is different in each length-of-growing-period zone.
The initial step is to calculate, from known theory about photosynthetic rates, the maximum yield as limited by climate which could be expected from each crop in each length-of-growing-period zone where the crop could grow. These theoretical yields are then reduced to take account of a number of agroclimatic constraints (divided into four groups) that would limit production. These include losses in yield owing to water stress, pests, diseases, weeds and harvesting difficulties (such as waterlogging at harvest time).
These constraints vary according to the level of farm inputs used; for example, in very humid areas maize might be grown successfully with high inputs if those inputs include means of drying the crop, but maize for grain could not be harvested satisfactorily on a large scale under these conditions using only low inputs.
These reduced yields are then expressed as a percentage of the maximum attainable yield in the most productive length-of-growing-period zone. These percentages form the basis of the suitability assessment. For each crop, and for each input level, zones which would produce less than 20 percent of the maximum are classified as not suitable; those that produce 20 to less than 40 percent as marginally suitable; those that produce 40 to less than 80 percent as suitable; and those that produce 80 percent or more as very suitable.
Maps of agroclimatic suitability can then be produced for each crop. Note that these maps do not yet include any assessment of soil suitability.
How the assessment is made: maize in Africa (low inputs)
Range of maximum yield for each crop in each length-of-growing- period zone results from gross and nett biomass calculations involving estimated radiation intensity and moisture availability.
Four groups of constraints are applied to reduce yield:
A: moisture variability or stress;
B: effect of pests, diseases and weeds on crop growth;
C: factors affecting yield and quality;
D: wetness effecting workability and handling of produce.
Constraints are rated at three levels:
2 reduces yield by 50 percent;
1 reduces yield by 25 percent
0 factor has no effect on yield
Reduced yield, after applying agroclimatic constraints In the order A to D, is calculated for each length of growing period. Reduced yields are expressed as a percentage of the maximum attainable in the most productive growing period zone (18 tonnes/ha in this example).
Agroclimatic suitability assessments are presented in map form (right, for maize in Africa). At this stage effects of soil conditions have jet to be included.
Suitability classes for each growing-period zone are assessed as: very suitable 110 percent or more of maximum yield; suitable, 40 to less than 110 percent, marginally suitable, 20 to less than 40 percent unsuitable, less than 20 percent.
Agroclimatic suitability for maize in Africa (low inputs)
<section>9</section>
Assessing land potential
The starting point is an assessment of the soil requirements of each crop, in terms of such variables as drainage, fertility, acidity, sodicity (excess sodium), stoniness and slope. These requirements are then matched, for each crop at each input level, with the properties of the soil units in the soil inventory.
The agroclimatic classification is, in effect, put through a series of 'veil gates', each of which may affect the area of land with any particular suitability classification.
An example: how soil conditions affect land suitability
marginally suitable soil causes all land to be downgraded one class
normal phase has no affect on land suitability
rolling land causes one-third of the area to be downgraded one class. one-third to be classed not suitable and one-third unaltered
coarse texture causes all land to be downgraded one class
For example, for each crop the soil units themselves arc, rated as suitable (S1) if the soil has no or only minor limitations to production, marginally suitable (S2) if production is affected markedly, and not suitable if crop production is not possible or very limited. The S1 rating does not affect agroclimatic suitability. A crop grown on S2 soil has its agroclimatic suitability downgraded by one class say from suitable to marginally suitable.
The soil constraints
soil unit rules
suitable soil:
no change
marginally suitable soil:
suitability downgraded one class
unsuitable soil:
all land rated as unsuitable
soil phase rules
normal phase
no change
others specific to crops and soil units
slope rules
level land:
no change
rolling land, low inputs:
one-third not suitable, one-third downgraded one class, one-third no change;
high inputs:
two-thirds not suitable, one-third no change
steep land:
85 percent not suitable, remaining 15 percent rules as for rolling land
texture rules
coarse texture:
suitability downgraded one class for nearly all soils
other textures:
no change
Similar rules affect the other soil gates - those concerned with texture and slope. As the diagram below illustrates, the soil constraints are quite stringent, and can rightly have a major effect on the suitability classifications.
In the example below, only one-quarter of the land has an initial agroclimatic classification of not suitable. But if the soil is only marginally suitable, the phase normal, the land rolling and the texture coarse, more than 90 percent of the land ends up as not suitable, and the remainder is classified only as marginally suitable. As in the rest of the study, the soil gates are applied for both low and high inputs.
The final step converts the land suitability classifications back into the range of potential yield for each crop, in each growing-period zone, for both input levels. An example, that of growing wheat in Africa, is shown below and illustrates how the total available area and potential yield vary with the level of inputs.
Land suitability and potential for wheat in Africa (million ha and tonnes/ha)
Agroclimatic suitability rainfed cassava low level of inputs
<section>a</section>
The results
Some of the results of the AEZ study are presented on this and the following three pages. They take two forms.
The first is a series of maps of agroclimatic suitability for 11 different crops in five regions: Central America, South America, Africa, Southeast Asia and Southwest Asia include only one crop, wheat, because this is grown on more than 75 percent of the land that is used for rainfed agriculture in the region.
The three maps on pages 18-20 show agroclimatic suitabilities for three crops, cassava, wheat and maize, assuming a low level of farming inputs. Similar maps exist for the other major crops, and are available for all developing countries (except those in Southwest Asia and China). Among other things, the maps indicate the lack of land suitable for growing rainfed wheat in almost all areas of the developing world except Southwest Asia. Maize and cassava, by contrast, can be grown widely in all regions except Southwest Asia.
Rainfed wheat in Southwest Asia
The second form that the results take is estimates of the extent of land available for growing each of the 11 crops in the developing world. The illustration on page 21 is a summary of the main results by region. The figures here include land of all suitability classifications except unsuitable and, again, are for low inputs.
The agroclimatic suitability map for cassava shows that the crop can be grown widely in all developing countries, except those in Southwest Asia. Similar maps are available for the other 10 crops included in the AEZ study. Very suitable areas for low-input cassava do not exist in Africa because of cassava mosaic. With mosaic-resistant, improved varieties and a high level of inputs, very suitable areas cover a large extent.
Wheat can be grown in few areas except in Southwest Asia, where it is grown on more than 75 percent of the land used for rainfed agriculture
This information is also available in more detailed formats, showing the extents of land available for growing each crop in each length-of-growing-period zone in each climate and in each country. These figures, unlike the agroclimatic suitability maps, are produced after appropriate adjustments have been made to allow for all the soil and related constraints.
The information is broken down into the three suitability classifications of very suitable, suitable and marginally suitable areas. Because potential crop yields are known for each classification, it is possible to estimate the potential crop production for each of the 11 crops in each developing country, for both low and high input levels.
Rainfed maize in Southeast Asia
Detail of the developing world map of agroclimatic suitability for maize (low inputs) for Southeast Asia.
Information which enables countries to make such calculations is available from FAO but more refined and precise climatic and soil inputs are needed before such results can be of practical use in land-use planning at the country level. National AEZ studies are dealt with in more detail in the section beginning on page 25.
Extent of land suitable for growing various major crops by region (all suitable or marginally suitable land under low or high inputs, million ha)
Extents of land suitable for growing the 11 major crops under rainfed conditions are shown for the five regions of the developing world.
<section>b</section>
The applications
The end product of the AEZ study covering the developing world is a computerized inventory of the land resources of developing countries and one form of interpretation, namely concise data on the area of land variously suited to the production of 11 different crops, under two levels of inputs. These data can be simply converted to give the production potential of any individual crop, or mix of crops.
The AEZ methodology is scale neutral and, providing sufficiently detailed data are available on climate and soil, the technique can be applied on a much larger scale to individual countries or even to administrative areas within them. These applications are now becoming increasingly important (see pages 25-31).
For example, it is relatively simple to calculate the crop mix which would give a region or country maximum calorie production. This is an important application of the AEZ methodology for development planning. Once the requirements or goals are established, the potentials can be calculated, and the investment and inputs required to realize them can be assessed.
The first major application of the AEZ technique by FAO was to calculate the potential population-supporting capacity of the land of the developing world, by agro-ecological zone, by country and by region. The steps involved are illustrated below.
Basically, the data on crop potentials are used to calculate the maximum calorie production possible for each agro-ecological zone. These are then modified according to the assumptions required, including assurance that the land also produces at least the minimum amount of protein needed. A knowledge of the per caput calorie and protein requirements of each country enables an estimate to be made of the total population that can be supported, and this figure is then compared with current and estimated year 2000 populations.
The results of this study have already been published (FAO/IIASA/UNFPA, Potential population-supporting capacities of lands in the developing world, 1982, FPA/INT/513). The study showed, for example, that even in 1975 some 55 of the 117 countries studied could not support their populations from their own land resources with low-input production systems. The area of these countries was 32.5 percent of the entire developing world. And the population that exceeded the critical carrying capacity was about 270 million people.
Eight steps to population supporting capacity
However, the situation changed dramatically if the level of inputs was improved. By the year 2000, the number of countries unable to support their own populations was calculated as:
o 65 countries if low inputs were applied;
o 36 countries at intermediate inputs;
o 19 countries even if high inputs were applied.
Many of the latter are small territories with limited land resources.
The results again illustrate the critical importance of input level in all AEZ-type studies. Currently, most African countries use little more than low inputs; those in Latin America are about one-third of the way toward intermediate levels of inputs; those in Southeast Asia are more than half-way toward intermediate input levels.
The population-supporting capacity study not only took the AEZ methodology a stage further, but expanded its original base in a number of important ways.
First, the original 11 crops were increased to 15: barley, groundnuts, banana/plantain, sugar cane and oil palm were added to the list (cotton, which is not a food crop, was dropped). Production of livestock from grassland was also included. Second, the study was not restricted to rainfed crop production but included actual and projected production from irrigated land. Third, allowance was made for nonagricultural land requirements. A simplifying assumption was made here, namely that the average need for non-agricultural land is equivalent to 0.05 ha/person. Finally, the study included requirements for fallow periods, limitations imposed by uncontrolled land degradation and estimated reductions in production caused by waste and the need to conserve seed (none of which was included in the original study). Calculations were also made for an additional intermediate level of inputs.
These are only some of the sophistications that can be added to the original AEZ methodology. Many further improvements are now being built into the technique as it becomes more widely applied at the country level. For example, if AEZ-type studies are carried out at district or even project level it becomes possible to quantify fairly exactly the requirements for non-agricultural land. National data on present and projected areas needed for forest products, national parks, and cash crops can be fed into the program to provide a more precise evaluation of the area of land potentially available for cultivation.
In addition, the existence of regional and national land inventories enables many different kinds of study to be carried out at the subregional as well as the regional level. One such study has investigated the potential for wheat production in Africa, where many traditional foods, particularly in urban centres, are being abandoned for wheat consumption.
This is a costly trend because relatively little wheat is grown south of the Sahara. Much of what is consumed must therefore be imported. To what extent would it be beneficial for African countries to become self-sufficient in wheat? The answer depends on whether policies are designed to maximize calorie production or income. But, as the box below shows, complete self-sufficiency for wheat is neither feasible nor desirable for most African countries.
Growing wheat in Africa
Wheat field in Tunisia. Wheat grows well in some North African countries but conditions south of the Sahara often limit yields severely.
Wheat production in Africa
Wheat consumption in Africa is growing fast. So are wheat imports. Should Africa, therefore, grow more wheat in the future? And, if so, what ecological and economic results would this produce?
These questions have been studied using the AEZ methodology. Calculations were made for three different assumptions:
1 wheat is grown only where it maximizes calorie production;
2 wheat is grown only where it maximizes agricultural revenue and
3 wheat is grown wherever conditions permit.
Using low inputs, rainfed wheat can be grown on only 37.7 million ha in Africa, out of a total land area of 3033 million ha. In North Africa who'. growing conditions for wheat are best, 13.6 million ha (2.4 percent) out of a total of 574 million ha are suitable for rainfed wheat. In the rest of Africa, an area of about 2460 million ha, only about 24 million ha (1.0 percent) are suitable for the crop nearly 17 million ha in the tropical highlands of countries such as Ethiopia, Kenya and Tanzania, and some seven million ha in southern Africa.
In North Africa, it would pay to plant wheat in preference to other crops on nearly two-thirds of all the land suitable for wheat. This would provide about 80 percent of the maximum possible wheat production. South of the Sahara, where land is less; suitable for wheat, a plan to maximize revenue would include only enough wheat to grow 11 percent of the maximum possible production.
The study shows that, considering the whole of Africa, it would be economically viable to grow only 17.6 million tonnes of wheat in Africa - against an estimated need for wheat of 29 million tonnes in the year 2000. However, only nine million tonnes per year were produced during 1979-81, and 13.6 million tonnes in 1988.
If the aim were to maximize calorie production, only 16.3 million tonnes of wheat would be grown in Africa. However, some 70 percent more wheat would be grown in sub-Saharan Africa than if maximum revenue were the aim, a figure nearly five times higher than production in 1978-80.
The main conclusions of the study are that wheat self-sufficiency is economically viable for very few countries in Africa. In most other countries of the region, calorie production and agricultural revenue can be increased more efficiently by growing other crops.
<section>c</section>
National studies
Agricultural planning, at the national level, is the most important application of the AEZ methodology. All developing countries have to develop policies that seek to provide sufficient food for their populations. Any shortfalls that occur have to be made up through food imports. Imports have to be paid for through the export of other commodities, such as non-food cash crops.
Many policies of this kind are based on an analysis of past performance, coupled to future production targets that planners believe can be met through appropriate development. The weakness of this approach is two-fold: first, the limits to production (what is and what is not possible) are usually unknown; and, second, scant account is taken of the concept of sustainable production.
Unless targets for agricultural production fall within the limits set by the soil and the climate, the result will be to 'mine' the country's agricultural resources- soil erosion and degradation being the inevitable result of over-ambitious policies. Decreasing productivity, malnutrition, hunger and human suffering soon follow. Countries should adopt a balance sheet approach to match present and future demands with resource potentials, identify required inputs and resolve competition between crops, livestock and forest.
The need for national AEZ studies
National AEZ studies can lead directly to improved land-use planning, and hence better sustainable crop production and quality, improved conservation, higher agricultural incomes and more efficient use of agricultural inputs. Inputs can be concentrated on areas of high potential and marginal land taken out of production and conserved.
AEZ country studies can provide the information needed to assess the limits of sustainable production. They can also be used to identify those areas in which development efforts will pay the highest dividends - in terms of food production, employment prospects and income generation.
The key questions that AEZ country studies can answer include:
o where are the potential food-deficit areas that cannot attain self-sufficiency?
o which areas, with high production potentials, could provide food for, or support people moving from, food-deficit areas?
o in which areas are population-planning programmes most urgently needed?
o which crops are best suited to the soil and growing conditions that exist in different parts of the country?
o what agricultural policies would make best use of a country's land resources?
o where are the best prospects for expanding production including cash crops?
o how, and how fast, should rainfed and irrigated land resources be developed in specific areas?
o what levels of farming inputs and soil conservation need to be developed to meet specific targets for sustainable self-sufficiency and crop exports?
o what are the future requirements for seed, fertilizer, pesticide and agricultural power to meet future population demands?
o how much production and land will be lost if adequate soil conservation programmes are not implemented?
o where do the research priorities lie and to which areas can current research findings be safely applied?
Some refinements are to be made to the AEZ methodology in order to undertake country studies. The land inventory needs to be more detailed, for example a 1:1 million scale soil map may need to be used in place of the 1:5 million map used in the original AEZ study. New 'rules' need to be formulated for the additional detail in the land inventory. The land inventory is also developed by administrative unit, i.e. by state, district or province. Nonagricultural land use can be accurately specified (the original study made a simple 0.05 ha/person deduction for :non-agricultural use), and requirements for fuelwood and timber taken into account. The crop list can be greatly expanded, to include additional food crops as well as non-food crops such as coffee, tea, sesame, tobacco and fuelwood.
Ten steps to national land-use planning
While these are modifications or expansions of steps already incorporated in the study of potential population-supporting capacities, country studies must also include a number of new steps: the likely level of inputs such as fertilizer and labour can be quantified, and the outputs from fisheries and from livestock production from crop residues can be included.
Country studies can be run with a range of different objectives. For example, a decision may be made to set specific targets for self-sufficiency and for the export of both food and non-food crops. This can be done on the basis of the crop potentials of different parts of the country.
Once these targets have been set, the model can be asked to select those crop mixes and input levels which will meet both targets. To do this, of course, requires additional inputs: assumptions about the future of overseas markets, and agricultural non-agricultural demand have to be made and fed into the program.
Digitizers can greatly speed the work of computing data from land inventories. Here a digitizer is being used to trace the boundaries of a particular soil association; the area of the association is calculated automatically and entered into the computer.
The flow chart on pages 26-27 outlines the basic elements of an AEZ country study. Because every country has different problems, each study will require different modifications to the original AEZ methodology. Fortunately, the latter is easily adapted to take account of changing requirements. At the beginning of 1990, country studies were in progress or had been completed in Bangladesh, China, Ethiopia, Malaysia, Kenya, Mozambique, the Philippines and Thailand.
Typical cost of a national AEZ study
The costs of a country study are considerably lower than many planners expect. The figures on the right are for a typical study and indicate the estimated expenses involved. Actual costs inevitably vary; depending mainly on the size of country and the amount and detail of information on soil, climate, irrigation, fisheries, forestry, labour, transport and other variables that is already available. These costs include the production of a number of specific outputs:
o an overall report;
o determination of potential production of food and cash crops;
o identification of degradation hazards and conservation requirements;
o determination of current rates of soil and productivity losses;
o computation of potential population-supporting capacities of administrative areas;
o identification of self-sufficient and deficit areas under differing input assumptions; and
o identification of the major constraints to food self-sufficiency and the alternative strategies needed to overcome them.
man-months
computer and mapping costs (US$)
1. Identification of crops, inputs and other assumptions required in the assessment
2. Preparation of climatic inventory from long-term climatic records including variability
3. Computation of agroclimatic potential crop yields
4. Preparation of soil inventory from available national surveys
5. Soil ratings for specific crops
6. Overlaying climatic and soil inventories Compiling land resource data base Determining land potential for crop production
7. Including data from administrative areas on: population, fuel, irrigation, labour, fish, transport, cash crop requirements, etc.
8. Soil erosion and conservation inputs
9. Computation of potential population-supporting capacities
Quantification of degree of self-sufficiency by area
10. Mapping of 9 Identification of constraints to self-sufficiency and strategies to overcome them Preparation of report
41 man-months at $10000
computer and mapping costs
TOTAL ESTIMATED COST PER COUNTRY
Generalized agroclimatic suitability for rainfed groundnuts (high inputs)
Mozambique gets ahead
Mozambique was the first country to carry out a national AEZ study, under a UNDP-FAO project which began in June 1981. The assessment of the country's land resources suitable for rainfed crop production was published in 1982, and its policy implications are currently being analysed. These are likely to be especially valuable to Mozambique, where land and population resources are very unevenly distributed and where there is intense interest in agrarian reform.
The study was conducted on the province level, at a scale of 1:2 million, and dealt with eight crops at two input levels. The crops considered were cassava, cotton, groundnuts, maize, millet, sorghum, soybean and wheat. The methodology and software developed are suitable for detailed follow-up studies covering more crops at district and project levels.
The methodology closely follows the original AR study. Some notable departures include a more detailed assessment of suitability classifications in five classes: very suitable, suitable, moderately suitable, marginally suitable and unsuitable. This refinement was applied to the agroclimatic classifications, the soil assessment (which enabled soil constraints on crop production to be quantified more exactly; only three soil ratings were used in the original study) and to the land suitability classifications.
The principal findings of the study are summarized below, at the country level:
Percentage of land suitable* for production of crops
*includes all suitability classes except unsuitable.
Crop
Low inputs
High inputs
maize
sorghum
millet
wheat
soybean
groundnut
cassava
cotton
Source: FAO, Assessment of land resources for rainfed crop production in Mozambique. Rome, FAO, 1982.
Agroclimatic suitability map for groundouts in Mozambique. Five suitability classes were used in the Mozambique study compared to four in the original AEZ project
<section>d</section>
A model for Kenya
Kenya was chosen as a model study for national AEZ projects at the beginning of the 1980s. The kind of quantitative information that the AEZ methodology can provide is of particular use to countries with high population growth rates and with rapid development.
For example, food production varies greatly over the country, with the result that the government has to spend considerable amounts of foreign exchange on fuel and vehicles, in transporting food by road from one area to another. The government therefore asked for studies on the degree of self-sufficiency that can be attained in each district of the country. Where shortfalls occur, the AEZ methodology should be able to identify the nearest surplus-producing area able to supply the extra food.
The gravity of the population problem is illustrated by the rapidly worsening fuelwood situation. About 75 percent of Kenya's energy comes from wood, and total annual consumption was estimated at 32 million tonnes at the beginning of the 1980s. Sustainable fuelwood production from existing forests and plantations amounts to only about six million tonnes, and the shortfall is being met by utilizing forest stock.
By the year 2000, the situation will be much worse, with demand rising to an estimated 70 million tonnes annually. If this figure were to be met on a sustainable basis, a further five million ha of good arable land would have to be forested for fuelwood. How much of this land could actually be found by the year 2000, and what are the alternatives? It is hoped that the AEZ study will throw light on these issues.
Though the study began in the 1980s, including preparation of the land resources inventory, various difficulties have delayed the development of the basic crop, livestock and fuelwood productivity models until 1986, and documentation and publication of results until 1990. These delays not withstanding, it is believed that the efforts made have been very successful in producing a model and a study that will serve as a base for many other national studies.
Kenyan crop potentials, year 2000 (thousand tonnes)
The land resources data base was compiled from the information contained in the 1:1 million scale national soil map of Kenya by the Kenya Soil Survey, as well as from information on climatic resources specially inventoried for the study. The climatic resources inventory recognizes nine thermal zones, 15 length-of-growing-period zones and 22 growing period variability zones. The productivity model considers 65 crops (including pasture) and 31 fuelwood species.
Indications of the type of results expected from the Kenyan model have been provided by assessments undertaken by the International Institute of Applied Systems Analysis (IIASA). These revealed the critical need for soil conservation in Kenya (see box left) and the large potential that exists for expanding sorghum and millet cultivation compared to that of wheat.
EXPLORATORY SOIL MAP OF KENYA
The soil map of Kenya at a 1:1 million scale formed the basis of the Kenyan country planning AEZ project. Country planning projects usually required much more detailed information on soil and climate than the 1:5 million scale information used in the original AEZ study.
<section>e</section>
How much land is already used?
The illustrations on this and the facing page provide a vivid picture of the amount of agricultural land available nationally for future expansion.
The original AEZ land inventory provided estimates of the land that is potentially cultivable under rainfed agriculture. With this as a basis, the figures can be adjusted to take account of major improvements that have already been made, such as terracing of steep land and installation of irrigation in desert and other lands. Other factors may need to be considered, such as non-food crops, for example, rubber in Malaysia, which extend the cultivable land; land which is considered cultivable even though yields are very low; and land cultivable with special technologies.
It is evident from the results that some countries have considerable areas of potentially cultivable land still available. Many of the countries with nearly all their potentially cultivable land already in use have installed major improvements, particularly irrigation, but some are also using marginal land on an unsustainable basis with the result that it may become so degraded that it can no longer produce.
The figures suggest that Southwest Asia is in that position. Southeast Asia is reaching a critical stage while South America and Africa have considerable areas of potentially arable land to exploit, although much of it is remote and difficult to manage.
Percent of land in use, 1983
Regional distribution of land
(million ha, 1983)
currently cultivated
potentially cultivable
percentage of cultivable land already in use
Southwest Asia
Africa
Latin America
Asia
TOTAL
Percent of land in use, 2000, estimated
Figure
