<title>Pan African Rinderpest Campaign (PARC) Campaign Communication Guide. Pan African Rinderpest Campaign guide</title>
<section>1</section>
contents next
Rinderpest in Africa
A century ago: Rinderpest killed 80-90% of Africa's cattle, oxen and cloven-hoofed wildlife in a catastrophic epidemic.
Today: The disease continues to kill - ruining the livelihoods of innumerable cattleowners, undermining livestock production, and hampering the growth of national economies, particularly those reliant on animal exports.
Many countries may be free of rinderpest, but the disease can spread quickly. It threatens every country in the sub-Saharan region.
The Pan African Rinderpest Campaign (PARC) seeks to eradicate the disease from Africa. Vaccination and control measures will involve as many as 34 countries in the region.
PARC will also revitalize national livestock and veterinary services, fight desertification in an overall strategy to increase production of livestock and food, and stimulate national economies.
The OAU is the regional executor of PARC, through the Inter-African Bureau of Animal Resources (OAU/IBAR). At the national level, member state governments have sole responsibility for implementing PARC.
At OAU/IBAR, the PARC Coordination Unit provides support for emergency action, vaccine quality control, disease diagnosis, sero-surveillance, information gathering and analysis, and promoting the campaign. Technical and financial inputs are provided by the EEC, as well as FAO, ODA, OIE, the World Bank, bilateral donors and others.
This booklet (and the accompanying kit of media materials) briefs national authorities and staff on ways to promote PARC to everyone who is - or should be - involved.
The challenge
The Pan-African Rinderpest Campaign (PARC) in your country has three main goals:
* rinderpest control and eradication
* improved livestock production through revitalised livestock and veterinary services
* protection of pastures against the spread of the desert.
The first task at hand is to stamp out rinderpest, or to ensure that the disease will not infect cattle in your country.
This is more than just a routine vaccination exercise.
PARC requires a complete immunization programme on a large scale. It must involve and affect many people in order to achieve success.
The rinderpest virus can wipe out entire herds of cattle in just seven days or less, but vaccination and control measures could eradicate the disease.
Success depends on people's cooperation
rural communities
* Will cattleowners bring all the cattle you request for immunization?
* Will cattleowners allow their cattle to be earpunched after vaccination?
* Will cattleowners allow blood samples to be taken from their cattle?
* Will cattleowners report all suspected outbreaks of rinderpest to the veterinary service or local authorities?
livestock services
* Will vaccinators be sure to earpunch the vaccinated cattle?
* Will field staff collect serum on a broad statistical base? (or will they avoid troublesome cattleowners?)
* Will field staff be motivated to maintain the vaccine cold chain in remote areas?
* Will there be enough trained field staff available when you need them?
government decision-makers
* Will local authorities relay the news of suspected rinderpest outbreaks to you, quickly?
* Will all the campaign vehicles and fuel be available when you need them?
* There are many national priorities for development. Will the veterinary services receive high priority from policy-makers in order to complete the PARC immunization programme?
If the answer to any of these questions is "maybe" or "no", the programme may fail ... such problems have undermined all past efforts to eradicate rinderpest in Africa.
Campaign communication
The human factor in PARC cannot be overlooked. It will make or break the success of your immunization programme.
Without cooperation from everyone involved, your programme will take longer to complete, and will be more costly. It might even fail entirely.
Campaign communication exists to help gain the cooperation you need. People should be informed and motivated about the benefits of PARC and need to be persuaded to conform to the its procedures.
As a PARC National Coordinator, you also need to find out people's attitudes towards PARC as it progresses. By taking this information into account, you can carry out the PARC programme in ways that better win their support.
A number of media and activities are used. These tools of Campaign communication are as vital to PARC as syringes and vaccine. They include everything from radio programmes to posters, from ministry directives to knowing how to establish a good relationship with cattle-owners.
And Campaign communication tools are not limited to the immuni-zation programme. They will prove themselves valuable for other PARC goals ..... and beyond.
Inform and motivate
* Why we must take action against rinderpest.
* What the PARC immunization programme will achieve for everyone.
* Who will be directly affected by the programme.
* How the programme will operate and what will be expected of people.
* When and where the programme will take place.
Communicate
* Increase mutual understanding about PARC between all parties concerned: cattleowners, veterinary services, policy makers, law enforcement agencies, educational institutions, and others.
* Learn about the attitudes of cattleowners and other key groups of people. Knowledge about people's attitudes and needs will help you be a more effective coordinator of the programme and overcome serious obstacles.
Campaign communication influences people's attitudes, behaviour and decisions.
Audiences and media
A target audience is a specific group of people with whom you want to communicate. For example, a group of nomadic herdsman coming across the border is one target audience. A government decision-maker who works in the capital city is another target audience.
For planning purposes, it is important to divide up the mass of people in your country into target audiences. Why? You have different messages for different audiences. Only some media reach these audiences.
Make use of all the different media available to you, but use them selectively for specific purposes. Consider the various target audiences which you'd like to inform, motivate and communicate with in order to make the campaign proceed smoothly and effectively.
Different audiences need:
different messages
different media
"Protect your cattle against rinderpest"
Nomadic herdsmen must be informed that vaccination and ear-punching are mandatory. The herdsmen don't watch television but they might listen to radio.
"Support PARC for national security"
Government decision--makers should know that the eradication of rinderpest can protect or even improve your country's economy, food supply and employment situation. Decision-makers might pay more attention if they learn about your message on television.
Selecting the best media to reach target audiences
Some typical audiences, which may concern you, are listed at the head of the chart. Also listed are three main types of media (and activities) available.
Look at the nomadic herders. Personal contact and radio programmes are direct ways to reach them. Demonstrations and Flipcharts at cattle markets and watering points could also be effective.
By contrast, look at the government policy-makers. The best media to reach them are through ministry directives, official meetings, television, newspapers and magazines. Perhaps the use of radio and publicity materials might also be effective. The influence of non-governmental organizations on these decision-makers could also bring good results.
X best media
O possible media
MEDIA Nomadic herders Farmers Merchants Field
staff Policy-
makers Rural
leaders Teachers/
students General
public
Person to person
Personal Contact Personal contact by Campaign workers in the veterinary service with cattleowners and others. X X X X X O
Flipcharts Flipcharts, sequences of large drawings, help campaign workers explain ideas. Such visual aids are used for discussions with small groups. O X X X X X
Adult literacy Literacy booklets for adults and children. These can be used to teach RC themes while also teaching literacy. X X
Institutional
Ministry directives Ministry directives which set guidelines for action by government personnel. X X
Official meeting National PARC meetings with representatives of government departments and organizations which have contact with cattleowners. X X
NGOs Non-governmental organizations can influence cattleowners and their families. NGOs include women's groups, trade organizations and rural health organizations. O O X X
Demonstrations PARC demonstration days at cattle markets and watering points. O X
Mass media
Radio Radio broadcasts containing news, participatory programmes, interviews, descriptions, motivational messages, drama, entertainment and music. X X X X O X X X
Television Television announcements showing the PARC symbol with a message, news reports, news "magazine" programmes, interviews and discussion programmes. X X
Newspapers and magazines News stories and feature articles. X X X X
Publicity materials Posters, leaflets, billboards, postage stamps, PARC symbol. O X X O X X X
An overall analysis, in this example, shows radio to be the most widely effective medium.
Types of media and communication activities
Flipcharts
A flipchart consists of illustrations arranged in a sequence to help veterinary field staff and extension agents tell a story, describe a situation or explain a technique step by step. Graphics are bold and simple. Each panel measures between 50 centimetre and 1 metre, large enough to be seen by a small group. For durability, flipcharts can be printed on panels of cloth bound together at the top between two strips of wood. Train the users of flipcharts in what to say with each picture. A brief script can help.
Posters
These should be bold and simple, and contain only one message in each poster design. The picture should convey the general message and the main text should not exceed 10 words. Posters are fragile and if placed outdoors, they quickly destroyed. For this reason a poster campaign will not reach many rural people unless the posters are placed indoors where they congregate. Posters are good for quickly raising awareness of people who work indoors such as government staff, merchants and some community leaders.
Leaflets
These can be produced in large quantities on A4-size paper (the size generally used for office correspondence) for mess distribution. A typical use of a leaflet is to show the symptoms of rinderpest. Rural people may keep leaflets in a safe place for future reference.
Extension scripts
Field staff and other extension workers can be provided with scripts which outline the subjects they should address when talking to cattle-owners. These scripts help ensure that the same information is presented consistently in the field.
Literacy booklets
Schools often badly need materials to teach literacy, particularly in rural areas. You can print small booklets about PARC and other livestock themes using simple drawings and large-size text . Use your poster and leaflet drawings. Consult educational planners about the type and quantity of materials they can use.
Printed national dress and fabrics
Print a PARC message on national dress and caps and then sell the items for slightly less than market price (the small price difference being subsidised by the national Campaign). This is often a cheap but effective way to spread your message. People often find that the price and the novelty make the garment doubly attractive.
PARC logo
Use the PARC logo on all media material produced, on vehicles, PARC equipment and property, buildings, doors, on stationery, cards in television announcements, etc. Describe the logo in radio programmes. It is important to use the official logo so that migratory cattleowners and merchants realise that PARC exists throughout the region.
PARC postage stamps
A national postage stamp featuring the PARC logo will help make PARC - and your veterinary service - an even more prominent national entity, even among people who have no direct contact with livestock. Request the national post office to adapt the stamp art in this kit and issue stamps with a low price- denomination. This will create a wider distribution within your country.
Radio
Use radio broadcasting to inform and involve a wide variety of audiences through interviews, news announcements,entertainment, educational programmes, rural radio and participatory programmes with cattleowners. The programmes should be broadcast in the language best understood by each particular audience (see the section on Radio).
Television
News programmes
reporting recent activities
Spots short messages to promote PARC. Producers can use the PARC video work-tape and locally produced material for a simple spot, with a written message or an announcement.
Interviews with PARC Coordination staff, cattle-owners and merchants, government decision--makers involved with PARC. General TV programmes describe the importance of cattle to your country's economy, food supply, employment situation and agriculture, with some focus on PARC and its activities.
News services
Contact and continuously inform journalists at local newspapers, magazines, radio and television about PARC activities. Send press releases and photos to them all at least once a month.
Press releases
are concise, non-technical, and should contain anything newsworthy. These canbe simply personal notes ( "You might be interested to know ...") or more formal statements about: vaccinations recently completed, vaccination schedules, arrival of vaccine, equipment and supplies' staff training, important meetings radio, TV, and printed materials recently prepared humourous incidents and even difficulties recently encountered.
Newspapers and magazines Even if your monthly press releases aren't used immediately in articles, the effect will be cumulative and will result in more coverage of your veterinary service over the year. Be sure always to include black and white photos-they gain the interest of editors and readers. Invite journals to photograph particular subjects. If necessary, advertisements can add to the on-going coverage.
Media field trips Invite national journalists (press, magazines, radio, television) on field trips where they may see your programme in action, interview cattleowners, community readers and field staff, and even cover subjects indirectly related to PARC.
Other media
Puppet shows
An entertaining way to get your message across to rural people. If professional puppeteers are available, invite them to present a PARC puppet show in cattle markets and to rural communities.
Filmstrips
These are colour slides reproduced on durable audio-visual film for easy handling. A person reads a script aloud with each picture, also adding comments and asking the audience's reaction. Filmstrips are used to tell a story, present ideas or help train people in new techniques. They cost less than video or 16 mm films, and are more practical for field use. Producing filmstrips requires outside assistance.
A free FAO Filmstrip Catalogue and further information is available by writing to: FAO, Sales and Distribution Section, Via delle Terme di Caracalla, Rome 00100, Italy.
Additional Activities
Market day demonstrations
Visit cattlemarkets to hand out leaflets and display posters, and to tell cattleowners about PARC. Invite well-known market leaders to speak publicly about the value of vaccination and the cloverleaf earpunch mark on cattle for sale. Stress that cattle with the mark of vaccination are more valuable because they are protected against rinderpest. Warn buyers to beware of any cattle without the official cloverleaf identification mark ... the cattle could catch rinderpest and die. Watering points and agricultural trade fairs might also be good locations to carry out this activity.
Events
An event, such as the official opening of PARC in your country, or a national PAP/C meeting, can be reported by national journalists in the media. The journalists should be invited to attend the event, and be provided with a press kit consisting of information about PARC and the event itself.
contents next
<section>2</section>
next contents next
Multi-media strategy
Dynamic awareness
Address as many target audiences through as many media as possible - and people's awareness of PARC will become dynamic. What does this mean?
Different target audiences are in contact with each other. They are in contact for many reasons - family, business, work, politics, education, administration and so forth.
Campaign communication tries to take advantage of these contacts by informing many different groups. These groups, in turn, inform each other.
For example, if you inform school teachers about PARC (and provide them with teaching materials such as a PARC literacy booklet) what may result?
School teachers influence community leaders, who in turn influence cattleowners. (These community leaders can also influence decision-makers about the importance of the Campaign.)
School teachers, of course, influence students who, in turn, describe the importance of the Campaign to their parents. Who are their parents? Cattleowners, community leaders, and perhaps even your own veterinary staff.
Multiple impact
By using a multi-media strategy, you send PARC messages to target audiences from more than one direction.
For example, a farmer might learn about PARC from:
1) a radio programme
2) a poster end leaflet
3) an adult literacy booklet or education programme
4) a son or daughter who learned about PARC at school
5) a PARC demonstration day organized at the local market
6) an agricultural extension worker
7) a community leader
8) a relative or friend
9) veterinary field staff or vaccination team.
In this example, the farmer will know something about PARC by the time the vaccination team (No. 9) arrives in his area.
Probably many of his doubts and questions about the Campaign have already been answered.
Pave the way for Campaign fieldworkers use a multi-media strategy.
In your country, many different groups are in contact. Campaign Communication informs them about PARC. Each group informs other groups. The effect is multiple. Awareness spreads in a dynamic way.
Using radio
Radio broadcasting can be very effective for generating dynamic | awareness of PARC among many people. But to succeed, the full potential of radio must be used.
If you talk as a veterinarian to other veterinarians, expressing PARC goals in the technical language of your profession, your messages will be interesting to your own professional group (the veterinary services) but may be less interesting to others. Present messages in ways that are relevant to other audiences.
Invite other groups to speak on the radio about PARC and related subjects. The appeal is much greater. For example, if policy-makers, are invited to speak about PARC and related topics, other policy-makers will be motivated to listen. Also community leaders, schoolteachers, students, and other social groups in the general public might be more interested. The effect can be multiple.
Ask your national radio producers about the types of programmes they can create in order to involve different groups. Use their creativity and expertise and you'll discover that radio programmes can help you manage the campaign.
A radio message...
...for the few
"The new epidemiological data survey, utilising the ELISA, on herds in the northern province for last year shows sero-immune levels to be dangerously low. We plan to vaccinate those herds as a first priority of the prophylactic programme. "
Appeals to veterinarians.
...or for the many?
"Cattle owners in the northern province have good reason to be worried about rinderpest. We've just tested the cattle there. It was alarming to find that most could catch rinderpest and die at any time. Those cattle need protection. We're sending the vaccination team north right away."
Appeals to cattle-owners, veterinarians, leaders and the general public.
Radio is an important tool for campaign management
As the Campaign progresses, it begins to affect more people. Their attitudes, concerns and interests will develop. Different areas of the country may develop different ideas on livestock issues.
Radio programmes which help them to voice their thoughts will also inform you. For example, radio can let you hear what a community leaderfive hundred kilometers to the southsays about a controlled grazing scheme.
Radio can let you hear a border officialfar to the eastdescribe how nomadic herdsman are reacting to inspection of their cattle for rinderpest immunization. There are many such examples, involving many groups and geographical regions.
This knowledge is an invaluable tool for managing the Campaign. It helps you devise ways of overcoming obstacles and make the Campaign more acceptable to all concerned.
Creating a flow of information through radio programmes takes time and effort. The radio programmes must be well produced. Invite national radio producers to carry out a wide-ranging production plan Make your first effort with the cattleowners themselves, particularly rural people and migratory herdsman.
When more groups talk on the radio, more listen to the radio.
Reaching nomads* with radio
* Even if you are not concerned with nomadic or semi-nomadic people, this section applies to other important rural groups. Substitute the words "rural people" for "nomads" and "migratory people".
Does your veterinary service have a strong and positive relationship with migratory cattleowners? Semi-nomadic or nomadic herdsman might be your most important target audience. Their livestock can carry cattle disease such as rinderpest across national borders.
Establishing a good relationship with migratory cattleowners is not easy. But one way of beginning is both to inform migratory people about PARC and to learn more about their attitudes and concerns. How can you do this?
Person-to-person contact is obviously the best method for communicating with migratory cattleowners. Radio broadcasting is a very good tool to help pave the way for this personal contact.
Many migratory people listen to the radio. Radio reaches great distances and is their link to the outside world. But if you broadcast messages about PARC, will the herders listen?
Radio listeners in general (including nomadic people) often do not pay serious attention to propaganda, lectures or commands which come over the radio. You need something more attractive.
Nomadic Radio is radio programming which is specially designed to gain the attention and involvement of migratory cattleowners. Producing these participatory radio programmes can increase the knowledge about migratory cattleowners among veterinary staff, and vice-versa.
"erisio enkiteng' nabo elukunya o'lee"
"One cow is as good as a man"
(if a person cares for his cattle, he and the community will prosper)
Persistent Pastoralists: Nomadic Societies in Transition. by Peter Rigby. 1985.
Practical requirements
Language: It is vital that Nomadic Radio programmes be made in the language understood by the cattleowners. At the same time, you will want your veterinary staff to understand many of the programmes too. The radio producers may have to translate programmes into one or more languages.
Production: An experienced local radio producer who can speak the nomadic language and become acquainted with their culture, should make the Nomadic Radio programmes. If there is no such radio producer available, make arrangements to have one trained. This can be done by your national radio service or possibly through a request for technical assistance to the PARC Coordination Unit Regional Office.
The Nomadic Radio producer(s) will require extensive field work to become acquainted with migratory people as they roam, gain their confidence, and record them on tape. The main programme content should not be recorded in the radio studio - it should come from the migratory people themselves - out in the field. This raw material then reeds to be edited into programmes back at the radio studio. Here the material can be checked for content too.
Broadcasting: Broadcast Nomadic Radio programmes on a consistent schedule when migratory people are likely to listen. Each programme can be repeated several times a week, and even reused in the future. Utilize all available radio transmitters.
Programmes for Nomadic Radio broadcasts
Radio programmes for nomadic audiences should not concentrate exclusively on PARC. They should focus on topics interesting to migratory listeners and include PARC themes. Feature migratory cattleowners who are sympathetic with PARC procedures (including ear-punching, serum collection and reporting).
Migratory cattleowners talking (in their own, everyday language) about a variety of non political subjects such as:
* cultural themes
* folk stories
* traditional medicine
* water points and the effect of drought
* travel experiences
* food preparation
* music
* proverbs
* the significance of their cattle
* animal health problems -- diseases and husbandry
* veterinary services they have received in the past
* PARC procedures of vaccination, ear-punching, serum collection, reporting
* marketing procedures in different countries
* market prices
Veterinarians talking about:
* animal health care problems experienced by nomads
* disease symptoms
* disease treatments and prevention
* PARC vaccination, earpunching
* the cloverleaf earpunch as a sign of value
* why serum must be collected
* how to report suspected rinderpest outbreaks
* what to do if there is an outbreak
* what veterinary field staff will do if there is an outbreak and so on.
Anthropologists, community leaders, teachers describing
* the characteristics of transhumants and nomads (tribes, customs, travel patterns)
Broadcasters, journalists and other contributors presenting:
* news items which are interesting to migratory people
* folklore, quiz programmes, games, songs and drama.
What messages?
What should you show on a poster? What topics should be discussed on radio? The most obvious PARC messages are why, what, who, how, when, and where.
Determine which messages have highest priority, using your general experience.
How do you present these messages? This requires consideration and field-testing of ideas with cattleowners.
Consult the cattleowners
PARC may require cattleowners to cooperate with the veterinary service in ways that are new.
Hold informal discussions with community leaders and cattleowners about the Campaign before it begins to gain insight about potential problem areas. This will help you decide upon what your main messages should be and how to present them.
After you have produced some media materials for use with cattleowners (such as a flipchart, leaflet, poster or radio programme), field-test the materials with these and other audiences. You will find ways to improve the materials and help ensure that they will be useful and effective. Some field-testing guidelines are below.
Consult other national experts
Many ministries and organizations are in contact with cattleowners and their families, even though their work is not concerned specifically with livestock.
They may have a wealth of ideas and experience to share with you about communicating with rural people and other target audiences.
National experts include those in rural education, agricultural extension, religious groups, border control, law enforcement, rural radio, television, newspapers, family planning, rural health, the university (rural development and anthropology departments), livestock owner associations, trade unions, etc.
Consult national experts individually or call them together for a one-day workshop.
Let them help you to identify obstacles to the campaign, as well as to -define target audiences, media and messages. You may discover worthwhile techniques that will save you time, money and effort.
Using the PARC kit
Consider PARC messages which have proved important in other countries. Some are shown on the art materials provided in this kit. The flipcharts, posters and leaflets are ideas for you to develop your own local messages, and draw pictures which are easily understandable by rural cattleowners. Do not print any flipcharts, posters, leaflets and adult literacy booklets until you have field-tested them with cattleowners and other target audiences.
Posters and leaflets
1. Rinderpest kills rinderpest is a cattle thief Healthy cattle with plenty of fodder and water available, can still be infected and die quickly from rinderpest.
2. Vaccinate! Vaccination can protect cattle against rinderpest. A wise cattleowner allows the veterinary services to carry out all immunization procedures.
3. Report! Cattleowners and local authorities must know the symptoms of rinderpest and report suspected outbreaks quickly to the veterinary services.
4. A sign of value Cattle with the cloverleaf earpunch are more valuable because they are protected against rinderpest. The earpunch is recognized by the veterinary services, government authorities, law enforcement agencies, cattle merchants. It is also recognized in bordering countries as the insignia of the PARC immunization programme.
5. Fewer, but better, cattle Introduces an important PARC theme - that when cattle are protected against disease (such as rinderpest) herds can be smaller because they are at less risk. if the smaller herd contains higher-quality cattle, it will be more productive. Fewer cattle will reduce the threat of overgrazing and land degradation.
A selection of items in the PARC kit
Flipcharts
1. The relunctant cattleowner The disaster that can befall the cattleowner who does not allow his cattle to be vaccinated
2. The wise cattleowner in contrast to the reluctant cattleowner, the wise cattleowner benefits from cooperating with veterinarians.
3. Isolate sick animals Cattleowners should be shown the benefit of isolating sick animals from healthy ones. A good subject for a flipchart to inform cattleowners.
Various themes in the PARC kit.
Other messages
The veterinary services unique objective As far as cattle owners are concerned, the veterinary service is interested in improving livestock production, and nothing else.
Temporary restrictions Inform cattleowners when it is necessary to close cattle markets and to restrict the movement of cattle due to suspected outbreaks. Tell them why the restrictions are being made and that they will be lifted as soon as possible.
Importance of cattle for food supplies, agriculture, employment and the economy The 'livestock factor' is often not given adequate importance by national planners. Yet cattle may figure prominently in the economy, food production, etc. If rural people lose their cattle through disease they may migrate to cities in search of employment.
PARC is international Beyond your country's borders, other countries are also carrying out the same PARC immunization programme. Migratory cattleowners and merchants will encounter PARC wherever they go. The cloverleaf earpunch is a recognised sign of protection.
Rinderpest struck recently Historical accounts of the devastation caused by rinderpest in the recent past in your country or elsewhere in Africa. The tragic results for cattleowners.
Other art material
1. PARC postage stamp Artwork is provided for adaptation by government stamp printers for a national issue of PA RC postage stamps.
2. and 3. Basic art sheets These can be used for creating ideas for graphic materials, or even the materials themselves if no artist is immediately available.
4. Photos Make more b/w prints to have on hand for distribution to journalists. Or even better, create your own photofile of local subjects.
Using the PARC sticker
The PARC stickers are designed to identify PARC vehicles, equipment, property and correspondence. Three sizes are available.
The surfaces on which the stickers are to be applied must be thoroughly clean, dry and fairly cool. The stripes should be applied diagonally, with the gold stripe uppermost. Apply the logo sticker squarely over the stripes.
next contents next
<section>3</section>
next contents
Field-testing
Test the media materials you have produced with the intended audience before duplication, distribution and use.
Testing will save money, time and effort.
The field-testing exercise puts media producers in direct contact with their target audience rural cattleowners. Some producers have not had much contact of this kind. Field-testing the materials allows them to adapt their media skills for your purposes.
Test the materials, not the audience
When field-testing materials remember that the materials are being tested, not the people asked to comment on them. There are no "right" or "wrong" comments. A herdsman is not "wrong" if he identifies a drawing of a sick cow as a dog. The drawing is "wrong". The graphic artist needs to redraw it to fit the farmer's image of a sick cow. Consult a number of people within the target audience to get a balanced view. No artist or radio producer should be embarrassed if the first drafts of media materials do poorly. The challenge is to adapt their skills to communicate with rural people.
Graphic materials
Rural people often see illustrations in ways that are very different from people who live in towns. They may even interpret a drawing to mean the exact opposite of what you intended.
With a graphic artist on hand, show the illustrations to cattleowners. Ask them what they see. If they see something different from what you intend, ask their advice on how to make the drawing better. Have the graphic artist re-sketch the subject, on the spot, and try it again. In just a short time you will have illustrations which rural people understand.
Radio messages and programmes
The goal is to find ways to make radio programmes accessible, interesting and convincing for cattleowners.
The first radio programmes produced may need improvement, particularly for new audiences, such as migratory cattleowners. This is normal and does not reflect badly on the skill of the radio producer.
Play a tape of these radio materials to typical cattleowners. Ask them whether the programme says anything new or interesting? Is there a part which needs more explanation? Would it be better to use a different language? Are there other important subjects which they would like to hear discussed or explained? Do they think that other cattleowners will agree with the ideas expressed in the programme?
Preparation
Use a systematic approach to prepare your communication campaign. It will be less time-consuming, less costlyand more effective.
1. Determine
problems that may arise, by discussing the PARC programme with key target audiences, especially cattleowners, and experts in contact with cattleowners and their families.
2. Identify different target audiences and important messages for each.
3. Select media which will best reach the audiences.
4. Consult national media producers (artists, rural communication experts, printers, radio and TV producers ) to make a media production plan and estimate the budget.
5. Make samples of media materials.
6. Field-test the sample materials, particularly with typical cattleowners. Revise the materials and produce more as necessary.
7. Duplicate the materials.
8. Train field staff and others in how to use the materials.
9. Distribute the materials to field staff and other organizations which have contact with cattleowners and their families.
10. Evaluate the effectiveness of the materials after several months. Ask field staff and others to recommend corrections and additions. Use this as a basis for media production next year.
Launching the campaign
After the majority of media materials have been produced, hold a national meeting on PARC at the beginning of the immunization programme. Here you can officially launch the campaign. Vaccinate and earpunch a cow to symbolize the launch.
Purpose of the meeting
The national meeting has four principal aims:
* describe your country's involvement in PARC - the objectives and benefits;
* demonstrate and distribute samples of PARC media materials produced by the veterinary service and national media producers - posters, leaflets, flipcharts, adult literacy booklets, tapes of radio programmes, etc. (Show the TV spot on a video monitor if possible.);
* gain the support of organizations and institutions in your country who have access to cattleowners and their families;
* create a news event worthy of coverage by national newspapers, magazines, radio and television.
Who to invite?
A government leader could be present to make a short declaration in support of the Campaign. Also, representatives from:
* agricultural extension service
* livestock owner associations
* rural education service
* national radio, television, newspapers, magazines
* law enforcement agency
* border protection administration
* religious groups
* non-govern mental organizations
* international organizations.
Provide everyone with an information sheet on the objectives and workplan of the PARC immunization programme in your country. Offer extra copies of the media materials (such as flipcharts, leaflets, posters, etc.) for use by personnel in various organizations.
For newspaper and magazine journalists, provide photos of PARC themes. (See the photos provided in this kit. Have more photos duplicated if you decide to use these images.)
Timetable for action: an overview
Begin to plan and prepare campaign communication activities, if possible, at least six months before PARC vaccinations commence.
Have your media materials produced, distributed and ready for use well before starting immunizations. If it is not possible to produce everything on time, create the materials which have highest priority. Consult national media producers as to when they should begin work in order to meet your deadline.
MONTH
Pre-launch activities Launch Post-launch activities
Planning
Production and field testing
Duplication
Distribution
Train users
Field use
Radio and TV broadcasting
Press releases
Campaign launch
Media teams field trips
More radio & TV production
Evaluation
More production graphic material
Organization and budget
Organization
Campaign communication will need to involve the talents of many national media producers and their respectives media institutions.
Linking up with other Ministries
National media institutions (such as educational rural radio) may be located outside your ministry. It is vital that national decision-makers link these facilities and personnel to the PARC national programme. You may need to make budgetary provision for their services.
PARC Communication Officer
To guide the efforts of the media producers, a communication officer should be designated to work directly under the PARC National Coordinator.
The job of Communication Officer is full-time in order to organize a national communication network for PARC. Also, he or she will be responsible for writing and creating ideas for many of the materials, as well as working with the national media producers. It may be necessary to recruit a communication officer from outside the veterinary services. If so, a budgetary provision may be required.
Budget
An adequate budget is required in order to carry out Campaign Communication - for production in media such as print, graphic materials, radio and television, for field travel, supplies and material, and for a PARC national meeting.
Budget formulation can be accomplished by the Communication Officer and national media producers. They need to plan the activities, the types and quantities of materials to be produced, and to estimate the budget.
This budget must be a component within the overall PARC national programme budget. See a plan for formulating the national PARC Communication Component (overleaf).
PARC Communication Officer: Terms of Reference
* identify potential obstacles to PARC implementation
* identify audiences, media and messages which have priority
* draw up a plan of action for each medium to be utilised (such as radio, television, flipcharts, etc.) in consultation with national media producers
* draw up a budget for media production, duplication and distribution, under the advice of national media institutions and producers
* draft the PARC National Communication Component propose
* draw up the Timetable for Action
* write draft materials with national producers to produce media materials
* field-test materials and have them revised as necessary
* train field staff and others how to use the media materials
* organize the Campaign Launch as a news event
* provide national journalists with press releases about progress of the campaign and organise media field trips
* monitor the effectiveness of the media materials and produce improved versions based on experience
* report to the National Coordinator on the progress of Campaign
Preparing a communication component proposal
Write a document which outlines the national PARC Communication component. This document will be the reference point for purposes of funding and implementing the activities. The Communication Component is considered part of the overall national PARC programme.
1. Background and justification
Description of the scope of your national PARC programme might include:
* numbers of cattle to be immunised;
* other activities;
* duration.
Identify which national groups must cooperate in order for the campaign to succeed. These might include farmers, migratory cattleowners, rural communities, local authorities, border officials, national policy-makers and veterinary field staff.
Identify which media and institutional channels must be utilized to inform, motivate and communicate with the national groups.
2. Objectives
Specific objectives of the communication activities:
* gain the cooperation of cattleowners regarding vaccination of all cattle, ear-punching all vaccinated cattle, sero-sampling, and reporting all suspected rinderpest outbreaks;
* help ensure that the vaccine cold chain is maintained and that immunization procedures are properly carried out, by informing and motivating field staff;
* facilitate implementation of PARC by creating awareness among various target audiences who will affect the Campaign operation;
* strengthen the veterinary services' capacity to carry out communication activities through improved linkages with national media, educational and extension institutions.
3. Activities and general workplan
Describe various activities such as planning, media production, field-testing, duplication of materials, training media users, holding an official meeting and involving national journalists.
4. Inputs
List the various media and activities and the estimated costs for each. These choices may be subject to adjustment as the actual communication work develops. However, by consulting printers, radio and TV producers, general costs can be estimated. (See Budget lines opposite.)
5. Reporting
It will be important to evaluate the progress of PARC communication activities to ensure that objectives are being met. For example, the first report would cite a specific workplan, followed by reports on work accomplished. As the campaign progresses, obstacles should be reported as a basis for revising the communication workplan.
6. Budget lines
Categorize the budget by media and general activities. The following table lists budget lines indicating typical sorts of expenditures within each category.
Estimated cost
1. Printed materials
(flipcharts, posters, adult literacy booklets etc.)
1.1 Preparation
Graphic artists
Research and field-testing
Field trip expenses
1.2 Duplication
List each item and quantities
1.3 Art materials and supplies
2. Radio spots and programmes
2.1 Research
Field missions to make participatory programmes with nomads, farmers and other rural people including field-testing
2.2 Studio editing and translation
2.3 Equipment and supplies
Tape recorders and microphones, tapes (cassette and/or reel), batteries, supplies
3. Television
3.1 Preparation
Field trip expenses
Studio production for spots and programmes (using PARC video work-tape and/or local material)
3.2 Supplies
Video cassettes (3/4" and VHS), batteries, etc.
4. Newspapers and magazines
4.1 Field trips
For national journalists during radio and TV field missions.
4.2 PARC press releases
Duplication and mailing
4.3 Additional photography
Film, processing, camera maintenance
5. Training for field staff
5.1 Training time added to regular training programmes of field staff
6. National meeting (Campaign Launch)
6.1 Travel and subsistence for guests who must travel to the meeting.
6.2 Meeting hall and facilities
6.3 Information sheets and press releases (see 4.2 above)
7. Office
7.1 Equipment 7.2 Supplies
8. Public address equipment
8.1 Megaphones/public address systems for market day demonstrations, meetings
9. Personnel
9.1 Communication Officer
9.2 Secretary
10. Contingency
10.1 10 percent of total
Rinderpest - a deadly history
Rinderpest entered Subsaharan Africa in the 1880-90s and wiped out 80-90% of the cattle and wild ruminants across the continent. It was a social and economic disaster for anyone dependent on those animals for their livehoods.
Vaccines were developed to protect animals from the disease. During the years 1962-76 a regional rinderpest campaign (Joint-Project 15) was conducted in 22 countries at a cost of $51 million. Rinderpest was eradicated from most of Africa. It is suspected, however, that the disease persisted in one or two remote areas.
Rinderpest inevitably began to spread yet again, but many veterinary services lacked the manpower and resources to stop the disease. Between 1978 and 1987, nearly 20 countries reported suspected outbreaks. Some countries suffered epidemics which killed thousands of cattle.
Many countries undertook emergency action against rinderpest, often with international help. But it was generally agreed that without a coordinated regional effort, and upgrading national veterinary services, the war against rinderpest could not be won.
PARC was born in 1986. Initially conceived as a mass immunization programme, PARC developed other far-sighted goals to improve the national veterinary services and livestock production, as well as fight desertification. With the efforts and cooperation of all concerned, rinderpest will never again have the upper hand in Africa. have the upper hand in Africa.
Regional overview
West-Central-East Campaign Regions
Projected zone of PARC involving as many as 34 countries. Although many countries do not have rinderpest, vaccination campaigns and other measures create sanitary cordons to protect borders and squeeze the virus out of existence. African laboratories are responsible for all PARC vaccine production, quality control, sero-surveillance and disease diagnosis.
The control and eradication of rinderpest is a first step towards the improvement of animal health services and livestock production throughout the region. This includes community participation in livestock development programmes, liberalization of livestock policies, decentralization of livestock services and protection of pastures against the danger of overgrazing and the encroaching desert.
National governments and their livestock services are responsible for implementing national PARC programmes.
Several international organizations are assisting.
Organization of African Unity Inter-African Bureau of Animal Resources (OAU/IBAR)
Regional executing organization for PARC. Houses of PARC Coordination Units in Nairobi and Bamako.
Multiple responsibilities include: advising on strategies and policies, identifying external funding needed for national campaigns, setting up strategic vaccine banks, supporting emergency campaigns, holding border harmonization discussions, organizing research, organizing meetings, providing technical advice in all areas of the campaign.
European Economic Community (EEC)
Major financial donor for PARC. Assists in formulation of national PARC programmes and national institution funding. Provides technical advice for the rehabilitation of livestock and veterinary services, as well as for the control of desertification.
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO)
Provides technical assistance and training for vaccine production and quality control, disease diagnosis, sero-surveillance, cold chain maintenance, information systems and communication activities.
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA)
In cooperation with FAO, provides resources and training for rinderpest sero-monitoring and diagnosis.
Office international des epizooties (OIE)
Collects and disseminates data on suspected disease outbreaks. Provides international regulations for import and export of livestock and livestock products.
World Bank
Provides funding and technical assistance for livestock development projects some of which also support rinderpest control activities.
Bilateral donors
Provide a variety of technical assistance and funding for livestock and veterinary services, including PARC.
next contents
