<title>ADCP/REP/89/42 - A Preliminary Review of Selected Legislation Governing Aquaculture</title>
<section>1</section>
FOREWORD
At the Expert Consultation on Planning for Aquaculture Development, held in Policoro, Italy in 1988 (see ADCP/REP/89/33), the participants put forward an integrated set of opportunities for technical assistance to developing countries. The opportunities were predominantly a group of identified needs or ideas, which collectively would assist in guiding investment decisions, primarily at the national level in both the public and private sectors.
One of the vital needs of national sector management was legislation in support of aquaculture. Few developing countries at the present time are enacting legislation dealing with aquaculture, other than regulations regarding the importation of species (as guided by their respective regional fisheries commissions). There are no projects currently directed toward the development of appropriate national legislation for the sector.
The Consultation noted that although legislation was a national responsibility, action was required first at an interregional level to identify and classify aquaculture legislation and to provide general guidelines.
To this end "A Preliminary Review of Selected Legislation Governing Aquaculture", commissioned by ADCP, has been prepared by staff of the Legislation Branch, FAO Legal Office in Rome.
In the preparation of this review, primary reliance has been placed on the materials available at FAO in Rome, supplemented by further materials received from a number of sources. Given the breadth of the laws which might impinge on aquaculture, only a visit to individual countries would ensure that all relevant laws, as well as the most up-to-date versions, would be located. As this was not a practicable option, the study has necessarily been characterized as a preliminary review at this stage, even though it is novel in approaching aquaculture from a comparative viewpoint, as well as drawing information from a wide number of different countries and varied legal systems.
Every care has been taken to rely on the latest information available, but in a study of this kind it is inevitable that occasionally reliance will have been made on an out-of-date law. The Legislation Branch particularly welcomes being kept informed of recent developments concerning aquaculture legislation.
One of the ideas behind the preparation of this Preliminary Review was the hope that it would lead to an expert consultation on aquaculture legislation, mainly to assist countries in developing guidelines for the elaboration of the legal issues which desirably should be addressed in formulating aquaculture legislation. This might in appropriate circumstances lead to the formulation of model provisions on certain aspects of an aqua-culture law, and taking into account the requirements of different systems - common law, civil law, centrally planned or free market. Ideally this might then be followed by action at the regional and sub-regional levels to (i) transfer such model provisions into comprehensive guidelines for nations within the region to use or amend as appropriate for their own use, (ii) organize meetings amongst groups of nations to discuss legislation for issues of common interest (such as introduction of species, genetic conservation, water resource use), and
(iii) provide expert assistance when required.
Colin E. Nash
Craig B. Kensler
Rome, 1989
<section>2</section>
INTRODUCTION
Whereas the legal regime of marine fisheries has been the subject of considerable attention as it has evolved since 1945, the legal regime of aquaculture has tended to be neglected in comparison. However, aquaculture is increasingly being seen as an important method of improving food production, and there are impressive statistics on the increased volume of production in recent years. For these, and no doubt other reasons, it is timely to examine the legal regime governing this activity.
The purpose of the present study is to examine the legal regime of aquaculture, focusing in particular on the key legal issues governing this activity. In addition to some general matters discussed in the introduction, these are: the general place of aquaculture in the legal system, access to and use of water and land, environmental aspects, including fish disease, import of live fish and the introduction of non-indigenous species.
It would have been impossible to have considered all or even a majority of the laws concerning aquaculture throughout the world. The approach adopted, therefore, was to consider at least the laws of particular countries reflecting the differences between common law and civil law systems, developed and developing societies, and centrally planned and capitalist societies.
Because information was not available for many countries, and because the quality of information was also variable, relevant examples have been included wherever appropriate in this study.
Although this has inevitably resulted in some unevenness in the information underlying this study it has enhanced its overall value, not least by enabling attention to be drawn to examples of laws not otherwise conveniently available.
At this stage, it has also not been possible in every instance to relate the nature of the legal regime to the importance of aquaculture activity in a particular country. It is possible that a country could have an advanced aquaculture sector, but have virtually no direct legislation on aquaculture, the regulation of the activity being found in, for example, laws regarding land, water and environmental control. At another extreme, it is possible that a country could have an elaborate legal regime for aquaculture, but very little aquaculture activity. In both situations, as well as any existing within those two extremes, it would be necessary to obtain more information about the aquaculture activity in individual countries before a judgement could be made whether the particular legal regime was effective. In many instances, this can only be ascertained by visits to a particular country.
It is, furthermore, important to distinguish between different types of aquaculture, for the applicable national rules sometimes vary according to which type is under consideration: mariculture, sea cage farming, sea ranching, may well depend primarily on the general marine fisheries law (which may or may not address those questions specifically), aquaculture (often referred to as fish farming, fish culture, etc.) that utilizes public lands may depend primarily on the laws affecting the public domain or water resources laws while aquaculture occurring entirely on private land may depend primarily or even exclusively on the land laws, the water laws and environmental laws.
As will be seen, national laws do not always cover what they otherwise appear to be intended to cover, and difficult problems of interpretation can arise.
An important result of this study is to assist in identifying the legal issues which will need to be addressed in setting up an aquaculture regime. It will also, it is hoped, assist in identifying possible obstacles to aquaculture development. For example, the absence or scarcity of laws directly regulating aquaculture might lead to a situation where the existing land or water laws could unintentionally amount to a disincentive to undertake aquaculture development, by imposing multiple or conflicting obligations.
It will also be self evident that unlike the legal regime of marine fisheries, international law issues have only a marginal impact on aquaculture.
Where the activity in question is inland and in the vicinity of the border of another nation, there is the theoretical possibility that upper riparian use might have harmful effects across the border, or that a water table straddling a boundary is affected adversely by aquaculture activity, in which case international environmental law questions might arise. Otherwise inland aquaculture activity will be a matter of domestic law. In bays and creeks, and river mouths, the coastal state can impose such regulations as it wishes on aquaculture, whereas in the territorial sea, internal waters enclosed by newly proclaimed straight baselines and the EEZ, certain navigational rights for foreign vessels will need to be respected.
If a coastal state engages in ranching of the living resources, the provisions of the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea will need to be considered, especially if the species are anadromous (e.g. salmon) (Art. 66) or catadromous (e.g. eels) (Art. 67). Also if offshore structures are established for aquaculture purposes, these will be subject to control by the coastal state whether they are in the territorial sea (Art. 21) or in the EEZ (Art. 60).
The present study does not intend to give a comprehensive review of the world legislation on aquaculture. This would have required an enormous amount of time and information. Based on the work of the Legislation Branch of FAO and in close collaboration with the UNDP/FAO Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (ADCP), the main objective of this paper is a preliminary review of the variety of legal problems raised by aquaculture and its development.
<section>3</section>
1. AQUACULTURE IN THE LEGAL FRAMEWORK
1.1 The place of aquaculture in the legal framework
1.2 The definition of aquaculture
1.1 The place of aquaculture in the legal framework
1.1.1 Countries with a specific set of rules on aquaculture
1.1.2 Countries with some specific aquaculture legislation
1.1.3 Countries with an enabling law
The activity of aquaculture is by nature multidisciplinary and multiform; this reality is also reflected in the legal approach to it. One of the main conclusions to which this comparative study on aquaculture leads is that there are a number of ways in which a state and its legal system could deal with aquaculture. In fact, as stated by a publication from the African Regional Aquaculture Centre (ARAC), "aquaculture lacks a firm legal status of its own, it being classified neither as agriculture, nor animal husbandry, nor truly fishing (capture fishery)" ^1^/. This is confirmed by a preliminary analysis of the consideration given to aquaculture activities by the legal systems examined in the course of this study.
^1^/ African Regional Aquaculture Centre, Introduction to Aquaculture, ARAC/87/WP/11.
A false idea about aquaculture consists in saying that it is a quite new activity and that, therefore, it is very understandable that most of the countries have not yet elaborated a legal framework in which it could operate. According to this view, aquaculture could be compared to the medical developments on human embryos and the new legal questions they raise.
However alluring this explanation could be, it must be clearly pointed out that it does not correspond to reality. The technique of aquaculture has been known and used for centuries. Furthermore, in a certain number of developing countries the culture of fish was introduced by the colonial power. Thus, in Rwanda, the Belgian administration set up a number of aquaculture and fish pond establishments, but it is impossible to find a single legal instrument dating back to the colonial era which refers to aquaculture. On the other hand a country like Mexico took a stand at a very early stage. In 1883 a book was published on the "Ideas on the importance of giving a vigorous promotion to Pisciculture and Aquaculture in the Country". The publication led a few years later to the adoption by the Mexican Government of a "Regulation for the development of pisciculture in the Republic" (27 May 1891). The regulation intended to give the legal foundations for an expansion of pisciculture.
The above text included, inter alia, provisions on application and petitions, authorization of establishments, fish transport, periodical reports, etc.
The example demonstrates that aquaculture and its legal implications were at the very least examined one hundred years ago. Indeed, it would be reasonable to assume that customary land tenure practices in traditional societies would almost certainly regulate aquaculture in some way. The lack of specific laws and regulations on aquaculture must then be attributed to other reasons. One of the objectives of the present study is to assist in identifying them and also to enquire into the need for a legal regime to govern aquaculture activity.
As said before, the legislative responses to aquaculture are variable and are not necessarily related to the existence and the development of an aquaculture industry. The main countries examined in this review can be divided into three categories depending on how their existing legislation deals with aquaculture. The three categories are as follows:
1.1.1 Countries with a specific set of rules on aquaculture
In this category we can find most of the western developed countries and some centrally planned states. Thus, countries like Canada, the USA, New Zealand, Norway, France and Ireland have a variety of legislation dealing directly with aquaculture and/or with certain types of it.
In New Zealand, for example, licences are required to operate all aquaculture ventures, and legislation is embodied in "The Marine Farming Act" and the "Freshwater Fish Farming Regulations" of 1983. New Zealand recently adopted policies for importing exotic species into the country for aquaculture. It is interesting to note that for many years New Zealand legislation prevented aquaculture development, particularly for the culture of salmonids, and there were strict regulations protecting the indigenous species and the inland fisheries for sport fishing ^1^/.
^1^/ The information on New Zealand is from the Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in the Pacific, published in 1988 by the Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme in Rome.
Similarly, France has a comprehensive set of aquaculture laws. The French legislation distinguishes between aquaculture done in freshwater ^2^/ and in marine water ^3^/. In addition to those basic texts France has a certain number of texts dealing explicitly, at least in part, with aquaculture in general or with certain forms of it. Thus salmon-breeding is mentioned as being an "installation classée" (classified installation) by the law on the subject and therefore is subject to a special procedure ^4^/. Similarly, different regulations deal with the question of shellfish breeding in particular from the environmental point of view ^5^/. The legal regime set up by those legal instruments will be analysed in further detail in the following sections. At this stage it is worth noting that France felt the need to provide for different legal regimes for the two main types of aquaculture, i.e. in freshwater and in marine water. It is also interesting to note that whereas freshwater
aquaculture is embodied in the Rural Code which is a general and basic text dealing with most of the activities taking place in the rural environment, mariculture is regulated by a decree independent from the general Fisheries Law. A similar situation can be observed in Spain where, after a long debate, a specific Act on Marine Culture has been adopted ^6^/.
^2^/ Under the legal regime set up by the Law No. 84-512 of 29 June 1984 concerning freshwater fishing and the management of fishing resources and the Decree No. 85-1400 of 27 December 1985.
^3^/ Whose activities are regulated by the Decree No. 83-228 of 22 March 1983 establishing the rules governing mariculture operations as modified by the Decree No. 87-756 of 14 September 1987. A third method of aquaculture being experimented with and practised by French aquaculturists is the so called "offshore mariculture". The expression intends to cover any activity of aquaculture in the open sea. The legal problems that such an activity raise are different in some important respects compared to "traditional" aquaculture. In particular, international law can affect in some way the development of this type of aquaculture. Presently, France has no specific legislation on this question, however the legal implications of development of aquaculture in the open sea are being studied by French lawyers (see in particular a study by the CEDEM (Centre de Droit et d'Economie de la Mer), Les problèmes juridiques de la pisciculture en mer ouverte, contrat IFREMER 1989, Université
de Bretagne Occidentale, Faculté de Droit et des Sciences Economiques, Brest, 270 p).
^4^/ Loi No. 76-663 du 19 juillet 1976, sur les installations classées pour la protection de l'environnement modified and completed by the Law No. 85-661 of 3 July 1985; also relevant is the Decree No. 82-756 of 1 September 1982.
^5^/ Arrêté fixant les conditions techniques auxquelles doivent satisfaire les établissements ostréicoles habilites a expédier ou vendre directement les huîtres, Journal Officiel, numéro complémentaire du 6 juillet 1978.
^6^/ Law No. 23/84 of 25 June 1984, Marine Culture, B.O.E. No. 153, of 27 June 1984.
This could indicate that these States feel that freshwater aquaculture can be more easily assimilated to a traditional activity, like, for example, animal husbandry; whereas mariculture differs from capture fisheries to such an extent that it cannot be put on the same footing.
It can also be argued that the interdependency between inland fisheries and aquaculture calls for a unique text governing both activities. An example of this approach is Hungary where the basic principles of aquaculture are set up in the consolidated text of Decree-Law No. 30 of 1977 on fishing ^1^/. According to the Hungarian authorities, this text "is the general framework of aquaculture legislation in Hungary, however in most parts it deals with open water fisheries, both commercial and sport. It should be mentioned that it is very difficult to separate aquaculture and inland fisheries activities. These two sectors are in very close connection and interdependency/utilization of the same resources, stocking programmes, intensive-practical aquacultural utilization of natural water-bodies, etc...." ^2^/. Nevertheless, Hungary has also enacted several specific regulations on water use and supply for aquaculture purposes ^3^/.
^1^/ Executive Order No. 44/1977 of the Minister of Agriculture and Food.
^2^/ Letter from the Ministry of Agriculture and Food in response to our request for information on aquaculture legislation in Hungary (21 August 1989).
^3^/ Order No. 1/1979 of the President of National Water Authority on supply of water for irrigation and pond farming purposes. Ordinance No. 5/1976 of the President of National water Authority on determination of water quantity for irrigation and pond farming. Order No. 3/1984 of the President of National Water Authority on determination of sewage penalties.
New Zealand, France and Hungary illustrate then, although with different means and objectives, a similar approach to aquaculture. Those countries decided that aquaculture was peculiar and important enough to justify an important set of rules devoted to it. This category of countries is however in a minority, in particular even amongst the developed countries. As for developing countries, very few, apart from some Asian States (e.g. the Philippines), have developed a comprehensive legal response even if aquaculture is dealt with in their laws.
1.1.2 Countries with some specific aquaculture legislation
This category needs to be viewed in a restrictive way. Only countries which have enacted a particular act and/or regulation dealing with aquaculture are included. Therefore the number of States in this situation is more limited than might have been thought at a first glance. A good illustration of this can be provided by the Asian countries where a number of legal instruments deal with aquaculture.
That having been said, "in most cases, however, existing legislation has a broad application, i.e. laws and similar regulations have been enacted to cover fisheries in general and not just aquaculture in particular" ^1^/. On the other hand a certain number of developing countries, while they do not have a law covering all the different aspects of aquaculture, have one (and in some cases more than one) legal text dealing with a certain type of aquaculture or a specific point related to this activity. In Singapore for instance, the Fish Culture (Control and Licensing) Rules, 1981, done under the Fisheries Act, provide for a legal regime for fish culture undertaken "upon the seabed within the territorial waters of Singapore" ^2^/.
^1^/ Excerpts from an ADCP document, see note 2.
^2^/ The Fish Culture (Control and Licensing) Rules 1981, Sect. 2.
A more probative example of a country with specific aquaculture legislation is given by Ecuador. This country is the leading producer of farm-raised shrimp in the western hemisphere with 1 300 farms, 100 hatcheries, 100 000 hectares in production and an annual heads-on production of 70 000 metric tonnes ^3^/. To regulate this very profitable activity, the Government of Ecuador enacted, in 1975, an ad hoc Regulation on the breeding and culture of aquatic species ^4^/. However, the scope of this regulation was clearly to provide a legal framework for a very precise type of aquaculture: i.e. marine shrimp culture. In reality, the Regulation established a legal regime for the use of the beaches and the bays ("zonas de playas y bahías") which are the areas in which shrimp farming is booming. Therefore the main intent of the text was to fix clear rules for the use of those coastal areas, which, being part of the public domain, are not susceptible to any private ownership ^5^/.
^3^/ This information has been taken from the Aquaculture Digest 1988.
^4^/ Reglamento para Cría y Cultivo de Especies Bioacuáticas No. 12771 de 5 de septiembre de 1975, Registro Oficial No. 889 de 1975.
^5^/ Article 5 of the Regulation 12771/1975 "Siendo las zonas de playas y bahías, bienes nacionales de uso publico, quienes desearen utilizarlas en cría y cultivo de especies bioacuáticas, deberán solicitar y obtener la correspondiente concesión de ocupación".
The above mentioned goal is clearly illustrated by the fact that all provisions included in section II of the Regulation dealing with the legal regime of the concession, constantly refer to the "zonas de playas y bahías". While appearing comprehensive Regulation 12771/1975 is indeed limited to a certain type of aquaculture (marine shrimp farming) and focused on a specific question (access to the public land via the system of concessions). Consequently an Ecuadorian aquaculturist who would like to know the general legal principles regulating his activity cannot rely solely on his knowledge of Regulation 12771/1975 but will then have to scrutinize the other relevant legal instruments.
In fact, it appears that most of the countries which have adopted a specific act or regulation dealing with aquaculture did so in order to respond to a precise need. In Singapore and in Hong Kong, taking into consideration their very limited size, ^1^/the crucial question was to regulate the access to water and land in order to avoid possible conflicts. In Ecuador the new legislation was a response to the uncertainty regarding the legal status of the coastal areas (there seemed to be a contradiction between the Maritime Police Code and the newly adopted Fisheries Act of 1974) and to stop illegal settlements on those zones ^2^/.
^1^/ In Hong Kong, the Marine Fish Culture Ordinance enacted in 1980 designated 26 marine culture zones within which all marine culture activities could be undertaken. Since 1983 some 50 offshore farms have been relocated into these areas.
^2^/ The introduction to the Decree No. 482 amending the Maritime Police Code gives a good account of the reasons underlying the new Regulation 12771, "Considered that hatcheries or conservation or fattening reservoirs of bioaquatic species have been established occupying beach and bay areas in clear ignorance of pertinent legal dispositions and that it is necessary to normalize this situation and to harmonize the dispositions of the Maritime Police Code with those of the Fisheries and Fisheries Development Law of 12 February 1974, published in the Registro Oficial No. 497, of the same date; that it is the task of the State to sustain the development of the country's fisheries activities by encouraging cultivation and breeding of bioaquatic species, utilizing its wealth and natural resources, establishing tax systems and special development measures in favour of the development of this sector of fisheries; that the rights established generally by the Maritime Police Code
for occupation of beach and bay areas are too onerous for the concessionaries concerned in consideration of the space needed for breeding and cultivation of bioaquatic species becoming thus too elevated" (unofficial translation).
Nevertheless, and however partial it may be, it is interesting to observe that a certain number of countries, and in particular developing states, gave consideration to aquaculture by the adoption of a special legal instrument on it.
1.1.3 Countries with an enabling law
(a) Basic laws including some provisions on aquaculture
(b) Countries with an enabling clause on aquaculture
This is certainly the category which includes most of the countries reviewed and in particular most of the developing countries. The title "countries with an enabling law" intends to cover all the countries which have a basic law, usually the Fisheries Act, for (a) setting up some principles on aquaculture, or (b) investing the legitimate authority with the power to regulate aquaculture. In both cases the basic legal instrument was meant to give a first input to a subsequent law, which, in general, was never elaborated. The major consequences of this lack of follow up are either the impracticability, and therefore the uselessness of the provisions, or, in the worst cases, the supervention with respect to aquaculture, of ambiguities and contradictions between the newly adopted basic law and the existing legal framework.
(a) Basic laws including some provisions on aquaculture
A certain number of developing countries fit into this category. Usually the presence of aquaculture takes the form of a section or a section in the basic Fisheries Act ^1^/.
^1^/ In this respect we can give the examples of Portugal, section III of the Decree-Law No. 278-87 of 7 July 1987 fixing a "quadro legal regulamentado do exercicio de pesca e dos cultivos marinhos em águas sob soberania e jurisdicao portuguesas". Mauritania, Title IV of the Ordonnance No. 88/144/PCMSN portant Code des Pêches Maritimes. Congo section VII of the Law No. 015/88 of 17 September 1988 réglementant la pêche maritime en République Populaire du Congo. Peru, Title III of the Ley General de Pesquería, Ley No. 24790 of 5 January 1988. In Colombia the situation is a bit different. In 1974, the Colombian Government adopted a quite innovative National Code of Renewable Natural Resources and Protection of the Environment. The Code is divided in two books. The first one concerns the environment. The second book is devoted to the property, the use and the environmental importance of renewable natural resources and it therefore includes aquatic resources. Part X of the
Code (Arts. 266 to 288) defines the different activities of the fisheries and aquaculture.
Further it is certainly not pure coincidence that most of the Fisheries Acts which include special legal provisions on aquaculture are fairly recent. It seems that States now feel obliged to take into account aquaculture from a legal point of view without necessarily seeing any difference between culture and capture fisheries ^2^/.
^2^/ However, the trend is not uniform. A country like Senegal which very recently enacted a whole new law on marine fisheries (Loi No. 87-27 of 18 August 1987, portant Code de la Pêche Maritime and five implementing decrees) makes no mention at all of marine culture. A similar situation exists in Mauritania where in spite of an enabling clause of the Maritime Police Code, the new implementing regulation contains no provision on marine culture or any other form of aquaculture.
Notwithstanding this formal common pattern the situation is quite different from country to country. In Peru, the General Fisheries Law (No. 24700 of 5 January 1988) includes a whole title containing six articles directed to aquaculture. The law defines the activity of aquaculture and the different forms it can take. As we will see later in this study, the Peruvian Law is one of the few to have defined aquaculture according to the literal meaning of the word. Further to those definitions the title on aquaculture includes a policy article (Art. 25) and an article setting up the basic legal framework in order to have access to water and/or to land. According to Article 26 of the Law, the concession is necessary if it implies the use of public land or water. When the activity takes place on a private property the sole administrative authorization is sufficient. We can therefore say that the Peruvian Fisheries Act provides the basic legal framework for aquaculture activities. In
Portugal the Decree-Law 278/87 regulating fishing and mariculture in waters under Portuguese jurisdiction establishes a legal regime for the setting up of a mariculture farm (authorization and permit) and for the use of public water and land (concession and permit) ^1^/.
^1^/ Decreto-Ley No. 278-87 que fixa o quadro legal reglamentador do exercicio da pesca e das cultivas marinas em aguas sob soberanias e jurisdicao portuguesas, Title III, Arts. 11 and 12. For its part the new Federal Fisheries Law of Mexico of 27 November 1986 contains a section XI dealing specifically with aquaculture in all its various forms.
On a slightly less elaborate level we can give the example of the Congo. Here section VII of the Marine Fisheries Law of 1988 provides very limited requirements with respect to aquaculture. The law restricts itself to an ambiguous definition of aquaculture ^2^/; it further states that any aquaculture activity has to be authorized by the Minister of Fisheries and that a concession from the administration in charge of the area must be obtained ^3^/. Two articles on the possible taxation of aquaculture farms and giving the power to the Minister to issue regulations on the conditions of aquaculture activity complete this section ^4^/. The section on aquaculture in the Congolese Fisheries Law in fact raises more questions than it solves. For one thing it is not very clear if the provisions it contains are directed only to mariculture or to any form of aquaculture, including freshwater aquaculture.
^2^/ Loi No. 015/88 réglementant la Pèche Maritime en République Populaire du Congo, of 17 September 1988, Art. 47.
^3^/ Ibid., Art. 48. Another example of an insufficient consideration given to aquaculture is provided by Honduras. According to the authors of a report on the state of aquaculture in the country, " 139. En Honduras no hay disposiciones especificas de tipo legal que regulan la acuicultura. La Ley de Pesca contiene un capitulo muy resumido, que establece normas para el fomento y expansión de la acuicultura, sin hacer distinciones sobre la actividad y menos regular los procedimientos para aprovechamiento, comercialización, etc. Por el momento, el Estado aplica por analogía la Ley de Pesca y otras afines para normar la actividad acuícola." in Diagnostico sobre el Estado de la Planificación Acuícola en Honduras, by Noemí Luna and Rosa Duarte, Tegucigalpa, D.C., Diciembre de 1988.
^4^/ Ibid., Arts. 49 and 50.
On the one hand the Fisheries Act intends to regulate fishing activities in the marine waters ^1^/. On the other hand Article 50, giving to the Minister the power to regulate aquaculture, does not seem to restrict itself to marine culture ^2^/.
^1^/ Ibid., Art. 1 "La présente loi a pour objet d'organiser, de protéger et de contrôler l'exploitation des ressources naturelles vivantes se trouvant dans les eaux marines sous jurisdiction Congolaise".
^2^/ Art. 50 "Des arrêtées du Ministre charge de la pêche maritime détermineront les conditions d'exercice de l'activité aquacole en République Populaire du Congo". Another ambiguity is raised by the fact that Art. 48 of the Fisheries Act speaks of the "Ministère charge de la pêche" whereas Art. 50 evokes the "Ministère charge de la pêche maritime". See also the Mauritanian Marine Police Code, Art. 34, where there is a similar uncertainty.
In fact the Congo can be placed in the second category of countries to be examined in this sub-section.
(b) Countries with an enabling clause on aquaculture
The category hereunder consists of countries which, while not having any special Law, section, or provision on aquaculture, have created the power to regulate this activity. The most common of these situations is the inclusion in the Fisheries Act of an enabling article giving the Minister or the Director of Fisheries the authority to regulate a certain number of questions including aquaculture.
Such an outline is widely used by developing States especially in Africa.
In Kenya the enabling provision on aquaculture is included in the Fish Industry Act of 1968, according to which "The Minister may make regulations... for regulating the manner in which any fish shall be caught, propagated, or cultivated" ^3^/. This can be compared to the wording used in the Zambian Fisheries Act, 1974 where the regulatory power granted to the Minister by the Act includes the possibility of issuing regulations for "... regulating and controlling fish culture and fish farming" ^4^/. A third African country, Malawi, has adopted a very similar provision in its Fisheries Act, 1973. Here the Minister may make provisions for "the regulation and control of fish culture, fish farming and fish breeding" ^5^/. Some remarks can be put forward by the examination of these three examples. First, it is interesting to note that the approaches are slightly different between Kenya on one hand and Zambia and Malawi on the other hand.
^3^/ Section 7 (a) of the Fisheries Industry Act, 1968, Act No. 24 of 1968 as amended by the Fish Industry (Amendment) Act, 1971, No. 10 of 1971.
^4^/ Section 21.2 (k) of the Fisheries Act, 1974, No. 21 of 1979.
^5^/ Section 58 ® of the Fisheries Act, 1973, No. 16 of 1973.
In the former, aquaculture is still considered to be an integral part of capture fisheries. Therefore the culture of fish is put on the same level as the catching and the stocking of fishes. On the contrary, Zambia and Malawi have isolated fish culture as a field for which specific regulations can be enacted ^1^/.
^1^/Incidentally, it can be seen here that the expressions "fish culture", "fish farming" and "fish breeding" are used without any explanation of the difference, if any, existing between them. In fact, as seen later, there seems to be a significant overlap on the meaning and the extent of these terms and others related to aquaculture. The FAO Terminology Bulletin No. 19 on Fish Culture includes a translation of the three terms in French and Spanish.
English
French
Spanish
Fish culture
Pisciculture/élevage de poissons
piscicultura/cultivo de peces
Fish farming
exploitation piscicole
explotación piscícola
Fish breeding
pisciculture/élevage de poissons élevage piscicole
cría de peces/piscicultura
From this brief linguistic comparison it appears that the three expressions are in fact synonymous.
The last comment but not the least important is the fact that the three countries examined here have not used the power to issue regulations on fish culture. One can talk only of a potential power but so far one that has been ineffectively exercised with respect to aquaculture. The examples we chose are representative of the attitude of most of many developing countries toward aquaculture. In fact a large number of them do not even have an enabling legislation dealing with fish culture or any other form of aquaculture ^2^/, and this is despite the fact that aquaculture is becoming a more and more profitable activity ^3^/.
^2/In this respect we can say that the largest category of countries is the one not having any direct reference to aquaculture in its fisheries legislation. This does not mean that aquaculture is not in one way or other regulated. As will be seen in the following sections, land laws, water laws, environmental regulations, etc., can very well have an effect, in some occasions a decisive one, on aquaculture and on the conditions of its development.
^3^/Countries like Ecuador, the Philippines and China have booming production. In 1988 the world's shrimp farms produced more than 22% of the shrimp placed on the world market. (Figures taken from the Aquaculture Digest, op. cit.).
Summarizing this part of the study we can say that:
- recognition in the law of different types of aquaculture occurs only in a minority of countries;
- nonetheless a large number of countries have some provisions which deal with a specific form or a particular aspect of aquaculture. Some other countries have the potential to regulate the activity;
- aquaculture is very often linked to fisheries, whether marine or inland;
- the legal instruments on aquaculture seem to have been adopted more in order to respond to a de facto situation then offering a reflection on the legal problems raised by aquaculture;
1.2 The definition of aquaculture
The Concise Oxford Dictionary defines aquaculture as the "cultivation of plants or breeding of animals in water", which is broad enough to embrace freshwater culture, mariculture, pisciculture, fish farming, sea farming, and perhaps even sea ranching. However, definitions of aquaculture tend to raise more complex problems than this dictionary definition would suggest. Quite apart from the legal definitions of aquaculture and related matters, the definition of aquaculture for other purposes is not always straightforward. The Aquaculture Steering Committee of the Fisheries Department of FAO defined aquaculture in the following terms:
"Aquaculture is the farming of aquatic organisms, including fish, molluscs, crustaceans and aquatic plants. Farming implies some form of intervention in the rearing process to enhance production, such as regular stocking, feeding, protection from predators, etc. Farming also implies individual or corporate ownership of the stock being cultivated. For statistical purposes, aquatic organisms which are harvested by an individual or corporate body which has owned them throughout their rearing period contribute to aquaculture, while aquatic organisms which are exploitable by the public as a common property resource, with or without appropriate licences, are the harvest of fisheries." ^1^/
^1^/ Definition of Aquaculture, Seventh Session of the Indo-Pacific Fisheries Council (IPFC) Working Party of Experts on Aquaculture, 1988, Bangkok, Thailand.
Here the emphasis on ownership, if only for statistical purposes, has the consequence of excluding from the definition several aquaculture activities which would almost certainly be included in the dictionary definition or, as will be seen, most legislative definitions, for it is the nature of the activity rather than the often elusive question of ownership which is the central concern.
In many countries, more commonly those whose legislation is drafted in accordance with common law principles, the principal legislation defines aquaculture. Where it is legislatively defined, that definition will govern, where it is not, the term, or similar ones such as mariculture, pisciculture will need to be given their normal meaning, unless the particular context requires that meaning to be adapted in some way.
In the Malaysian Fisheries Act, 1985, one finds a number of terms defined which are relevant to aquaculture. Aquaculture itself is defined as "the propagation of fish seed or the raising of fish through husbandry during the whole or part of its life cycle", while further definitions are provided of "culture system", "fish seed", "fishing stakes", "riverine fishing" and "riverine waters". The latter two terms make it clear that included within them, in addition to rivers, lakes and streams, are "ponds and such other waters other than maritime waters, whether natural or man-made, privately owned or otherwise".
Here the comprehensive definitions of both aquaculture and the related issues provide a clear guide to the legislative intent.
In countries whose legal systems are based on the civil law model, definitions tend to be less elaborate. For example, the Peruvian General Law on Fisheries (Law No. 24790 of 1986), in Article 21 defines aquaculture as the cultivation and re-stocking of living resources in their complete or partial cycle in a selected or controlled environment in marine and inland waters.
Recognizing the difficulty of providing a perfect legislative definition, the Norwegian Act of 14 June 1985 (No. 68) relating to the Breeding of Fish, Shellfish, etc. states that "for the purpose of the Act breeding means all activity where fish and shellfish are fed and handled with a view to consumption, feed production, reproduction, release, research or education", but there is then added: "In cases of doubt the Ministry shall decide what is to be considered as breeding". Such a clause enables a resolution, at the administrative level, of the ambiguities and uncertainties that are apt to arise with definitions concerning aquaculture activity.
An example of where it is necessary to look at the context in order to determine the precise area of operation of the law is to be found in the Congolese Law on Marine Fisheries. Article 47 of the Law states that "on entend par aquaculture, l'art d'élever des êtres aquatiques en se servant des éléments de base se trouvant dans le milieu marin, pour construire de toutes pièces des ensembles écologiques artificiels". This provision, looked at alone, does not make clear whether it covers freshwater culture, mariculture, both, or any other form of aquaculture. It is only by analysing the Act teleologically that it is possible to assume that it is concerned with marine aquaculture. If this is the case, the choice of the word aquaculture, which undoubtedly covers both freshwater and marine culture, is completely misleading. This vagueness can be contrasted with the Polish Sea Fishery Act, 1963, Art. 1, which refers to fishing as the breeding and catching of fish and other marine
animals in inland sea waters and Polish territorial waters.
However, whereas the definition of marine fisheries, in most fisheries laws, occupies a key position in the legislative regime, with aquaculture the definition by itself and quite apart from any ambiguities of the kind referred to above does not advance matters very far, because the area in which the activity can take place will be subject to a much more complex regime than is the case with marine fisheries. Because most aquaculture is conducted in tidal areas such as the foreshore, in bays and inlets, or takes place inland, the land laws will play an important role. In particular, in the absence of any specific definition in a law relating to aquaculture, the legal provisions which govern the delimitation of the foreshore, such as the determination of high and low water marks, and the definition of riparian rights, will shape whatever legal definition of aquaculture may be provided.
This can be illustrated by reference to the Irish Fisheries (Consolidated) Act 1959 (Sects. 245-285) where it refers to the Minister granting "to the owner of any several fishery or the owner of the bed and soil of any estuary, a licence to form or plant an oyster bed within the limits of such several fishery or over such bed or soil above or below the lowest water mark of spring tides". Here, the low water mark is defined fairly precisely while the term estuary would raise a mix of geographical issues (not all rivers have estuaries) and legal interpretation, for in the context the term may cover all tidal areas of a river ^1^/.
^1^/ Another example of how a law indirectly will affect aquaculture, can be found in the laws of Guyana, where the Sea Defences Act (Cap. 64:01) states that all sea defences (defined inter alia as all land fifty feet landwards from the centre of a sea or river wall and all land on the other side of the sea or river dam, to the toe of such sea or river dam or river wall. These sea defences, and future ones, are the property of the state. [Sect. 12(1) Sea Defences Act. The Civil Law Act (Cap. 6:01) Sect. 4 gives adjacent land owners on rivers title up to the median high tide.]
These "demarcational" laws are apt to be almost as important to aquaculture as the aquaculture laws themselves, for unless the latter contained clear provisions authorizing aquaculture activity they would probably be regarded as having priority over aquaculture laws in particular legal systems. Nor do the definitional issues stop there for there may arise collateral questions in other legislation. In the United Kingdom, for example, where there are to be found several different definitions of fish farms, it is important to decide whether fish farming is a branch of "agriculture", for if it is, permission to develop land under the Town and Country Planning Act will not be required ^2^/.
^2^/ See further, W. Howarth, The Legal Status of Fish Farming, (1987) Journal of Planning Law 484 at 491.
<section>4</section>
2. BASIC LEGAL REQUIREMENTS FOR SETTING UP AN AQUACULTURE FARM
2.1 The scope of the legal instrument
2.2 Form of the administrative requirement
2.3 General conditions attached to the authorization
The previous section examined how different legal systems have dealt with aquaculture. From the analysis of several examples coming from developed and developing countries it appeared that States give a variety of legislative responses to this new activity. Furthermore, in order to have a comprehensive view of relevant legislation, it is not sufficient to examine the provisions dealing directly with aquaculture. The next sections will be devoted to the questions of access and use of land and water, and the importance of environmental laws and regulations on aquaculture.
However, before this it is necessary to examine the legal conditions which surround the setting up of an aquaculture farm. This has to be clearly distinguished from the authorization, permit, concession or license required in order to have access to the water or land.
Indeed, in some countries the two types of authorizations are merged into one ^1^/; in others, special provisions may provide for a formal linkage between them ^2^/.
^1^/ This seems to be, for example, the case in Congo (Loi No. 615/88 already mentioned) and in El Salvador (Ley General de las Actividades Pesqueras, No. 799, 1981).
^2^/ In particular, for the activities implying the use of freshwater. In France, Art. 12 of the relevant decree (No. 85-1400) provides in this case for a common procedure of investigation: "Lorsque la création simultanée d'un plan d'eau et d'une pisciculture nécessite a la fois une enquête publique au titre de la réglementation relative a l'eau et une enquête publique au titre de la réglementation de la pêche, il est procédé a une seule enquête dans les conditions prévues par l'article 4-1 du décret du 23 avril 1985 susvisé. Further, in Spain, Art. 14 of the Law No. 23/84 on Marine Cultures, provides that concession for the use or discharge of sea water shall be granted at the same time as the concession or authorization for the aquaculture establishment. "Las solicitudes de concesiones para tomar o evacuar agua de mar, a través de zonas de dominio publica, que precisen los establecimientos de cultivos marines, se harán al mismo tiempo que se hace la petición para
obtener la concesión o autorización del establecimiento.
Nonetheless, a certain number of States have established distinct procedures for obtaining an authorization to set up an aquaculture farm ^3^/. In this section we will try to point out the common points and the striking differences between these procedures ^4^/. In particular, we will examine:
- the scope of the law;
- the form and conditions of any administrative requirement;
- the general characteristics of it;
- the special limits and obligations attached to it;
- the special rights it entails;
^3^/By the expression "aquaculture farm" we intend to cover all types of aquaculture establishments in all types of water. However, as we will see, the situation is different from country to country.
^4^/The following countries have been considered: Hong Kong, El Salvador, Mexico, Congo, Mauritania, Singapore, New Zealand, Philippines, France, Spain, Ireland, Norway and Republic of Korea. The fact that only two African countries are represented demonstrates that very little legislation on aquaculture has been prepared in this continent.
2.1 The scope of the legal instrument
In this section we intend to examine the scope of the legislative act and in particular the precise kind of activity it is intended to regulate.
In this respect we can observe that very few countries provide for a single and general administrative regime ^5^/. This is probably due to the fact that, first, most of the countries' legal systems acknowledge a different legal status to the water with respect to its public or private character ^6^/and second, that some States felt the need only to regulate certain types of aquaculture activities.
^5^/ In fact, the only example we came across was Ireland. The Fisheries Act, 1980, seems to apply to all types of waters (sea/brackish/freshwater). The Mexican Federal Fisheries Act, 1981, also applies to "inland and internal waters, the territorial sea, the exclusive economic zone and any man-made bodies of water" (Art. 71). However, the Act does not set up any administrative requirement, which is provided for in the General Regulation, 1988, implementing the Fisheries Act. El Salvador, in its Ley General de las Actividades Pesqueras of 1981, imposes a common requirement (permit) applicable in all waters, whether they are public or private.
^6^/ However, not all the countries examined have the same definition of public and private waters. This will depend essentially on their legal tradition (common law vs. civil law) and on the structure of the State (Central vs. Federal).
(a) A certain number of States use the division between public and private waters in order to only submit the users of the former to administrative requirements or to provide for different rules according to the legal nature of the waters utilized. Thus in the Philippines the procedures set up by the main Act concern solely public waters ^7^/.
^7^/ The Presidential Decree No. 704 of 1975, revising and consolidating all laws and decrees affecting fishing and fisheries, applies to "Philippines and municipal waters". The definition of those two terms [in Sect. 3(p) and (r) of the Decree] entails that all public waters, inland or sea waters, are submitted to the Presidential Decree. Similarly the Philippines Rules and Regulations on Seaweeds, 1983/12, applies to all public waters.
Another common approach is to limit the scope of the act to public waters and to private waters which communicate with them. In the Republic of Korea the legislation applies to "all public water and private waters forming common lots with publicly owned waters connected therewith" ^1^/. In France the provisions on pisciculture concern all public freshwaters and private waters connected with them ^2^/, whereas the decree on marine culture is applicable to all exploitation on seawater (which is public) and private land if the exploitation needs the taking of sea water ^3^/.
^1^/ The Republic of Korea, Fisheries Law, 1967, Arts. 3 and 4.
^2^/ Decree 85/1400 of 27 December 1985 prescribing the forms and conditions relative to fish farming concessions and authorizations.
^3^/ Decree No. 83/228 establishing the rules governing mariculture operations, as modified by the Decree No. 87-756 of 14 September 1987.
In these examples the administrative requirement appears to cover both the setting up of the establishment and the granting of a portion of water to be used for aquaculture.
(b) In other cases, States do not operate a division according to the legal status of the water but they do take into consideration its nature ^4^/. Accordingly, in several countries the legal regime applies only to marine waters ^5^/ whereas in other cases only aquaculture installations set up on freshwater are concerned ^6^/.
^4^/ In this respect France presents a specific example. On one hand, as just seen, it regulates activities in the public waters, but on the other hand the set of laws dealing with aquaculture covers both marine and freshwaters and in a certain sense even brackish waters. Indeed the Decree 85/1400, already mentioned, is also applicable to the "cours d'eau et canaux affluent a la mer dans la partie en amount de la limite de salure des eaux" (Art. 402).
^5^/ Here we can give the examples of Hong Kong, Marine Fish Culture Act, 1980; Singapore, Fish Culture (Control and Licensing) Rules, 1981; Spain, Ley de Cultivos Marines 23/84, de 25 de junio; Mauritania, Ordonnance No. 88/144 portant Code de la Pêche Maritime; New Zealand, Marine Farming Act No. 29, 1971.
^6^/ Further to the example of France already mentioned, The New Zealand Freshwater Fish Farming Regulations, 1983, can be cited.
The division presented above, however, is too rigid for all purposes and certain States have enacted legislation that does not neatly fit into the two categories. Reference may be made to the following countries to illustrate this point:
In Ecuador, the principal act regulating the setting up of aquaculture farms does not follow the public/private water or the sea/freshwater classification. As we have already seen, the Regulation is in fact applicable only to not very clearly defined "zonas de playas y bahías" ^7^/.
^7^/ Reglamento para Cría y Cultivo de Especies Bioacuaticos, No. 12771, 1975.
In New Zealand, the New Zealand legislation dealing with aquaculture farms set up in freshwater is interesting in more than one respect ^1^/. In the first place the regulations deal explicitly and exclusively with fish farms, being understood that "fish farm means any establishment (including an ocean ranching establishment), licensed under these regulations to capture, raise, feed, release, process, or deal in fish for sale; but does not include:
(a) Any hatchery established and operated by an acclimatization society or by the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries or by the Department of Internal Affairs; or
(b) Any food premises; or
(c) Any establishment licensed under these regulations solely to process or deal in fish for sale" ^2^/.
^1^/ Freshwater Fish Farming Regulations, 1983, enacted in accordance with the provisions of the Fisheries Act, No. 14, 1983, which provides as follows:
"91. Special regulations relating to freshwater fish farming - Regulations may be made under section 89 of this Act:
(a) Authorizing persons, to be registered for the purpose, to construct and maintain ponds as fish farms for breeding and rearing fish (except trout) for sale subject to such conditions as are specified in the regulations;
(b) Regulating the operation of fish farms subject to such conditions as may be specified in the regulations, and prohibiting the operation of any such fish farm and the sale, disposal, transport, or export of any fish from such a fish farm without a licence;
(c) Providing for the registration of persons who may hold licences to operate fish farms and for the qualifications those persons shall be required to hold and the conditions with which they shall be required to comply before being granted registration and in order to remain registered;
(d) Providing for the appointment of officers, including any class of officers with specialist qualifications, to inspect such fish farms and ensure that any regulations made under this section are enforced and for the inspection of any such fish farm for facilities for processing or storing any fish reared on the farm;
(e) Providing for the issue, renewal, and transfer of licences in respect of any such operation and the form and contents of any such licence, and prescribing the fee, not exceeding $300 per annum, payable in advance in respect of any such licence;
(f) Specifying the species, sub-species, varieties, or hybrids of fish that may be bred or reared in any such farm, and regulating the types and quantities of food that may be fed to any such fish, and the methods of feeding;
(g) Regulating or prohibiting the canning of any such fish, their sale or other disposal, or possession;
(h) Providing for the keeping by the licensee of any fish farm of records of fish acquired, kept, and disposed of, and for the keeping of records relating to those fish by any other licensee or other person;
(i) Prescribing the measures to be taken to avoid the outbreak or on an outbreak of any disease among the fish, and authorizing or requiring the taking of any specimen, the testing of any thing, or the sampling of any substance present on any fish farm and authorizing or requiring the removal of any specimen or sample, or the destruction of diseased fish, whether with or without payment of compensation."
^2^/ Freshwater Fish Farming Regulations, 1983, Regulation 2.
This definition is interesting for what it includes and what it excludes. In particular the fact that ocean-ranching establishments are included should be pointed out. Further, the regulations give a definition of ocean ranching as being "releasing juvenile salmon into waters to grow at sea and, on the return of the adult salmon to a specified place, harvesting them or producing ova from them" ^1^/. In fact, the extent of the regulation is wider than is suggested by its title.
^1^/ Ibid.
In the case of Norway the legislation dealing with aquaculture presents the peculiarity of being applicable "to breeding in freshwater, brackish water and salt waters" whether they are public or private ^2^/.
^2^/ Act of 14 June 1985, No. 68, relating to the Breeding of Fish, Shellfish, etc., Art. 2 "The scope of the Act".
2.2 Form of the administrative requirement
2.2.1. The authorizing authorities
2.2.2 The form of the authorization
If the scope and extent of the parent act can vary from one country to the other, some common patterns can nonetheless be observed.
Concerning the administrative requirements necessary for setting up aquaculture facilities, the first and most striking if obvious similarity is the need, in all the States under review, to obtain an authorization from the administration ^3^/. This authorization can be granted by different authorities and may have different names but it remains that all of the countries we have examined require approval from some relevant public agency ^4^/.
^3^/ A list of the countries reviewed for the elaboration of this report can be found here: Hong Kong, El Salvador, Mexico, Congo, Mauritania, Singapore, New Zealand, Philippines, France, Spain, Ireland, Norway and Republic of Korea.
^4^/ This may be considered obvious but apart from the fact that in the agricultural world a certain number of activities do not have to be authorized, it is interesting to note that no country uses the system of notification.
2.2.1. The authorizing authorities
They are often either the central administration usually represented by the Minister of Fisheries or a person acting on his behalf ^5^/, or a decentralized authority at either a regional or municipal level ^6^/. Where different interests might be involved, no authorization will be granted without prior approval by several other authorities ^7^/.
^5^/ According to the Singapore Fish Culture Rules, 1981, "every person working on fish culture farms must be registered by the Director". In New Zealand under the Freshwater Fish Farming Regulations, 1983, "No person shall establish or operate any fish farm except pursuant to a fish farm licence granted by the Minister under these regulations and for the time being in force and in accordance with the conditions of the licence and with the provisions of these regulations".
^6^/ In France, all requests concerning a freshwater aquaculture establishment must be addressed to the Préfet de Département (ex Commissaire de la République), Arts. 6 and 21 of the Decree No. 85/1400 of 27 December 1985. In the Republic of Korea, according to the Fisheries Law of 1967, those wishing to operate culture fishing "shall obtain licences from the Mayor of the Special City of Seoul, the Mayor of Pusan City, or provincial governors".
^7^/ In Ecuador, aquaculture activities may be undertaken only under legal authorization issued by the Directorate General for Fisheries. When these operations are carried out in coastal areas, a special licence from the Ministries of National Defense and of Natural Energy Resources is requested, in addition to the aforesaid authorization. [Art. 52 of the Fisheries and Fisheries Development Act, and Reglamento No. 12771/1975, Art. 1 (see further below)].
A point which cannot be fully analysed in this paper must be however underlined here. There is a special situation created by a Federal or decentralized form of government. A number of States in the world, both developed and developing ones, have a federal structure that entails a distribution of authority between the central government and the State or provincial authorities. The consequences for aquaculture are quite important in further complicating the legal regime applicable to this activity ^1^/. Together with Federal States we may place countries with a high level of decentralization. In these countries special laws have devolved a certain number of competences onto regional administrations. In some cases this can go as far as giving them authority to regulate not only inland fishing activities but also marine fisheries within the territorial sea ^2^/.
^1^/ Thus, according to the ADCP Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in North America (1989), most if not all aquaculture activities in Canada are touched by various federal and provincial government regulations. Under the provision of the British North America Act, the Federal Government has jurisdiction over the primary aspects of the fisheries resource, with the exception of oysters and marine plants which are a provincial responsibility. Federal regulations require all persons engaged in the breeding, holding or rearing of fish (all marine fish, shellfish, except oysters, crustaceans and marine animals), for commercial sale to have a mariculture licence issued by the Department of Fisheries and Oceans. All provinces of Canada have laws regarding commercial aquaculture. In 1985, a draft National Aquaculture Act was published in Canada, mainly as a discussion document to plan the development of aquaculture on a national basis. The draft suggested an appropriate
federal aquaculture role and legislative base.
In the USA there are about 120 federal laws, scores of state and municipal laws, and hundreds of regulations which have an impact on aquaculture. Federal aquaculture laws generally fall into two categories: those that apply to waters located beyond state jurisdiction (e.g. the Fisheries Conservation and Management Act of 1976) and those that authorize the conduct of research and development programmes and the establishment of federal hatcheries. None of these federal laws or regulations apply directly to private farming of fish, shellfish, or marine plants. However, other federal laws related to land and water use, environmental protection, health or safety affect private aquaculture ventures. Many of the laws and regulations which specifically authorize permit, control, or prevent aquaculture are at the state level. State laws concerning aquaculture are usually closely related to state authorities charged with management of fisheries resources. Hatchery programmes are
therefore usually administered by state fish and game or conservation agencies.
The procedures required to obtain permits and licences have been a severe deterrent to aquaculture. Because aquaculture operations deal with food production, water supply, the use of navigable waters, and effluent discharge, they are regulated by agencies concerned with wholesomeness of food, public health, water purity, land use, and pollution control. These regulations sometimes occur at all three levels of government - federal, state and local". The inextricable situation which is created by those different jurisdictions is very well described in J.A. Hanson and H.L. Goodwin, Shrimp and Prawn Farming in the Western Hemisphere, Chapter X, The Legal and Regulatory Web., published by Dowden, Hutchinson and Ross Inc.
^2^/ Two European countries, Italy and Spain, provide very good illustrations of this case.
In Italy, the law devolving authority to the regions has given a quasi exclusive competence to the regions in order to regulate inland fisheries and aquaculture. We must therefore look into Regional laws to find pertinent acts like the Lombardia, Loi Régionale No. 55 du 11 juillet 1983 portant mesures en faveur de l'aquaculture, or Puglie, Loi Régionale No. 57 du 11 décembre 1981 portant régime d'aide en faveur de la mise en valeur des activités ichtyques et de l'aquaculture.
Furthermore, certain regions benefiting from a "special status (statuto speciale) are entitled to regulate fisheries matters in their territorial sea.
A similar situation occurs in Spain with the Autonomous Communities (Comunidades Autonomas) which, with respect to fisheries, have exclusive legal authority over the territorial sea. The Law No. 23/84 of 25 June on Marine Cultures recognizes this jurisdiction by stipulating that "lo dispuesto de la presente Ley será de aplicación supletoria respecto de las normas que puedan dictar las Comunidades Autónomas que ostenten competencias en la materia".
2.2.2 The form of the authorization
As said before, most countries have an administrative procedure based on prior approval by the administration for the setting up of aquaculture facilities ^1^/. The names under which this approval is given are different, and the following were noted when undertaking the review: authorization, licence, permit, lease and concession ^2^/.
^1^/ An interesting opposite example is provided by the Norwegian Act relating to the Breeding of Fish, Shellfish, etc., (Act of 14 June 1985, No. 68). While submitting the breeding of fish to a general obligation to obtain a licence, Section 7 of the Act stipulated that "A licence in accordance with Section 3 for the breeding of shellfish and species of fish other than salmon and trout shall be granted provided that this is not prevented by the provisions in Sections 1 and 5". This Section which intended to favour the development of other types of breeding, other than salmon or trout, indeed had this effect. However, the success was so great that it is now feared that the farming of salmon and trout could suffer. Therefore in a Report of 1987 on Aquaculture it was mentioned that "The Ministry of Fisheries will present a proposal whereby an amendment is made to the Fish Breeding Act implying that it no longer contains a provision stating that licences for the farming of
other species must be granted".
^2^/ In France, Congo, Spain and Ecuador the laws speak of authorization and concession. In the Republic of Korea, Philippines, Norway, Ireland, Hong Kong, Singapore and New Zealand the terms license and permit are used.
Although these terms sometimes are used in distinction to each other, in reality they appear to amount to the same in the area of aquaculture.
Usually, the authorization (in the widest meaning of the word) being granted is a licence to culture. The Korean Fisheries Law of 1967 speaks about a licence for "cultivating marine animals or marine plants in certain demarcated water or work facilities". However, some countries give a large scope to the licensing system. In Norway "without a licence from the Ministry, no person may build, fit out, extend, acquire, operate, own or possess a majority interest in a facility for the breeding of fish or shellfish. Nor may anyone, without a licence, carry out breeding by a method other than a breeding facility" ^1^/.
^1^/Act of 14 June 1985, No. 68, Sect. 3, Activity Requiring a Licence.
Most countries have a global licensing system whatever species is intended to be cultivated. However, on some occasions special licenses or authorizations are required. In the Philippines, along with the ordinary licence, a special licence is necessary in order to construct or operate a fish pen ^2^/. Ireland has a very peculiar licensing system due to the joint existence of two basic Fisheries Acts ^3^/. Accordingly, the Fisheries Act 1980 provides that it shall not be lawful for any person at any place to engage in aquaculture without one of the following licenses:
(a) a fish culture licence;
(b) an oyster bed licence;
(c) a licence granted by the Minister under this section;
(d) an oyster fishery order. ^4^/
^2^/ Presidential Decree No. 704 of 1975 revising and consolidating all laws and decrees affecting fishing and fisheries.
^3^/ The Fisheries (Consolidated) Act 1959 and the Fisheries Act 1980.
^4^/ Sections 2 and 54 of the Fisheries Act 1980. The licenses (a), (b) and (d) were already provided for by the Fisheries (Consolidated) Act, 1959, whereas the license (c) is created by the Fisheries Act, 1980. In the Philippines specific regulations are in force concerning the culture of mussels, the culture of seaweeds and fish in pens and cages.
For its part, France requires a special authorization for salmon culture facilities whether the activity takes place in public or private waters, in sea or freshwater ^5^/.
^5^/ The requirement is embodied in the law No. 76-633 of 19 July 1976 (sur les installations classées pour la protection de la nature). Under "installations classées" are considered buildings and/or constructions, which for their possible impact on public health, on agriculture, on conservation of nature and the environment, had been put on a special list named "nomenclature" (Loi 76/633 du 19 juillet 1976). Salmon cultures were put on the list by the Decree No. 82/756 of 1 September 1982.
It must be noted in this respect that the authorization to set up an aquaculture farm can be linked to obtaining other types of licences (however named) for the access to water and/or land, etc. In most cases this is not explicitly provided for in the legal instrument relevant to aquaculture; nonetheless, New Zealand demands that, prior to the grant of an aquaculture licence, the applicant "shall obtain under the provisions of the Water and Soil Conservation Act 1967 any right required by the Act in respect of any water required for, or affected by, the proposed fish fauna" ^1^/.
^1^/ Freshwater Fish Farming Regulations, 1983, Sect. 5.
New Zealand has another particular feature, which is to contemplate two varieties of freshwater fish farm licences. According to Section 4 of the Freshwater Fish Farming Regulations,
"(1) No person shall establish or operate any fish farm except pursuant to a fish farm licence granted by the Minister under these regulations...";
and
"(2) No person shall process or deal in any produce of a fish farm except pursuant to a fish farm licence, or a licence to process or deal in the produce of a fish farm, granted by the Minister under these regulations..."
2.3 General conditions attached to the authorization
2.3.1 Obligation to provide documents and information
2.3.2 Citizenship, professional qualifications and other criteria
2.3.3 Duration, payment, renewal of the authorization
2.3.4 Special obligations and rights
It is now intended to focus on the principal terms and conditions attached to the authorization; however, the review will be brief.
2.3.1 Obligation to provide documents and information
Several countries require the applicants to provide the granting authority with a set of documents (dossier in French) containing information on the intended activity. Naturally, the amount of information required and the degree of detail will vary from country to country. Indeed, a developing country like the Philippines has limited requirements even for a special type of aquaculture like the culture of mussels. Section 4 of the Rules and Regulations governing the culture of mussels is worded as follows:
"Sect. 4. Application and requirements. - A duly accomplished application for the culture of mussels shall be filed with the Provincial Fishery Office where the area is located and accompanied by the following:
(a) Sketch plan of the area applied for in the designated mussel belt.
(b) An application fee of P20.00, either in cash or postal money order payable to the Director which is non-transferable and non-refundable; and
(c) Xerox copy of the duly approved Articles of Incorporation and/or Certificate of Registration, when applicable." ^2^/
^2^/ Fisheries Administrative Order No. 138, Rules and Regulations governing the culture of mussels (Tahong) 1982-01-15.
In contrast, developed countries, whether they are from common law or civil law legal traditions, have much more detailed requirements. The New Zealand Freshwater Fish Farming Regulations provide that:
"(1) Every application for a fish-farm licence to process or deal in the produce of a fish farm, shall be made in writing to the Director-General in a form provided by him.
(2) Every application for a fish-farm licence shall specify the kind of fish intended to be raised on the fish-farm.
(3) Every application for a fish-farm licence shall be accompanied by plans (in duplicate) showing:
(a) The location of the proposed fish farm and all premises associated with the farm for processing or dealing in its produce;
(b) The layout of all ponds and buildings;
(c) All intake and outlet structures, where applicable;
(d) The source of the water to be used, the flow pattern of the water through the fish farm, and the location of outflows;
(e) In relation to ocean-ranching, the place from which salmon are to be released, and the place from which salmon shall be recaptured.
(4) In every application for a fish-farm licence, the applicant shall specify his right to occupy the area of the proposed fish farm, and shall supply sufficient evidence that all rights, licences, and other authorities required by any enactment authorising him to draw water from and return water to any lake or river or stream, to take or discharge water into the sea, and to occupy any foreshore have been duly granted and are in force.
(5) The Director-General may require the applicant for any licence that may be issued under these regulations to supply such further information of any kind as the Director-General may consider relevant and require, which, in the case of an applicant for a fish-farm licence, may include information concerning the suitability for the purpose of the waters proposed to be used as a fish farm, the methods proposed to be adopted in operating the fish farm, and the suitability of the applicant, having regard to his qualifications, experience, and resources, to operate the fish farm. Until that information is supplied, the Minister shall be under no obligation to give further consideration to any application." ^1^/
^1^/ Section 6, Applications for licences.
The legal regime set up by French legislation is even stricter. According to the relevant Act on Pisciculture, applications shall consist of the following documents and items of information:
"1. the name or trade name and address of the applicant;
2. the name and fish farming category of the watercourse, canal or body of water where it is proposed to install the fish farm together with a site map on a 1:25 000 scale;
3. evidence of the titles of the applicant where these are required by article 5, and, where appropriate, a copy of the deed, conferring water rights or authorization issued to him pursuant to the water laws;
4. a 1:2 500-scale plan of the fish farm and its surroundings accompanied by a note indicating the surface area, limits, registration details of the land in question, the proposed conversion, inlets and outlets, the volume of the flow rate, or the manner in which water is supplied, and the position and nature of the standing closure devices;
5. the nature of the fish farm;
6. a report describing the nature and proposed methods of fish rearing, the fish species, the production target or purpose of the experiment and the method of harvesting the fish;
7. the arrangements proposed in order to ensure that in the bed of the watercourse or canal a sufficient flow rate shall be maintained as well as the free circulation of the fish, and any measures planned, in particular for maintaining the quality of the water, in such a way that no adverse effects shall be produced on other fish stocks;
8. the emptying schedule;
9. the period for which the authorization is requested, the period foreseen for completing any arrangements, and a note indicating the financial capacity of the applicant in relation to the planned undertaking." ^1^/
^1^/ Decree No. 85-1400, Art. 7.
These examples, together with the relevant provisions of other States, permit us to draw some conclusions on the type of information usually requested by States.
In summary we can say that applicants should usually provide three types of documents and information:
- economical/administrative: these may include the names and legal status of the applicant, his financial capacity, the duration of the authorization requested, any relevant title, etc.
- geographical: including, inter alia, the map of the requested area with, in some cases, a detailed design of the premises and facilities to be built thereon.
- technical: what species will be cultivated, methods to be adopted in operating the aquaculture farm, the production target, etc.
2.3.2 Citizenship, professional qualifications and other criteria
In several cases applicants must fulfil conditions of citizenship while in some countries, normally developed ones, certain professional qualifications may be required.
(a) Citizenship: if the legislative text on aquaculture takes a standing on this question it will be in the direction of favouring aquaculture activities for its nationals.
The Philippine regulations on fish pens and fish cages contain a typical provision on nationality requirements. According to them:
"A licence to construct, establish or operate a fish pen or fish cage may be issued only to the following:
- Citizens of the Philippines; and
- Corporations, associations, partnerships or cooperatives duly registered in accordance with law and at least sixty (60%) percent of the authorized capital stock of which belongs wholly to citizens of the Philippines." ^1^/
^1^/ Fisheries Administrative Order No. 166, Series of 1986, Rules and Regulations governing, Section 3, Who may apply.
Mexico, after stating in the Fisheries Law that no concession or permit can be granted to a Foreign State ^2^/, gives a precise definition of what should be considered a Mexican company. An applicant for an aquaculture concession must prove his/her Mexican nationality. In the case of a company certain conditions must be met ^3^/.
^2^/ Articles 4 and 5 of the Federal Fisheries Law, 1986.
^3^/ "(a) Que están constituidas conforme a las leyes mexicanas; (b) Que tienen su domicilio en territorio nacional; (c) Que el 51%, cuando menos, de su capital social con derecho a voto, está suscrito por mexicanos o por sociedades mexicanas cuya escritura social tenga cláusula de exclusión de extranjeros y establezca que la designación de la mayoría de los administradores recaerá en personas de nacionalidad mexicana, de acuerdo a la composición del capital social, así como que, en ningún caso y por ningún título, los inversionistas extranjeros podrán determinar el manejo de la empresa." (Art. 15.III of the General Fisheries Regulations, 1988).
It should not be assumed that this kind of restriction is limited only to developing countries. In France the possibility of operating a mariculture farm is available only to EEC citizens ^1^/. Spain goes even further in allowing only Spanish citizens to undertake aquaculture ^2^/.
^1^/ Decree No. 83-228 of 22 March 1983 establishing the rules governing mariculture operations, as modified.
^2^/ Law No. 23/84, 25 June 1984, Marine Cultures, Art. 4. However, those provisions could have been modified by the Spanish accession to EEC in 1986. In Ecuador the granting of a concession to foreigners must be explicitly authorized by the Joint Command of the Armed Forces.
There are probably several reasons for such restrictions on access of foreigners to practice aquaculture; the most important of which is that aquaculture implies a prolongated occupation of water and land.
(b) Professionals, qualifications and priority criteria
Concerning the first point the leading country is undoubtedly France. The Decree on Marine Culture of 1983 was very strict on this matter, requiring the individual applicant to be in possession of a special diploma (Brevet d'études professionnelles agricoles option pisciculture, or un brevet de technicien agricole option aquaculture), or to provide evidence of professional experience of at least three years. In 1987 these requirements were slightly changed, in particular with respect to the diploma required, but they remain essentially the same ^3^/.
^3^/ Decree No. 83-228 of 22 March 1983, Art. 5, Sect. 2, then modified by Decree of 14 September 1987, Art. 5.1. A detailed account of the new legal regime of marine culture in France can be found in an article of M.C. Miner "Le Régime juridique des cultures marines; la fin des tribulations?", in La Pêche Maritime, Octobre 1987.
The professional qualification requirement is used to ensure the best development of marine culture in French waters. It must not be forgotten that marine culture entails the occupation of a part of the sea. Notwithstanding its economic importance, mariculture is not the only activity taking place in the sea; capture fisheries and navigation interests have always to be taken into account together with the risks to the environment caused by aquaculture. Therefore, a certain number of States have set up priority activities for the granting of authorizations for aquaculture purposes. The requirement of professional qualifications is one possible way to select applicants but it is not the only one. The Norwegian legislation is interesting in several respects. The Norwegian Act on the breeding of fish set up a range of criteria to be taken into account when granting a licence for the breeding of salmon and trout. The criteria are as follows:
"(a) that the activity contributes towards a positive development in the district and for the industry;
(b) that the breeding industry, as far as possible, is given a structure of ownership where the majority of the owner interests in the facility are held by several specific persons or a juristic person with a local connection, see Sect. 4, second paragraph;
(c) that the breeders possess the necessary professional competence." ^1^/
^1^/Act of 14 June 1985, No. 68, Relating to the Breeding of Fish, Shellfish, etc., Sect. 6, Breeding of salmon and trout for food.
Apart from the reference to "professional competence" which can be brought together with the requirements of the French law, close attention should be given to points (a) and (b).
Point (a) represents a general objective of economic and social efficiency. The wording is quite loose and gives large discretionary power to the granting authority. Point (b) on the other hand is quite precise, giving a sort of priority right to local interests. This kind of provision contains a clear policy aspect. During this review it has been observed that very few countries ^2^/, and in particular virtually no developing countries have thought it necessary to establish a plan for the development of aquaculture. Nevertheless, a certain number of States have adopted practical provisions which, like the case of Norway, intend to influence in a certain direction the development of aquaculture. As examples the following types of measures can be cited:
- provisions granting special rights to public administrations or public entities to operate aquaculture farms; ^3^/
- provisions granting special rights to cooperatives or associations to operate aquaculture farms; ^4^/
- provisions aimed at the development of a certain type of aquaculture. ^5^/
^2^/ However, USA has enacted an Act dealing quasi-exclusively with the concept of "National aquaculture development plan", National Aquaculture Act, 1980, Pub. Law 96-362. Other examples that can be given are the Italian National Plan for Maritime Fisheries and Aquaculture in Marine and Brackish Water, Ministerial Decree of 4 August 1988, and the Aquaculture Development Plan for Canada published by the Science Council of Canada in 1984. This Plan reviewed new technologies and ways of managing the natural resources of Canada to maximize economic and social benefits. ADCP Regional Survey of the Aquaculture Sector in North America (1989).
^3^/ e.g. Guatemala, Chapters I and II of the Decreto Gobernativo 1235, Ley que reglamenta la piscicultura y la pesca. Provisions on the setting up of Municipal and State Fisheries.
^4^/ e.g. Special provisions included in the Mexican Federal Fisheries Law and General Regulations.
^5^/ e.g. All the provisions contained in the Philippine legislation tend to develop family-size fish ponds. The already mentioned special facilities granted by the Norwegian authorities for the breeding of species other than salmon and trout.
Here again what is striking is the diversity of options available to governments.
2.3.3 Duration, payment, renewal of the authorization
(a) Duration of the authorization
(b) Payment
(c) Renewal of the authorization
The granting of the authorization is certainly a necessary step in order to undertake aquaculture. However, as with any other economic activity, the terms and conditions attached to it will play an important role in stimulating interest of the people. In particular, if aquaculture is not a traditional activity, which is the case in most developing countries, it is important to provide for an attractive regime including the fiscal and financial incentives which can be given. In order to promote the activity, like in Ecuador, the duration of the authorization, its cost and the possibility of its renewal are certainly elements that a private enterprise will keep in mind.
(a) Duration of the authorization
As already mentioned, the name under which the authorization is granted is not very important. The crucial point is to guarantee sufficient stability for the investment by the beneficiary of the authorization.
From this point of view, the legal regime provided in Singapore is not helpful. There, the licence is granted for only one year ^1^/and
"The Director may refuse to issue a licence or may vary or impose such other conditions as he thinks fit or revoke any licence already issued without assigning any reason therefor." ^2^/
^1^/ Fish Culture (Control and Licensing) Rules, 1981, Sect. 7.
^2^/ Fish Culture (Control and Licensing) Rules, 1981, Sect. 6(3).
The short duration of the licence and the full discretionary power of the Director could prove to be great obstacles to the development of aquaculture. In fact, the example of Singapore is quite unique, as generally the State will grant an authorization for several years.
In the Philippines, a licence for the culture of mussels is valid for three years, whereas a licence for the construction and operation of fish pens is for five years ^3^/. It is interesting to note that in the case of fish ponds the original legal regime instituted in 1975 provided for a one-year permit or a 10-year lease agreement, but in 1979 the Government decided to allow for the conversion of these authorizations into a "twenty-five year fish pond lease agreement... otherwise said permits and lease agreements shall be deemed automatically terminated/cancelled" ^4^/.
^3^/ Rules and regulations governing the culture of mussels, 1982, Sect. 8. Rules and regulations governing the construction, establishment or operation of fish pens and fish cages in Philippine waters, 1986, Sect. 7.
^4^/ Rules and regulations governing conversion of ordinary fish pond permits and ten (10) year fish pond lease agreements into twenty-five (25) year fish pond lease agreements and other related matters, 1975.
In Spain, a concession for marine culture is granted for 10 years ^1^/, whereas in France it is given for 35 years ^2^/.
^1^/ Law No. 23/84 of 25 June, Marine Cultures, Art. 5.
^2^/ Decree No. 83/228 establishing the rules governing mariculture operations, as modified.
Two Central American countries have peculiar provisions dealing with aquaculture which deserve mention. The El Salvador General Fisheries law requires everybody, whether practising aquaculture in private or public water, to possess a permit. The permit to culture in private inland waters is indefinite, while if aquaculture implies the use of public waters, the permit is valid for only 10 years ^3^/. In Mexico, legislation dealing with aquaculture permits provides for a minimum duration of 5 years and a maximum duration of 20 years ^4^/.
^3^/ Ley General de las Actividades Pesqueras, Decreto No. 799, 1981, Art. 47.
^4^/ Reglamento General de la Ley Federal de Pesca, 1987, Art. 15.1.
With respect to the duration of authorization, another way of operating is for certain States to give discretionary power to the granting authority. This is, for example, the case in Hong Kong; whereas for freshwater fish farming in New Zealand, the duration is specified in the licence but cannot exceed 14 years ^5^/.
^5^/ Hong Kong, Marine Fish Culture Act 1980. New Zealand Freshwater Fish Farming Regulations, 1983.
(b) Payment
The question of the amount to be paid for the authorization is clearly very important. However, the information available on this subject is quite fragmentary and for most of the countries analysed it was not possible to get the relevant figures. There are several reasons that may explain this situation:
- A number of States, in particular civil law ones using the system of concession, indicate the amount of payment in the contract of concession ^6^/;
- In certain common law countries, the amount of payment appears in the schedule; however the schedules are changed regularly and are not always readily available ^7^/;
- Last but not least, in some cases there is real ambiguity on the topic of payment.
^6^/ e.g. France, the Decree on freshwater aquaculture 85/1400 stipulates that the amount of the fee to be paid by the grantee is to be defined in the contract of concession.
^7^/ e.g. In New Zealand the amount is fixed from time to time by the Minister by notice in the Gazette.
An example of this last case is given by Norwegian legislation. The basic act on aquaculture (1985, No. 68) states nothing on the question of payment, in the sense that there are no indications that licences are free but also that there is no mention of a possible payment. It is only in reading the subsequent debates that it becomes clear that licences are free. ^1^/
^1^/ During the Debates in the Storting (The Norwegian Parliament)(Report No. 65, 1986-87, p. 6) the rapporteur claimed that the administrative apparatus was insufficient and announced that "a possible solution which will receive consideration is to require the industry to pay a fee for completion of the necessary administrative procedures and/or a fee for a licence...".
Nonetheless, for three countries it was possible to get some figures:
- Ecuador:
annual fee
- Sucres 300 000 per hectare authorized for culture;
- Singapore:
- Sgp.$ 500 for each 5 000 square meters and Sgp.$ 5 for every person working on a fish culture farm;
- Philippines:
. seaweed
(not specified)
- P.Ps. 20.00 for the application fee to culture;
- P.Ps. 50.00 per 10 000 square metres or fraction thereof, for the licence fee to cultivate;
. mussels
annual fee
- P.Ps. 50.00 per half hectare or fraction thereof payable in advance;
. fish pens
annual fee
- P.Ps. 200.00 per hectare or fraction thereof;
. fish cages
annual fee
- P.Ps. 20.00 per 100 square metres or fraction thereof.
It is difficult to form any conclusion on the level of the fees because the countries, the type of cultures, and the time in which the fees were fixed are different. However, from this brief comparison some common patterns were observed. First, the fees have to be paid annually even if the authorization is granted for several years (this is the case for Ecuador and the Philippines). Second, the criteria of the amount of land/water occupied is the main one. Third, in the Philippines, however, the type of culture is also taken into account.
(c) Renewal of the authorization
From a comparative analysis of the different States' practices it appears that the licence is usually renewable under the same terms and conditions on which the first one was granted. This includes in particular its duration ^1^/.
^1^/ Such provisions can be found in the Philippines, Republic of Korea, El Salvador, New Zealand, France, etc.
With respect to this last point, a peculiar provision may be found in the Spanish Law regarding marine culture. According to the law, whilst the first concession is granted for 10 years, its renewal may be authorized to a maximum of 50 years ^2^/.
^2^/ Law No. 23/84 of 25 June 1984, Marine Cultures, Art. 5.
2.3.4 Special obligations and rights
(a) Special obligations
(b) Specific rights
The last item to be examined in this section concerns certain obligations and rights attached to the granting of an aquaculture licence. The objective is not to present an exhaustive review of the problems but rather to give two or three illustrations.
(a) Special obligations
The majority of the countries analysed provide for certain special obligations on behalf of the aquaculture farm.
In some cases, the obligations are stated clearly before granting of the authorization. In France:
"No fish farming authorization or concession may be granted if it appears that any adverse situation is likely to supervene for the fish living in any waters connected with the fish farming establishment in question, inter alia, if the installation were to lead to an interruption in the unrestricted circulation of the fish in the watercourse, to an insufficient flowrate, or to an impairment in the quality of the water such as to place the lives of such fish in danger.
Furthermore, no authorization or concession may be granted unless the proposed fish harvesting procedure excludes line fishing." ^3^/
^3^/ Decree No. 85-1400, Art. 2. A similar provision is included in the Norway Fish Breeding Act No. 68, Sect. 5.
However, in most of the countries the main requirements are focused on the subsequent use of the authorized area for culture. Different kinds of obligations may therefore be provided by the law:
. obligation to give regular information and to grant permanent access to the site ^4^/. Thus, in the Philippines people practising the culture of mussels must submit a half yearly report of production for statistical purposes ^5^/;
. obligation to start the exploitation or not to stop it for a stated duration. The El Salvador law states that if the area is not exploited for six months the permit will be cancelled ^6^/;
. obligation to improve the area granted. In the Philippines the "licensee" is required to introduce improvements in the area covered by the license within 60 days from the issuance thereof ^7^/;
. obligation to mark or delimit its concession. In Singapore "the licensee shall display on the fish culture farm such identification mark as may be prescribed by the Director to denote that it is a licensed fish culture farm. The licensee shall ensure that his fish culture farm is lighted at night to the satisfaction of the Director." ^8^/
^4^/ e.g. Norway, Ibid., Sect. 10.
^5^/ Rules and regulations governing the culture of mussels, 1983, Sect. 15.
^6^/ Ley General de las Actividades Pesqueras, Decreto No. 799, 1981. A similar provision may be found in the above mentioned Philippine Regulation, Sect. 14.
^7^/ Ibid.
^8^/ Fish Culture (Control and Licensing) Rules, 1981, Schedule, Sects. 4 and 5.
Naturally, such specific obligations must be added to the more general requirement of respecting the existing legislation and the terms and conditions specified in the authorization.
(b) Specific rights
If aquaculture activity entails special obligations it may in some cases give rise to specific rights.
* Transferability or cession of the authorization. This question is very delicate because on one hand a certain guarantee must be offered to the beneficiary and on the other, in particular if the activity takes place on the public domain, the government must reserve its rights. That explains the variety of solutions found in the legislation. Apart from the legal instruments, which consciously or unconsciously do not take any stand on the question, in some States the possibility of transfer is clearly prohibited. For example this is the case in Hong Kong and in Ecuador, the latter also explicitly prohibiting the sale of the authorization ^9^/.
^9^/Hong Kong Marine Fish Culture Act, 1980, Sect. 5. Ecuador, Reglamento para Cría y Cultivos de Especies Bioacuaticas, No. 12771, 1975, Arts. 17 and 18.
However, developed countries now realise that such rigid prohibitions constitute an obstacle to the development of the activity and to the possibility of transfer and/or cession of the title. In New Zealand, as far as freshwater fish farming is concerned,
"Any person, being:
(a) the licensee; or
(b) the personal representative of a deceased licensee; or
(c) the manager under the Mental Health Act 1969 of the estate of a licensee; or
(d) in the case of a licensee in respect of whom a protection order is in force under the Aged and Infirm Persons Protection Act 1912, the manager of his estate; or
(e) the assignee in bankruptcy of a licensee who has been adjudged a bankrupt; or
(f) the liquidator of a company which is a licensee ^1^/",
^1^/ Freshwater Fish Farming Regulations, 1983, Sect. 12.
may transfer the license to any other suitable person. However, the transfer must be approved by the Minister, provided that
"He is satisfied that the proposed transferee, having regard to his qualifications, experience and resources, is a suitable person to operate the fish farm or processing plant;
Provided that the Minister shall not approve any such transfer unless he is satisfied that all licences and other authorities required by any other enactment authorizing the proposed transferee to draw water from and return water to any lake or river or stream, to discharge water into the sea, and to occupy any foreshore have been duly granted and are in force". ^2^/
^2^/Ibid.
The Spanish legislation on marine culture also includes the possibility of transferring the concession or authorization. In this case the authorization of the granting authority is requested and if the beneficiary is more than one person, the transmission is "pro indiviso" ^3^/.
^3^/ Law No. 23/84 of 25 June 1984, Marine Cultures, Art. 17. "La transmisión, cesión o gravamen de concesiones y autorizaciones requerirá la previa autorización del organismo quo otorgó aquellas. Cuando sean varios los adquirentes, cesionarios o herederos, la transmisión se hará siempre pro indiviso."
In the Republic of Korea, the Fishing Licence can be offered as a mortgage, Fisheries Law 1967, Sect. 31.
France has recently set up a very interesting system with regard to the transfer of a marine culture concession. The law permits the transfer (in French "substitution") of the concession, to a member of the family or even to a third party under the following conditions. The concession must be held for 10 years if the transfer is to a third person or for five years if it is a family transfer; furthermore, the beneficiary must fulfil the same legal requirements as the original licensee. But the most interesting point is that the "substitution" can occur on payment of a sum which takes into account not only the facilities constructed but also the productivity of the exploitation ^1^/. This makes the transfer of the concession akin to the sale of a shop or a factory, in other words, a quasi-property right ^2^/.
^1^/ Decree No. 83-228 establishing the rules governing mariculture operations, as modified by the Decree of 14 September 1987, Art. 12.
^2^/ The New Zealand Freshwater Fish Farming Regulations, 1983, Sect. 13, provide for "the carrying on of a fish farm by the personal representative of a deceased licensee", which is also another illustration of the existence of a property right.
* Fishing rights. Usually these rights are not explicitly mentioned in the law. The Republic of Korea is an exception; according to its Fisheries Law 1967 a fishing licence carries with it fishing rights which are "under the category of right in rem, and legal provisions pertaining to land shall apply mutatis mutandis to the same" ^3^/. For its part Norway recognizes the right to "re-catch" fish on the following grounds:
"It is prohibited for any person other than the owner of the facility who has a licence in accordance with Sub-section 3 to re-catch fish or shellfish which are no longer penned in and are to be found in a free state in the vicinity of the facility.
The right to re-catch may be exercised for up to 14 days after escape. The right to re-catch applies even if a period has been fixed when the equivalent species are protected." ^4^/
^3^/ The Republic of Korea, Fisheries Law, 1967, Art. 24.
^4^/ Norway, Act of 14 June 1985, No. 68, relating to the breeding of fish, shellfish, etc., Sub-section 9.
* Other legal protection. As already noted on several occasions, aquaculture may enter into conflict with other activities and/or interests. Some legislation takes this into account and gives a particular protection to aquaculture. In Spain, for example, in zones declared to be of interest for marine culture all activities which can have an effect on the quality of water must be equipped with adequate protection systems ^5^/. El Salvador goes further in providing that in the areas where aquaculture is practised, no navigation, fishing or straying of unauthorized persons is permitted ^6^/.
^5^/ Law No. 23/84 of 25 June 1984, Marine Cultures, Art. 23.
^6^/ Ley General de las Actividades Pesqueras, Decreto No. 799, 1981.
From this chapter it is evident that aquaculture activities are not easy to regulate, not only because of their diversity but also because of their interdependence with other essential aspects of the legal system; namely, land and water laws.
<section>5</section>
3. ACCESS TO AND USE OF LAND AND WATER
3.1 Land
3.2 Water
Aquaculture takes up land, uses water, deals with animals, uses chemicals, etc. The purpose of this section is to analyse the legislation governing access to and use of (1) land and (2) water for aquaculture.
3.1 Land
3.1.1 Publicly owned land versus privately owned land
3.1.2 Agriculture Development Policies and Land Reform Regulations
3.1.3 Protected Areas
Despite the fact that in many countries very little attention is paid to use and access of land devoted only to aquaculture purposes, the laws regarding private and public property rights, agriculture development policies and land reform acts (insofar as fish culture is regarded as a branch of agriculture), environment protection policies and finally national security and defense considerations are the ones most likely to regulate the access and use of land for aquaculture purposes.
3.1.1 Publicly owned land versus privately owned land
It is well known that fish culture operations are often carried out in coastal areas, or on riparian lands and in some cases on forest lands. Access to and use of the sites, where they fall within the public domain, are most likely to be subject to special concessions or authorizations granted by competent authorities. In France and Ecuador ^1^/ special regulations provide that aquaculture operations located on the public maritime domain may only be carried out with a concession provided by the competent authorities. In both countries the procedure aims at obtaining, during the "inspection" phase, a favourable report of all persons and state organizations concerned and to involve various Ministries in the allocation of the authorizations.
^1^/ France: "concession d'établissement de pêche et de cultures marines; Decree No. 83-228 of 22 March 1983, establishing the rules governing mariculture operations as modified by Decree No. 87-756 of 14 September 1987. The Decree sets out the conditions governing authorizations for mariculture establishments and for sea water intakes for establishments maritime domain and brackish water areas of rivers, lakes and canals. Ecuador: "Concesión de ocupación de zonas de playa y bahía", Reglamento para Cría y Cultivo de Especies Bioacuaticas, No. 12771 de 5 de septiembre de 1975.
In France, applications for concessions are made to the Chief of the maritime affairs area. The application is circulated to interested government officials and departments (e.g. maritime prefect, inland revenue, health and welfare) and the local representative of the Marine Fisheries Scientific and Technical Institute. Each application is subject to an administrative enquiry and to a public enquiry. Public notice of the latter is given in the commune where the site is situated and in the neighbouring communes affected by the operation. Files are opened in the offices of the chief of the area, the chief of the maritime station and the town halls, and comments on the application are collected and made available to the public ^1^/.
^1^/ Decree No. 83-228 establishing the rules governing mariculture, as modified. Furthermore, this Decree sets up Mariculture Committees for each district, composed of representatives of interested government departments (maritime affairs, inland revenue, health and social affairs, etc.), a representative of the Marine Fisheries Scientific and Technical Institute, members elected by the general or regional councils, and an equal number of members representing mariculturists. The regional mariculture committees are consulted on all proposals to extend or decrease the area of public land put under mariculture, on any plans for the management or improvement of any given sector, and on any scheme for the allotment of mariculture lands prepared by the administration.
The Ecuadorian procedure to obtain authorization for such an establishment involves the Ministries of Natural and Energy Resources and National Defense, and the Department of Merchant Marine and Coasts. On the one hand, they determine, according to the Fisheries and Fisheries Development Act ^2^/, the maritime areas, shores, tidelands, rivers and lakes and swamps available for public use where the establishment of fish ponds or cisterns for the conservation and fattening/feeding of bioaquatic species and laboratories, agrarian or experimentation centres, may be undertaken; on the other hand, they decide whether or not to grant the authorization ^3^/and together they prepare the "Interministerial Agreement on Concession", should the requested authorization be granted ^4^/.
^2^/ Art. 52, Fisheries and Fisheries Development Act, 1974, reads that "for the establishment of fish ponds or fish tanks or animal fattening farms of bioaquatic species and laboratories, aquariums or experimental centres, the Ministries of Natural Energy Resources and National Defense, jointly and before informing the Directorate of the Mercantile and Coastal Navy, will determine the maritime areas, beaches, estuaries, riverbanks and lakes of public use, for this scope".
^3^/ Reglamento para Cría y Cultivo de Especies Bioacuáticas, No. 12771/1975, Art. 11.
^4^/ i.e. when the authorities consent to grant the authorization; Regulation cit. No. 12771/1975, Art. 15.
Ecuadorians (individuals, companies and cooperatives) ^5^/ and foreigners, provided that they comply with Art. 2 of the Law on Aliens, must apply to the Directorate of Merchant Marine and Coasts for a licence; the application must include the following information:
(i) identity and nationality of the applicant;
(ii) type of hatchery or fish farm; and
(iii) the geographic area intended to be occupied.
^5^/ Ibid., Art. 6.
At the same time, certain documents must be annexed to the application, such as the constitution papers of the company, a map of the area concerned and the design of the installations to be constructed thereon, and, in the case of foreigners, an authorization from the Joint Command of the Armed Forces.
The procedure consists of various phases: (a) submission of the application, (b) inspection of the requested area by the Directorate General for Fisheries and the National Fisheries Institute, (c) report to the Ministries of National Defense and of Natural Resources and Energy, (d) draft of the Interministerial Agreement ("Acuerdo de Concesión") between the state bodies referred to, (e) once promulgated, the licence holder(s) will receive the "matricula de ocupación" to be renewed annually and upon payment of certain fees ^1^/.
^1^/ Reglamento No. 12771 of 1975, Arts. 13, 14, 15 and 16.
The concession is granted for 10 years and can be renewed under certain conditions. However, the latter will remain without effect if the licence holder does not pay the annually established registration fee ^2^/. An inspection will take place each year prior to the payment of the registration fee ^3^/.
^2^/ Ibid. Arts. 7, 8 and 16.
^3^/ Ibid. Art. 9.
The concession cannot be transferred ^4^/nor sold ^5^/.
^4^/ Ibid. Art. 17 (see also above).
^5^/ Ibid. Art. 18.
The areas granted to individuals are between 10 and 50 hectares, while companies and cooperatives can be authorized to occupy between a minimum of 50 and a maximum of 250 hectares, depending on the number of its shareholders. In addition to this, other factors might influence the area granted, such as the investment, or the presence of complementary activities like marketing or industrial operations ^6^/.
^6^/ Ibid. Arts. 21 and 22.
Licences, permits or lease agreements for the use of the public domain for aquaculture purposes are also in force in several other Latin American countries. This is the case for, among others, Peru ^7^/, Honduras ^8^/and Colombia ^9^/ and El Salvador ^10^/.
^7^/ Law No. 24790, the General Fisheries Law deals with concessions for the use of public properties or of the sub-soil of marine and continental waters.
^8^/ Civil Code, section V, Title II, "De la ocupación", Fisheries Law of 1959, Arts. 9 and 11.
^9^/ With the Decree No. 2349/1971 the National Government created the Port Maritime Division, DIMAR, an institution empowered to grant permits to use beaches and tidal lands for aquaculture and tourism purposes. Procedures and requirements are also laid down. Decree Law No. 2324/1984 reorganized the structure of DIMAR but did not change the procedure nor the terms and conditions for obtaining the permits.
^10^/ El Salvador has a special regulation entitled "Regulation governing the establishment of "salineras and explotaciones con fines de acuicultura marina en los bosques salados". (Decree No. 14 of 1 April 1986). Both operations can only be carried out on such mangrove forest lands with a permit issued by the Forestry and Fauna Service (Arts. 1 and 2). Only the owners of properties contiguous to the mangrove forest lands concerned and the owners of properties located nearby who have a right of way on the properties contiguous to such forest lands can apply for such a permit. An exception is made where the area requested is an island (Art. 3).
Permits, licenses and lease agreements are common to different countries in East Asia. These usually cover the use of the public domain for aquaculture purposes, as fish pond lease agreements or lease hold rights, fish pen operation permits and licences to operate concessions in fry collecting grounds, among others.
In the Philippines, the Fisheries Decree of 1975 ^1^/provides for the identification and setting aside by the Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources of public lands to be sub-divided into family-sized fish ponds to be leased in accordance with guidelines established by the Fishery Industry Development Council ^2^/.
^1^/ Presidential Decree (P.D. 704) of 1975 revising and consolidating all laws and decrees affecting fishing and fisheries.
^2^/ Ibid., Sect. 26.
Public lands, available for fish pond development can only be leased to qualified persons, associations, cooperatives and corporations, subject to certain conditions such as duration (25 years), productivity performances, site, etc. ^3^/. In addition to this basic law, there are regulations pertaining to public forest lands use ^4^/ (covering as well fish pond and fish pen leases) and the zoning of mangrove and lake areas for fish pond and fish pen development respectively ^5^/. No person, individual or corporation shall occupy or use any portion of public forest lands, including tidal, mangrove and other swamps, ponds and streams within public forest lands or proclaimed timberlands, or established forest reserves, for fish pond purposes without obtaining beforehand a permit or lease ^6^/ issued by the Director of Fisheries or by the Secretary of Agriculture and Natural Resources upon recommendation of the Director. A one-year permit or a ten-year lease are also subject to
conditions regarding duration, productivity, performances, finances, payment of fees, etc.
^3^/ Ibid., Sects. 24 and 25.
^4^/ Revised Fisheries Administrative Order No. 60 of 1960: Regulations governing the issuance of fish pond permits and/or leases on public forest lands.
^5^/ Fisheries Administrative Order No. 160, Series of 1986: Regulations and rules governing the construction, establishment or operation of fish pens and fish cages in Philippine waters.
^6^/ Administrative Order No. 60 of 1960, Sects. 2 and 3.
The interesting point of this legislation is that, where the permit was the standard regime, under certain circumstances and conditions, and in particular if the holder of the permit had improved the area covered by the permit, the latter could be converted into a lease. This regime had been modified in 1979, with the conversion of such permits/leases into fish pond lease agreements of 25 years ^1^/, with the payment of an annual rent.
^1^/ Fishery Administrative Order No. 125, Series of 1979, Sect. 2.
Terms and conditions, such as establishment of boundaries, drafting of a development plan, introducing improvements in the area within 180 days from the issue date of the lease agreement, use of the land exclusively for fish ponds and other aquaculture purposes, etc. are set out in Section 5 of Administrative Order No. 125/1979.
This legislation obviously takes into account an essential aspect of fish farming, namely the importance of long-term leases for aquaculture to allow for the recuperation of long-term investments.
Exploitation rights of any other resources within the area granted, detrimental to the interests of the permit holder or lessee, will not be granted to other persons ^2^/.
^2^/ Revised Fisheries Administrative Order No. 60, Sect. 28, (i), "Exclusive privilege".
These examples clearly show that legislation concerning public lands directly influences the access and use of them for aquaculture purposes.
In some of the Pacific islands, reef and lagoon areas are owned by villages or families. In these cases aquaculture operations must meet with the approval of the appropriate chief or family head. These traditional management systems are still operational in the Cook Islands, Palau, Federated States of Micronesia and on many other islands ^3^/.
^3^/ ADCP/REP/88/32.
In most countries, legislation on this particular subject seeks to offer equal opportunities for nationals, be it administrative units (Peru), small-scale fisherfolk groups or family size groups (Philippines) ^4^/, or bigger corporations (France). In the latter country, the 1983 legislation for marine and coastal aquaculture was a strong protector of small-scale enterprises and made it extremely difficult for corporations to have access to aquaculture sites. In 1986, the legislation was revised in France to facilitate transfer of aquaculture enterprises from one owner to another, and gave access to corporations for investment. Foreign investors and assistance (foreign capital and technology) are welcome in most developing countries, as long as national investors are not adversely affected, control of the sector is not lost, and nationally oriented sectoral developments are not hindered. Typical examples are the Philippines and Ecuador, where, for the above mentioned reasons,
access to aquaculture sites is subject to a complex administrative procedure and foreigners are allowed limited access only.
^4^/ "For the purpose of accelerating the development of fish ponds, the Bureau, subject to the approval of the Secretary, shall identify and set aside the public lands which shall be sub-divided into family-size fish ponds and leased in accordance with guidelines established by the Council", Section 26 of the Presidential Decree No. 704.
3.1.2 Agriculture Development Policies and Land Reform Regulations
The fact that these policies and laws influence access and use of land for aquaculture purposes is particularly true in Colombia, Panama and Venezuela, and to a lesser extent in Tunisia, Zambia and the Philippines. Access to and use of land for fish culture was facilitated in Colombia by the Rural Integrated Development Programme established in 1975 and the "Programa de Protección Integral de Cuencas en Deterioro (PRIDECU)" set up in 1977. In accordance with those development programmes, areas suitable for aquaculture were granted more easily under the form of leases to small-sized groups, individuals or corporations ^1^/. Furthermore, Decree No. 533 of 1986 of the Ministry of Agriculture deals with contracts for the development of uncultivated land for agricultural and pastoral purposes. The economic exploitation of hydrobiological resources of any kind through productive activities, such as aquaculture, is also considered to be an agricultural activity. INCORA ^2^/ may
make contracts for the exploitation of land beyond the 50 metre shoreline established by Decree No. 2324 of 1984 and which have the characteristics of uncultivated land which may be developed. The beneficiaries have to abide by the existing rules for the exploitation of mangrove trees, hydrobiological and other renewable natural resources.
^1^/ Freshwater farming development units for the production of seeds (UPIS).
^2^/ Institution belonging to the Ministry of Agriculture; its task is to promote the development of aquaculture operations.
In a different way, Egyptian Fisheries Law ^3^/ states that the establishment of fish farms is prohibited except on fallowland that is unsuitable for agriculture; agricultural lands and farms cannot be prejudiced. An authorization from the Ministry of Agriculture is required.
^3^/ Act No. 124 of 1983, Act on fishing, aquatic life and the regulations of fish farms, Arts. 14 and 48.
3.1.3 Protected Areas
Legislation regarding so called "protected areas" for aquaculture operations, carried out by private or public bodies, is most likely either to hinder or to facilitate access to and use of lands suited to aquaculture.
Various reasons may justify such rules: environmental protection ^1^/, aquaculture protection and promotion ^2^/, natural resources management, educational, research and scientific development purposes ^3^/, public health protection ^4^/, management of the conflicting uses of certain natural resources ^5^/, protection of water quality, etc.
^1^/ France (cfr. infra).
^2^/ Singapore, The Fisheries Act (Section 294), "The Fish Culture (Control and Licensing) Rules", 1981, Sect. 4.
^3^/ Philippines, Section 31 of Presidential Decree No. 704 of 1975 states that upon the recommendation of the Director, the Secretary of Natural Resources may designate by Fishery Administrative Order an area or areas in Philippine waters as a fishery reserve for the exclusive use of the Government or of any of its political sub-divisions, agencies or instrumentalities, or of the inhabitants of any municipality, or for the culture of fish and other aquatic animals for education, research and scientific purposes.
^4^/ The Philippine Code of Sanitation, reads in Section 32:
"1. Oysters shall be planted and grown only in areas approved by the Secretary of Health or his duly authorized representatives and in places duly licensed by the Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources.
2. Oysters offered for sale, if not originating from approved areas, shall be confiscated and destroyed by the local health authority."
^5^/ The Federal Coastal Zone Management Act (CZM) (1976) in USA provides for Federal support to each state in developing a CZM master plan and in then enacting appropriate legislation and management structures to carry out the plan. The purpose of the CZM plan is to resolve conflicts and ensure that the best use of the coastal zone is made in terms of long-range public interest.
The Government of the Republic of Korea is committed to protect its fishery resources and the Fisheries Law ^6^/ establishes "protective areas" (waters suitable for the spawning of fish, the seeding of marine animals and plants or the growing of fish larvae).
^6^/ Fisheries Law Decree, Art. 12, and Fisheries Law, Art. 25.
The establishment of shrimp hatcheries along the Ecuadorian coast is only allowed in technically specified areas. A Commission, formed by the Oceanographic Institute of the Army, the Directorate for Merchant Marine and Coasts, the Directorate General for Fisheries and the National Fisheries Institute, decides on the location of the specific areas ^7^/. The competent authorities have refused to recognize and, consequently legalize, some existing shrimp hatcheries because they were not located in these areas. The authorities have the power to direct that the areas be returned to their natural state.
^7^/ Ministerial Agreement No. 14425 of 1978, Article 2.
In France, the situation is even more complex.. Traditional town planning documents ^1^/ and maritime areas development documents ^2^/ are Used as tools to preserve and protect, inter alia, aquaculture sites; and also urban areas indirectly. The SDAU control and the POS furnish guidelines to plan national development in certain areas and ensure that on sites suited to aquaculture only the construction of buildings directly related to the fish farming activity should be allowed. Regarding coastal and marine areas, these documents provide for the optimization of the various activities located there, as veil as resolving problems of compatibility between different uses.
^1^/ Two documents are relevant: the "SDAU" (Schémas Directeurs d'Aménagement d'Urbanisme) and the "POS" (Plans d'Occupation des Sols), provided for by the "Loi d'Orientation Foncière du 30 Décembre 1967".
^2^/ The most relevant ones are: (a) Schémas d'Aptitude et d'Utilisation de la Mer (SAUM), decision of the Inter-Ministerial Committee for National Development, dated 26.10.1972; (b) Schémas de la Mise en Valeur de la Mer (SMVM); Law of 7.1.1983.
It is interesting to note that in Zambia, the establishment of special areas is motivated by the wish to protect or control natural resources therein and the quality and the quantity of water resources ^3^/. Indeed, Zambia is characterized by a "water resources oriented legislation", in which the conservation of water resources, as natural resources, is of major concern. Thus, upon request of a land occupier of a certain area and on recommendation of the Natural Resources Advisory Board, the Minister of Land and Natural Resources and Tourism may designate the area as a conservation planning area ^4^/ and elaborate a conservation plan, which might deal among others with the following matters:
(i) the demarcation and allocation of land for agriculture purposes, including the layout of land for fish farms;
(ii) the regulation of bee-keeping and fishing ^5^/.
^3^/ The Natural Resources Conservation Act No. 53 of 1970, Sect. 42.
^4^/ The Natural Resources Conservation Act No. 53 of 1970, Sect. 41.
^5^/ Ibid, Schedule 4.
In some countries, the intervention and interference of the Government for purposes of National Security and Defense are likely to limit or hinder the access to and use of certain lands. This is, among others, the case in Ecuador. The Ministry of National Defense and the Joint Command of Armed Forces are regularly involved in the decision-making process whether or not to grant the "concesión de ocupación respectiva" ^6^/. Furthermore, competent authorities may refuse to recognize existing shrimp hatcheries for, inter alia, reasons of national security ^7^/.
^6^/ Reglamento No. 12771 of 1975, Arts. 13, 14, 15 and 16.
^7^/ Ministerial Agreement No. 14425, Art. 2.
3.2 Water
3.2.1 Access to and use of water
3.2.2 Discharge of used waters and water quality
3.2.1 Access to and use of water
Water, together with land, is one of the major and basic natural resources for which each government tries to plan orderly economic policies, at a national, regional or local level. In most countries, the legislation on water resources deals with its beneficial uses (domestic, municipal, irrigation, etc.) the harmful effects of water, the uncontrolled waste and misuse of water, and finally the quality and environmental aspects. Each of these subjects often seems to be administered by a different ministry, department or autonomous institution without apparent coordination.
Most countries have a regulation dealing with the right to use water resources for aquaculture purposes, either specifically or as a part of the right to use water for fishing or agriculture purposes in general. In the same manner, regulations concerning discharge of waste water and effluent, and more rarely quality aspects, can be found. Indeed, in some countries, the law is first concerned with the conservation of the water resources or with its optimum use and only then with its other uses (e.g. Panama). In other countries, the law deals with water in general, together with other natural resources and environmental elements (e.g. Colombia ^1^/, Poland).
^1^/ For instance, priorities are determined on a regional basis in the light of ecological, economic and social considerations (The National Code of Renewable Natural Resources and Environment Protection, 1974, Art. 49), allowance being made for the need to establish reserves, the wish to conserve the environment, the economic and social costs and benefits of any project, and considerations of subsistence and the economic and social development of the population of the region concerned (Ibid. Art. 49). Furthermore, like any other constituent part of the environment or renewable natural resource, water must be used in an efficient manner so that the maximum gain may accrue, compatible with the general interest of the community and with the principles contemplated by the National Code of Renewable Natural Resources and Environment Protection, in such a way that no interference shall occur with any of those resources or with the rights of third parties (Ibid., Art. 9).
Whether adhering to water law principles of the Common Law System, the Civil Law System, or others, the amount of water available for aquaculture purposes is almost invariably stated in a permit, licence or authorization from local, regional or central governing bodies. Differences found in the following fields are most likely to influence the regime of water use for aquaculture purposes:
(i) legal status of ownership of water;
(ii) explicit reference to the need of a licence for aquaculture; and
(iii) place of aquaculture in the order of priority established among beneficial uses, if there is priority.
In the following paragraphs, a brief analysis is made of legislation dealing with the right to use water resources for aquaculture.
The Federal Water Act (30 December 1971) of Mexico represents the expression of a national water policy embodying the constitutional principle of national ownership of natural resources, with the consequent need for regulating the use of such resources. Title II regulates in detail the various types of water use and the works and facilities associated with them. All water withdrawal or use is subject to prior authorization, with the exception of water use for domestic purposes and for public services (for which a strict order of priority exists). Article 27 of the Act provides for a priority order amongst nine kinds of uses; aquaculture is in the seventh place preceded by domestic use, use for municipal public services, for watering of livestock, use for irrigation, use for hydro-electric power generating industries for public services, and others; it is followed by use for hydro-electric power generating industries for private purposes, drainage and other uses. The setting
up of fish farming districts ^1^/ with a view to preserving and improving "the natural conditions of public water resources (i.e. resources belonging to the Nation), for the development and exploitation of the vegetable and animal aquatic species..." is also provided for ^2^/. This law does not deal with the use of water from coastal areas, tide lands and of marine water not located in aquaculture districts. Assignments, concessions and permits granted by the Secretary of Agriculture and Water Resources regulate the use of public water resources. Assignments (asignaciones) are a special type of authorization and are granted by the Secretary to the Governments of the States, of the Federal District and of the Federal Territories and to public agencies. Concessions are granted to private individuals and corporations. Permits are given directly for the construction or alteration of water management works. The users of the aquaculture districts have to pay for the services which
are established. The regulation of the use of water is strictly related to the establishment of districts for aquaculture. Moreover, the use of waters should not adversely affect the ecological balance. Rather, water should be used to protect the soil, the wild lands and forest lands, as well as to maintain the flow and the volume of the watercourses and to preserve the aquifers. Special attention is given to these considerations particularly when authorizations to divert or utilize national water are to be issued and when aquaculture districts are established. Finally, the water used for aquaculture operations (marine or freshwater) must meet the quality standards fixed by the Secretariat of Hygiene and Health ^4^/.
^1^/ Federal Water Act, 30 December 1971, Art. 87 e.f.
^2^/ Ibid., Art. 88.
^3^/ General Law on the Ecological Balance and the Protection of the Environment, 29 January 1988.
^4^/ Regulation on the Sanitary Control of Fisheries Products, D.O. 7 July 1980.
In Zambia, where the ownership of all water is vested in the State ^1^/, there is no legal priority among the different uses of water. In terms of the Water Ordinance, different uses of water are classified as "primary" or "secondary" or "tertiary". According to this classification, the use of waters for irrigation and for fish breeding is classified as "secondary use" ^2^/; domestic use of water, including the watering of animals, is a "primary" water use; and industrial and mechanical use of water, including that for power generation, is "tertiary" use. This classification does not appear to result in a priority status of corresponding uses of water. Different rights of use of water apply to the two different classes (public and private) of water: the acquisition of a right to impound, store, divert or simply use public water for purposes other than domestic use (primary use) is subject to grants by the administrative authority (the Water Board) ^3^/. The granting of an
application takes the form of an order by the Water Board in which water rights can be exercised subject to appropriate terms and conditions ^4^/. Where a term (i.e. time) clause has been included, renewal of water rights after the term has expired is at the discretion, by a formal act, of the Water Board ^5^/. Thus, public water can be diverted or utilized for fish breeding purposes, and water rates can be levied in respect of the amount of water supplied and of a "special" water right ^6^/.
^1^/ Current legislation, however, classifies waters as "public" and "private":
(i) public waters include public streams, i.e. those waters, courses, drainage depressions and "damboes" (a low-lying area in which water tends to collect during the rains) of natural origin wherein water flows in the ordinary season, as well as the lakes, swamps or marshes which form the source of a public stream;
(ii) private waters include all those swamps and springs which are entirely situated within the boundaries of one's land, and which do not feed a stream or watercourse flowing beyond one's land boundaries. Also groundwater which is artificially brought to the surface of one's land, and flood water which is impounded on one's land, are classified as private waters. The Water Ordinance, No. 34 of 1948 as amended, Sect. 2.
^2^/ The Water Ordinance, No. 34 of 1948 as amended, Sects. 39, 41.
^3^/ Ibid., Sects. 9, 16 and 18.
^4^/ Ibid., Sects. 32, 26(2) and 28(b).
^5^/ Ibid., Sect. 33.
^6^/ Ibid., Sect. 5.
The right to use private water situated on private land for one's own (i) domestic, (ii) irrigation, including fish breeding, (iii) industrial and (iv) hydro-power generation purposes is free from administrative control.
Any land-owner demonstrating a need for water for a secondary use may claim another's surplus upon the eventual payment of compensation with respect to any expenses incurred by the deprived party in making the claimed water available. It is still necessary to obtain the necessary water use right from the water authority ^7^/.
^7^/ The Water Ordinance, cit. Sect. 11.
No specific provisions laying down an order of priority in beneficial water uses exist in the United Kingdom. However, in considering an application for a licence to use water, water authorities must be satisfied that a copy of a corresponding notice has been served on any navigation, harbour or conservancy authority having functions in relation to the relevant water resources at any proposed point of abstraction, and on any drainage board within the district in which any proposed point of abstraction is located ^1^/. The Water Resources Act 1963 introduced a system of licensing for water abstraction. The general effect of the present licensing provisions is that no person is permitted to abstract water from any source of supply except in accordance with a licence to abstract granted by the Water Authority for the area ^2^/. Nonetheless, an exception to the general licensing requirement for water use is made in respect of uses made by an occupier of land contiguous to the
water where the abstracted waters are to be used for agricultural purposes ^3^/. "Agriculture" in this context is defined to include the keeping of livestock including any creature kept for the production of food ^4^/. As regards aquaculture, the water abstraction, therefore, will not require a licence provided that the fish farmer is the occupier of land contiguous to a watercourse and that the fish in question are kept for the production of food. Conversely, a water abstraction licence will be required where fish are farmed, for example, for ornamental purposes or for restocking other waters.
^1^/ In assessing the demand for water, the water authorities must, according to Section 24 of Water Act 1973: prepare an estimate of the future demand for use of that water during a twenty year period from the date on which the survey is completed, or such longer or shorter period from that date as the appropriate Minister or Ministers may in any particular case direct; prepare a plan for action to be taken during that period by the authority (whether by way of executing or otherwise) for the purpose of securing more efficient management of water in their area, including the meeting of future demands for water and the use of water and restoring or maintaining the water quality of rivers and other inland or coastal waters in their area; and carry out a survey of the water in their area, the existing management of that water, the purposes for which it is being used and its quality in relation to its existing and likely future uses, and to prepare a report setting out the
results of the survey.
^2^/ Water Resources Act, 1963, Sect. 23.
^3^/ Water Resources Act, 1963, Sect. 24(2)b.
^4^/ Water Resources Act, 1963, Sect. 135(1).
Malawi acknowledges a distinction between private water (which may be privately owned) and public water (which may not). No ownership is possible in the running water over the surface of the ground or contained in or flowing from any river, spring or stream or natural lake or in a pan or swamp and all underground water. Any stagnant pan or swamp wholly contained within the boundaries of any private land is private water ^5^/. All public water is vested in the President and the use of public water (direct, dam, storage, abstraction, etc.) is prohibited except with lawful authority. Sources, quantity, period (whether definite or not) are defined in the grant. Only the taking of public water for fighting fires is free. Apparently, there is no legal status regarding priority of uses of public water nor is any reference made to use of water for aquaculture or fishing purposes in the Water Law. In case of private water, the right to use is a normal attribute of the ownership of
this water.
^5^/ The Water and Resources Act of 6 May 1969, Sect. 3.
Panama, in its turn, has a quite distinctive legal regime for water use. Water is not susceptible of ownership. All waters belong to the public domain and their use is subject to government permits or concessions ^1^/. The latter will only be granted for any demand for "beneficial use" of water ^2^/, that is to say a use which serves directly its concession holder or permittee, which is rational and which conforms to the social and public interests ^3^/. The following are considered as beneficial uses of water: domestic use and use for public health purposes, as well as use for agriculture, industry, mining and energy purposes and use for animal health and recreational purposes ^4^/. Highest priority is given to the use of water for public health purposes as this use serves best the social and public interest. Regarding other uses, priority will be given to existing use rights and then to the use which serves best the social and public interests if any controversy arises
among existing rights or to decide on specific demands ^5^/. There is no definition of "agriculture", nor any reference to fishing or aquaculture. The point is to what extent does aquaculture serve the public and social interests of the State. A similar priority system exists in Ecuador, where among different uses, whenever water is insufficient in quantity to satisfy more than one use, preference will be accorded to the use which best serves the economic and social interests of the country ^6^/. The Water Act lays down the following priorities, which the authorities may modify in the event of a "social emergency":
1. supply of population centres, domestic needs and livestock watering;
2. crop and animal husbandry;
3. energy production and industrial and mining uses;
4. other uses.
^1^/ Decree-Law No. 25 of 22 September 1966, Art. 15; and Art. 16 reads that the right to use or to discharge waste water can only be acquired through (a) a permit (period of maximum one year, and special purpose); (b) temporary concession (3 to 5 years, and special purpose); and (c) permanent concession.
^2^/ Ibid., Art. 15.
^3^/ Ibid., Art. 16.
^4^/ Ibid., Art. 16.
^5^/ Ibid., Art. 40-42.
^6^/ Water Act of 1972, Sect. 25.
However, the first priority mentioned in the above list may not be modified in any event ^1^/. The point is to what category does the water use for aquaculture purposes belong. The only reference made is the following: the Water Resource Institute of Ecuador is empowered to grant a water use right in respect of sections of rivers and other natural or artificial watersheds for the culture, harvesting and exploitation of "aquatic flora and fauna" ^2^/. Before doing so, the Institute must obtain a report from the Fisheries" Department of the Ministry of Natural Resources and Tourism and comply with the terms and conditions prescribed by law. Meanwhile, priority must also be given to considerations of social interest laid down in the Marine Fisheries and Hunting Act. In granting such authority, preference will be given to the harvesting of juveniles of species to be cultivated and exploited ^3^/.
^1^/ Water Act of 1972, Sect. 34 and Water Act Regulation, 1973, Reg. 85.
^2^/ Supreme Decree No. 40, issuing the Water Act Regulations, 1973, Regs. 126-127.
^3^/ Ibid.
The use of public waters for aquaculture purposes is clearly regulated in Guatemala. Indeed, the Governmental Decree No. 1235 of 1932 ^4^/ states that the Municipalities in agreement with the Ministry of Agriculture are empowered to grant the use of public waters (fresh or salted) to establish lakes, backwaters or ponds assigned for fish hatcheries or fish ponds, provided that no damage is caused to the public health.
^4^/ Law which regulates the Freshwater Fisheries and Fisheries.
The Polish Water Law distinguishes between the flowing and stagnant surface waters. Flowing water, except water in ditches, is the property of the State; stagnant water and water in ditches are the property of the land-owners where such waters occur. The groundwater, except water in wells, is also the property of the State. The basic method of regulating water consumption is the issue of a water licence. It is an individual and unilateral administrative act, granting to the persons applying for such a licence the specific right to utilize the water and fixing the respective duties. A legal water licence is required, among others, for fishing purposes, considered as a specific use of water, i.e. one which exceeds public or normal use of water ^5^/. The control of water use is linked with the economic plans. Thus, irrespective of the subject applying for a water licence, a licence will be refused if the proposed use of water is contrary to the requirements of national economic
development or the protection of the natural environment, as set up in the social and economic plan for the country's development ^6^/.
^5^/ The basic forms of water use are: public or normal use of water. The latter is available for anyone willing to utilize it for personal and domestic purposes, without the need of a water licence.
^6^/ The Water Law treats in a special manner irrigation and drainage installations, which include facilities for fish ponds. Indeed, irrigation and drainage installations are divided into basic ones such as canals, weirs, water reservoirs (intended exclusively for agricultural purposes) [...] and detailed ones such as ditches, sprinklers, fishing ponds [...] The costs of basic installations are borne by the State while the detailed installations are financed by the State, which means that part of such expenses is refunded to the State by the respective land-owners in the form of annual land improvement dues. Majewski T., "Economic stimuli of rational water management in Poland, Present state and predicted trends of development". Seminar on the rational use of water in industrial processes, 29 March 1985. Surowiec Stanislaw and Deja Andrzej, "Water law and its application in Poland", 1977.
France, as opposed to the above mentioned countries, does provide for the use of maritime water (sea water) and the use of fresh water for aquaculture purposes.
Sea water is considered as "res communis", that is to say that its nature does not allow any ownership and that the use of it belongs to everyone without limits or permission ^1^/. However, when the use of such water involves the possession of a part of the public maritime domain, the user must obviously ask for due authorization from the competent authorities. Consequently, as far as aquaculture is concerned, two situations must be distinguished:
1. the fish farm is located on the Public Maritime Domain (PMD): no other authorization is required in addition to the one asked to establish the fish farm, if the water abstraction facility (including pumps, etc.) does not imply a supplementary encroachment/trespass on the public maritime domain; or
2. the fish farm is located on private property ^2^/, but using seawater. The abstraction of such water is subject to the terms and conditions set out in Decree No. 83-228 if the water intakes are located on the Public Maritime Domain ^3^/.
^1^/ Civil Code, Art. 714.
^2^/ Decree No. 83-228 of 22 March 1983, Arts. 1 and 2, establishing the rules governing mariculture operations, as modified by Decree No. 87-756 of 19 September 1987.
^3^/ Decree No. 83-228 cit., Art. 17.
On the other hand, the use of surface and groundwater (catchment, diversion, etc., installations) for fresh water culture is submitted to an authorization ^5^/, unless the water source derives from or flows within privately owned land or the user has some existing ancillary right or prior use rights in this respect.
^4^/ Rural Code, Arts. 97, 106 and 107.
There are no legislative provisions establishing a general order of priority between different uses, areas or existing rights. However, in cases where a priority of use has to be established, the National Water Committee, at the national level, and the relevant Basin Committee, at the local level, are consulted and the decision granting priority to one use or area is adopted by Order of the Council of State ^1^/.
^1^/ Law No. 64-1245 of 16 December 1969, Arts. 15 and 31.
Priorities among existing rights to the use of private waters are regulated by the provisions of the Civil Code relating to land ownership. As to the use of public waters, existing rights are taken into consideration during the procedure of inquiry preceding the issuance of water use titles.
Because of the different conditions existing from one country to another and the limited amount of information available, it is difficult at present to make a thorough analysis of the existing situation with respect to water resources administration and legislation for aquaculture purposes. However, from the above country analysis, it was noted that several countries have a statute on water use for aquaculture purposes (Mexico, Guatemala, Poland, France). Many others have a number of discrete enactments which either have an indirect bearing on water use and control on the subject (U.K., Zambia) or which cover only certain aspects of water management without reference to aquaculture as such (Malawi, Panama). Most of the latter countries acknowledge the right to use water for agriculture, animal health, etc., and the point is to know whether or not fish culture can be understood as such or not.
In addition, even in those countries whose laws refer to aquaculture, it is rarely specified if the authorization granting the right to use water for fish culture has a temporary character or not, or if the duration of the water licence agrees with the duration of the aquaculture licence, if any exists ^2^/. At the same time, it is also not known whether the duration meets or is adapted to aquaculture needs.
^2^/ The only known countries where the aquaculture licence is issued in complete accordance with the Water Laws are El Salvador, Guatemala and France. Indeed, in the former country the General Board of Fishing Resources must grant a permit to engage in aquaculture operations in accordance with the Law on uses of water (General Law on Fishing Activities, Decree No. 799 of 1981, Art. 46).
The priority given to the use of water for aquaculture purposes is not always clear in those countries where a priority order exists: it is most often placed after domestic use and use of livestock watering or for public interests; it is sometimes preceded or followed by the use for agriculture purposes and usually followed by the use for industries or recreational purposes, etc. (depending on whether aquaculture is included in one or another category). Obviously water management policies are to optimize the use of water (domestic, drinking, etc.) and then the other uses. But the criteria for classification do not appear very clear. Lack of awareness of the importance of regulating the use of water for aquaculture could be a reason. But it is also true that aquaculture operations have been integrated in a legislative framework quite recently for many countries while the water laws are much older.
Finally, among the countries analysed, only in France is there a different legal statute between the use of seawater and the use of fresh water for aquaculture purposes (bearing in mind that most countries adhere to the principle that all waters vest in the State). It appears that no significance is attached to the various types of existing aquaculture techniques, i.e. brackish, fresh and marine water fish culture.
3.2.2 Discharge of used waters and water quality
Water discharge
Water quality
Aquaculture is likely to produce significant environmental impacts on rivers, lakes and coastal areas, primarily as a result of the discharge of wastes into them. On the other hand, however, water pollution is a great threat to aquaculture.
Laws dealing with the problems of water discharge, water quality and environment protection are likely to be found in almost all countries. Pollution prevention regulations, water laws, natural resources conservation laws, health codes as well as other laws might regulate these matters.
Water discharge
Viewed from the perspective of aquaculture operations, legislation on water discharge varies from country to country. First of all, not all countries' legislation deal specifically with discharge of used water by fish farms. The heart of such laws is often the general requirement that "the discharge of any pollutant" must be authorized; in other terms, the most important common feature is the requirement of prior authorization for discharge of waste into water.
This authorization can either be incorporated in the grant (permit or concession) to use water (Zambia, Ecuador) or be given separately (U.K., Korea, Malawi and Poland).
Zambia has specific legislation with respect to the qualitative and quantitative aspects of water. Where water is used under a grant, as is the case for fish breeding purposes, the metering of the water as well as control over water waste may be prescribed by terms and conditions drafted in the grant ^1^/. Further, a legal obligation for individuals to take proper antipollution measures at their own expense may arise from a term or condition which the water authority may attach to the grants, whereunder water users may acquire rights to use public and in some cases private water ^2^/. Auxiliary legal provisions authorize the Minister of Health to enact regulations governing (a) the setting of quality standards for effluents from any source and (b) the establishment and operation of factories whose activities may result in water pollution ^3^/
^1^/ The Water Ordinance, No. 34 of 1948, as amended, Sect. 28(b).
^2^/ The Natural Resources Conservation Act No. 53 of 1970, Sects. 13(3) and (4).
^3^/ The Public Health Act No. 12 of 1930, as amended, Sect. 78.
According to the Ecuadorian Water Regulations, studies and works concerning water catchment, conduits, diversion, storage and discharge of water may only be executed upon approval of the Water Resources Institute of Ecuador and having regard to legal requisites relating thereto ^1^/ Several characteristics of a water right are that it is granted on the condition that no interference arises with other uses, that there is water in sufficient quantity and appropriate quality available, and that the authorities approve the plans and the installations (intakes and discharge) ^2^/. The Water Authorities supervise, jointly with the Ministry of Health, all installations for the treatment of water that has become polluted ^3^/ On the other hand, pursuant to the Health Code, the following prohibitions exist:
(i) nightsoil, waste water and industrial water may not be discharged, directly or indirectly, into streams, rivers, lakes, conduits or any watercourse used for domestic, agricultural, industrial or recreational purposes, unless they have first been subjected to treatment to render them harmless to health ^4^/
(ii) the discharge into sewerage systems, streams, conduits, rivers, lakes or sea, or the seepage into the soil of effluents containing contaminants that are harmful to human health, the fauna, the flora or to property when such effluents do not conform with the technical rules and regulations prescribed by the authorities ^5^/.
^1^/ Supreme Decree No. 40 issuing The Water Act Regulations, 1973, Art. 187.
^2^/ Supreme Decree No. 369, the Water Act 1972, Art. 30.
^3^/ The Water Act Regulations 1973, Art. 92.
^4^/ The Health Code No. 188, 1971, Arts. 12 and 17
^5^/ Ibid.
Water permits are required in Poland, in particular for the discharge of waste water into waters or soil, the collection of waste water and wastes on the littoral, and the discharge or supply of water by means of equipment traversing the land of another freeholder. The permit is issued on the basis of a hearing where the competent administrative body considers and analyses all aspects of the water use intended by the users and the expected impact of that use on water management of the area in question. The Polish Water Code provides for a special clause allowing the administration, at the time of the authorization or later, to require the construction, enlargement, or modification of sewage purification installations or other installations for the prevention of water pollution ^6^/.
^6^/ The Polish Water Code of 30 May 1962, Art. 48.
Moreover, Poland also set up a system of water pollution control based on the prohibition of water pollution in terms of discharge or introduction of effluents, subject to penalties for violations. The prohibitions are formulated in terms of water quality requirements, based on a system of classification of waters according to the ability to receive and also overriding water quality requirements to be imposed irrespective of usability ^1^/. Requirements are also imposed on the treatment of effluents prior to discharge, and limitations are placed on specified substances contained in them. Of particular interest is the fact that the discharge of effluents, whatever their quantity, is prohibited if they contain, among other things, "substances imparting a persistent smell or taste to the water or to equipment used in fish rearing" ^2^/.
^1^/ Ordinance of 28 February 1962 of the Council of Ministers.
^2^/ Lichorowicz A., "Le droit des eaux en agriculture polonaise", 13th European Congress and Colloquium on Agrarian Law, 23-26 September 1985; and Majewski T. "Economic stimuli of rational water management in Poland. Present state and predicted trends of development", Seminar on the rational use of water in industrial processes, 29 March 1985.
The fish farmer in England or Wales may require a licence from the Water Authority for his area to abstract water for fish farming purposes depending on the nature of his enterprise, but he will invariably require consent from the water authority to discharge water into a watercourse whatever the nature of the enterprise ^3^/. Such consent may stipulate a range of conditions governing the manner in which water may be discharged and, amongst other things, these may regulate the nature, composition, temperature, volume and rate of discharges and the periods during which the discharges may take place ^4^/. Failure to obtain consent may result in an offence by the person causing the discharged polluting matter to enter a stream ^5^/ or the offence of causing trade or sewage effluent to be discharged into the stream ^6/. Moreover, consent to discharge water into a watercourse will be required whether or not the initial abstraction required a licence.
^3^/ The Control of Pollution Act, 1974, Sect. 34.
^4^/ Ibid., Sect. 34(4)(b).
^5^/ Ibid., Sect. 31(1).
^6^/ Ibid., Sect. 32.
Since 1978, Malawi has had a general prohibition against water pollution; polluted effluents or waters may be discharged in public waters only under prior written consent delivered by the Minister responsible for Agriculture and Natural Resources ^7^/. The persons granted permission shall pay the fees and rents specified in the Minister's consent and comply with every obligation (i.e. works or analysis of water or effluent at its own expense) and conditions specified therein ^8^/. The legislation ^9^/ in the Republic of Korea, has the same intent. In fact, persons wishing to install pollution discharging facilities must obtain the consent of the Minister of Health and Social Affairs; "permissible" criteria for water pollution is established by the Minister of Health and Social Affairs.
^7^/ Water Resources (Water Pollution Control) Regulations, 1978, Regulation 4.
^8^/ Ibid., Regulation 12.
^9^/ Fisheries Amendment Law, 1971, and the Pollution Prevention Law.
The French Decree of 23 February 1973 ^1^/ defines the conditions under which discharge (among other substances) of liquids may occur. Pursuant to Article 1 of this Decree, the following are subject to authorization: any direct or indirect discharge, drainage and deposit of water or matter able to alter the quality of waters, including surface waters, underground waters and maritime waters within the territorial limits. The application must state, for instance, the nature and importance of the discharges, the equipment to be used to discharge and the measures taken to avoid and eliminate water pollution. The discharge authorization is based on the waste load capacity of the recipient water body ^2^/.
^1^/ Decree No. 73-218 of 23 February 1973, regulating the discharge, dumping, throwing and deposit of liquid or other matters likely to contaminate surface and underground water.
^2^/ Circular of 4 November 1980.
As opposed to the previous countries, some countries deal specifically with discharge of water by fish farms: aquaculture related laws and discharge rules might be part of a single package, insofar as the aquaculture concession or permit creates reciprocal obligations between the user and the administration, and among them there exists the obligation for the fish farmer to provide suitable installations or equipment to discharge the used waters in order to conserve the quality thereof. This is the case of New Zealand and El Salvador, for instance. In New Zealand, the applicant for a fish farm licence must obtain (before application) a right to take or discharge water as required under the Water and Soil Conservation Act 1967. The applicant, immediately after making an application for any such right, must give notice thereof to the acclimatization society in whose district the proposed fish farm will be situated and each acclimatization society into whose district water from
the proposed farm may be discharged ^3^/. Further, the applicant must supply sufficient evidence that all rights, licences and other authorizations allowing him to draw water from and return water to any lake or river or stream, to take or discharge water into the sea... have been duly granted and are in force ^4^/. It is a condition of every fish farm licence, whether specified in the licence or not, that (i) all rights, licences, etc. relating to the use or discharge of water in the operation of the fish farm shall be kept in full force and effect so long as fish farming operations are carried out under the licence; and that (ii) means are provided to ensure that water can be supplied to every pond on the fish farm and that it cannot be discharged without being treated by the process approved by the Director General ^5^/. In addition, as regards this subject matter, the Minister may impose other conditions as he thinks fit ^6^/. The Act further states "without limiting the
provisions of regulation 8(4) of these regulations, the Minister shall, where practicable, make it a condition of every fish farm licence that, subject to compliance by the licensee with any requirements of the Water and Soil Conservation Act 1967, and with the terms of any right granted under that Act to the licensee, all effluents from the fish farm shall, after being treated as mentioned in paragraph (b) of regulation 8(3) of these regulations, be discharged into the sea or into estuarine waters or, where that is not practicable, shall be further treated and disposed of in a manner specified by the Minister".
^3^/ Fresh Water Fish Farming Regulations, 1983.
^4^/ Ibid., 1983, Sect. 6(4).
^5^/ Ibid., 1983, Sect. 8(3), paragraphs (a) and (b).
^6^/ Fresh Water Fish Farming Regulations, 1983, Sect. 8(4).
The French legislation is broadly similar. A French freshwater fish farmer is not able to start his activities without the following prior authorizations ^1^/:
(i) to create such a farm ^2^/;
(ii) to abstract and discharge water ^3^/; and
(iii) to open a "Classified Installation" to protect the environment, if necessary ^4^/.
^1^/ Decree No. 85-1400, Art. 3.
^2^/ Rural Code, Art. 432.
^3^/ Rural Code, Arts. 97, 106 and 107.
^4^/ Law No. 76-663 of 19 July 1976 on the "Classified Installations" amended and completed by Law No. 85-661 of 3 July 1985, and executed by Decree No. 77-1133 of 21 September 1977.
The General Law on Fishing Activities in El Salvador explicitly prohibits conveying used/waste waters from fishing activities without proper treatment on beaches and coastal areas, in rivers, lakes, natural or artificial watercourses or to provoke any other form of contamination ^5^/. Finally, in other cases, discharge of used waters by fish farms is covered by a specific regulation. France again, can, together with other countries like Hungary and Ecuador, be listed as the country in which a particular regulation exists regarding the discharge of water by certain fish farms. Shellfish culture farms and more particularly those equipped with oyster depuration facilities are subject to a special regime: the waste waters must in all cases be conducted towards a sewerage system and never into natural waters ^6^/.
^5^/ The General Law on Fishing Activities, Decree No. 799/1981, Art. 51(b).
^6^/ Decree on the technical conditions to be satisfied by shellfish breeding farms authorized to market or sell oysters directly, JONC of 6 July 1978.
Hungary, in its turn has a whole set of regulations and guidelines regarding the quantity of water supply for fish breeding purposes ^7^/, the disposal of sewage in fish ponds and in storage reservoirs used for fish farming ^8^/, and providing for a progressive system of effluent fines ^9^/.
^7^/ Instruction No. 7/1969 OVH-AH of the President of the National Water Affairs Office on the regulation of water supplies for irrigation and fish breeding purposes, and rates thereof, 19 March 1969, MEM E No. 6, 19 March 1969, p. 228, and guiding principles for the uniform interpretation of the regulations governing the use of and fees of water for irrigation and fish breeding purposes, undated, NEM.E. No. 27, 3 October 1969, p. 672.
^8^/ Fisheries in Hungary by A. Lajos Dobrai and Gyula Pekh,
^9^/ Order No. 2/1970 - State Decree No. 40 of 1969.
The situation in Ecuador is somewhat different. Generally speaking, it is prohibited, according to the Fisheries and Fisheries Development Act ^1^/ to direct the used waters, without proper treatment, towards the shores/beaches and seabanks, rivers, lakes, natural and artificial basins as to cause any form of pollution ^2^/. Therefore, as seen above, the Water Resources Institute of Ecuador has to approve, among other things, works concerning discharge of water ^3^/. In addition to this, shrimp farming industries, in order to obtain tax exemptions or special incentives according to the category of enterprise they belong to must, inter alia, possess a system of treatment for the water used, approved by the Directorate General for Fisheries and other competent authorities, to avoid environmental pollution ^4^/. Apparently, Ecuador tries several methods in order to prevent fish farmers from polluting the environment when discharging used water. The question then is what is the
most efficient way to compel the fish farmer to protect, preserve and respect the environment?
^1^/ Decree No. 178 of 1974.
^2^/ Fisheries and Fisheries Development Act, 1974, Art. 2.
^3^/ Supreme Decree No. 40, issuing the Water Act Regulations, 1973, Reg. 127.
^4^/ Ministerial Agreement 13319 of 1976, Arts. 3(i) and 3(j).
However, all these rules place a considerable amount of power into the hands of the water authorities to determine whether a fish farming operation should be conducted or not, and if so at a particular site.
Water quality
The importance of water quality and its protection, for aquaculture purposes, has not received much attention and the question has to be asked whether countries are aware of the vulnerability of aquaculture to pollution damage. Again, environment protection laws, water laws, natural resources protection and conservation laws are dealing mostly with water pollution control regulations, either in a general or specific way, with any aspect of it being considered separately. General regulations might prohibit pollution in leased areas, or several plants in the same area, or create civil liability for any damage or consider policies on marine pollution control. In Ecuador, in order to protect waters from damage by pesticides and use of other harmful materials in farming activities, and at the same time the agriculture farms from salt influences, the construction of fish ponds and hatcheries must allow for a security strip of at least 200 metres calculated from the point where the
agriculture farms start ^5^/. Polluters may be guilty of an offence and subject to the payment of penalties. Preservation of the quality of water for aquaculture might be dealt with separately. For instance, several governments have established "maritime protected areas" where special attention is given to conservation and use of the coastal environment, controlling, for instance, diseases and the introduction of non-indigenous species (see below) ^6^/.
^5^/ Regulation No. 12771 of 1975, Art. 4.
^6^/ See sections on use of land for aquaculture (above) and on environmental aspects (below).
Few countries make any real distinction between the control of inland water pollution and coastal water pollution. The question must be asked if this is justified for the actual quality standards? Within the European Community, Council Directives have been made in order to protect, preserve or improve the quality of waters relevant to aquaculture. The waters concerned are salmonid and cyprinoid waters on one hand ^1^/ and shellfish waters on the other hand ^2^/. Pursuant to both directives, quality objectives are met by fixing, firstly, parameters to measure the quality of the waters and, secondly, by establishing a set of reference values. The competent authorities in the Member States should carry on sampling operations and those samples should be in conformity, for at least a certain period (one year), with the values set by Member States. The parameters (physico-chemical) taken into consideration with regard to salmonid and cyprinoid waters are the following: temperature
(°C), dissolved oxygen (mg/l O^2), pH, suspended solids, total phosphorus, nitrites and some others. These parameters apply also to shellfish waters, but in addition to them there are: salinity, suspended solids mg/1, substances affecting the taste of shellfish, faecal coliforms, etc. The protection and improvement of the environment necessitates, according to the Council, concrete measures to protect waters, including shellfish waters, against pollution and, further, it is necessary to safeguard certain shellfish populations from various harmful consequences, resulting from the discharge of polluting substances into the sea. The Directive of 1979 therefore covers those coastal and brackish waters designated by the Member States as needing protection or improvement in order to support shellfish life and growth ^3^/. Shellfish culture is especially dependent on the maintenance of the high quality of coastal waters. Oysters, and sometimes mussels, are eaten raw, hence the
preservation of public health requires close attention to water quality standards. The most important shellfish production basins need to be protected against hazardous effects of other human activities.
^1^/ Council Directive 78/659/EEC, OJEC No. L 222/1 on the quality of fresh waters needing protection or improvement in order to support fish life.
^2^/ Council Directive 79/923/EEC, OJEC No. L 281/47 on the quality required of shellfish waters.
^3^/ Ibid.
France, Mexico, Ecuador and the Philippines have rules covering the preservation of high quality standards with regard to their shellfish culture.
In 1974 Mexico established a special Program on the Health of Bivalve Molluscs ^4^/. Accordingly, waters used to culture those species have been classified into three categories, depending on the presence of coliform bacteria: approved waters, conditionally approved waters and waters of restricted use. The following physical and chemical parameters have been used to classify the waters: temperature and colour, pH, percentage salinity, dissolved oxygen, minerals and toxic organic elements. Bivalve molluscs cultured in waters defined as "of restricted use" will have to be depurated before being authorized for sale on the market. Whenever the water quality is below the established limits, it is prohibited to harvest, or exploit the species therein, or market them. In addition, the general regulation on the sanitary control of fisheries products ^5^/ also covers the subject. It states on the one hand, that shellfish depuration activities must be carried out in those places where
a continuous flow of salt or fresh water exists which does not contain any contaminants. On the other hand, for the culture of shellfish and some other species, specified in the Act, sanitation certificates are to be issued with respect to the quality of the waters in the area where the fish farm operates. Such certificates can be obtained by means of an application to the Secretary of Health and Hygiene, upon compliance with the rules regarding water quality. These certificates must be renewed regularly.
^4^/ Regulation relating to the Mexican Program on the Health of Bivalve Molluscs, 1974.
^5^/ Regulation of 5 June 1980, D.O. No. 5, 7 July 1980, p. 9, second part.
In France, the subject falls within the set of rules drafted to protect the culture of products to be eaten raw. First, the French coast has been classified into healthy ("salubre") and non-healthy ("insalubre") areas ^1^/. Whether or not an area is salubrious depends on the degree of contamination determined by counting the faecal germs existing in the living shellfish. In those areas recognized as healthy, shellfish culture farms may operate and market their production, while in non-healthy areas, no farm establishment can be authorized ^2^/. The harvesting of shellfish is specifically authorized by the Department of Maritime Affairs in case of oyster holding or purification operations ^3^/. Secondly, the condition of the area requested for fish culture operations is studied and determined during the preliminary investigation phase of the application for a concession for establishment ^4^/. Finally, the oyster culture facilities are protected by a surrounding area,
established by law, wherein it is prohibited to deposit or discharge any substance which could be harmful to the sanitary quality of the oysters ^5^/.
^1^/ Decree of 12 June 1969 amending the decree of 20 August 1939 on the healthiness ("salubrity") of oysters, mussels or other shellfish.
^2^/ Decree of 12 October 1976 regulating the salubrity rules of shellfish culture areas.
^3^/Ibid., Art. 3.
^4^/ Decree of 28 March 1919, Art. 4. Decree governing concessions for fishery establishments.
^5^/ Decree of 30 October 1935 relating to the protection of drinking water and oyster culture farms. (J.O. of 31 October 1935).
The Philippines, in its turn, seeks to protect shellfish culture, not from the point of view of water quality but by means of sanitation certificates stating the quality of the shellfish. And finally in Ecuador it is prohibited to harvest molluscs or crustaceans in the neighbourhood of drainage areas or doubtful hygienic areas ^6^/.
^6^/ Code of Maritime Police, Art. 102.
France, Mexico, Colombia and Spain have general regulations regarding the quality of waters for aquaculture operations.
In Mexico ^1^/ and Colombia ^2^/ the Minister of Health states that water used for aquaculture must meet the quality requirements established by law.
^1^/ The Regulation on the Sanitary Control of Fisheries Products, D.O. of 7 July 1980. Culture in freshwater, as well as maritime waters, coastal lagoons, rivers and lakes are covered.
^2^/ Decree No. 1594/84 of the Ministry of Health establishes rules and criteria for the control of the quality of water and of waste water. Permissible criteria regarding the quality of water to be used in different aquaculture activities are set out.
In areas declared as being of interest for mariculture ^3^/, the Spanish law provides for a general prohibition directed towards population centres, agriculture enterprises, and industries against the discharge, without proper sewerage systems, into the sea, directly or indirectly, of water or waste products which might contaminate such areas as to damage aquatic species. Consequently, existing sewerage systems should be adapted, whereas new sewerage systems must be approved by competent authorities and be in conformity with the legislation on water treatment and waste disposal ^4^/.
^3^/ Law No. 23/1984 of 25 June 1984, Marine Cultures. Art. 5 reads: "The Government is empowered to declare areas as being of interest for mariculture which, because of their excellent condition for the production of Crustacea, molluscs and shellfish in general, need to receive special protection". Art. 16.
^4^/ Ibid., Arts. 23 and 24 "water quality".
France, with respect to the preservation of the quality of the water for aquaculture operations, has several kinds of rules:(i) some of them regulate the co-existence of certain industrial activities in aquaculture areas, such as exploitation of minerals ^5^/, or the extraction of any materials on the Public Maritime Domain ^6^/, by means of exploitation concessions or authorizations;(ii) some legal instruments have been introduced to protect the environment and, at the same time, the interests of traditional users of the sea: the impact studies ^7^/ the "classified installations procedure" for environment purposes ^8^/, and regulations relative to the discharge of wastes or polluting substances (telluric and also pelagic) into surface waters, and the waters of the sea within the territorial limits and finally, the Director of Health and Social Affairs is consulted by the Director of Maritime Affairs during the administrative enquiry to which each application for concessions
is submitted. The opinion of the former is decisive because he determines the compatibility between the aquaculture enterprise and other activities as regards public health ^9^/.
^5^/ Act No. 76-646 of 16 July 1976 and its executive Decree of 18 June 1980: the exploitation of minerals in the marine sub-soils of the Public Maritime Domain is subject to obtaining a "mining title" from the competent Department.
^6^/ Decree No. 84-285 of 13 April 1984 provides that any extraction of materials on the public maritime domain cannot take place without authorization delivered by the "Commissaire de la Republique" of the Department (Art. 2).
^7^/ The impact studies introduced by Art. 2 of the Act No. 76-629 of 10 July 1976: ("The Nature Protection Act") and enforced by Decree No. 77-1147 of 12 October 1977. This text recognizes, among others, the protection of environmental spaces, the preservation of animal and plant species, the maintaining of biological balance of which those species are component elements and the protection of natural resources against all agents of degradation to which they are exposed (Art. 1). Decree No. 85-1400 prescribing the forms and conditions relative to fish farming concessions and authorizations and the formalities attaching to declarations of existing bodies of waters as contemplated in Art. 433 of the Rural Code, reads in its articles 9 and 10:
"9. Within two months following the definitive receipt of the application, the Commissioner of the Republic shall either:
1. notify the applicant that the application is refused...; or
2. call upon the applicant to carry out, as required by article 10 and within not more than two years, under penalty of being deemed to have withdrawn from the undertaking, an impact assessment or an impact statement within the meaning of Decree No. 77-1141 of 12 October 1977 as cited in the preamble hereto.
10. The following shall be subject to an impact assessment: new trout farming installations and fish rearing plant for experimental purposes; and fish farms where production and marketing amounts to two tonnes or more, or where the surface area under water is of three hectares or more, as well as any extension of fish farms where the effect is to bring their annual production and marketing or their surface area under water to a figure equal to or in excess of the limits here laid down. An impact statement shall be required for any newly installed fish farm other than those defined in the previous paragraph."
^8^/ Law No. 76-663 of 19 July 1976, as amended by Law No. 85-661 of 3 July 1985 and its Decree No. 77-1133 of 21 September 1977 according to which certain dangerous plants are submitted to special procedures. As "dangerous" are meant those which can be harmful for agriculture, public health, nature, environment, etc.
^9^/ Decree No. 83-228 establishing the rules governing mariculture operations, as modified.
At this point it can be questioned whether one alternative or another is more effective in achieving the goals of water quality for aquaculture.
The alternatives given in previous examples are numerous: general prohibition (Spain), sanitary controls (Colombia and Mexico), general quality Standards, sphere of protection (France), impact studies (France), approval systems, etc. (Colombia). One should not forget that all of these laws provide for punishment ranging from fines to imprisonment, and from prohibition on sale to closing of aquaculture establishments, etc. Another question is whether enough information is available to assess the quality standards used and the effectiveness of the methods to protect aquaculture operations. French legislation, for instance, provides for a variety of alternatives. One can speculate on whether the aquaculture farmer really feels protected from large-scale pollutions such as industry, agriculture, and population centres or if he feels that he is one himself.
Finally, the question should be asked whether these various controls aimed at water quality, which operate at almost every phase of the aquaculture process, are more likely to lengthen procedures for obtaining the necessary approvals, or whether they do meet their intended objectives.
<section>6</section>
4. ENVIRONMENTAL ASPECTS
4.1 Aquaculture and environment
4.2 Fish diseases
4.3 Fish movement: import of live fish and introduction of exotic species
4.1 Aquaculture and environment
4.1.1 Land use planning and zoning
4.1.2 Control over installation and operation
4.1.3 Discharge limits and pre-discharge treatment to meet limits
4.1.4 Fiscal incentives
4.1.5 Prohibitions of specific activities or definition of limits on activities
Each country, whether industrially highly developed, or less developed, has some level of environmental concern. Among the environmental concerns that countries consider as affecting aquaculture development, emphasis is laid on pollution by domestic or industrial waste and on pesticide pollution.
On the other hand, aquaculture operations can have adverse effects on the beneficial uses of the environment (effects on human health and welfare, ecological impacts, etc.). Various remedial and preventive approaches and combinations are possible.
Amongst the many environmental aspects relating to aquaculture the following have been identified:
1. Land use planning and zoning
2. Control over installation and operation
3. Discharge limits and pre-discharge treatment to meet limits
4. Fiscal incentives
5. Prohibitions.
4.1.1 Land use planning and zoning
The recommendation of zoning areas for aquaculture purposes through legislative measures has already been mentioned in the previous section on water and land law ^1^/. Such measures would also help in preventing the contamination of aquaculture products and in settling conflicts relating to land and water use, with the cooperation of other users in controlling environmental degradation and optimum use of land and water resources. Mexico, Malaysia and the Philippines are examples of countries that provide for some sort of protected areas. However, their regulations for protected areas are all formulated differently and modelled in different legal frameworks. The Mexican General Law on the Ecological Balance and the Environment Protection ^2^/ provides for areas "de protección de recursos naturales", established in accordance with the Federal Hunting and Fishing Law. Exploitation and exploration of natural resources therein are subject to a licence. The applicant must
demonstrate that because of his technical and economic knowledge and ability, his activities will not adversely affect the ecological balance. However, the law refers to activities, such as "exploration, exploitation or use of natural resources" and it is not clear whether aquaculture is included.
^1^/ e.g. Ecuador: Shrimp hatcheries are only allowed in technically specified areas.
e.g. France: Town planning documents (SDAU & POS) and maritime areas development documents (SAUM & SMVM).
e.g. Zambia: Conservation planning areas wherein layout of land for fish farms can be specified.
^2^/ Mexico, Law dated 29 January 1988.
In Malaysia, the Minister of the Federal Government who has the responsibility for fisheries, may by order establish any area or part of an area in Malaysian fisheries waters as a marine park or marine reserve ^1^/ where aquaculture activities are most likely not to take place. These parks and reserves are established in order to:
"(a) afford special protection to the aquatic flora and fauna of such area or part thereof and to protect, preserve and manage the natural breeding grounds and habitat of aquatic life, with particular regard to species of rare or endangered flora and fauna;
(b) allow for the natural regeneration of aquatic life in such area or part thereof where such life has been depleted;
(c) promote scientific study and research in respect of such area or part thereof;
(d) preserve and enhance the pristine state and productivity of such area or part thereof; and
(e) regulate recreational and other activities in such area or part thereof to avoid irreversible damage to its environment" ^2^/.
^1^/ Act 317: Fisheries Act 1985. An Act relating to fisheries, including the conservation, management and development of maritime and estuarine fishing and fisheries, in Malaysian fisheries waters, to turtles and riverine fishing in Malaysia and to matters connected therewith and incidental thereto, 22 May 1985.
^2^/ Ibid., Sect. 42.
Any person who, in any marine park or marine reserve in Malaysian fisheries waters without the permission of the Director General for Fisheries in writing:
"(a) fishes or attempts to fish;
(b) takes, removes or is in possession of any aquatic animal or aquatic plant or part thereof, whether dead or alive;
(c) collects or is in possession of any coral, dredges or extracts any sand or gravel, discharges or deposits any pollutant, alters or destroys the natural breeding grounds or habitat of aquatic life, or destroys any aquatic life;
(d) constructs or erects any building or other structure on or over any land or waters within a marine park or marine reserve;
(e) anchors any vessel by dropping any kind of weight on, or by attaching any kind of rope or chain to, any coral, rock or other submerged object; or
(f) destroys, defaces or removes any object, whether animate or inanimate, in a marine park or marine reserve
shall be guilty of an offence."
Permission to do any of the items listed above may be granted where it is necessary for the proper management of the marine park or marine reserve or pursuant to any of the purposes referred to in previous items ^1^/.
^1^/ Act 317: Fisheries Act 1985 of 22 May 1985, Sect. 43.
In the Philippines, certain projects, undertakings or areas in the country have been declared as environmentally critical. No person, partnership or corporation shall undertake activities on or operate in any such declared environmentally critical project or area without first securing an Environmental Compliance Certificate issued by the President or his duly authorized representative ^2^/. This Certificate states that the project under consideration will not bring about an unacceptable environmental impact and that the proponent has complied with the requirements of the Environmental Impact Statement System ^3^/. "Project" means activities including actions, programmes or undertakings, regardless of magnitude, which may have significant impact on the environment ^4^/. Amongst the projects declared to be environmentally critical are: fishery projects, i.e. dikes for fish pond development ^5^/ and forestry projects, such as, among others, the extraction of mangrove products
^6^/. The following are proclaimed as Environmentally Critical Areas:
(i) all areas declared by law as national parks, watershed reserves, wildlife preserves and sanctuaries ^7^/;
(ii) revived areas of aquifers ^8^/;
(iii) water bodies characterized by the fact that they support wildlife and fishery activities ^9^/;
(iv) mangrove areas characterized by one or any combination of the following conditions:
(a) with primary pristine and dense young growth;
(b) adjoining the mouth of a major river system;
(c) near or adjacent to traditional productive fry or fishing grounds;
(d) which act as natural buffers against shore erosion, strong winds and storm floods;
(e) on which people are dependent for their livelihood ^10^/; and
(v) Coral reefs characterized by one or any combination of the following conditions:
(a) with 50% and above live coralline cover;
(b) spawning and nursery grounds for fish;
(c) which act as natural breakwater of coastlines ^11^/.
^2^/ Presidential Decree No. 1586 establishing an Environmental Impact Statement System including other environmental management related measures and for other purposes, 11 June 1978.
^3^/ Rules and Regulations implementing the intent and provisions of Presidential Decree No. 1586, Article I, Section 2.
^4^/ Ibid., Article 1, Sect. 2(b).
^5^/ Proclamation No. 2146 proclaiming certain areas and types of projects as environmentally critical and within the scope of the Environmental Impact Statement System established under Presidential Decree No. 1586, A, II, c, 1.
^6^/ Ibid., A II, b, 5.
^7^/ Ibid., B 1.
^8^/ Ibid., B 9.
^9^/ Ibid., B 10.
^10^/ Proclamation No. 2146, B 11.
^11^/Ibid., B 12.
If any proposed project is within the above lists, the project proponent must file a Project Description with the National Environmental Protection Council (NEPC), prepare an Environmental Impact Assessment in the form of a draft Environmental Impact Statement (EIS), and finally prepare the final EIS for the NEPC. If the expected environmental impact of the project is of substantial magnitude in terms of, inter alia, the number of people affected, the area affected, the cost involved, the NEPC may call for a public hearing. Finally, if the project as planned brings about acceptable environmental impacts, the Environmental Compliance Certificate will be issued ^1^/.
^1^/ Rules and regulations implementing the intent and provisions of Presidential Decree No. 1586 establishing the EIS system in relation to Presidential Decree No. 1151 promulgating the Philippine Environmental Policy, 1979, Articles III and IV.
4.1.2 Control over installation and operation
Venezuela, Mexico, Philippines and France require an environmental impact study to secure a licence for fish farming and to control any aquaculture operations proposed.
The Philippine Environmental Impact Statement System, referred to above, should also be mentioned here. It was established in 1978. The system is based on the Environmental Impact Statement required of all agencies and instrumentalities of the national government, including government-owned or controlled corporations, as well as private corporations, forms and entities for every proposed project and undertaking which significantly affect the quality of the environment ^2^/. The scope of this system is "to attain and Statement System including other environmental management related measures and for other purposes, 1978. maintain a rational and orderly balance between socio-economic growth and environmental protection" ^3^/. It can be assumed that this legislation might affect aquaculture operations, as the projects or areas declared as "environment ally critical" are relevant for fish farm installations and exploitations ^4^/.
^2^/Presidential Decree No. 1586 establishing an Environmental Impact
^3^/ Presidential Decree No. 1586 of 1978, Sect. 1.
^4^/ See above.
Without due authorization issued by the Ministry of Environment and Renewable Natural Resources (MARNR), no fish farm can be established in Venezuela. Such authorization is issued provided that MARNR approves the "environment impact study" submitted by the fish farming applicant ^1^/. Guidelines regarding the contents and the procedure for such a study are as follows:
1. the environment impact study must include the following items:
. full description of the project;
. physical, biological and socio-economic characteristics of the area of influence of the project;
. evaluation of the positive and negative effects on the environment;
. measures proposed to prevent, eliminate or compensate for any harmful effects of the project on the environment, during the construction phase as well as the operative/active phase;
2. the study must be drafted by professional experts in the matter;
3. the MARNR investigates and evaluates the study; and
4. depending on the outcome of the study, the authorization may or may not be granted.
The French legislation has broadly the same intention. As seen above ^2^/ fish farming operations might be subject to impact assessment or an impact statement prior to the authorization being issued to establish a fish farm ^3^/. The content of these impact studies must consider similar items as those listed above. The law adds, however, that the content of the study is dependent on the importance of the planned work and on its foreseeable effects on the environment ^4/. Moreover, where an impact assessment is required there must be a public hearing. Such a public hearing will discuss the physical installation of the fish farm, its outlying farm buildings and the proposed fish rearing methods ^5^/. Whenever a public hearing pursuant to the water regulations and a public hearing on the fishery regulations are required, a single hearing shall be held ^6^/. Coordination between water and fishery regulations simplifies (to a certain extent) the procedure.
^1^/ Extract from "Investigación sobre el Estado de la Acuicultura en Venezuela", proyecto FAO-ITALIA (GCP/RLA/075/ITA), 33 p.
^2^/ See Section 3.1.
^3^/ Decree No. 85-1400 prescribing the forms and conditions relative to fish farming concessions and authorizations. Act No. 76-629 on nature protection, and Decree No. 77-1141 of 12 October 1977.
^4^/ Decree No. 77-1411 of 12 October 1977.
^5^/ Decree No. 85-1400 of 27 December 1985 cit., Art. 11.
^6^/ Ibid., Art. 12.
In addition to this legislation, there exists the legislation on "Classified Installations", referred to above several times ^1^/, which applies to any corporation or individual, private or public, owning an establishment (i) which represents possible harmful effects for the neighbourhood, public health, security, public sanitation, agriculture, the environment, as well as for the conservation of sites and monuments ^2^/ and (ii) which is listed in a "nomenclature" ^3^/. Installations classified as such can either be subject to a special declaration procedure or to a special authorization procedure. Salmon culture farms (freshwater or salt water) ^4^/, since 1982, can only be established upon obtaining a special authorization decree ^5^/.
^1^/ Law No. 76-663 of 19 July 1976 on "Classified Installations" as being for the protection of the environment, completed by Decree No. 77-1133 of 21 September 1977, amended by Law No. 85-661 of 3 July 1985.
^2^/ Ibid., Art. 1.
^3^/ Ibid., Art. 2.
^4^/ Decree No. 82-756 of 1 September 1982 amending the nomenclature of "Classified Installations".
^5^/ Indeed, the establishment of these farms is subject to a special authorization procedure whereby a personal authorization decree is issued for the fish farming applicant, providing for technical prescriptions to be fulfilled by the fish farming applicant, Decree No. 82-756. With respect to freshwater salmon culture farms, there is a decree providing for enforcement of technical prescriptions which the farmer must implement to carry out his activity.
Mexican legislation is somewhat different in that the impact study is not automatically requested. However the Fisheries Secretariat might be ordered to do one by the Secretariat for Urban Development and Ecology. This occurs especially when the fishing activity (for which an application for exploitation has been made) might be harmful to the species concerned or might upset the ecological balance ^6^/. However, as the law refers to "fishing activities" in general, it is not clear whether aquaculture operations are covered ^7^/.
^6^/ Law of 29 January 1988 on the Ecological Balance and Environmental Protection.
^7^/ Note: According to the fishery law, fishing activities include aquaculture operations.
Another way to control operations might be to set limits on activities by category and to consider permits or licences to prohibit what is not licensed, and to control what is licensed. This is certainly the case of France with its legislation mentioned above on "Classified Installations". Alternative methods to try to achieve the same results can be found in several countries. In Norway, the Ministry of the Environment has decided that fishing and fish farming facilities shall be regarded as ordinary pollution activities and that a permit must be applied for and considered in accordance with the Pollution Act. The State Pollution Control Authority evaluates all applications and grants permits to the Fisheries Authorities accordingly.
In the Philippines, "breeding places" are considered as "nuisances", i.e. "anything that injures health, endangers life, offends the senses or produces discomfort to the community" ^1^/. Consequently, the owner, manager or operator of establishments must:
(a) obtain a sanitary permit from the local health authority before establishing and operating their business or trade;
(b) remove daily all injurious by-products and wastes;
(c) prevent the escape of industrial impurities and adopt methods to render them innocuous;
(d) maintain working establishments and their premises clean and sanitary at all times; and
(e) store all materials properly to prevent emission of noxious or injurious effluvia ^2^/.
^1^/ Philippine Code on Sanitation, Presidential Decree No. 856, 1975, Sect. XIX.
^2^/ Ibid., Sect. 86.
The above examples show that the targets of the environmental legislation dealing with aquaculture are the natural resources to be protected against pollution or other deterioration, the considerations of effects on human health and welfare, the ecological impact and the danger to undermine the regenerative capacity of the given ecosystem.
4.1.3 Discharge limits and pre-discharge treatment to meet limits
As analysed in the previous section, the implementation and/or adoption of environmental protection measures regarding waste discharge are quite common to a number of countries and require various permits or licences, standards, pre-discharge treatments and sometimes subsidies or charges/sanctions ^3^/.
^3^/ The pollutants here are often the economic resources that are wasted or poorly managed.
4.1.4 Fiscal incentives
These incentives usually take the form of direct subsidies for the installation of the control equipment during a limited time period (Poland, see above) or a tax deduction. As seen in the previous section, in Ecuador, to be granted the incentives offered under the Fisheries and Fisheries Development Act ^1^/, fishery enterprises (including shrimp hatcheries) must be classified and fulfil certain conditions, one of which is to install proper water discharge treatment. The incentives are exempt from duties normally payable on corporation or company operations, such as increase of capital, reconstruction, and share issues or division. Other exemptions include duties on working capital, export duties on fishery products, and import duties on goods and raw materials used in the processing of fishery products but not produced in the country, and the deduction from taxable income of up to 50% of income, loans or new capital reinvested in fleet or plant expansion or Improvement
^1^/ Decree No. 178 of 1974.
^2^/ Ibid., Part IV.
Charges or taxes on polluting effluents or emissions resulting from aquaculture activities exist in Poland, Hungary and France, amongst other countries.
4.1.5 Prohibitions of specific activities or definition of limits on activities
In Norway, a licence for breeding activities in freshwater, brackishwater and salt water shall not be granted if the facility is badly located in relation to the surrounding environment, lawful traffic or other on-going exploitation of the area ^3^/.
^3^/ Act of 14 June 1985, No. 68, Sect. 5(3).
Measures for the rational exploitation of fisheries and other aquatic resources in the Philippines may include the following: conserving the endangered species of fish and aquatic resources such as turtles, sea snakes, crocodiles, corals, as well as maintaining the mangrove areas, marshes and inland areas, coral reef areas and islands serving as sanctuaries for fish and other aquatic life ^4^/.
^4^/ Presidential Decree No. 1152, Philippine Environment Code 1977, Title IV, Sect. 27.
Destruction of mangroves in Ecuador is strictly prohibited ^5^/. Aquaculture licence holders are responsible for the protection and conservation of contiguous mangrove areas ^6^/.
^5^/ Regulation No. 12771, as amended by Regulation No. 14425, Art. 24.
^6^/ Ibid.
Further, the Ecuadorian authorities determine the width of the marginal strip along channels and natural watercourses with the view to facilitating navigation, transit and other services. Where dams and similar impounding structures are concerned it is prohibited to: (a) build dwellings or livestock folds or stables, or drive herds or flocks on the banks of dams or similar structures given over to the drinking water supply for population centres. (Existing facilities of this type must be withdrawn to a minimum distance of 500 metres from the high water line) ^1^/; (b) discharge any waste matter likely to affect the composition of the water or contaminate it ^2^/; (c) apply fertilizers or pesticides within a basin and within a distance of five kilometres from the edge of the impounding structures.
^1^/ Order No. 81 of 6 March 1978 issued by the Minister of Agriculture, Art.l.
^2^/ Ibid., Art. 2.
Another country which refers to pesticides in a fishing "milieu", but in a different way, is Zambia where "the use of any pesticides as a means of curing, preserving, processing or storing fish in any commercial fishing area is prohibited" ^3^/.
^3^/ The Fisheries Regulations, 1986, Sect. 8.
These are examples of some of the various existing environmental laws and others which relate to aquaculture activities. Some questions arise: are these measures discouraging the establishment of aquaculture operations for any person interested therein? Can these measures lead to possible trade competition among aquaculture products from different countries?
These pollution control approaches are part of a comprehensive effort to use and manage resources properly. Pollution discharges can result in a body of water being useless for aquaculture purposes, in a way analogous to over-fishing of a certain area. It is obvious that the further development of aquaculture in any country should be governed essentially by the available resources and the limits of environmental tolerance, in the local context. In the future fish farmers will have to cope with and face other measures taken in view of environmental policies.
4.2 Fish diseases
As already known, fish diseases can lead to dramatic consequences in a country as regards its fish production and consumption, its foreign exchange earnings through the export of high-value products, etc. And the situation can be even worse for fish farmers. As regards the legislation on the subject, a difference exists between less developed countries and developing countries.
In developing countries, either the competent Minister is empowered to make regulations for this purpose ^4^/ and/or control of fish disease is linked to rules dealing with fish import or export ^5^/, or there is no specific reference at all. However, in most of the latter cases, it is quite common to find an "Animal Health (Protection) Act" but it is not always clear whether "fish" is included in the definition of "Animal" ^6^/.
^4^/ Malaysia:
(a) The Minister in charge of Fisheries may make regulations specifically or generally for the proper conservation, development and management of maritime and estuarine fishing and fisheries in Malaysian waters for the purpose of controlling fish diseases. Act 317, Fisheries Act 1985, Sect. 61(ag).
(b) Import into or export from Malaysia or transports from Vest Malaysia in the Federal Territory of Labuan or the State of Sabah or Sarawak, etc.... of live fish without a permit is prohibited. This permit might include such conditions as to avoid "the spread of communicable fish diseases". Act 317, Fisheries Act 1985, Sect. 40(e).
^5^/ Malawi: There exists the obligation of registration of fresh fish importers and exporters. The Minister is empowered within this framework to issue an Order providing for "the destruction of tainted or diseased fish without compensation". (The Fisheries Act No. 16, Sect. 28). Further on, probably with the scope to avoid and/or control fish disease (this is not stated in the law), "Any person who, without the prior written consent of the Minister (a) transfers fish of any species from any fish pond or water in Malawi to any other fish pond or water; or (b) stocks any fish pond or water with fish, shall be guilty of an offence". The same prohibition exists for diversion of stocked waters. (The Fisheries Act No. 16, Sections 31 and 34).
^6^/ Ecuador: Animal disease, as such, is regulated by the Animal Health Act, which does not include any specific provision regarding fish disease. The Health Code, in turn, delineates precautions to be taken in the matter of immunization, observation, capture, quarantine, disinfection, confiscation and slaughter of animals which are diseased or suspected of being so, and the destruction of carcasses. Health Code No. 188/71, Arts. 86 and 87.
It is interesting to note that in a country such as Malawi, where no particular reference to aquaculture operations seem to exist within any legislation (water, land, environment, etc.), the prohibition on fish transfer is most likely aimed at, inter alia, fish culture activities, in addition to general fish health. Opposed to this, there is Ecuador with particular legislation on (shrimp) culture activities but with very little reference to fish diseases.
Examples of preventive or remedial measures can be found in Norway, England, Canada, New Zealand, etc. In Norway, for instance, no licence to establish breeding activities shall be granted if the position of the site will cause risk of spread of disease in fish and shellfish ^1^/.
^1^/ Act of 14 June 1985, No. 68, relating to the breeding of fish, shellfish, etc.... The Act No. 2 of 6 December 1968, concerning measures to counteract diseases in freshwater fish (the Disease Act).
In order to exercise some degree of control over the spread of fish disease from one farm to another the competent Minister of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food (MAFF) in the United Kingdom is given extensive powers under the Diseases of Fish Acts, 1937 and 1983, to take measures to prevent the spread of disease. Provisions cover freshwater and marine fish. Provision is made for the registration of fish farms and the obligatory keeping of records of live fish and eggs transported both in and out of fish farms. Such records are designed to assist in tracing the whereabouts of suspect fish in the event of an outbreak of disease at their farm of origin.
In particular, where the Minister has reasonable grounds for suspecting that any inland or marine waters are, or may become, infected waters, he may by order designate the waters and such land adjacent to them as he considers appropriate in the circumstances as a "designated area" ^1^/. The effect of such an order is that the Minister may prohibit or regulate the taking into or out of the designated area of live fish, live eggs of fish and foodstuff for fish ^2^/. Along with this the Minister may serve a notice on the occupier of a fish farm situated in inland or marine waters directing him to take steps to secure the removal of dead or dying fish from the waters concerned, and may regulate the manner in which any fish removed from the waters are disposed of ^3^/. If an inspector appointed by the Minister has reasonable grounds for suspecting that any inland waters which are the waters of a fish farm are infected waters he may serve a notice on the occupier of the fish farm
^4^/. The effect of the notice is to place the fish farm in a state of quarantine by preventing any live fish or live eggs of fish being taken into or out of the farm or any foodstuff being taken out of the farm without the permission of the Minister for a period of thirty days from the service of the notice ^5^/. Moreover, a criminal offence is committed where a person intentionally takes any fish, eggs or foodstuff into or out of a fish farm under quarantine, unless he proves that he did not know that such transfers were prohibited ^6^/.
^1^/ Section 2(1) of the Diseases of Fish Act 1937 as amended by Section 2 of Diseases of Fish Act 1983.
^2^/ Ibid., Sect. 2(2).
^3^/ Ibid., Sect. 2A(1), (2) and (4).
^4^/ Section 4(1) of the Diseases of Fish Act 1937 as amended by Section 3 of the Diseases of Fish Act 1983.
^5^/Ibid., Sect. 4(2).
^6^/ Ibid., Sect. 4(4).
Preventive action/measures may also be vested in the licensee. This is the case, among other countries, in New Zealand. The licensee, when he discovers, or first suspects any fish on the fish farm to be diseased, must advise the Director General for Fisheries or the authorized officer specified in the licence within 24 hours and keep the diseased fish (or suspected to be diseased) from coming into contact with other fish. No person may allow water in any pond containing any such diseased fish, except when the disease is known to be "saprolegnia", to be discharged into any natural waters ^7^/. On the other hand, the authorized officer where he believes "on reasonable grounds" ^8^/ that any fish on the fish farm is diseased, by notice can order the licensee to take measures for the prevention of the disease, for the treatment of the disease and the decontamination of any ponds and intake and outlet structures, or for destruction of any fish stock in case of emergency ^9^/.
^7^/ Fresh Fish Farming Regulations, 1983, No. 278, Sect. 26.
^8^/ Fresh Fish Farming Regulations, 1983, No. 278, Sect. 27.
^9^/ Ibid., Sect. 27.
In addition to the above, the following preventive measures were also found:
- different treatment and destruction actions depending on the kind of disease concerned ^1^/;
- vaccination of freshwater fish provided that the vaccine is approved by the Minister ^2^/;
- destruction of brood fish when genetic defects develop ^3^/;
- sterilization of animal feeding material ^4^/;
- prohibition to transfer diseased fish from any fish farm to any other fish farm or to release into any waters any diseased fish ^5^/; and
- the issuing of certificates indicating the presence of any harmful or harmless disease at the moment of importation ^6^/.
^1^/ New Zealand, Fresh Fish Farming Regulations, 1983, No. 278.
^2^/ Norway, Rules governing the vaccination of freshwater fish,1 November 1976.
^3^/ New Zealand Freshwater Fish Farming Regulations No. 278/1983, Sect. 28.
^4^/ Ibid., Sect. 23.
^5^/ Ibid., Sect. 31.
^6^/ Canada Fish Health Protection Regulations, SOR/76-765.
All the measures referred to herein often cover all aquaculture activities in freshwater, brackish and salt water.
4.3 Fish movement: import of live fish and introduction of exotic species
4.3.1 General rules to control animal health and disease
4.3.2 Specific rules concerning fish disease prevention
Regulations on the import of live animals and fish are most likely found in all countries. The scope of such regulations might either be the protection and control of animal health and prevention of animal disease generally (4.3.1), or the protection of aquaculture interests more specifically (4.3.2). In most countries, certain documentation is required prior to customs clearance at the border.
4.3.1 General rules to control animal health and disease
Regulations on import of live fish and introduction of exotic species, formulated in order to control animal health and prevent animal disease, are common to most countries. Such regulations do not only apply to aquatic species suitable for aquaculture purposes, but often cover the control of entrance into the country of live animals and plants, biological products, which are likely to carry any disease or disease agent. This seems among others the case of England and Wales.
"Endangered Species" (Import and Export) Act, 1976, of the U.K. ^7^/, provides for controls over the importation and exportation of certain animals and plants. The import and export of animals (dead or alive), plants and items listed in the three Schedules to the Act are prohibited, except under a licence ^8^/ issued by the Secretary of State ^9^/.
^7^/ Endangered Species (Import and Export) Act, 1976, Current Law Statutes, 1976, Ch. 72.
^8^/ Endangered Species (Import and Export) Act, 1976, Current Law Statutes, 1976, Sect. 1.
^9^/ Fish concerned are: sturgeons, bonytongues, salmon, carp and suckers, toothcarp, coelacanths, Australian lungfish, catfish, perch and freshwater mussels.
All applications for licences are to be submitted by the Secretary of State to the appropriate scientific authority established or designated under the Act for its advice as to whether the licence should be issued ^1^/. The licence issued under the Act may be general or specific, may be modified or revoked at any time by the Secretary of State and shall not in any case be valid for more than 12 months ^2^/. The Act provides for the charging of fees, and the sanctioning of false or reckless application statements. In order to facilitate enforcement of the Act, the Secretary of State is empowered to make an order restricting the places at which live animals may be imported, where a licence has been given ^3^/. Where a licence has been given to import a live animal of an endangered species covered by the Act, the Secretary of State may, where he considers it desirable, give a direction restricting the movement of the animal and requiring it to be held at specified premises,
whether for quarantine or for other purposes ^4^/.
^1^/ Ibid., Sect. 1(3).
^2^/ Ibid., Sect. 1(4).
^3^/ Ibid., Sects. 1(7) and 5.
^4^/ Ibid., Sect. 6.
Malaysia ^5^/, Zambia ^6^/ and the Philippines ^7^/are other countries which might be included in this first category. According to their legislation no person shall import any live fish and/or introduce into any water of the country any non-indigenous fish without a written permit from the competent authorities. Any person contravening this provision or in breach of any condition in a permit shall be guilty of an offence. Terms and conditions of the permit often refer to the fish's state of cleanliness, to avoid the spread of fish disease, or to control the release into the environment of non-indigenous species of fish.
^5^/ Art. 317: Fisheries Act 1985 (An Act relating to fisheries, including the conservation, management and development of maritime and estuarine fishing and fisheries in Malaysian waters to turtles and riverine fishing and to matters connected therewith or incidental thereto).
^6^/ Fisheries Act No. 21, Sect. 5, 1974. The Control of Goods (Import and Export) (Amendment) Order 1975; The Control of Goods (Import and Export)Regulations, 1970, Schedule.
^7^/ Presidential Decree No. 704 of 1975 revising and consolidating all laws and decrees affecting fishing and fisheries.
4.3.2 Specific rules concerning fish disease prevention
The second category of rules on import of live fish and exotic species, which is more oriented towards the protection of aquaculture interests and when the import is authorized mainly for aquaculture purposes, can be found in Venezuela ^1^/, Panama ^2^/, Mexico ^3^/, Colombia ^4^/, Spain ^5^/, Canada 6/ and France ^7^/. Legislation in this regard is often quite recent (e.g. Venezuela, Mexico, France) as opposed to others (Panama, Canada).
^1^/ Resolution MAC-391 of 20 November 1989 and MAC-251 of 18 May 1988.
^2^/Fisheries Decree-Law No. 17 of 9 July 1959, Art. 36.
^3^/ Federal Fisheries Law, D.O. 26 December 1986; and the Federal FisheriesLaw Regulations, D.O. 7 January 1988, Regulations 33, 62, 63, 64 and 65.
^4^/ Decree of 1978.
^5^/ Law No. 23/1984 of 25 June 1984, Marine Cultures, (B.O.E. NOM-153 of27 June 1984), Arts. 20, 21 and 22.
^6^/ Fish Health Protection Regulations, SOR/76-765 of 19 November 1976.
^7^/ Decree of 30 March 1985 on the prohibition to import live fish, their eggs or fry.
Regulations usually require the following information to obtain a permit:
1. identity of applicant;
2. scientific name of species (quantity and development status);
3. purpose of import (aquaculture, scientific or ornamental purposes);
4. source, place of origin;
5. place of destination;
6. sanitary certificate from export country, especially for import of non-indigenous species ^8^/.
^8^/ e.g., France, Spain, Mexico, Canada, Venezuela.
In most cases, the Certificate of Health must state that the fish or eggs are free of any infections, diseases or parasites or disease agents. In some countries, such as Mexico, Colombia and Spain, the applicant must provide, in addition to the above-mentioned items, a technical study on the socio-economic impact and a description of the possible impact such species could have on the environment.
Furthermore, in some countries there are regulations or facilities for the quarantine of fish at introduction: Venezuela and Mexico impose quarantine restrictions to ensure disease-free importations and to observe the young resulting from controlled reproduction. Once this period of observation has passed, in some countries like Colombia, there is a final evaluation according to which the final authorization is granted or not.
Some countries distinguish between import of native or non-native live fish (e.g. Prance, Canada, Spain). Others limit the import authorization to a certain species (e.g. Venezuela: "live shrimps"; Canada: cultured fish or eggs of wild fish of salmonid family) or to live fish in general. Import of the latter usually requires, in addition to the Health Certificate as referred to above, a special consent, for instance from the Ministry of Environment in France, or from the Spanish Oceanographic Institute in Spain. Import of such species is often strictly limited for the purpose of fish culture.
Thus, regulations for the import of live fish seek either to control animal health or, more particularly, to develop aquaculture. These rules are usually enforced either by the withdrawal of the import license or by payment of penalties. It would be interesting to know to what extent these rules contribute to the development of aquaculture.
<section>7</section>
CONCLUSIONS
Certain observations can be drawn from the foregoing preliminary analysis of selected legislation applying to aquaculture operations.
Firstly, few regulations in existence today are purposely designed to protect or allow aquaculture ^1^/. Countries usually have aquaculture provisions in existing legislation. The aquaculturist must often cope with a complex network of laws and regulations which deal with land tenure, water use, environment protection, pollution prevention, public health, and fisheries in general. Few of them are especially drafted to promote or regulate aquaculture and confusion, conflicts and overlappings exist. And yet, this study did not analyse the possible conflicts which are likely to arise between aquaculture and legislation (mainly agriculture and fisheries legislation) not dealing specifically with aquaculture, but bearing some of the regulatory burdens which may be inappropriate for aquaculture activities. As examples the following can be mentioned:
(i) The many rules on periods during which it is prohibited to fish, or regarding the minimum size under which fish might not be captured, which are often included in the general fisheries law and are relevant to aquaculture ^2^/. An underlying reason for this might be that the activities meant to be regulated under the so-called "Fisheries Act" were those which concerned the protection and management of wild fish as a public resource. The question is whether aquaculture is a "fishery activity" for the purposes of the various rules which apply to and define "fishery".
(ii) The prohibition to obstruct free navigation in any stream or lake adjoining or flowing through an area or to impede the flow and ebb of the tide to and from the interior of the swamps or streams, or the prohibition to interfere with the passage of people along streams or banks, etc. ^3^/.
^1^/ This is particularly true for developing countries where many, and perhaps most, countries with aquaculture industries do not have special legislation governing this activity. In developed countries however there seems to be a tendency among most governments to over-regulate.
^2^/ Guatemala and the Republic of Korea are countries which have clearly stated that these restrictions do not apply to fish culture activities.
^3^/ It is, for instance, an ancient principle of the common law that everyone has the right to pass and repass freely in navigable waters. Although the foreshore, that is, that part of the sea coast which is alternately exposed and covered by the ebbing and flooding tides, is rendered non-navigable at times of low tides, the water overlying the foreshore is nevertheless navigable water and subject to the public right of navigation when flooded. In a number of countries, therefore, any action to enjoin an interference with this public right of navigation is often regulated.
Neither have the problems of sea ranching (of salmon) been addressed (mainly because they concern an activity which goes beyond the traditional image and common opinion of the meaning of aquaculture). Sea ranching might create problems because it represents especially sensitive resources use conflicts (the EEZ and its legal status, ownership conflicts, wild-cultured fish, rights of upstream riparian owners...) ^1^/.
1^/ Nonetheless, some countries are trying to regulate and control this activity. This is the case of Norway and Spain. Norway: Act of 14 June 1985, No. 68, relating to the Breeding of Fish, Shellfish, etc., Sub-section 9 of the Act gives the breeder an exclusive right to re-catch escaped fish and shellfish. It is assumed that the right to re-catch is limited geographically, and shall be the sole right of the affected breeder. The period of time during which the right to re-catch escaped fish may be exerted is explicitly limited to 14 days after escape.
Spain: Decree of 11 May 1982 governing "La actividad de repoblación marítima" (B.O.E. No. 125, 26 May 1982). The scope of this Decree is to regulate all restocking activities (whatever the method used) on the continental shelf and in the EEZ, in the territorial sea and maritime inland waters (Art. 1). This includes salmon release techniques (as the Preamble refers to it). Maritime restocking activities include any activity carried on to increase the natural fauna and flora population. Two categories are distinguished: (a) artificial restocking methods (i.e. release of animal or vegetal species into the natural environment at whatever stage or phase of its life cycle); (b) natural restocking methods (i.e. the establishment of favourable conditions and measures to facilitate the development of animal or vegetal species) (Art. 2).
A reason for this rather confused situation can be found in the difficulty that the legislator seems to face in resolving the problem of conflicting uses of natural resources. Many aquaculture activities involve the use of lands and resources which other members of society either can or already do utilize. Social and cultural factors also may sometimes play a constraining role in the implementation and enforcement of relevant legislation to develop aquaculture, especially at the level of local communities.
Secondly, this study shows that throughout the world a great diversity of legal frameworks governing aquaculture operations exist. This situation certainly reflects the fact that the needs of individual countries vary considerably. Therefore, it is apparent that before considering the legal framework in which the needs of aquaculture are to be met and to provide a better understanding of how aquaculture operations need to be legally organized, the legislation should clearly take into consideration:
- the purposes of the industry: e.g. food production and market (local or export), employment, production of an industrial product, sport and recreation;
- the resources or species it uses: e.g. finfishes, crustaceans, molluscs;
- the system or elements it utilizes for production: e.g. pond system, pen/cage system, open water system, integrated fish culture with plant crops or animal husbandry and ranching; and
- the environment in which production is conducted: low-lying inland plains; coastal swamplands, lakes/reservoirs, along rivers and streams, in the sea (bays and inlets), along irrigation systems.
Furthermore, the laws governing aquaculture are subject to much greater change as a result of ancillary changes in the law. Aquaculture activity cannot be isolated from changes introduced into the law in subject areas such as water and land, quite apart from the changes which might be made to the laws affecting the environment, fiscal laws, etc. In this respect, the contrast with the situation concerning marine fisheries laws is quite strong, for the latter are not affected by these collateral changes to anything like the same extent.
In light of the foregoing, it would not be realistic to conclude that a model aquaculture law could be prepared which could meet all circumstances that would have to be covered. A particular legal regime in an individual country must ensure that the needs of aquaculturists are met, but also that existing or future relevant laws are carefully integrated. As such, legislation can be an essential tool for sound management of aquaculture operations and its natural surroundings.
Thirdly, freshwater farming is generally less closely regulated than that in marine waters since the former is usually conducted on privately owned land, in legally controlled water, and without the necessity of capturing wild broodstock or seed.
Fourthly, it is apparent from the above preliminary analysis that there is a tendency to over-regulate. Some regulations can form a significant barrier to the establishment of an aquaculture enterprise or its continued operation by creating legal uncertainties. For instance, there exists considerable overlapping of legal requirements governing aquaculture. Permits for aquaculture activity may still be subject to other authorizations, e.g. to use water or public land, and the duration of the permit may not correspond to the duration of authority to take water, etc. This point would have been even more visible had the study been based on individual country studies.
The point can be made here that aquaculture activity has increased in importance in many countries, both in terms of volume of production, and in terms of diversity of aquaculture activity, while for many countries, it is an important means by which food production can be increased. However, this importance is often not reflected in the legal regime governing aquaculture. This points to the need, in particular cases, of at least the following: an analysis of an individual country's needs and its policy towards the role of aquaculture in its society. In the light of that analysis, the existing legal regime can be examined in order to ascertain whether it assists in the realization of those needs, and its policy. Nations with a fish farming industry and regulations that control the industry directly or indirectly, could be advised to examine the latter to determine whether they are all necessary, and whether they could be eliminated or made less constraining. Countries without
aquaculture legislation should perhaps determine whether it is needed yet. Against that background changes to the law can be formulated, and obstacles to development removed if appropriate.
