<title>ADCP/REP/89/43 - Aquaculture Systems and Practices: A Selected Review</title>
<section>1</section>
FOREWORD
At the Expert Consultation on Planning for Aquaculture Development, held in Policoro, Italy, in 1988 (see ADCP/REP/89/33), the participants put forward an integrated set of opportunities for technical assistance to developing countries. The opportunities were predominantly a group of identified needs or ideas, which collectively would assist in guiding investment decisions, primarily at the national level in both the public and private sectors.
One of the production needs identified by the ADCP Consultation was the need for new long-term approaches to increase production of low-cost fish through aquaculture and fisheries technologies. This need is greatest in those countries and sub-regions where population growth is rapidly accelerating the gap between market demand for fish and all potential sources of supply, including traditional aquaculture. Special priority should be given to the promotion of appropriate production systems, which are feasible from a socio-economic and environmental point of view, to enhance production in bodies of water which are not presently considered utilizable. Of particular importance is the promotion and management of culture-based fisheries (particularly in Africa and Latin America); of coastal lagoons (in Africa, Latin America, and the Mediterranean); and in open-water systems (potentially all regions).
At the Consultation, it was proposed that appropriate actions be taken starting at the interregional level "to prepare a catalogue listing available systems and practices of production", to assist governments of developing countries in planning and developing appropriate aquaculture methodologies.
To this end, "Aquaculture Systems and Practices: A Selected Review", commissioned by ADCP, has been prepared by Ms. Elvira Baluyut. It describes available practices in different environments (marine, brackishwater, and freshwater) using the three main culture systems (extensive, semi-intensive, and intensive). In addition, the Selected Review presents various considerations which have to be taken into account in the selection of the most appropriate culture system/approach. It also describes approaches to culture-based fisheries which are seen as potentially useful tools for resource enhancement, especially in those countries where extensive open-water areas are available to use for fisheries development.
The Consultation also pointed out that there is a need to stimulate ideas on innovative and appropriate approaches whereby aquaculture technology can be applied toward the management of large water bodies for increased low-cost fish production. Hence one of the ideas behind the preparation of this Selected Review was the hope that it would lead to an expert consultation to identify and test approaches for aquaculture production of low-cost fish. The approach then should be regional reviews of existing projects, technologies, and resources of the individual regions, followed by regional expert consultations to identify specific research opportunities and to outline model projects (for each region) which are systems-oriented in design and application.
Colin E. Nash
Craig B. Kensler
Rome, 1989
<section>2</section>
1. INTRODUCTION
Aquaculture continues to increase in volume and value of output in many countries of the world, filling the gap between the supply and demand for fish and fishery products, improving nutrition, creating new or additional employment, and contributing to the household economy, particularly in rural areas.
In 1986, world production from aquaculture reached around 11 million metric tonnes (t) (8.2 million t of fish, crustaceans, and molluscs and 2.8 million t of seaweeds and algae) valued at about US$ 12 thousand million or roughly one-third of that from the total world fisheries catch of. about US$ 30-40 thousand million (Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (ADCP), 1989a).
Of the total production from aquaculture some 9 million t, representing around 82% of the global total, were produced in Asia and the balance of 2 million in the other regions of the world (Table 1). The top 16 producers were led by China with an output of about 4.86 million t, followed by Japan with about 1.3 million t, and the Republic of Korea with 993 000 t (Table 2).
It has been estimated that the increasingly substantial contribution of aquaculture to total fish production will continue to rise, with production projected to reach 22 million t by the end of the century, representing about 20-25Z by weight of total world fisheries production and possibly greater than 50% by value as more and more high-value commodities are produced through aquaculture.
<section>3</section>
2. WHY AQUACULTURE?
The recent great interest In aquaculture, or the breeding and rearing of aquatic plants and animals in enclosures/confinements, was spurred by the oil crisis of the early seventies that made the exploitation of aquatic resources through fish capture highly uneconomical and due to declining fish catches in major traditional fishing grounds in a number of developing countries in the world. The farming of fish was seen as the best option to catching fish to feed the growing masses, provide them with alternative livelihood opportunities for their socio-economic upliftment, as well as generate much-needed foreign exchange to service foreign debt.
In many countries, especially in the developing world, fish and other aquaculture products serve as the main source of cheap protein to combat malnutrition and under-nutrition, fish having essential amino acids that are often lacking in cereal protein substitutes. Value-wise, cultured fish products compete with poultry and livestock in the local market. Nutrition - wise, however, aquaculture species are more efficient in converting food into body tissue than poultry or livestock (Liao, 1988).
In Asia, aquaculture products are essential in improving the largely high-carbohydrate, low-protein diet predominant in the region, where paradoxically enough, a great number of people, especially in the rural areas, engage in labour-intensive work but subsist on low-protein diets (Liao, 1988). A relatively small amount of fish protein in combination with a cereal-based diet would enhance the nutritional quality of the cereal protein, improve the overall quality of the diet, and therefore increase labour efficiency.
Table 1. World aquaculture production in 1986 in tonnes
Area
Finfish
Crustacea
Mollusca
Seaweeds
Others
Total
Percentage of World Total
Africa, N & NE
Africa, South of Sahara
North America
Central America
South America
Caribbean
Europe
USSR
Oceania
Asia
Totals
Percentage of World Total
Source: ADCP, 1989b
Table 2. Aquaculture production of finfish, crustacea, molluscs and seaweeds by 16 leading countries in 1986 in tonnes
China
Japan
Republic of Korea
Philippines
USA
Indonesia
USSR
Spain
Taiwan Province of China
France
Viet Nam
Bangladesh
Thailand
Italy
Democratic People's Republic of Korea
Netherlands
Total
Source: ADCP, 1989b
In addition to supplying cheap protein for human consumption, aquaculture provides excellent opportunities for employment and income generation, particularly in the more economically depressed rural areas. Aquaculture employs large numbers of people either directly in fish farming activities (as for example, fish pond/fish pen/fish cage operators, caretakers, construction workers, pump tenders, vehicle/machine operators, harvesting aides) or indirectly as employees in related or ancillary industries (as net manufacturers, boat-makers, fry gatherers, bamboo suppliers).
Although the number of people directly involved in aquaculture production is difficult to estimate for lack of statistical information, especially on a global basis, China's 350 000 people employed in its 22 000 village-operated fish farms and the Philippines' approximately 250 000 fish pond employees, give some indications as to the magnitude of the aquaculture industry's labour force (Baluyut, 1989a). Moreover, it has been shown that aquaculture labour is more productive than comparable agricultural activities and that income and profits generated from aquaculture are generally higher than those derived from other agricultural activities (Trono, 1988).
Aquaculture has also been the best means of alternative livelihood for fishing communities whose traditional source of income has been substantially adversely affected by the over-exploitation of coastal municipal fishing grounds. The introduction of small-scale aquaculture in many such areas has been shown to create employment and improve the socio-economic status of subsistence fishermen. Doty (1977, as cited in Trono, 1988), noted that incomes of artisanal fishermen in the South China Sea region have increased several times over with their participation in seaweed farming. Likewise, the introduction of seaweed culture has transformed Sitangkai, a small, sleepy fishing village in remote Tawi-Tawi, Sulu, the Philippines' southernmost province, into a very progressive town (Trono, 1988).
In this sense, aquaculture therefore not only provides employment/livelihood opportunities; it also contributes to the development of rural areas. It also helps maximize the use of idle or marginal lands in a number of developing countries where land is still the basis of wealth and social status and thus, general well-being. Aquaculture has, for example, helped restore economic activity in Negros Province, the Philippines to usual high levels after the collapse of the sugar industry caused severe economic dislocation, especially among the rural farm workers. (At present, Negros Province has the most intensively managed shrimp ponds in the country, most of which have been constructed from what used to be sugarcane fields.)
Aquaculture is also an important alternative for those countries whose traditional fishing grounds have been severely reduced by the imposition of the 200-mile Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ), primarily by the introduction of fish farming in areas well within the EEZ (Liao, 1988).
Aquaculture has likewise proven to be an excellent source of foreign exchange for aquaculturally-producing countries with the export of high-value species like penaeid shrimps, oysters, and seaweeds. For example, the Republic of Korea has a monopoly of supplying salted sea mustard (Undaria) or "wakame" to Japan, of which it exported 23 000 t valued at US$ 30 million in 1982. It is also an exporter of oysters, mainly canned, to the USA, Canada, Australia, and the Netherlands, bringing in resources of US$ 27.5 million in 1982 (Baluyut, 1989a).
In the ASEAN countries, the Philippines, Indonesia, Thailand, and Malaysia have all registered increasing export earnings from aquaculture. For example, the Philippines has become a leading exporter of jumbo tiger shrimp, Penaeus monodon, mainly to Japan, with 24 292 t valued at US$ 251 226 428 in 1987. It is also a top exporter of dried and processed seaweeds, earning an estimated US$ 26 848 238 from 26 651 t shipped out in 1987 (Baluyut, 1989a).
Aquaculture development also spurs the establishment and growth of related industries in support of production, as feed-milling, fish processing, ice-making and cold storage, net manufacture, and even construction. In major aquaculture producing countries, the manufacture of fish/shrimp feeds and support equipment, supplies, and materials has expanded side by side with the expansion of aquaculture. Taiwan, Province of China (PC) is a case in point. The phenomenal growth of shrimp culture also saw the proliferation and expansion of shrimp feed-milling enterprises and of manufacturers of aquaculture equipment like paddlewheels, aerators, and various pumps.
In the Philippines, the introduction and subsequent expansion of fish pen culture in Laguna de Bay spurred the growth of ancillary industries like net manufacture, bamboo-cutting, and milkfish fry collection.
<section>4</section>
3. GENERAL CONSIDERATIONS IN THE CHOICE OF CULTURE SYSTEM/APPROACH
3.1 Development Goals and Target Beneficiaries
3.2 Culture Species
3.3 Technology Availability
3.4 Availability of Inputs and Support Facilities
3.5 Investment Requirements
3.6 Environmental Considerations
The selection of the aquaculture system or approach to adopt in a particular development, is determined by several factors including the following:
(i) Development goals/objectives and target beneficiaries.
(ii) Acceptability/marketability of culture species.
(iii) Availability and level of technology.
(iv) Availability of production inputs and support facilities and services.
(v) Investment requirements, and
(vi) Environmental considerations.
3.1 Development Goals and Target Beneficiaries
A primary consideration in the choice of appropriate culture system/approach would be the underlying goals/objectives of the proposed development and the beneficiaries it envisions to assist.
Development objectives, as discussed in the preceding section, can include any or all or a combination of the following:
(i) Increased supply/production of fish for local/domestic consumption.
(ii) Employment/livelihood generation and improved income levels.
(iii) Greater foreign exchange revenues, and
(iv) Socio-economic development and the expansion of ancillary industries.
Aquaculture development, when pursued by the private sector on a commercial scale, is usually undertaken primarily for financial profit. In contrast, government-led and implemented aquaculture projects may be motivated principally by socio-economic goals like the provision of alternative employment and livelihood opportunities for municipal/artisanal fishermen, or the generation of greater foreign exchange earnings for the country.
Depending on the specific project goals and the target beneficiaries, the approach to aquaculture development may be small-scale, low-input, and low-technology or large-scale, high-investment, and high-technology, as the case may be. If the project is envisioned to help coastal subsistence fishermen improve their socio-economic condition, the approach to be taken must necessarily involve small-scale farming which requires low capital outlay, low technology, and low risk, as in seaweed farming, mollusc culture, or tilapia cage culture. On the other hand, commercial aquaculture operations can be as large-scale, high-input, and high-risk as the owners can afford, as in highly intensive shrimp fish ponds or large-scale fish pen operations.
3.2 Culture Species
The choice of culture species is, in more ways than one, closely linked with the objectives of the development and therefore the strategy/approach to be used to achieve set goals. Not all fish species are suitable for aquaculture. By the same token, some cultivable species are more appropriate for large-scale, commercial aquaculture rather than for small-scale operations, as exemplified by the high-value shrimps, the production of which can hardly be undertaken profitably on a small scale. Also, some species are best cultured using specific types of enclosures; for example, penaeid shrimps are best cultured in fish ponds rather than in fish pens, and certain species are more acceptable in certain countries than in others (Table 3).
The choice of species for culture depends on a number of factors including the availability of suitable sites for culture, the biological characteristics of the indigenous or introduced/exotic species, their suitability for culture, and their acceptability in the local or international markets, and the availability of technology and other requirements for their culture.
Table 3. Principal aquaculture species in Asia
Common Name
Scientific Name
Culture System*
Environment**
FINFISHES
Milkfish
Chanos chanos
E, S, I
F, B, S
Freshwater eel
Anguilla japonica
EX, E, I
F
Anguilla spp.
Grey mullet
Mugil cephalus
EX, E, I
F, B, S
Cockup
Lates calcarifer
EX
F
Grouper
Epinephelus spp.
EX
S
Porgy
Mylio macrocephalus
EX
S
Mylio spp.
Red porgy
Chrysophry major
S, I
S
Black porgy
Acanthopagrus schlegeli
S
B, S
Tilapia
Oreochromis mossambicus
SI
F. S
O. nilotica
E, SI
F, S
Tilapia zillii
S
F
O. aureus
S
F
O. mossambicus x O. niloticus
S
F
O. niloticus x O. aureus
S
F
Red tilapia
Oreochromis spp.
S, I
F, B, S
Sweet fish, ayu
Plecoglossus altivelis
I
F
Common carp
Cyprinus carpio
E, S
F
Goldfish (wild)
Carassius auratus
E, S
F
Crucian carp
Carassius carassius
E, S
F
Puntius carp
Puntius gonionotus
E, S
F
Puntius spp.
Rohu
Labeo rohita
EX, S
F
Mrigal
Cirrhina mrigala
EX, S
F
Bottom carp
Cirrhina molitorella
E, S
F
Catla
Catla catla
EX, S
F
Grass carp
Ctenopharyngodon idellus
E, S
F
Black or snail carp
Mylopharyngodon piceus
E, S
F
Silver carp
Hypophthalmichthys molitrix
EX, E, S
F
Bighead carp
Aristichthys nobilis
EX, E, S
F
Nilem
Osteochilus hasselti
EX, E
F
Walking catfish
Clarias batrachus
E, S
F
Clarias spp.
MOLLUSCS
Japanese oyster
Crassostrea gigas
E, I
S
Hard clam
Metrix lusoria
I
S
Small abalone
Haliotis diversicolor
I
S
Corbiculas
Corbicula fluminea
E
F
C. formosa
E
F
Purple clam
Soletellina diphos
E
S
Apple snail
Ampullarius insularum
S, I
F
Blood clam
Tegillarca granosa
S
S
Crassostrea malabonensis
E
S
C. iredalei
EX, E
S
C. palmipes
S
S
C. cuculata
EX, S
S
C. lugubris
E
S
C. belcheri
E
S
C. commercialis
S
S
Metrix metrix
EX, S
S
Cockle
Andara granos
E, S
S
Green sea mussel
Mytilus smaragdinus
EX, E, S
S
REPTILES
Soft-shell turtle
Trionyx sinensis
I
F
Crocodile
Crocodilus siamensis
I
F
C. porocus
I
F
AMPHIBIANS
Bull frog
Rana catasbiana
S
F
Tiger frog
Rana tigrina
I
F
SEAWEEDS
Gracilaria
Gracilaria spp.
E
B, S
Nori
Porphyra spp.
E
S
Wakame
Undaria pinnatifida
E
S
Green laver
Monostroma nitidum
E
S
*EX = experimental, E = extensive, S = semi-intensive, I = intensive
**F = freshwater, B = brackish water, S = saltwater
Source: Liao, 1988
Huet and Timmermans (1972) list the following criteria for evaluating the suitability of a species for culture:
(i) It must withstand the climate of the region in which it will be raised. Thus, the rearing of coldwater fish like salmonids and trout is limited to temperate regions or mountain areas of tropical countries because they can not tolerate warm water with its low oxygen content.
(ii) Its rate of growth must be sufficiently high. Small species, even if they reproduce well in ponds and accept formulated diets, are not the most suitable for rearing. Also, the best culture species are those which are low in the food chain, e.g., plankton feeders, herbivores, and detritivores. Their culture is also least expensive, even on an intensive scale, because they do not need to be given diets which have a high content of animal protein.
(iii) It must be able to reproduce successfully under culture conditions. Species for culture should be able to reproduce in captivity/confinement without needing special conditions that have to be fulfilled, and which give high returns on eggs and fry. Although it is possible to rear species whose reproduction in confinement is not possible at all (e.g., some carps) or whose reproduction under hatchery conditions has not yet been possible on a commercial scale (e.g., milkfish in the Philippines), the sustainability of the grow-out operations is hampered by the seasonal unavailability of wild fry for stocking in fish pens and/or fish ponds.
(iv) It must accept and thrive on abundant and cheap artificial food. Culture species which feed on cheap artificial feeds and give low feed conversion ratios (FCRs), also tend to give very good production rates, thus bringing in better financial returns.
(v) It must be acceptable to the consumer. Even if all the foregoing criteria are met by a candidate species, it is not worth culturing if there is no market for it. It is possible, though, to promote acceptability of or encourage consumption of a particular species to ensure that it will eventually sell in the market. (This was the situation with tilapia in the Philippines prior to the introduction of the bigger-sized, lighter coloured S. niloticus in the early 1970s.)
(vi) It should support a high population density in ponds. Social and gregarious species which can grow well to marketable size even under high density conditions in ponds or tanks (e.g., tilapia) are preferable to those which can be grown together in dense numbers only up to a certain age beyond which they eat each other (e.g., pike).
(vii) It must be disease-resistant. Reared fish must be resistant to disease and accept handling and transport without much difficulty. Tilapia is an ideal species for culture because of its high resistance to disease even in highly intensive culture systems.
A wide variety of fish and aquatic resources is cultured in freshwater, brackishwater, and marine environments world-wide using different methods (Table 4). Rabanal (1988a) estimates that there are close to 50 species of freshwater, brackishwater, and marine finfish species; about 13 crustacean species, 13 molluscan species, 5 seaweed species, and 5 economic aquatic vertebrates (frogs and other amphibians and turtles and other reptiles) cultivated in Southeast Asia.
Liao (1988) lists some 25 major finfish species, 18 molluscan species, 2 reptile species, 2 amphibian species, and 4 seaweed species as the principal species cultured in Asia (Table 4). To the list could be added the crustaceans consisting of the brackishwater/marine penaeid shrimps (mainly Penaeus monodon, P. semisulcatus, P. japonicus, P. orientalis, P. merguiensis, and Metapenaeus ensis) and the freshwater prawn of the genus Macrobrachium; the seaweeds Eucheuma, Laminaria, and Porphyra; and marine finfishes like sea bass and groupers (Baluyut, 1989a).
Table 4. Examples of aquaculture practices employed in different countries for different species
Country
Species Raised
Mode of Culture
Reference
NEPAL
Common carp, Chinese carp, Indian carp
Integrated fish farming
Pullin, 1989
THAILAND
Penaeid shrimps, freshwater prawn (Macrobrachium)
Pond and cage culture in freshwater and brackishwater
Sirikul, et al., 1988
Cockles and mussels
Mariculture along the coast
Finfishes
Cages suspended in rivers and standing waters
Clarias batrachus
C. macrocephalus
Tricnogaster pectoralis
Pangasius sp.
Lates calcalifer (sea bass)
Epinephelus spp. (grouper)
INDIA
Indian carps
Integrated rice-fish culture
Mukhopadhyay, 1989
YUGOSLAVIA
Primary species:
Pond culture
Wurtz, I960
Table carp
Aischgrund sp.
Croatian sp.
Secondary species:
European catfish
Tench
Pike
POLAND
Carp, tench, pike
Pond culture
Ackefors, 1989
EAST GERMANY
Carp, tench
Pond culture
Ackefors, 1989
ECUADOR
Penaeid shrimps
Pond culture
ADCP, 1989b
EL SALVADOR
T. aurea
Pen culture; floating cage culture
FAO, 1986
T. mossambica
GUATEMALA
Tilapia and carp
Cage and pond culture
FAO, 1986
COSTA RICA
Tilapia
Pond and cage culture
FAO, 1986
Trout
Semi-intensive pond culture
Chinese carp
Freshwater shrimp
Crayfish
Giant clam
(Anodontis luteola)
ECUADOR
Trout
Intensive pond and cage culture
FAO, 1986
Trout, marine shrimp
Extensive culture
AUSTRALIA
Salmonids, marine shrimps, molluscs
Intensive/semi-intensive pond culture
Nelson, 1988
FRENCH
POLYNESIA
GUAM
Giant clam, seaweeds, and pearl oysters
Open water culture
NEW CALEDONIA
NEW ZEALAND
Tilapia, milkfish, catfish, freshwater prawns, and crayfish
Less intensive onshore pond farming
In Africa, the predominant species are the tilapias, carps, mullets, sea bass, and catfishes; in addition, some salmonids, miscellaneous freshwater fish, molluscs, and crustaceans are also cultured. Latin America grows miscellaneous exotic fish and marine shrimps, molluscs, and salmonids. Successful experiments on the artificial reproduction and pond culture of indigenous finfishes of the genus Colossoma and Piaractus (locally known as "tambaqui" and "pirapitinga" in Brazil, "cachama" and "morocoto" in Venezuela, "gamitama" and "parco" in Peru, and "cachama negra" and "cachama blanco" in Colombia) also give promise of increased yields (Saint-Paul, 1989). The Caribbean rears tilapia, carp, marine and freshwater crustaceans, oysters, and seaweeds; in the Mediterranean region, salmonids are the prime fish and carps are secondary fish. In the Pacific, tilapia, milkfish, catfish, salmonids, marine and freshwater crustaceans, molluscs (including giant clams and pearl oysters), and
seaweeds are cultured but mostly on a pilot/experimental scale (ADCP, 1989a).
3.3 Technology Availability
As aquaculture involves the application of certain methods and techniques in the breeding and rearing of fish and other aquatic species, the selection of a particular culture system will necessarily depend on whether or not the technology for such is available in the country or project area and if so, its level of complexity and/or transferability to the fish farmer beneficiaries.
In general, simple, low-cost, low-technology systems (as for tilapia culture) are easier to transfer to the end users and have greater chances of success as compared to more sophisticated/complicated and relatively high-technology systems like those involved in penaeid hatchery and farming, especially using intensive culture techniques.
Thus, if aquaculture is being considered as an alternative livelihood for displaced coastal fishing families, the preferred system is one that will require the use of simple techniques and low-cost production facilities whose construction and operation may involve entire families or communities, e.g., seaweed and mollusc farming. On the other hand, more complex technologies which require higher capital and other inputs and which promise better profits, are usually adopted by medium- to large-scale entrepreneurs who have the capability to engage the services of technical specialists in running their operations.
3.4 Availability of Inputs and Support Facilities
Corollary to the level of technology is the ready availability of the production inputs, mainly seed and feeds, and ancillary facilities and services like hatcheries, feed mills, processing plants, ice plants, and cold storages. At the grassroots level, it is essential that not only are the production inputs available, the fish farmers should be adequately provided with technical assistance including training and extension support. For large-scale, intensive, commercial operations, especially those geared for the export market, the constant availability of seed and feeds is critical as well as the existence of adequate post-harvest handling and processing facilities to ensure high quality products.
3.5 Investment Requirements
The magnitude of financial investment required to set up, operate, and maintain an aquaculture operation depends on the level of technology involved and the type of culture system adopted. In general, the investment requirement Increases as a function of technology level and degree of complexity of the culture system, with extensive systems requiring the least capital investment and intensive systems needing the most.
Thus, as mentioned earlier, small-scale aquaculture development projects which involve simple production facilities (like rafts and stakes for mollusc culture and bamboos and ropes for seaweed farming) require minimal financial inputs. In contrast, highly intensive, highly complicated production systems, as those used for intensive shrimp grow-out operations, require large outlays not only for initial development but also for operation and maintenance.
The major cost items in aquaculture production, as in any other type of agriculture, include initial development and pre-operating costs including cost of land/site acquisition, production inputs (seed, feed, fertilizers, pesticides), and operating and maintenance costs (including cost of labour, power, supplies and materials), and miscellaneous expenses including harvesting and marketing costs.
Where investment costs are high and land and labour are limited and costly, as in Japan and Taiwan (PC), the trend will be intensification to achieve maximum yields per unit area. Where land, labour and fish are inexpensive and feed is unavailable or costly, as in the Philippines and Indonesia, the trend is for extensive culture utilizing larger pond area and natural food.
3.6 Environmental Considerations
Much concern has been raised over the potential adverse impacts of aquaculture on the environment, especially as a result of intensive culture. Taiwan (PC) and the serious shrimp disease and water quality problems it presently faces as a result of the tremendous expansion of its intensive shrimp industry, is the best example one can think of at the moment.
The widespread destruction of mangrove forests to give way to fish ponds, has also disturbed the ecological equilibrium in a number of coastal zones, reducing aquatic productivity and eliminating breeding and nursing grounds of important species of fish and other aquatic life, among others.
In Australia, the possibility of eutrophication of natural waters from high nutrient loads discharged from fish ponds is a subject of concern (Jamandre, 1988). In Negros Province in the Philippines, a continuing debate between two main industries - aquaculture and sugar - over industry standards, remains unresolved as wastes discharged by sugar refineries into the river used by aquaculture farms as a water source, have reportedly caused increased temperature and acidity levels that have disastrous effects on the shrimp farms (Cayco, 1988).
Aquaculture can produce a number of negative impacts on the environment (Table 5). It is therefore important to take environmental considerations into account in selecting the culture system to adopt, either by reducing the extent to which aquaculture practices interfere with the ecology of the aquatic milieu or by making the milieu itself more amenable to the aquaculture pursuit (UNDP/NORAD/FAO, 1987).
Concern that coastal aquaculture can have adverse impacts on the coastal environment has prompted a number of authors to suggest practical guidelines for siting and operating aquaculture installations in mangrove systems. Kapetsky (1982) summarizes these as follows:
(i) Establishment of types of aquaculture which do not involve destruction of mangroves and associated flora and fauna, e.g., fish cages and fish pens in open water areas.
(ii) Integrated aquaculture and forestry, e.g., planting of mangroves along fish pond dikes and other nearby suitable areas.
(iii) Preservation of a functional ecosystem by means of:
- establishment of aquaculture in areas already reclaimed from mangroves rather than on productive mangrove stands, where possible;
- utilization of the least productive parts of the mangrove forest or those with the lowest value trees;
- locating aquaculture sites toward the landward side of the mangroves to preserve the productivity of the most productive portions for capture fishery resources;
- ensuring that the Area occupied by ponds and other elements of the farm should be small in relation to the overall area of the mangrove system in which they are installed.
(iv) Paying ample attention to site selection, culture installation design, and the management of culture operations.
<section>5</section>
4. AQUACULTURE METHODS AND PRACTICES: A SELECTED REVIEW
4.1 Historical Perspective
4.2 Overview of Aquaculture Methods and Practices
4.3 Fish Pond Culture
4.4 Integrated Fish Farming
4.5 Pen and Cage Culture
4.6 Open Water Culture
4.1 Historical Perspective
Aquaculture has a tradition of about 4 000 years. It began in China, possibly due to the desires of an emperor to have a constant supply of fish. It is speculated that the techniques for keeping fish in ponds originated in China with fishermen who kept their surplus catch alive temporarily in baskets submerged in rivers or small bodies of water created by damming one side of a river bed. Another possibility is that aquaculture developed from ancient practices for trapping fish, with the operations steadily improving from trapping-holding to trapping-holding-growing, and finally into complete husbandry practices (Ling, 1977).
Table 5. Possible environmental Impacts of aquaculture
Culture System
Environmental Impact
EXTENSIVE
1. Seaweed culture
May occupy formerly pristine reefs; rough weather losses; market competition; conflicts/failures, social disruption.
2. Coastal bivalve culture (mussels, oysters, clams, cockles)
Public health risks and consumer resistance (microbial diseases, red tides, industrial pollution; rough weather losses; seed shortages; market competition especially for export produce; failures, social disruption.
3. Coastal fishponds (mullets, milkfish, shrimps, tilapias)
Destruction of ecosystems, especially mangroves; increasingly non-competitive with more intensive systems; nonsustainable with high population growth; conflicts/failures, social disruption.
4. Pen and cage culture in eutrophic waters and/or rich benthos (carps, catfish, milkfish tilapias)
Exclusion of traditional fishermen; navigational hazards; conflicts, social disruption; management difficulties; wood consumption.
SEMI-INTENSIVE
1. Fresh- and brackishwater pond (shrimps and prawns, carps, catfish, milkfish, mullets, tilapias)
Freshwater: health risks to farm workers from waterborne diseases. Brackishwater: salinization/acidification of soils/aquifers. Both: market competition, especially for export produce; feed and fertilizer availability/prices; conflicts/failures, social disruption.
2. Integrated agriculture-aquaculture (rice-fish; live stock/poultry-fish; vegetables - fish and all combinations of these)
As freshwater above, plus possible consumer resistance to excreta-fed produce; competition from other users of inputs such as livestock excreta and cereal brans; toxic substances in livestock feeds (e.g., heavy metals) may accumulate in pond sediments and fish; pesticides may accumulate in fish.
3. Sewage-fish culture (waste treatment ponds; latrine wastes and septage used as pond inputs; fish cages in wastewater channels)
Possible health risks to farm workers, fish processors and consumers; consumer resistance to produce.
4. Cage and pen culture, especially in eutrophic waters or on rich benthos (carps, catfish, milkfish, tilapias)
As extensive cage and pen Systems above.
INTENSIVE
1. Freshwater, brackishwater and marine ponds (shrimps; fish, especially carnivores - catfish, snakeheads, groupers, sea bass, etc.)
Effluents/drainage high in BOD and suspended solids; market competition, especially for export product; conflicts/failures, social disruption.
2. Freshwater, brackishwater and marine cage and pen culture (finfish, especially carnivores -groupers, sea bass, etc. - but also some omnivores such as common carp)
Accumulation of anoxic sediments below cages due to fecal and waste feed build-up; market competition, especially for export produce; conflicts/failures, social disruption; consumption of wood and other materials.
3. Other - raceways, silos, tanks, etc.
Effluents/drainage high in BOD and suspended solids; many location-specific problems.
Source: Modified from Pullin, 1989
Chinese who emigrated to other Southeast Asian countries probably carried the knowledge with them and inspired the local people to take up fish farming. Brackishwater aquaculture is thought to have originated in Indonesia with the culture of milkfish and grey mullet (Ling, 1977) and must have spread to neighbouring countries like the Philippines which has been practising it for about 300 to 400 years (Baluyut, 1989).
The husbandry of fish is therefore not a new phenomenon. Ancient practices based on the modifications of natural bodies of water or wetlands to entrap young fish in enclosures until harvest, have just evolved into more systematic and scientific methods and techniques.
Other regions of the world have shorter traditions of aquaculture. In North America, it is about a century old; in Africa, aquaculture production consists almost exclusively of tilapia culture in freshwater ponds and dates back to the 1940s (UNDP/NORAD/FAO, 1987). Aquaculture development has been very recent and is just gaining momentum in Australia, New Zealand, and the Pacific Island countries (Rabanal, 1988b).
4.2 Overview of Aquaculture Methods and Practices
A number of aquaculture practices are used world-wide in three types of environment (freshwater, brackishwater, and marine) for a great variety of culture organisms. Freshwater aquaculture is carried out either in fish ponds, fish pens, fish cages or, on a limited scale, in rice paddies. Brackishwater aquaculture is done mainly in fish ponds located in coastal areas. Marine culture employs either fish cages or substrates for molluscs and seaweeds such as stakes, ropes, and rafts. (Summarized information on major culture systems and practices used for the principal culture organisms on a regional basis, is given in Table 6.)
Culture systems range from extensive to intensive depending on the stocking density of the culture organisms, the level of inputs, and the degree of management. In countries where government priority is directed toward increased fish production from aquaculture to help meet domestic demand, either as a result of the lack of access to large waterbodies (e.g., Nepal, Central African Republic) or the over-exploitation of marine or inland fisheries (e.g., Thailand, Zambia), aquaculture practices are almost exclusively oriented toward production for domestic consumption (UNDP/NORAD/FAO, 1987).
These practices include:
(i) freshwater pond culture;
(ii) rice-fish culture or integrated fish farming;
(iii) brackishwater finfish culture;
(iv) mariculture involving extensive culture and producing fish/shellfish (e.g., oysters, mussels, cockles) which are sold in rural and urban markets at relatively low prices.
Table 6. Aquaculture production systems and practices, by region
Region
Major Culture Species
Major Culture Systems
Major Culture Practices
Scope for Future Development/Needs for Further Expansion
ASIA
At least 75 species; diverse freshwater and marine species, including high-value shrimps, molluscs, seaweeds, with carps and seaweeds dominating production
Traditional extensive to intensive
- Fish ponds
- Fish pens and fish cages
- Floating rafts, lines, and stakes for molluscs and seaweeds
Development of culture-based fisheries in inland lakes, rivers, floodplains, and permanent and temporary reservoirs and barrages
Resource enhancement programmes integrated with environmental management
PACIFIC
Mussels and oysters, red seaweeds
Intensive/semi-intensive to extensive
- Hanging lines for mussels and pearl oysters
Production of high-value species for select markets;
- Offshore cages for salmon
Small-scale aquaculture for local markets;
- Pond culture for shrimps, tilapia, catfish, milkfish
Improved management of fishery resources, particularly reef fisheries
- Freshwater pens for crayfish
LATIN AMERICA
50 species of fish, crustaceans, and molluscs, including freshwater fish and marine shrimps in South America and molluscs in Central America
Extensive to semi-intensive and Intensive
- Offshore cage farming of Pacific and Atlantic salmon
- Ocean ranching in Southern Ocean
- Semi-intensive farming of marine shrimp in coastal ponds and extensive farming of freshwater fish in ponds
Production of species for export and marine shrimp and salmon
AFRICA
>26 freshwater fish; the most important being tilapia and common carp, molluscs and oysters also
Mainly extensive, rural-based, integrated with poultry and animal husbandry, rice-fish farming; some intensive in raceways and floating cages
- Fish pond culture for freshwater fish
- Raceways and floating cages for marine species
Increased emphasis on higher value catfishes for urban markets, on marine species of fish and crustaceans for select national market and export
Culture-based fisheries in lakes and reservoirs
Development of coastal lagoons which are almost totally unexploited
MEDITERRANEAN
>50 individual species, mostly freshwater and brackishwater fishes - most important being salmonids and carps; oysters and mussels
Well-diversified modern practices, with highly technical and intensive systems in developing countries and semi-intensive and extensive elsewhere
- Fish pond
- Fish cages
- Ocean ranching
Production of high-value species of tourism and export
Integrated coastal zone management
CARIBBEAN
About 16 species of tilapias, carps, marine shrimp and, freshwater prawns, oysters and seaweeds
- Floating cages in reservoirs
Priority is for aquaculture production for local markets
- Fish pond farming in freshwater
- Culture-based fisheries in reservoirs
- Rope production of molluscs
Source: ADCP Aquaculture Regional Profiles, 1989b
Extensive systems use low stocking densities (e.g., 5 000-10 000 shrimp post larvae (PL)/ha/crop) and no supplemental feeding, although fertilization may be done to stimulate the growth and production of natural food in the water. Water change is effected through tidal means, i.e., new water is let in only during high tide and the pond can be drained only at low tide. The ponds used for extensive culture are usually large (more than two ha) and may be shallow and not fully cleared of tree stumps. Production is generally low at less than 1 t/ha/y.
Semi-intensive systems use densities higher than extensive systems (e.g., 50 000-100 000 shrimp PL/ha/crop) and use supplementary feeding. Intensive culture uses very high densities of culture organism (e.g., 200 000-300 000 shrimp PL/ha/crop) and is totally dependent on artificial, formulated feeds. Both systems use small pond compartments of up to one ha in size for ease of management.
Semi-intensive and intensive culture systems are managed by the application of inputs (mainly feeds, fertilizers, lime, and pesticides) and the manipulation of the environment primarily by way of water management through the use of pumps and aerators. Feeding of the stock is done at regular intervals during the day. In intensive shrimp culture, the computed daily feed ration is given in equal doses from as low as three to as high as six times a day. Water change is also effected on a daily basis, with approximately 10-15% of the water in the pond replenished by the entry of new water in semi-intensive shrimp ponds.
Semi-intensive and intensive culture systems are therefore more labour-intensive than extensive systems which need little attention, and are costlier to set up and operate, not to mention the fact that they also carry higher risks of mortalities resulting from disease, poor management, and/or force majeure (e.g., from anoxia due to non-functioning aerators during times of power failure).
Production is of course much higher (for example, ranging from a minimum of 1.5 t/ha/crop from semi-intensive shrimp culture to a high of 10 t/ha/crop from intensive shrimp culture). Financial returns are therefore much more attractive than those from extensive culture, although studies have shown that the return on investment (ROI) from semi-intensive culture is better than from intensive culture due to the high cost of inputs (largely fry and feeds) used in intensive culture.
A summary of the comparative features among these three main types of culture systems is shown in Table 7.
4.3 Fish Pond Culture
4.3.1 Culture Species
4.3.2 Site Selection
4.3.3 Pond Layout
4.3.4 Design of Pond Facilities
4.3.5 Pond Management
Pond culture, or the breeding and rearing of fish in natural or artificial basins, is the earliest form of aquaculture with its origins dating back to the era of the Yin Dynasty (1400-1137 B.C.). Over the years, the practice has spread to almost all parts of the world and is used for a wide variety of culture organisms in freshwater, brackishwater, and marine environments. It is carried out mostly using stagnant waters but can also be used in running waters especially in highland sites with flowing water.
Table 7. Summary of comparative features among the three main culture systems
Parameter
Extensive
Semi-Intensive
Intensive
Species Used
Monoculture or Polyculture
Monoculture
Monoculture
Stocking Rate
Moderate
Higher than extensive culture
Maximum
Engineering Design and Layout
May or may not be well laid-out
With provisions for effective water management
Very well engineered system with pumps and aerators to control water quality and quantity
Very big ponds
Manageable-sized units (up to 2 ha each)
Small ponds, usually 0.5-1 ha each
Ponds may or may not be fully cleaned
Fully cleaned ponds
Fully cleaned ponds
Fertilizer
Used to enhance natural productivity
Used regularly with lime
Not used
Pesticides
Not used
Used regularly for prohylaxis
Used regularly for prophylaxis
Food and Feeding Regimen
None
Regular feeding of high quality feeds
Full feeding of high-quality feeds
Depending on stocking density used, formulated feeds may be used partially or totally
Cropping Frequency (crops/y)
Quality of Product
Good quality
Good quality
Good quality
Culture species dominant but extraneous species may occur
Confined to culture species
Confined to culture species
Variable sizes
Uniform sizes
Uniform sizes
Running water fish culture involves growing the fingerlings to marketable size in earthen ponds using water from rivers, irrigation canals, or plain rain water. The system approximates intensive culture in that it involves the application of rapid water changes and the heavy stocking of the cultured species. The continuously flowing water is advantageous for fish culture as it supplies abundant dissolved oxygen and flushes away waste products and unconsumed feeds.
4.3.1 Culture Species
Commonly raised species in freshwater ponds are the carps, tilapia, catfish, snakehead, eel, trout, goldfish, gouramy, trout, pike, tench, salmonids, palaemonids, and the giant freshwater prawn Macrobrachium. In brackishwater ponds, common species include milkfish (Chanos chanos), mullet (Mugil sp.) and the different penaeid shrimps (Penaeus monodon, P. orientalis, P. merguiensis, P. penicillatus, P. semisulcatus, P. japonicus, and M. ensis). The more popular species for culture in marine ponds are the sea bass, grouper, red sea bream, yellowtail, rabbitfish, and marine shrimps.
In Asia, where the bulk of world production from aquaculture emanates, fish ponds are mostly freshwater or brackishwater, and rarely marine. In China and most of the Indian sub-continent, pond culture is traditionally dominated by freshwater species, mainly the carps, usually in polyculture and/or integrated with animal husbandry. In Southeast Asia, fish ponds are predominantly brackishwater, with milkfish and penaeid shrimps grown either in polyculture or in monoculture.
Recently in Latin America and the Caribbean, brackishwater pond culture of penaeid shrimps has expanded rapidly, as it has in some parts of Asia.
In Africa, the tilapias and carps dominate aquaculture production. Controlled breeding is also carried out in ponds with goldfish, trout, Bagrus and, to a lesser extent, Lates niloticus, Heterotis niloticus, and Clarias lazera. Ten species of molluscs belonging to four genera (Crassostrea, Mytilus, Venerupis and Pinctada) are cultured. Crustacean culture has yet to be developed on a significant scale (Satia, 1989).
4.3.2 Site Selection
Proper site selection is recognized as the first step guaranteeing the eventual success of any aquaculture project and forms the basis for the design, layout, and management of the project (SCSP, 1982a). For fish ponds, especially those to be used for coastal/brackishwater aquaculture of high-value species like shrimps, site selection is critical and should be given utmost attention.
Adisukresno (1982), Hechanova (1982), and Jamandre and Rabanal (1975) listed the following guidelines for the selection of a suitable site for coastal fish ponds:
(i) Soil Quality: preferably, clay-loam, or sandy-clay for water retention and suitability for diking; alkaline pH (7 and above) to prevent problems that result from acid-sulphate soils (e.g., poor fertilizer response; low natural food production and slow growth of culture species; probable fish kills).
(ii) Land elevation and tidal characteristics; preferably with average elevation that can be watered by ordinary high tides and drained by ordinary low tides; tidal fluctuation preferably moderate at 2-3 m. (Sites where tidal fluctuation is large, say 4 m, are not suitable because they would require very large, expensive dikes to prevent flooding during high tide. On the other hand, areas with slight tidal fluctuation, say 1 m or less, could not be drained or filled properly.)
(iii) Vegetation; preferably without big tree stumps and thick vegetation which entail large expense for clearing; areas near river banks and those at coastal shores exposed to wave action require a buffer zone with substantial growths of mangrove. (The presence of Avicennia indicates productive soil; nipa and trees with high tannin content indicate low pH.)
(iv) Water supply and quality: with steady supply of both fresh and brackish water in adequate quantities throughout the year; water supply should be pollution-free and with a pH of 7.8-8.5.
(v) Accessibility: preferably readily accessible by land/water transport; close to sources of inputs such as fry, feeds, fertilizers, and markets, fish ports, processing plants, and ice plants; and linked by communication facilities to major centres.
(vi) Availability of manpower for construction and operation.
4.3.3 Pond Layout
The layout of the pond system depends on the species for culture and on the size and shape of the area, which in turn determines the number and sizes of ponds and the position of the water canals and gates. A fish farm is considered properly planned if all the water control structures, canals, and the different pond compartments mutually complement each other (SCSP, 1982a). A complete fish farm has nursery and grow-out ponds and, in some instances, transition ponds for intermediate-sized fish/shrimp, all of which are properly proportioned and positioned within (Fig. 1).
Milkfish culture in brackishwater ponds in the Philippines follows the traditional practice of providing for nursery, transition, and rearing operations. In some cases, formation ponds are used for additional growth or stunting of fingerlings prior to stocking in rearing ponds (Fig. 2). The nursery ponds comprise about 1-4% of the total production area while the transition and formation ponds constitute about 6-9% of total area (Camacho and Lagua, 1988).
It has been suggested that a similar progressive culture scheme be adopted for shrimp pond culture when no supplementary feeding is practised. For growing to a medium size, a two-stage progression composed of a nursery pond (NP) and a rearing pond (RP) is adequate (Fig. 3); for growing to larger sizes, a three-stage progression composed of nursery, transition, and rearing ponds is recommended (Fig. 4) (ASEAN/SCSP, 1978).
Fig. 1. Layout of conventional pond system (from Camacho and Lagua, 1988).
Fig. 2. Modular pond system for milkfish culture (from Camacho and Lagua, 1988).
Fig. 3. Pond layout with one nursery pond and three rearing ponds (from ASEAN/SCSP, 1978).
Fig. 4. Pond layout with one nursery pond, one transition pond, and one rearing pond (ASEAN/SCSP, 1978).
In general, however, shrimp monoculture uses direct stocking of post larvae in rearing ponds and therefore requires only one type of pond with separate inlets and outlets for better circulation and aeration.
4.3.4 Design of Pond Facilities
A fish pond system consists of the following basic components (Fig. 5):
(i) pond compartments enclosed by dikes;
(ii) canals for supply and drainage of water to and from the pond compartments; and
(iii) gates or water control structures to regulate entry and exit of water into and from the pond compartments.
Pond compartments are usually rectangular in shape although in Indonesia, running water ponds are generally triangular, raceway-shaped, or oval. They vary in size from less than a hectare to several hectares each, sometimes up to 20-50 ha in size. However, with the new intensive methods, the trend is to use smaller units for flexibility and ease of management.
The elevation of the rearing pond bottom for milkfish is usually such that only a maximum of 40 cm of water can be held in the ponds during the culture period (Jamandre and Rabanal, 1975). For new shrimp ponds, the minimum water depth is 1 m.
The entire pond system is enclosed by a perimeter dike and the individual pond compartments are separated from each other by partition dikes. The outer perimeter dike is usually wider and higher than the inner partition dikes and serves to protect the entire fish pond area from flooding and destruction brought about by tide and wave action. The inner dikes are narrower and shorter.
The design of the dikes depends primarily on soil characteristics. Dikes are usually earthen although intensive shrimp ponds are concrete-lined or brick-lined as in Taiwan (PC). The side slopes are designed for structural stability, the ratio of horizontal length to height ranging from 1:1 to 1:3 (Fig. 6). The height and width of dikes depend on the type (primary, secondary, or tertiary), tide conditions, flood level, pond water depth, soil shrinkage, and freeboard (SCSP, 1982a).
The following slopes are recommended for dikes built with good clay soil:
- 2:1 when dike height is above 4.26 m and exposed to wave action;
- 1:1 when dike height is less than 4.26 m and tidal range is greater than 1 m; and
- 1:2 when tidal range is 1 m or less, and dike height is less than 1m.
The dike crown should not be less than 0.5 m and the main dike surrounding the farm should be 0.5 m above the highest dike or flood level recorded in the locality (ASEAN/SCSP, 1978).
Fig. 5. Pond layout showing shrimp pond compartments, canals, and gates.
Fig. 6. Typical cross sections of dikes. (A)
Fig. 6. Typical cross sections of dikes. (B)
Water conveyance structures (canals/channels) supply new water into the pond and drain out old water. They also provide the facility for holding and harvesting of fish and of serving as waterways for transporting farm supplies. Traditional milkfish ponds usually have only one canal that is used for both supply and drainage. Shrimp ponds have separate supply and drainage canals. Canals which are to be used for harvesting should be 30 cm below the level of the pond bottom to allow draining of pond water.
Having separate water intake and discharge canals in a pond complex brings about the following advantages (ASEAN/SCSP, 1978):
(i) Better filling and non-contamination of pond by discharge from other ponds.
(ii) Greatly reduced possibility of spread of disease.
(iii) Maintenance of constant head in intake canal thus reducing water loss through leaks/seepages in pond dikes and consequently reducing leaching of acids into the ponds from dikes with acid-sulphate soils.
(iv) Absence of conflict of usage between farmers.
(v) Better water exchange for individual ponds, and
(vi) Possibility of effecting flow-through systems.
The width of the canals depends on the amount of water they must carry. The following should be taken into account when designing canals:
(i) Volume of water to be held in the ponds.
(ii) Time requirement for filling or draining the pond.
(iii) Amount of rainfall which must be carried off in a given period of time.
(iv) Elevation of canal bottom in relation to tide.
(v) Other uses like transportation, harvesting of milkfish, and holding of broodstock (ASEAN/SCSP, 1978).
Diversion canals are constructed where there is much runoff from adjoining areas, to prevent sudden salinity changes and the possible entry of polluted, pesticide-loaded water and/or of silted water into the pond complex (Jamandre and Rabanal, 1975).
The entry and exit of water into ponds through the canals is regulated or controlled by gates. Main gates regulate the exchange of water between the pond system and the tidal stream or sea, and may be constructed of reinforced concrete (Fig. 7) or wood (Fig. 8). Reinforced concrete is more expensive but lasts longer. Such a gate has one or multiple (2, 3, 4, etc.) openings depending on the relative size of the pond unit to be served. A recent innovation for a smaller and less expensive main gate is the monk-type gate which uses culverts usually made of concrete hollow blocks (Fig. 9). The SEAFDEC Aquaculture Department has also introduced the open sluice gate made of ferro-cement (Fig. 10) (Corre, 1988).
Fig. 7. Main water control gate of reinforced concrete (from Jamandre and Rabanal, 1975). (A)
Fig. 7. Main water control gate of reinforced concrete (from Jamandre and Rabanal, 1975). (B)
Fig. 7. Main water control gate of reinforced concrete (from Jamandre and Rabanal, 1975). (C)
Fig. 8. Diagram of wooden gate (from Jamandre and Rabanal, 1975). (TOP VIEW)
Fig. 8. Diagram of wooden gate (from Jamandre and Rabanal, 1975). (FRONT END VIEW)
Fig. 9. Use of culvert pipes as secondary gates (from Jamandre and Rabanal, 1975). (A)
Fig. 9. Use of culvert pipes as secondary gates (from Jamandre and Rabanal, 1975). (B)
Fig. 9. Use of culvert pipes as secondary gates (from Jamandre and Rabanal, 1975). (C)
Fig. 10. Ferrocement culvert developed at the SEAFDEC Aquaculture Department (from Corre. 1988).
Secondary gates, which regulate water exchange between the ponds and the canals, are usually made of wood. Pipes or culverts can also be used for smaller ponds such as nursery or fry ponds and transition ponds for milkfish culture. Secondary gates are now usually located toward one end of the narrower side of the pond compartment to give good turbulence and circulation during the filling and draining.
Shrimp ponds are provided with separate supply and drainage gates to effect flow-through water management and facilitate water exchange through supply and drainage canals (NACA, 1986). Inlet and outlet gates are best located at opposite corners of the same pond (ASEAN/SCSP, 1978), across which a diagonal trench, about 5-10 m wide and 0.3-0.5 m deep, extending from inlet to outlet gates is recommended for convenient draining of water (Fig. 11) (Kungvankij et al, 1986).
Gates should be located where they are not exposed to strong weather forces and where water of good quality can be allowed to enter the fish pond system. Proper gate location can also serve to aerate the pond water and promote water circulation (SCSP, 1982a).
During the construction of gates for shrimp ponds a number of requirements should be kept in mind (ASEAN/SCSP, 1978), and the gates should:
(i) be durable, water-tight, and made of locally available materials;
(ii) have adequate capacity for the amount of water to be taken in or drained;
(iii) allow water to be taken in or discharged at the bottom;
(iv) have provisions for draining pond surface water;
(v) have gate bottom elevation that permits complete draining of pond water;
(vi) have slots or grooves for the placement of outside and inside screens to prevent undesirable species from entering the pond and the shrimps from leaving the pond;
(vii) have place for net installation for harvesting; and
(viii) be easy to operate.
4.3.5 Pond Management
4.3.5.1 Pond Preparation
4.3.5.2 Stocking
4.3.5.3 Feeding
4.3.5.4 Water Management
4.3.5.5 Pond Maintenance
4.3.5.6 Harvesting
Pond management techniques for finfish and shrimp culture, while varying slightly depending on the specific biological requirements of the culture organism, the type of culture system, and the culture environment (freshwater, brackishwater, and marine), are similar in that they involve the following basic activities:
(i) Pond preparation/conditioning.
(ii) Stocking.
(iii) Feeding and/or fertilization (depending on the culture system used).
(iv) Water management.
(v) Pond maintenance, and
(vi) Harvesting.
Fig. 11. Layout of improved shrimp pond showing diagonal trench extending from inlet to outlet (from Kungvankij et al., 1986).
Variations would consist mainly of differences in application rates of fertilizers, lime, pesticides, and feeds; stocking rates and sizes of stocking material; rate of water change; and harvesting techniques (Table 8).
As discussed earlier in Section 4.2, extensively managed systems generally require the least management, with no supplemental feeding and minimal water exchange on account of the low stocking density used. On the other hand, intensively managed ponds require full artificial feeding and substantial water management to ensure optimum culture conditions for the species being reared.
4.3.5.1 Pond Preparation
Ponds are totally drained and the pond bottoms dried prior to the application of pesticides. Tobacco dust, derris root/rotenone powder, teaseed cake/powder, or Gusathion-A are used to eliminate predators and/or wild species that may eventually compete with the cultured organisms for food and space. Teaseed cake is perhaps the best fish poison to use in brackishwater ponds to selectively kill unwanted fish without damaging the shrimps and without affecting rotifers and copepods which are feed for shrimps. On the other hand, rotenone is most effective in fresh water and works better in low-salinity water (ASEAN/SCSP, 1978).
Ponds with acid-sulphate soils are repeatedly dried and flushed, i.e., filled and drained to remove the acids formed by pyrite oxidation. Agricultural lime is then applied to correct soil pH and bring it up to at least 6.5. Brackishwater ponds are usually treated by spreading 1.5 t of agricultural lime per ha, followed by another 1.5 t worked into the soil.
To stimulate and maintain the growth of natural plankton, organic (e.g., chicken manure) or inorganic fertilizer (e.g., urea, ammonium phosphate) are applied to the pond bottom. After fertilizer application, water is let in to a depth of about 20-40 cm and gradually increased to 1 m a week after fertilization. Intensively managed ponds or ponds where artificial feeding shall be given, do not need to be fertilized. Extensive ponds need regular fertilization during the culture period to maintain the growth of natural food. Semi-intensive ponds may use a mix of fertilization and supplementary feeding.
Table 8. Variations in pond management techniques commonly used for different species
Species
Stocking Rate
Fertilization
Feed Type
Rate of Water Change
Pesticides/Predator Control
Reference
Type
Application Rate
MILKFISH (Chanos chanos)
5 000/ha
16-20-0 at 50 kg/ha;
45-0-0 at 15 kg/ha;
chicken manure at 0.5 t/ha twice weekly
Rice bran and trash fish as supplemental feed
Once every two weeks at high tide
Lime; ammonium sulfate
1 t/ha
10 g/m^2
Bombeo-Tuburan & Gerochi, 1988
TILAPIA (O. niloticus; O. mossambicus)
20 000/ha
Chicken manure at 500 kg/ha;
Inorganic fertilizers at 50 kg/ha
Rice bran, fish meal, ipil-ipil leaf meal
Camacho & Lagua, 1988
CATFISH (Clarias botrachus and monocephalus)
300/m^2
9 parts trash fish and 1 part rice by-products
When necessary
Sirikul et al., 1988
PENAEIDS
From as low as 15 000 to as high as 300 000/ha
Chicken manure at 1-2 t/ha followed by inorganic fertilizer at 75-150 kg/ha mono-ammonium phosphate (16-20-0) and 25-50 kg/ha of urea (46-0-0)
Supplemental feed of rice bran with trash fish, mussels, and clam meat; artificial/formulated diets with 40% CP.
20-30% once every week or every two weeks for low density ponds; 5-20% daily for semi-intensive to intensive ponds
Corre, 1988
4.3.5.2 Stocking
After the pond is prepared, fish fingerlings or shrimp post larvae are stocked at the appropriate density depending on the culture strategy, size of pond, and the size of fingerlings, among others.
The fingerlings are properly acclimated and conditioned prior to stocking and weak or diseased fish eliminated. Stocking is usually done in the early morning or late afternoon.
4.3.5.3 Feeding
Fish/shrimp grown in semi-intensive and intensive culture ponds are given supplementary and full artificial feeds, respectively, the former to augment the natural food in the pond, the latter to totally replace the natural organisms in the water as a source of nutrition.
A wide variety of feed ingredients is used to prepare supplemental/artificial feeds. The simplest fish feeds are prepared at the pond site using locally available raw materials like rice or corn bran, copra meal, and rice mill sweepings as sources of carbohydrates. These are usually mixed with animal protein like trash fish/fish meal, shrimp heads, and snail meat. Supplemental feeds for tilapia are prepared using 80% rice bran and 20% fish meal. Those for shrimps in improved extensive culture (low-density stocking but given dietary supplements for increased growth/production) usually include fresh raw materials like snail/mussel/clam meat or carabao hide and other slaughterhouse leftovers.
Commercial feed preparations are also available now in a wide range of brandnames, mostly for semi-intensive and intensive shrimp culture. (Taiwan (PC), Japan, and the USA are the top producers of commercial fish/shrimp feeds.) These commercial diets consist of a number of ingredients like fish meal, blood meal, bone meat, and shrimp head meal (to serve as attractant for the shrimp), together with vitamin and mineral premix and carbohydrate sources like rice/corn bran or wheat. The crude protein (CP) content of these shrimp feeds is generally not lower than 30% to satisfy the high animal protein requirement of shrimps, actually estimated to be about 40% during the earlier stages of growth.
Commercial feeds usually come in various formulations to match the protein requirement of the culture organism, which as a rule, decreases with age. Thus, fish/shrimp feeds come in different forms as starter, grower, and finisher, with starter feeds having the highest CP content of about 40% and finisher feeds having the lowest CP content of about 20%. Starter feeds are usually given on the first month of culture, finisher feeds on the last month, and grower feeds in between.
Some shrimp culturists prefer not to give artificial feeds during the first two weeks of culture when the newly stocked post larvae can subsist on the plankton available in the water.
The feeding rate is computed as a percentage of the estimated animal biomass in the pond, with higher rations given when the animals are small and gradually decreasing as they become bigger. The daily feeding rate usually starts at 5% and 10-15% of estimated biomass of fish and shrimps, respectively, and decreases to a low of 2% and 5%, for fish and shrimps, respectively, toward harvest.
The daily feed rations are given in equal portions during the course of a day. Freshwater fish like tilapia are usually fed twice a day - early morning and late afternoon. Penaeid shrimps are fed more frequently, from three to four to as often as six to seven times a day.
Feeds are broadcast into the water and/or supplied on feeding trays. In semi-intensive and intensive shrimp ponds, small feeding boats are used by caretakers who go around the pond distributing the feed by broadcasting. At certain points along the periphery of the pond, feeding trays (Fig. 12) are submerged into the water after known quantities of feed are put on the surface, to supply feed to the shrimps in the pond as well as to monitor feed consumption and shrimp growth. The feeding tray is lifted two to three hours after the feed was supplied to check how much of it has been consumed and to see if the shrimps are healthy and feeding. Empty feeding trays may indicate that the quantity given is inadequate and may have to be increased. Conversely, full or slightly touched trays indicate excessive feed quantities and/or sluggish shrimps. The feeding ration is subsequently adjusted accordingly to optimize feed utilization.
By monitoring the feeding tray, one can get a good indication of the sizes and quantity of shrimps present in the pond without a need for cast-netting or actual sampling, since shrimps are invariably found on the tray when it is lifted out of the water.
4.3.5.4 Water Management
Water in the pond is kept at certain levels for optimal fish growth. In general, a pond water depth of 1 meter is considered best for culture of tilapia, carps, and shrimps; traditional milkfish ponds can do with just 40-60 cm of water.
Pond water is not just maintained at a certain depth; its quality must also be kept high to ensure optimal growth of the culture organism. This is particularly important in semi-intensive and intensive culture systems where large amounts of metabolites are continously excreted into the pond and where excess, unconsumed feeds add to the bottom load and serve to pollute the water.
To prevent the deterioration of the pond environment, pond water is continuously freshened by the entry of new water from the river or water source (through the supply canal) while old water is drained through the outlet/drainage gate and through the drainage canal into the sea or river.
A flow-through system of water management that allows the simultaneous entry and exit of water into and out of the pond is essential in any high-density culture system. This is effected by the provision of separate inlets and outlets for all the ponds, each inlet regulating the flow of water from the supply canal to the pond and each outlet controlling the discharge of water out of the pond into the drainage canal. Both the supply and drain gates are so designed as to bring water into and drain water out of the lower levels of the pond, where water quality tends to get poorer faster as a result of the accumulation of wastes and their subsequent decomposition.
Fig. 12. Feeding tray.
The regular replenishment of pond water, independent of natural tidal fluctuations, is made possible by the use of pumps which draw water from the source even at low tide. Although there is no hard-and-fast rule as to the rate of water change necessary for medium- to high density aquaculture, semi-intensive culture systems usually change water at the rate of 10% daily for an equivalent total replacement of water every ten days or three times per month. Intensively managed ponds require greater water exchange in view of the much higher organic load on the pond bottom, especially toward the latter part of the culture cycle when the animals excrete more wastes.
Intensive ponds/tanks usually need to provide for aeration facilities/equipment to prevent anoxia that may lead to mass mortalities. Oxygen depletion in high-density ponds results not only from the faster rate of utilization of dissolved oxygen for respiratory activities; it is also caused by the fast rate of decomposition at the pond bottom by aerobic or oxygen-consuming micro-organisms.
Paddlewheels or other types of aerators are thus provided in the ponds to effect the infusion/introduction of greater quantities of oxygen into the water and prevent fish/shrimp mortalities. The aerators are usually operated at regular/periodic intervals for certain fixed durations during the day but especially in the early morning hours when the concentration of dissolved oxygen is known to be lowest (as a result of the absence of photosynthetic, oxygen-producing activity in the pond). Toward the end of the culture period when oxygen demand is highest, aeration may have to be provided continuously and not just sporadically as could be done during the initial stages of rearing. At that time too, water pumps usually need to be run for longer periods to effect greater water exchange.
Pond water is also regularly sampled and measurements taken of basic/essential parameters, particularly dissolved oxygen, pH, and salinity. This is important for the purpose of determining the need for corrective/remedial action to bring water quality to optimum levels and obtain good yields.
Dissolved oxygen levels are kept, as much as possible, above 5 ppm by pumping and aeration. Problems of acidity are corrected by liming. Salinity is an important parameter for penaeid culture and has to be maintained within a range of 15-25 ppt for best results. During summer months, high-salinity water can be diluted by mixing with fresh water from springs or deep wells.
4.3.5.5 Pond Maintenance
(i) Fertilization
Aside from feeds and water management, the following pond maintenance procedures are carried out: regular application of fertilizers, lime, and pesticides; prevention of entry of predators; monitoring of the stock for growth rate determination as a basis of feeds and water management; and regular pond upkeep and maintenance.
Extensive ponds are fertilized regularly using either organic fertilizers like chicken, cow, or pig manure, or inorganic fertilizers like urea, ammonium phosphate, or both, to maintain the plankton population in the pond. The fertilizers are either broadcast over the pond water surface or kept in sacks suspended from poles staked at certain portions along the pond periphery. Semi-intensive and intensive culture systems do not require fertilization since they are not natural food-based, except for those which grow plankton-feeders like milkfish whose diet is largely algae dependent.
(ii) Liming
In addition to fertilization, ponds also need to be given regular doses of lime to maintain water pH at alkaline or near-alkaline levels (preferably not lower than six). Agricultural lime is broadcast over the pond and applied on the sides of the dikes to correct soil and water acidity.
(iii) Elimination of Pests and Predators
Unwanted and predatory species which may have survived the application of pesticides during pond preparation or which were able to enter the pond through the gate screens or through cracks in the dikes, are eliminated by the application of pesticides, preferably organic, into the pond.
Crabs, which are a serious problem in shrimp ponds because they are carnivorous and cause damage to the pond dikes, are not usually affected by known pesticides and are therefore best eliminated by the use of crab traps situated in the pond.
It is also important that the gates are properly screened and the screens kept whole, to prevent the entry of small unwanted fish into the pond. Double screens are usually installed at the main intake to ensure that pests and predators are prevented from entering the pond system.
(iv) Stock Monitoring
The culture organisms are monitored closely and regularly to determine their rate of growth and the general condition of the stock. They are regularly sampled for length-weight measurements as a basis for determining/estimating their biomass in the pond and therefore their daily feed rations, as well as for making projections on harvest schedules and procurement of pond inputs.
In the first few months of culture, the feeding tray is a good tool for stock monitoring, as explained in Section 4.3.5.3. As the organisms grow in size, cast-netting is used as a sampling tool, with those caught in the throw of the cast net providing an indication as to sizes and weights of stock. Based on the sampled weights and the daily feed consumption, it is possible to predict the available biomass (i.e., stock surviving after initial mortalities) and make projections on volume of harvest. For this purpose, it is essential that accurate records are kept for analysis at a later time. Data on initial size/weight and number of fry/post larvae stocked, average body weight at each sampling, and feed consumption on a daily basis, are important to have on file.
(v) Regular Upkeep and Maintenance of Facilities
The pond dike and gates are checked regularly for cracks that could lead to seepages and losses of stock. The dikes are best planted with grass or vegetative cover to prevent erosion. The gates and other support infrastructure are properly maintained for efficient operation.
4.3.5.6 Harvesting
Marketable-size fish/shrimps are harvested at the end of the culture period by draining the pond and using harvesting nets to catch the fish or shrimps. The latter are harvested with a bag-net attached to the sluice gate as water is drained out of the pond at low tide. Tilapia are harvested using seine nets after the pond water is drained to half-level the night before.
Harvest of milkfish takes advantage of their behaviour of swimming against the current. The method, known in the Philippines as "pasulang" or "pasubang" involves draining 85-90% of the pond water during low tide and allowing in the water at the incoming high tide so that the fish swim against the current through the tertiary gate and into the catching pond, whose gate is closed once a large number of fish is impounded. The fish in the catching pond are then harvested by seining and the rest hand-picked.
4.4 Integrated Fish Farming
In a number of countries in Asia (e.g., China, Nepal, Thailand, Malaysia, Indonesia) and in some parts of Africa, freshwater fish culture is integrated with the farming of crops, mainly rice, vegetables and animals (usually pigs, ducks, and chickens). This leads to greater overall efficiency of the farming system as wastes/by-products or one component are used as inputs in another. For example, poultry or pig manure can be used to fertilize the fish pond and the vegetable garden and the waste vegetables can be fed to the fish and the pigs (Fig. 13).
In Africa, fish culture in rice fields and in combination with pig and duck rearing, is not too widely practised but has significant potential. Reported fish yields ranged from 2 000-4 000 kg/ha/y with ducks, 8 500-8 900 kg/ha/y with pigs, and 3 600-4 900 kg/ha/y with poultry in Gabon. It has also been proven economically viable since it involves minimal investment. Its spread has, however, been constrained by the widespread use of pesticides in many countries (Satia, 1989).
4.5 Pen and Cage Culture
4.5.1 Culture Species
4.5.2 Site Selection
4.5.3 Design and Construction
4.5.4 Pen and Cage Operation
Pen and cage culture involve the rearing of fish within fixed or floating net enclosures supported by frameworks made of bamboo, wood, or metal, and set in sheltered, shallow portions of lakes, bays, rivers, and estuaries.
Compared to fish pond culture with its 4 000-year tradition, fish pen/cage culture is of more recent origin. Cage culture seems to have developed independently in at least two countries - in Kampuchea where fishermen in and around the Great Lake region would keep Clarias spp. and other commercial fishes in bamboo or rattan cages and baskets; and in Indonesia where bamboo cages have been used to grow Leptobarbus hoeveni fry as early as 1922. Since then, cage culture has spread throughout the world to more than 35 countries in Europe, Asia, Africa, and the Americas (Beveridge, 1984).
Fig. 13. Diagram showing interrelationships among the various components of an integrated fishfarming system.
Pen culture is said to have originated in the Inland Sea area of Japan in the early 1920s (Alferez, 1977), adopted by the People's Republic of China in the 1950s for rearing carps in freshwater lakes (Beveridge, 1984), and introduced to culture milkfish in the shallow, freshwater, eutrophic Laguna de Bay in the Philippines in the 1970s (Baguilat, 1979). From there it has been successfully extended for the culture of tilapia and carps (Rabanal, 1988b). Its development and adoption as a popular technology has not been widespread, though, perhaps because of its site-specific requirements like its suitability mainly in shallow lentic environments. At present, it is commercially practised only in the Philippines, Indonesia, and China (Beveridge, 1984).
The wider popularity of cage culture as compared to pen culture may be due to its greater flexibility in terms of siting the structures. For example, cages may be installed in bays, lagoons, straits, and open coasts as long as they are protected from strong monsoonal winds and rough seas. Floating cages can also be set up in deep lakes and reservoirs, and in rivers and canal systems, and even in deep mining pools which could not be used otherwise for culture due to harvesting difficulties (Chua, 1979 and Gargantiel, 1982).
In general, however, both pen and cage culture have expanded rapidly, especially over the past two decades vis-a-vis the decreasing availability of land-based resources for fish culture and an increasing awareness of their merits over traditional pond culture, such as:
(i) their applicability in different types of open water bodies like coastal waters, protected coves and bays, lakes, rivers, and reservoirs;
(ii) their high productivity (of as much as 10-20 times that of ponds Of comparative sizes) with minimal inputs and at lower costs to develop and operate; and
(iii) the greater socio-economic opportunities they provide to low-income families in the rural areas, particularly those displaced by the reduction of fish catches in over-exploited coastal, municipal waters, because they require comparatively low capital outlay and use simple technology.
Yields from pen and cage culture are generally high, with or without supplemental feeding depending on the natural productivity of the water body. In the Philippines, for example, the yields of milkfish from fish pens in Laguna de Bay were as high as 4 t/ha/crop (compared to a national milkfish fish pond average of 1 t/ha/y in 1980 when the productivity of the lake was very high at 1 700 mg C/m^3/hr (Baluyut, 1983).
In Indonesia, the cage culture of common carp in the Lido Reservoir in Cigombong gave a total production of 28 kg/m^2 at a stocking density of 6 kg/m^2 (Baluyut, 1983). The cage culture of marine finfishes has likewise been shown to give high yields (Table 9).
4.5.1 Culture Species
The choice of species for stocking and rearing in pens and cages is governed by much the same criteria as in species selection for pond culture, including (Guerrero, 1982):
(i) fast growth in confinement;
(ii) good consumer acceptance;
(iii) high tolerance to a wide range of environmental conditions;
(iv) resistance to disease;
(v) ready supply of fish seed for stocking; and (vi) ease of culture and management.
Table 9. Comparison of production of cage-cultured marine fish
Species
Seriola T: quinqueradiata
Trachinotus carolinus
Polydactylus sexfilis
Epinephelus salmoides*
Country of culture
Japan
Florida, USA
Hawaii, USA
Penang, Malaysia
Initial stocking density
fish/m^3
kg/m^3
Rearing period (days)
Production (kg/m^3)
Average production rate (kg/m^3/day)
Mean size of fish
Initial (g)
At harvest (g)
Average growth rate (g/fish/day)
*Based on existing commercial culture.
Source: SEAFDEC/IDRC, 1979
There are approximately ten species of fish which are commercially cultured in cages and pens in both temperate and tropical waters, including tilapias (S. mossambicus and S. niloticus); carps (Chinese, Indian, and common varieties); milkfish; snakeheads and catfishes; marble goby; and salmonids (rainbow trout, salmon). Marine species include mainly grouper, sea bass, mullet, snapper, and milkfish (Table 10).
In the Philippines, Indonesia, and China, pen culture is limited to the following species: milkfish (Chanos chanos); tilapia; and the Chinese carps: bighead (Aristichthys nobilis), silver carp (Hypophthalmichthys molitrix), grass carp (Ctenophanyngodon idella); and common carp (Cyprinus carpio).
Other species have been suggested as possible candidates for utilization in pen/cage culture in the following three different environments (SEAFDEC/IDRC, 1979):
(i) Freshwater
Habitats with high natural productivity (e.g., lakes, oxbow lakes, swamps, mining pools, rivers, and reservoirs): mullets, eels, catfish, Puntius gonionotus.
Habitats with low natural productivity: Leptobarbus, Clarias batrachus, Oxyeleotris, and Macrobrachium.
(ii) Brackishwater
Sea bass, mullet, siganids, sea bream, grouper, snapper, threadfin, carangids. Hilsa spp., Sparus spp., and eels.
(iii) Marine
Siganids, pampano, yellowtail, tuna, grouper, snapper, sea bass, sea bream, carangids, pomfret.
4.5.2 Site Selection
The selection of sites for fish pen/cage culture should be guided by the following basic criteria (Felix, 1982; Mane, 1982; and Chua, 1979):
Table 10. Commercially important species in inland water cage and pen farming
Species
Countries
Climate
Type of feeding
Lotic/Lentic
Cage/Pen
Salmonids
Rainbow trout
Europe, North America, Japan, high altitude tropics (eg Colombia, Bolivia, Papua New Guinea)
Temperate
Intensive. High protein (40%)
Lentic
Floating cage
Salmon (various species) smolts
Europe, North America, South America, Japan
Temperate
Intensive. High protein (452)
Lentic
Floating cage
Carps
Chinese carps (Silver carp, grass carp, bighead carp)
Asia, Europe, North America
Temperate -tropical
Mainly semi-intensive, although also extensive (Asia) and intensive (Europe North America)
Lotic and lentic
Cages and pens
Indian major carps (Labeo rohita)
Asia
Sub-tropical -tropical
Semi-intensive
Mainly lentic
Mainly cages
Common carp
Asia, Europe, North America, South America
Temperature -tropical
Mainly semi-intensive, although also intensive
Mainly lentic
Mainly cages
Tilapias
(O. Mossambicus, O. niloticus, etc.)
Asia, Africa, North America, South America
Sub-tropical -tropical
Mainly semi-intensive, although also intensive
Mainly lentic
Mainly cages
Catfishes
Channel catfish
North America
Temperature -sub-tropical
Intensive
Lentic
Floating cages
Clarias spp.
Southeast Asia, Africa
Tropical
Semi-intensive
Lotic and lentic
Floating cages
Snakeheads
Channa spp. Ophicephalus spp.
Southeast Asia
Tropical
Semi-intensive/intensive
Lotic and lentic
Floating cages
Pangasius spp.
Southeast Asia
Tropical
Semi-intensive
Lentic
Floating cages
Milkfish
Southeast Asia
Tropical
Semi-intensive
Lentic
Pens
Source: Beveridge, 1984
(i) Protection from high winds or typhoons.
(ii) Adequate water exchange that will enable the flow of nutrient-laden water through the pens/cages.
(iii) Good water quality (high or adequate dissolved oxygen, stable pH, and low turbidity, and absence of pollution).
(iv) Firm bottom mud to allow pen framework to be driven deep into substrate for better support.
(v) Freedom from predators and natural hazards.
(vi) Accessibility to sources of inputs, including labour and markets, and
(vii) Good peace and order condition.
The factors to be considered in selecting sites for pens and cages in freshwater, brackishwater, and marine environments are shown in Table 11. It is important to note that the selection of a suitable site is vital to the success of the culture system; a good site selected solves much of the management problems of pen/cage culture (Chua, 1979).
4.5.3 Design and Construction
Both fish pens and fish cages are built around the same basic design concept: a net enclosure supported by a rigid framework. They differ, however, in a number of respects. Firstly, a pen does not have a net bottom; the edges of its net wallings/fencings are anchored to the lake bottom/substrate by means of bamboo pegs and the lake bottom is the pen bottom (Fig. 14). In comparison, a cage is like an inverted mosquito net with the cage bottom made of the same netting material used for its four sides (Fig. 15).
Secondly, fish pens theoretically have no limit to their size/area while cages cannot exceed 1 000 m^2 in area for reasons of the quantity of material required for cage construction (due to the need for a flooring) and manageability of operation (cages have to be lifted and the fish scooped out and not harvested using nets as in pens).
Thirdly, design of the structures and methods of construction are different. Fish pens are fixed structures; fish cages may either be fixed or floating. Fish pens for milkfish culture in Laguna de Bay, Philippines consist of a nursery pen within the grow-out pen/enclosure (Fig. 16). Cages are individual units for either seed production or grow-out; they are, however, usually installed in clusters or modules with a common framework (Fig. 17).
Pens and cages come in various shapes and sizes and are made of different types of materials. Most pens and cages are rectangular or square although some may be circular, as in some milkfish pens in Laguna de Bay and the milkfish broodstock cages at the SEAFDEC Aquaculture Department in the Philippines (Fig. 18), or cylindrical as those used for fish collection in Malaysian or Indonesian fresh waters (Fig. 19). Rectangular cages are preferred for easy operation and management. Circular cages are more suitable for some species like milkfish and yellowtail but are more expensive to build (SEAFDEC/IDRC, 1979).
Table 11. Factors to be considered in the selection of cage/pen sites
Marine
Brackishwater
Freshwater
Protection from Elements
Natural
Wind direction
Water current
Wind direction
Lagoons, bays and coves offer
Erosion and
Water current
differing
accretion
Floods
situations
siltation
Typhoons
Artificial
Breakwaters
Deflectors
Breakwaters
Water Circulation
Related to protection
Currents
Currents
Currents
Tidal levels
Tidal levels
Stratification and up-welling
Net pen spacing
Well-spaced
Well-spaced
Well-spaced
Water Quality and Soil Type
Chemical
Salinity
Salinity
Soil type
Type of bottom
Type of bottom
pH, NH3, BOD, hardness
Pesticides and fertilizer run-off
Saltwater intrusion
Physical
Temperature
Temperature
Temperature
Siltation and turbidity
Siltation and turbidity
Siltation and turbidity
Tidal fluctuation
Tidal fluctuation
Depth fluctuation
Topography
Topography
Texture of the substratum
Floating objects
Topography
Floating objects
Biological
Predators, pests and competitors
Predators, pests and competitors
Algal bloom
Vegetation
Vegetation
Predators, pests and competitors
Plankton bloom
Plankton and benthos
Vegetation
Diseases and parasites
Diseases and parasites
Diseases and parasites
Natural productivity
Pollution
Industrial pollutants
Industrial pollutants
Industrial pollutants
Thermal pollution
Domestic pollutants
Domestic pollutants
Agricultural pollutants
Agricultural pollutants
Agricultural pollutants
Mine pollution
Access and Security
Supplies
Materials
Materials
Materials
Feeds
Feeds
Feeds
Fingerlings
Fingerlings
Fingerlings
Markets (live and fresh sales)
Close to market
Close to market
Close to market
Labor
Availability
Availability
Availability
Cost
Cost
Cost
Monitoring
Easy access necessary for regular monitoring visits.
Security
Efficient precautions and security from interference of all sorts.
Others
Frequency of navigation
Frequency of navigation
Frequency of navigation
Property rights, policies and laws
Property rights, policies and laws
Property rights, policies and laws
Social aspects
Social aspects
Social aspects
Source: SEAFDEC/IDRC, 1979
Fig. 14. Indicative design of a fishpen wall showing how it is anchored on the lake bottom. (A)
Fig. 14. Indicative design of a fishpen wall showing how it is anchored on the lake bottom. (B)
Fig. 15. Perspective view and parts of a floating cage. (A)
Fig. 15. Perspective view and parts of a floating cage. (B)
Fig. 16. Perspective of a fishpen showing nursery pen within the grow-out enclosure.
Fig. 17. Cluster/module of fish cages.
Fig. 18. Circular milkfish broodstock cage used at the SEAFDEC Aquaculture Department (from Yu et al, 1979).
Fig. 19. Cylindrical fish cage made of bamboo and rattan (from Watson and Tingang Raja, 1979).
Polyethylene and nylon monofilament twine are widely used for fabricating cages and net pens although wire mesh is used in several countries. The framework structure is generally made out of bamboo and other locally available wood. Cage floatation materials include bamboo, PVC pipes/containers, steel or plastic drums, styrofoam, and aluminum floats. The type of anchor for floating cages varies depending on the depth of water, nature of bottom, tides, and currents. Concrete slabs of different sizes and shapes, sand bags, and iron anchors are widely used in different countries (Fig. 20).
4.5.4 Pen and Cage Operation
Basic procedures involved in the management of pen and cage culture are very much like those in pond culture, starting with completion of construction and preparation of the culture facilities for stocking, rearing, and harvesting. Slight variations in specific activities exist, however, as the result of the very nature of the system. For example, it is obviously not possible to apply fertilizers, lime, and pesticides since the system has open water exchange between the inner compartment and the outside environment.
Soon after construction of the pen/cage is completed, preparations are made to procure fry/fingerlings for stocking. Milkfish pens have a nursery compartment into which milkfish fry are grown for 3-4 weeks to 12 cm long fingerlings which can be released into the grow-out compartment.
The nursery pen and the grow-out compartment are prepared for stocking by clearing the bottom of predatory fish like Megalops cyprinoides and Elops hawaiiensis. The milkfish fry/fingerlings from the nursery pen are stocked in the rearing pen at 20 000-50 000 per ha where they are cultured to marketable size.
In the Philippines, the milkfish stock in the pen is not generally given supplemental feeding except for occasional rations of bread crumbs, rice bran, broken ice cream cones, fish meal, and ipil-ipil leaf mill.
On the other hand, cage-reared fish may or may not be fed supplemental or artificial diets depending on the stocking density used and the level of technology in the country. Cage feeding trials in the Philippines showed the adequacy of a ration composed of 77% rice bran and 23% fish meal with feed conversion ratios of 2.2-2.8. Current feed practices in freshwater cage culture involve the provision of supplemental feeds using readily available ingredients like rice bran and poultry feeds. Other countries use artificial feeds based on simple diets (Table 12) preferably prepared in pelleted form for best results.
At the end of the culture period, the fish are harvested from pens using harvesting nets (e.g., gill nets, cast nets, seines) or from cages by lifting the cage and causing the fish to collect in one corner for scooping out using a pail.
Fig. 20. Types of anchor used for floating cages (from SEAFDEC/IDRC, 1979). (A)
Fig. 20. Types of anchor used for floating cages (from SEAFDEC/IDRC, 1979). (B)
Fig. 20. Types of anchor used for floating cages (from SEAFDEC/IDRC, 1979). (C)
Fig. 20. Types of anchor used for floating cages (from SEAFDEC/IDRC, 1979). (D)
Fig. 20. Types of anchor used for floating cages (from SEAFDEC/IDRC, 1979). (E)
Table 12. Feed types given to cage-reared fish
Country
Culture Species
Feed Type
Reference
GDR
Common carp
Formulated feed/pellets, 33.7% CP
Muller, 1979
USSR
Common carp
Mixture of minced trash fish, molluscs, crayfish, and grown cereals
- do -
Hungary
Wels (Silurens glanis)
Trash fish, slaughterhouse wastes, cereal grain meals
- do -
-do-
Carp polyculture (common, silver, bighead)
Pelleted common carp feed
India
Indian carp polyculture
Soya bean powder, ground nut, oil cake, rice polish (1:1.1)
Natarajan et al., 1979
Indonesia
Leptobarbus hoeveni and Thynnichthys thynoides
Coconut water, cassava, rubber leaves
Reksalegora, 1979
Indonesia
S. niloticus
Aquatic plants (Lemna, Hydrila, Chara)
Rifai, 1979
Nepal
Common carp
Wheat flour, rice bran, mustard oil cake
Sharma, 1979
Thailand
Catfish, sand goby, common carp, local carp, tilapia, snakehead
Pellets consisting of ground fish meal, soy bean, peanut, and rice bran
Tangtrongpiros, 1979
Sea bass (Lates calcarifer)
Trash fish
Dhebtaranon et al., 1979
4.6 Open Water Culture
4.6.1 Mollusc Culture
4.6.2 Seaweed Farming
The farming of molluscs and seaweeds in open marine waters has become increasingly popular in a number of countries, especially in the Third World where it is seen as a viable alternative to municipal or artisanal fisheries or as a means of supplementary income for small-scale fishermen. Because seafarming is generally low-cost and labour-intensive and could thus involve entire coastal communities, it is particularly appropriate in areas where production from municipal fisheries has substantially declined and where, as a result, subsistence fishermen have little or no means of livelihood.
4.6.1 Mollusc Culture
Bivalves are widely cultured in a number of countries world-wide. In Asia and the Pacific, they represent a high quality food resource with annual production higher than from crustacean culture on a per hectare basis (Sitoy, 1988). In 1984, molluscs accounted for approximately 35% of the total production of coastal aquaculture in terms of gross weight in the region (Shang, 1986).
The most important species for culture in Southeast Asia are the oysters (mainly Crassostrea spp.), mussels (mainly Perna spp.), clams, cockles, and scallops (Pagcatipunan, 1987; Sitoy, 1988; Cheong, 1988; Liong et al., 1988).
In Japan, the most commonly cultured species include Crassostrea gigas, C. rivularis, C. nippona, C. echinata, and Ostrea denseramellosa, with C. gigas as the predominant species (Honma, 1980). In Africa, the culture of Venerupis is reported in Tunisia and Pinctada spp. in Sudan (Shehedah, 1975). In Mexico, the culture of the large oyster Crassostrea spp. is carried out by cooperative societies and of the mussel Mytilus edulis on floating rafts by private investors.
Oysters are widely distributed in estuaries and bays which receive some run-off from land and have somewhat lower salinity than the open sea. As they filter their food from the water, they grow best in areas with moderate to high concentrations of phytoplankton (SCSP, 1982c). Oysters grow best in intertidal areas where they are exposed for some minutes or a few hours during low tide (Pagcatipunan, 1987). Mussels, on the other hand, cannot tolerate tidal exposure even during low tide.
The best sites for culturing molluscs are therefore those that meet their biological requirements, including the following:
(i) Seawater salinity range of 15-35 ppt.
(ii) Water depth of 1-10 m, and
(iii) Muddy bottom for mussels and hard rocky or coralline substrates for oysters.
In addition, the area for mollusc culture should be protected from strong water currents reaching three knots and should be accessible to source of seed, transport, and markets. Furthermore, the presence of local available stock in an area is a good indicator of its suitability for mollusc culture.
Countries which have successfully cultured bivalve molluscs have developed their own systems of culture which depend entirely on natural seed stock, which are either gathered from natural seed beds or collected using suitable materials for collecting seed from natural grounds (Sitoy, 1988).
In the Philippines, both natural and synthetic ropes have been used for spat collection. However, since natural ropes, which have been found to attract more larvae than synthetic polyethylene or polypropylene ropes, do not last long, natural fibrous materials like coconut coir are sometimes interwoven with synthetic nylon ropes to make them more attractive to the larvae (Yap et al., 1979; Sitoy et al., 1983).
The string seed collectors are submerged in the sea water for seed collection at the right time. They are hung on a collector rack, normally 12 strings along a distance of 1.8 m to hold about 1 000 shells. Sometimes, strings are hung separately from each other at regular intervals; at others, three or four strings are put together for hanging to prevent branches from attaching to strings when they occur in large quantities (Fig. 21) (Honma, 1980).
Three principal methods of oyster culture are used in the Philippines and Japan: (i) hanging method including rafts, longlines, simple hanging, and rocks; (ii) stake or stick method; and (iii) broadcast or sowing method (SCSP, 1982c; Honma, 1980).
In Japan, the earliest method used at the Hiroshima Prefecture, where oyster culture began in the 17th century, was the stick culture method. In 1927, the hanging method of culture was introduced which later developed into different variations, viz., the simple hanging method, raft method, and longline method, to suit different local conditions as culture grounds shifted from inner to outer parts of the bay to outer open seas (Honma, 1980).
The broadcast system is actually used throughout the world in places where the bottom of shallow bays is firm enough to support the materials used as collectors and for growing oysters. Oyster shells, stones, or other hard objects are scattered on the bottom in areas where setting or the attachment of oyster larvae is known to occur. The young oysters or spat are left in places attached to the collectors until they are large enough for harvest (SCSP, 1982c).
The stake method is usually applied in shallow areas with soft or muddy bottom, usually not more than 1 m deep during low tide. The stakes, usually bamboo trunks (whole or split), branches of mangrove trees, or concrete Y-shaped posts and other similar materials are staked on the sea bottom in rows spaced about 0.5 m apart, to serve as attachment for oyster spat.
The hanging method of oyster culture uses empty oyster shells or other material such as coconut shells as collectors. The collectors are strung on synthetic twine or heavy monofilament nylon, and placed about 10 cm apart by using bamboo tubes as spacers or by tying knots in the twine. The strings are hung from a platform or rack/tray made of bamboo or wooden splits or welded wire with wooden frame, and placed on wooden plots. Oysters detached from the collectors or those small oysters/seedlings which are separated from harvested stocks are cultured on the trays until they are big enough for the market (SCSP, 1982c; Pagcatipunan, 1987).
Fig. 21. String seed collectors for mollusc spat (from Honma, 1980).
Harvesting procedures vary with the culture method. Oysters grown on stakes or by hanging are removed from the stakes or ropes on shore or in a boat after the stakes/ropes are lifted out of the water. Those grown by broadcasting are usually collected at low tide (SCSP, 1982c).
Mussel farming makes extensive use of bamboos either as stakes or as floating rafts. The stake method, similar to that for oyster culture, is the most commonly used. The mussels are harvested by divers after 6-10 months when they reach a length of 5-8 cm.
Alternatively, mussels are grown on floating rafts (Fig. 22) which have the following advantages: (i) faster growth; (ii) possibility of regular thinning and therefore higher production per unit area; (iii) possibility of transfer to other areas to prevent siltation; and (iv) ease of construction using more durable materials (Sitoy, 1988).
Mussels and oysters grown in waters contaminated by domestic and industrial wastes need to undergo depuration or cleansing, using artificially cleaned water or clean seawater from saltwater wells, to ensure satisfactory microbiological and chemical quality of the product. The depuration process flow and schematic diagram of a shellfish purification plant are shown in Figure 23.
4.6.2 Seaweed Farming
Seaweeds, aside from being used as food, are important sources of colloids or gels, such as agar, as well as minerals of medicinal importance such as iodine. Eucheuma, a red algae, is a valuable source of carrageenan, an important industrial compound used in stabilizing and improving the quality of a great number of products. Caulerpa lentillifera, a green algae, is economically important because it is a favourite and nutritious salad dish containing essential trace minerals such as calcium, potassium, magnesium, sodium, copper, iron and zinc. It is also known for its medicinal properties, being used as an anti-fungal agent and as a natural means for lowering blood pressure. Gracilaria, another red alga, is economically important in Taiwan (PC) for its agar extracts.
The culture of the seaweed Porphyra is believed to have started as early as between 1596 and 1614 in Hiroshima Bay utilizing pole and net devices originally installed to catch fish. At present, commercial seaweed culture is limited to five countries in East Asia, viz., Japan and Korea (which both grow mainly Porphyra, Undaria and Laminaria), China (Porphyra and Laminaria), Taiwan (PC) (Gracilaria and Porphyra), and the Philippines (Eucheuma spinosium, E. cottonii and Caulerpa lentillifera). Thirty-one species belonging to 18 genera and three divisions are presently cultured in these five countries, of which only three out of the 31 species are green algae (Table 13) (Trono, 1986).
In 1988, the estimated world seaweed production for use in the manufacture of carrageenan was nearly 68 000 t of dried seaweeds, of which nearly 66% was supplied by the Philippines and the rest by Indonesia, Chile and Canada. The bulk of the Philippine seaweed production consists of Eucheuma produced mainly in the southern part of the country in reef-protected coastal areas. Caulerpa is also successfully farmed in seawater ponds in Mactan, Cebu (Trono, 1986).
Fig. 22. Diagram of a mussel raft unit (from Sitoy et al, 1983).
Fig. 23. Schematic diagram of a shellfish depuration plant (from SCSP, 1982c).
Table 13. Species under cultivation in the Asia-Pacific region
Seaweed Groups/Species
Country Where Cultivated
A. Green Seaweeds (Chlorophyta)
Caulerpa lentillifera J. Agardh
Philippines Japan
Enteromorpha sp.
Monostroma nitidum Wittrock
Japan
Taiwan, Pr. of China
B. Brown Seaweeds (Phaeophyta)
Ecklonia sp.
Japan
Eisenia sp.
Japan
Heterochoradaria sp.
Japan
Hizikia sp.
Japan
Korea, Republic of
Laminaria japonica Areschoug
Japan
L. japonica
China
Korea, Republic of
Macrocystis sp.
Japan
Nemacystus sp.
Japan
Nereocystis sp.
Japan
Sargassum sp.
Japan
Undaria pinnatifida (Harvey) Sur.
Japan
China
Korea, Republic of
U. Peterseniana (Kjellman) Okamura
Japan
U. undariodies (Yendo) Okamura
Japan
C. Bed Seaweeds (Rhodophyta)
Eucheuma alvarezii Doty
Philippines
E. denticulatum (Burman) Collins et Harvey
Philippines
E. gelatinae (Esper) J. Agardh
China
Gelidium amansii Lamouroux
Japan
Gloiopeltis sp.
Japan
Gracilaria verrucosa (Hudson) Papenfuss
Taiwan, Pr. of China
Japan
China
G. gigas Harvey
Taiwan, Pr. of China
G. lichenoides (L.) Harvey
Taiwan, Pr. of China
Japan
Porphyra angusta Ueda
Taiwan, Pr. of China
P. dentata Kjellman
Taiwan, Pr. of China
P. haitanensis Chang et Zhang Baofu
China
P. kuniedai Kurogi
Korea, Republic of
P. seriata Kjellman
Korea, Republic of
P. suborbiculata Kjellman
Korea, Republic of
P. tenera Kjellman
Japan
P. yezoensis Ueda
Japan
P. quangdongensis Tseng et T.J. Chang
Korea, Republic of China
Source: Trono, 1986
In Taiwan (PC), Gracilaria is cultured in ponds formerly used for milkfish, with Pingtung County alone accounting for 110 ha of the total 400 ha of Gracilaria ponds in Taiwan (PC) in 1974 and producing 1 000 t of dried Gracilaria seaweed.
In Japan, indoor facilities are used to obtain buds/seedlings for on-growing at sea. The facilities consist of 70-80 cm deep square or rectangular concrete tanks provided with illumination, a temperature control system, and ventilation (Mito and Fukuhara, 1988).
The successful cultivation of seaweeds depends on four important factors (Velasco, 1988):
(i) Type of Seaweeds Used
The seaweeds cultured must be healthy and resistant to disease and breakage. They must be able to grow fast and give high yields during harvest. During processing, they must have high amounts of dry matter from which will be extracted high concentrations of carrageenan of high gel strength and viscosity.
(ii) Ecological Conditions of the Farm
The farm must be well-sited and fulfill the bio-ecological requirements of the culture species. In general, the presence of a particular seaweed species in an area is a good indicator of the suitability of that site for culture of the species under consideration.
(iii) Access to Sunlight
Seaweeds being cultivated need abundant sunlight for photosynthesis. Shading by other seaweeds and plants must be prevented by regular inspection and removal of the unwanted plants.
(iv) The Seaweed Farmer
The personality and dedication of the seaweed farmer is an important factor since the farmer must visit the farm regularly and carry out routine inspections. Some of the farmer's chores include shaking off silt and other foreign materials from the seaweeds, repairing broken lines, restoring uprooted stakes, and picking up drifting branches of seaweeds.
Trono and Ganzon-Fortes (1988) listed the following criteria for selecting good sites for Eucheuma in open waters and Caulerpa and Gracilaria in seawater ponds:
(i) Unpolluted seawater supply.
(ii) Salinity of 30-35 ppt Eucheuma and Caulerpa and 8-25 ppt for Gracilaria.
(iii) Water temperature of 27-30* C.
(iv) Moderate water movement of 20-50 m/min.
(v) Water depth of 0.5-1 m at low tides and not more than 2-3 m at high tides, and
(vi) Firm bottom protected from strong waves for Eucheuma and muddy-loam bottom for Caulerpa ponds.
Seaweeds are grown using different types of planting material (vegetative cuttings, natural seeds, hatchery-reared seeds) and methods of culture (store planting, bottom culture, rope method, rope-concrete method, and pond culture either in monoculture or polyculture with milkfish, shrimp and crabs). These methods are described in detail by Trono (1986) and are summarized in Table 14.
Table 14. Types of planting material and methods of culture for different seaweeds
Seaweed Groups/Species
Country Where Cultivated
Type of Planting Material and Methods of Culture
A. Green Seaweeds (Chlorophyta)
Caulerpa lentillifera J. Agardh
Philippines
Vegetative propagation by cuttings; pond culture
Enteromorpha sp.
Japan
Naturally produced "seeds" grown on hibi nets in open seas
Monostroma nitidum Wittrock
Japan Taiwan, Pr. of China
Hatchery-reared or naturally produced "seeds" grown on hibi nets in open seas
B. Brown Seaweeds (Phaeophyta)
Ecklonia sp.
Japan
Natural seeding on improved substrates
Eisenia sp.
Japan
Natural seeding on improved substrates or introduction of mother plants or seedlings
Heterochoradaria sp.
Japan
No information available
Hizikia sp.
Japan Korea, Rep. of
Introduction of fertile plants on natural or artificial substrates; seeding of naturally produced spores or embryos on rocks
Laminaria japonica Areschoug
Japan
Hatchery produced "seeds"; rope cultivation in open waters using artificial support system; natural recruitment on improved substrates; stone planting or bottom culture using artificially seeded stones
L. japonica
China
Hatchery produced "seeds"; rope cultivation in open waters using artificial support system; scone planting or bottom culture using artificially seeded stones
Korea, Rep. of
No information (probably same used In Japan)
Macrocystis sp.
Japan
Natural "seeds" on improved substrates; hatchery produced seedlings on twines introduced to artificial substrates
Nemacystus sp.
Japan
No detailed information available
Nereocystis sp.
Japan
No detailed information available
Sargassum sp.
Japan
Introduction of mother plants or seedlings; artificial substrates in open seas
Undaria pinnatifida (Harvey) Sur.
Japan China Korea, Rep. of
Hatchery produced "seeds"; raft or floating rope system in open seas; stone planting using artificially seeded stones; bottom planting in open seas; management of natural stocks by improvement of substrates for natural seeding
U. peterseniana (Kjellman) Okamura
Japan
Same as used for U. pinnatifida
U. undariodies (Yendo) Okamura
Japan
Same as used for U. pinnatifida
C. Red Seaweeds (Rhodphyta)
Eucheuma, alvarezii Doty
Philippines
Vegetative cuttings using artificial support system on open reefs
E. denticulatum (Burman) Collins et Harvey
Philippines
Same as used for E. alvarezii
E. gelatinae (Esper) J. Agardh
China
Vegetative cuttings tied to pieces of corals and planted on the bottom
Gelidium amansii Lamouroux
Japan
Natural seeding on improved substrates; vegetative cuttings scattered on the bottom and rope-concrete method
Gloiopeltis sp.
Japan
Artificial seeding of substrates using spore suspension or embryos
Gracilaria verrucosa (Hudson) Papenfuss
Taiwan, Pr. of China
Vegetative cuttings; pond monoculture and/or polyculture with milkfish, shrimp and crab
Japan
Vegetative cuttings Inserted in nets and ropes in protected bays and coves
China
Vegetative cuttings inserted in bamboo splits; net method; scattering cuttings on the substrate
G. gigas Harvey
Taiwan, Pr. of China
Same as used for G. verrucosa in Taiwan
G. lichenoides (L.) Harvey
Taiwan, Pr. of China
Same as used for G. verrucosa in Taiwan
Japan
Same as used for G. verrucosa in Japan
Porphyra angusta Ueda
Taiwan, Pr. of China
Hatchery produced seeds; net-raft system in outgrowing areas
P. dentata Kjellman
Taiwan, Pr. of China
Hatchery produced seeds; net-raft system in outgrowing areas
P. haitanensis Chang et Zhang Baofu
China
Hatchery produced seeds on nets using the fixed, semi-floating or floating methods
P. kuniedai Kurogi
Korea, Rep. of
Same as used for P. tenera in Japan
P. seriata Kjellman
Korea, Rep. of
Same as used for P. tenera in Japan
P. suborbiculata Kjellman
Korea, Rep. of
Same as used for P. tenera in Japan
P. tenera Kjellman
Japan
Hatchery produced seeds on bamboo blinds and (recently) on artificially fixed or floating support systems
P. yezoensis Ueda
Japan
Same as used for P. tenera in Japan
Korea, Rep. of
Same as used for P. tenera in Japan
China
Same as used for P. haitanensis
P. guangdongensis Tseng et T. J. Chang
China
Same as used for P. haitanensis
Source: Trono, 1986
Fig. 24. Three methods of Eucheuma culture practised in the Philippines (from Alih, 1989). (MONOLINE METHOD)
Fig. 24. Three methods of Eucheuma culture practised in the Philippines (from Alih, 1989). (NET METHOD)
Fig. 24. Three methods of Eucheuma culture practised in the Philippines (from Alih, 1989). (FLOATING METHOD)
In the Philippines, the monoline method of culture is the most popular and successfully used of these methods (Fig. 24) (Alih, 1989). The farming activities involved in monoline culture of Eucheuma species based on the Philippine experience are as follows (Trono and Ganzon-Fortes, 1988):
(i) Securing a license from the Bureau of Fisheries and Aquatic Resources (BFAR) prior to farming the area.
(ii) Preparing required materials needed for farm construction.
(iii) Clearing the area of sea grass, seaweeds, large stones and corals, and other foreign materials, followed by measuring it according to the proposed dimensions of the farm.
Wooden stakes are then driven into the bottom with the help of an iron bar and sledgehammer and arranged into 10 m rows at 1 m intervals. An 11 m nylon line is securely tied to one end of each stake about 0.5 m above the ground and then stretched to the corresponding opposite stake and tied securely. If the current is very strong, an additional row of stakes is placed in the middle to provide additional support.
(iv) Obtaining seedlings from the nearest source and transporting them to the farm site within the shortest possible time. During transport, the seedlings are protected from exposure to sun, wind, heat or rain. If the transport of seaweeds will take several hours, the seaweeds are kept damp during the trip and upon arrival at the farm, are immediately submerged in water.
(v) Preparing the seedlings by tying bunches weighing about 50-100 g with soft 25 cm long plastic straw, and then tying these to monolines in the water at 20-25 cm intervals. The plants are allowed to grow to about 1 kg or larger before harvesting.
(vi) Building a farm house if drying of the harvested seaweeds is part of the operations. The farm house is built in or near the farm site so as not to waste time during post-harvest handling. The size of the farm house, which is designed to provide for drying and storage, will depend on the farmer's financial capacity and market commitments.
(vii) Maintaining planted seaweeds by inspecting them regularly while they are growing. Unwanted seaweeds which will compete with the Eucheuma for nutrients and sunlight are removed along with dirt and other foreign materials clinging to the seaweeds. Lost or broken Eucheuma are replaced.
(viii) Harvesting the whole plant and reserving select portions as seedlings for the next crop.
(ix) Sun-drying of the rest of the harvest by spreading these on a drying platform of bamboo slots initially lined with coarse fine-mesh nylon net. The seaweeds are freed of all foreign matter clinging to them.
During hot and sunny weather, it takes about 3-4 days to dry the seaweeds to a moisture content of about 30% or less. The dried materials are then packed in plastic sacks for storage in a dry place or for delivery to the buyer.
The pond culture of Caulerpa involves the following major steps (Trono, 1988):
(i) Pond Construction
The pond is divided into manageable units measuring about 0.10-0.25 ha. The pond design allows for a flow-through system by providing each unit with its own supply and drainage gates. Water flows uniformly from the main gate to the secondary and exit gates during the draining and flooding process. Peripheral diversion dikes or canals along the landward edge of the pond are also built to divert run-off water from the ponds during the rainy season.
(ii) Planting
To facilitate planting activities, pond water is drained to a depth of about 0.3 m.
Caulerpa seedlings are obtained from the nearest source available and transported to the farm site within the shortest possible time.
The ponds are stocked at a rate of 1 000 kg seedlings/ha or 100 g/m^2. A handful of seedlings is uniformly buried on one end at approximately 1 m intervals using a string as guide.
After planting, the pond water is gradually raised to a depth of 0.5-0.8 m or just until the plants can be seen from the surface of the water.
The newly planted seaweeds are inspected after a few days. Uprooted seaweeds are replaced and bare areas are replanted.
(iii) Pond Management
Water is changed daily or every other day to maintain adequate levels of nutrients. During the initial stages of growth, the seaweeds deplete the water of nutrients at a high rate and frequent water changes are needed to replenish lost nutrients and eliminate the need to fertilize. Water level is, however, carefully maintained to prevent the collapse of the dikes.
Unwanted seaweeds, sea grasses, and animals which will compete with the Caulerpa for nutrients are regularly weeded out.
The dikes and pond gates are inspected regularly to check for leakages, which are repaired immediately. This is vital, especially during the typhoon season.
The application of fertilizer may not be necessary as long as frequent water change is maintained. However, fertilization is resorted to when the stocks appear unhealthy and pale in colour, i.e., from light green to yellowish. When this happens, pond water is changed and fertilizer with a high nitrogen content is applied at the rate of 16 kg/ha by broadcasting or by suspending the fertilizer contained in several layers of plastic sack in strategic areas in the pond. The pond water is not changed in the next two to three days.
(iv) Harvesting
Two months after planting, the Caulerpa forms a uniform carpet on the pond bottom, a good indicator for harvest time.
About 75% of the crop is harvested by uprooting the Caulerpa from the mud and placing it on to a wooden raft.
About 25% of the original crop is left behind, uniformly spaced on the pond bottom to serve as seedstock for the next crop. This may be harvested after two to three weeks.
Harvested seaweeds are washed in clean sea water to remove mud and other dirt. The clean seaweeds are then placed in a basket or clean plastic sheets for further sorting and cleaning before packaging and immediate transport to the market.
<section>6</section>
5. CULTURE-BASED FISHERIES
5.1 Sea/Ocean Ranching
5.2 Coastal Lagoon Farming
5.3 Stocking of Inland Waters
5.4 Floodplain Fisheries Management
In contrast to aquaculture which involves the cultivation of aquatic life within controlled environments or the commercial production of certain aquatic species by managing the major part of their life history under strict control, culture-based fisheries increase production in natural environments by controlling a part of the life history of certain species and transplanting or releasing their seed or fry into the open waters (Honma, 1980). The juvenile fish, which are produced in hatcheries and are released into fresh-, brackish-, or marine waters, are allowed to propagate or grow on natural foods until they reach harvestable size (Thorpe, 1980).
Unlike aquaculture, culture-based fisheries are not limited by land or population pressures and do not have to modify or manage the culture system to approximate the natural environment since it uses the natural environment itself (Liao, 1988). Also, unlike aquaculture, harvests are uncertain and returns are more difficult to predict as the "release of fish to sea involves the number harvestable ultimately being reduced to 1-15% of the number released, depending on species and locality" (Thorpe, 1980).
Nonetheless, culture-based fisheries have been increasingly resorted to as means of enhancing the fishery resources, replenishing natural stocks whose populations have declined through over-exploitation or environmental degradation, or simply maximizing the productivity of a water body, be it an open bay, a coastal lagoon, or a freshwater reservoir. Their adoption or application on an expanded scale has in fact been identified as a high-priority item in the agenda for development in a number of regions in the world in the coming years (Table 6) (ADCP, 1989a).
The major types of culture-based fisheries include: (i) sea/ocean ranching as practised in Japan with various marine finfishes and the Kuruma prawn, and in the Pacific Ocean and Baltic Sea with salmon; (ii) coastal lagoon farming, as exemplified by valliculture in the Mediterranean; (iii) stocking and restocking in freshwater lakes and reservoirs; and (iv) floodplain fisheries management.
5.1 Sea/Ocean Ranching
5.1.1 Salmon
5.1.2 Other Species
Sea ranching, in which juvenile fish are released to grow unprotected on natural foods in marine waters where they are harvested at marketable size (Thorpe, 1989), takes advantage of the sea as a large aquatic pasture (Liao, 1988). While it is practised in slightly differing forms around the world, in its distinctive form, young fish are released to the sea through ponds, enclosures or channels, and allowed to grow until they are ready for the market.
5.1.1 Salmon
Sea ranching of salmon is widely practised in countries such as the United States (mainly Alaska, Washington and Oregon), Canada, Japan, USSR, New Zealand, Iceland, and the Baltic countries (Thorpe, 1980).
The most widely used species for ocean ranching is the Pacific salmon (Oncorhynchus sp.) because of the success of its artificial spawning coupled with the rapid growth and the high degree of its homing precision that makes it amenable to harvesting at maturity (McNeil, 1975 and 1980; Thorpe, 1980).
The practice of salmon ranching was initially carried out more than 100 years ago in the Nordic countries where salmon smolts were released into the Baltic Sea area (Ackefors, 1986).
Hatchery production of salmon in the United States dates back to 1872 when the US Fish Commission established its first hatchery on the McCloud River in California. This was followed by the first private salmon hatchery on the Rogue River, Oregon in 1877. The technology for artificial propagation of salmon was introduced to Japan in 1877 and to western Canada in 1884 (Thorpe, 1980).
In Japan, while salmon hatching and release have been carried out for nearly 100 years, the results were not considered very successful. It was only with the new method of intermediate feeding and timely release of salmon fry, starting in 1961, that significant advances in salmon production have been achieved (Honma, 1980). Most Japanese hatcheries use gravel-lined raceways to incubate larval salmon (alevins) and practise short-term feeding of newly-emerged chum fry on artificial diets (McNeil, 1980).
Pink and chum salmon are raised in equal numbers in Soviet hatcheries using technology similar to that of Japan. In the Pacific Northwest, chinook and coho salmon are the predominant species used in hatcheries where raceways and ponds for feeding juvenile fish are prominently featured.
In Alaska, floating raceways in protected saltwater bays had to be innovated to suit Alaskan conditions.
Canada's salmon farming industry has grown tremendously in the last five years as a result of its successful hatchery operations (Annett, 1989). Canadian hatchery workers have pioneered development and application of spawning and egg incubation channels which provide favourable environmental conditions for eggs and alevins. These techniques have been applied most successfully to sockeye, pink, and chum salmon (McNeil, 1980).
The spawning channels produce fry with a capacity for rapid growth and high survival because they simulate high-quality natural spawning beds. Incubation channels, shallow raceways with a silt-free gravel bed, enable the alevins from artificially fertilized and hatched eggs to complete their development in a natural substrate (McNeil, 1975).
Salmon fry that need to be raised in low-salinity or fresh water before release into marine waters (e.g., sockeye, coho, and chinook) have to be transferred from the incubation system to feed-lot systems consisting of tanks, raceways, ponds, floating pens, or a combination or modification of these. The newly emerged fry are given frequent feedings of high-protein diets containing vitamin supplements and certain fats (McNeil, 1975).
5.1.2 Other Species
Aside from the widely popular Pacific salmon, other marine species have been used for ocean ranching in Japan. The Japanese National Culture-Based Fishery Project, which was started in 1953, has succeeded in developing techniques for mass seed production and subsequent release of juveniles of commercially valuable fish/shellfish, such as the Kuruma prawn, red sea bream, blue crabs, sole, flounder, and yellowtail, into the Seto Inland Sea (Table 15). The Project has now reached the stage where the fishermen themselves carry out the release of fry and manage the propagation work. The Project, based on its earlier successes, has been expanded on a national scale with the construction of a large number of Prefectural Centers for Culture-Based Fisheries all over Japan (Table 16) (Honma, 1980).
The Ezo abalone, Haliotis discus Hanai, is one of the most important species for ocean ranching in Japan, with about 1.15 million hatchery-produced juveniles released in 1980 in rocky areas of the Sea of Japan around Hokkaido. Likewise, the giant Ezo scallop, Patinopecten yessoensis, is propagated in the Okhotsk Sea, the Nemuro Channel, and in other areas of the Hokkaido coast (Saito, 1984).
Table 15. National fish farming centres for culture-based fisheries and species being used
Warm water areas
Tamano Centre
Blue crab, grouper
Yashima Centre
Yellowtail, butter fish
Hakatajima Centre
Red sea bream, sole
Kamiura Centre
Red sea bream, hardtail, horse mackerel
Komame Centre
Red sea bream, hardtail, yellowtail
Shibushi Centre
Kuruma prawn
Goto Centre
Yellowtail, Spanish mackerel, cuttlefish
Okinawa Centre
Amber jack, siganus spp, tuna
Mid-Pacific Centre
Bass, striped pigfish, parrot bass, lobster
Cold water areas
Miyako Centre
Flounder, stone flounder, rock fish, crab, prawn
Akkeshi Centre
Horsehair crab, rock-trout, king crab, flat fish
North Japan sea Centre
Cod, prawn, flounder
Western Japan sea Centre
Snow crab, sea bream, octopus, squid
Source: Honma, 1980
Table 16. Prefectural fish farming centres for culture-based fisheries
Prefecture
Construction cost (1 000 yen)
Area (a^2)
Capacity of ponds and tanks (t)
Species dealt with
Niigata
Kuruma prawn, abalone, red sea bream, flounder
Ishikawa
Red sea bream
Fukui
Kuruma prawn, abalone, red sea bream, blue crab
Shimane
Abalone, red sea bream
Yamaguchi
Red sea bream, scorpion fish
Miyagi
Kuruma prawn, abalone, Hokkai prawn
Kanagawa
Kuruma prawn, abalone, red sea bream
Aichi
Kuruma prawn, abalone, sweet fish
Toyama
Kuruma prawn, abalone, red sea bream, blue crab, plaice, sea urchin, top shell, sweet fish parrot bass
Saga
Kuruma prawn, abalone, red sea bream, bloody clam sea urchin
Nagasaki
Kuruma prawn, abalone, sea bream, parrot bass
Kumamoto
Abalone, red sea bream, parrot bass
Shizuoka
Kuruma prawn, abalone, sea bream, southern scallop
Wakayama
Kuruma prawn, abalone, red sea bream
Okayama
Blue crab, black sea bream, scorpion fish, shrimp
Fukuoka
Kuruma prawn, abalone, red sea bream
Ehime
Kuruma prawn, abalone, red sea bream
Tokushima
Kuruma prawn, abalone, red sea bream, blue crab
Oita
Abalone, red sea bream
Kagoshima
Kuruma prawn, abalone, red sea bream, southern scallop
Akita
Kuruma prawn, abalone, red sea bream, blue crab, flounder, sweetfish
Miyazaki
Kuruma prawn, abalone, red sea bream, parrot bass, hard tail
Tottori
Abalone, flounder, sand borer, plaice, top shell, bay scallop, sea cucumber
Aomori
Abalone, flounder
Mie
Kuruma prawn, abalone, red sea bream, clam, sea cucumber, scorpion fish
Iwate
Abalone, flounder, sea urchin, hokkai prawn
Hokkaido
Abalone, Hokkai prawn
Yamagata
Kuruma prawn, abalone, flounder
Fukushima
Abalone, stone flounder, sea urchin
Ibaragi
Abalone, clam, sea urchin, sea bass, ark shell, whelk
Chiba
Red sea bream, flounder, sea bass
Kyoto
Abalone, red sea bream, penaeid
Hyogo
Kuruma prawn, red sea bream, blue crab, flat fish, rock fish
Hiroshima
Red sea bream, blue crab, black sea bream
Kagawa
Kuruma prawn, black sea bream, sea bass, bloody clam
Kochi
Okinawa
Source: Honma, 1980
5.2 Coastal Lagoon Farming
5.2.1 Valliculture
5.2.2 Brush-park fisheries
Extensive lagoon farming is a traditional activity in various European and Mediterranean countries with a production of about 10 000 t/y (Girin, 1981). Among the Mediterranean countries, Italy has the largest areas of brackish water (called "valli") that are exploited for lagoon farming of commercially valuable species like Anguilla anguilla, Mugil cephalus, Liza aurata, Liza saliens, Liza ramada, Chelon labrosus, Dicentrarchus labrax, and Sparus aurata.
Restocking of the valli/coastal lagoons is carried out by anadromous, natural, and annual migration and by artificial restocking. Catches from the valli primarily depend on the quantity of fingerlings which entered the lagoons some years before and on the quantity of fingerlings stocked.
5.2.1 Valliculture
Valliculture, as the practice is called in view of its being fish culture-based, is one of the most ancient forms of aquaculture in the Mediterranean region. Its origins date back to the first rudimental fish pond and fattening systems used along the Adriatic and Tyrrhenian coasts. This technique was developed by the upper Adriatic populations to exploit the seasonal migrations of some fish species from the sea into the lagoon and delta areas which were more suitable for their growth. The fish returned to the sea because of altered environmental conditions (temperature) of the sea or for reproduction. To exploit these periodic movements, large brackish areas were enclosed to prevent the fish returning to the sea and complex permanent capture systems, fish barriers, were developed consisting of barriers in the channels communicating with the sea to catch the adults. Later, from the simple ponding of fry freely entering the lagoon from the sea, came a man-made seeding of fry
fished elsewhere and introduced into the basins to be reared for a few years (Ardizzone et al., 1988).
The successful management of coastal lagoons using hatchery-bred fry of important species is thought to hold considerable promise world-wide for expansion in the future.
5.2.2 Brush-park fisheries
Brush-park fisheries are a traditional form of low-technology aquaculture which is practised in coastal lagoons and brackish waters in many areas of the world. The brush parks are constructed in a variety of forms and sizes, but basically a brush park consists of an inner core, or concentric circles, of densely packed tree branches or other material surrounded by an outer, more substantial wooden framework which is fished periodically, usually by encirclement.
In coastal lagoons the most sophisticated forms of brush-park fisheries occur in Benin. There are several basic types of brush-park fisheries in Benin where they are known collectively as "acadjas". They vary from each other in configuration, construction and fishing characteristics. The acadjas are constructed of tree branches with harder woods forming the peripheral structure and with soft wood branches with many ramifications forming the interior of the acadja. Acadjas are preferentially placed in shallow, quiet waters of no more than 1.5 m depth (Kapetsky, 1981).
Fishing is accomplished by surrounding the smaller types of acadjas with a net after which all of the branches are removed and the net is then pursed. For the larger brush parks the surrounding net is fished in a step-wise process by gradually moving the net inwards as branches are removed until the fish are concentrated in small areas and can thus be removed with traps, baskets, and hand-nets. After fishing, the used branches are replaced and new ones added as necessary (Welcomme, 1972).
Elsewhere in Africa, brush-park fisheries are found in coastal lagoons in Nigeria, Cte d'Ivoire, Ghana, Togo, and Madagascar. Elsewhere in the world, brush-park fisheries are found in Negombo lagoon in Sri Lanka and have been introduced in some Mexican lagoons.
5.3 Stocking of Inland Waters
Among the most advocated and widely used practices for the management of the fisheries resources of lakes and reservoirs throughout the world is the stocking and recapture technique (De Silva, 1988).
Species stocked are either indigenous or exotic and either herbivorous, carnivorous, or omnivorous. In the developing countries of the tropics, where the production of more fish for food is the goal of any fisheries activity, high-yielding herbivores, detritivores and plankton feeders (like tilapia and carp), are commonly stocked in lakes and reservoirs. This is in direct contrast with the developed countries in temperate zones where carnivores like trout and bass are stocked in lakes and reservoirs to support the recreational or sport fishery (Baluyut, 1983). The major lakes and reservoirs in ASEAN countries, for example, have been stocked with hatchery-produced fingerlings of a wide variety of species including tilapia, various Chinese and Indian carps, milkfish, mullet and catfish.
In China, around 65%, or 1.4 million ha, of reservoir area out of a total of two million ha are farmed and managed like fish ponds. They are stocked with fingerlings and following a period of growth, mature fish are harvested. The species used are the common carp, grass carp, silver carp, bighead carp, mud carp, and Wuchang bream (Megalobrama amblycephala) in varying densities and species ratios (Beveridge and Phillips, 1988). Reservoir fisheries in China are almost entirely dependent on the regular release of large quantities of fingerlings because the Chinese carp do not spawn outside their area of origin. In many instances, therefore, stocked fish make up over 90% of fish catches from reservoirs (Lu, 1986).
In Israel, many water storage reservoirs (10-40 ha area, 5-7 m depth) originally constructed for irrigation, are now stocked with a range of species including tilapia, mullet and carp, usually grown in intensively managed polyculture systems (Sarig, 1984, and Hepher, 1985, as cited in Beveridge and Phillips, 1988).
Sri Lanka's large perennial reservoirs and small seasonal tanks constitute the country's main freshwater resource. These are regularly stocked with fingerlings of the different carp species (Indian, Chinese, and common) which are produced at Government-run hatcheries spread all over the country. Since the Indian and Chinese carps do not spawn in the reservoirs/tanks, they have to be stocked regularly to sustain the fisheries. There is thus large pressure on the State to accelerate its seed production programme to keep up with the large demand for fingerlings. It is interesting to note that unlike the Philippines and Thailand, for example, where fish seed production is largely a private sector undertaking, the Sri Lankan Ministry of Fisheries is primarily responsible for the production of carp fingerlings for distribution among the various reservoirs and seasonal tanks.
In Cuba, most of the freshwater fish is produced from seeding of the country's small to medium size reservoirs; in Colombia, some dams are stocked and restocked with mullets (FAO, 1986).
African small reservoirs are stocked mainly with tilapias and Clarias. In Zambia the most important species for stocking reservoirs are Tilapia melanopleura, T. macrochir, T. andersonii, and Haplochromis spp. In Zimbabwe the fish most commonly used for dam stocking are Oreochromis mossambicus, O. macrochir, T. rendalli, and several exotics like black bass and rainbow trout (Balarin, 1984).
5.4 Floodplain Fisheries Management
5.4.1 Brush parks or acadjas
The floodplains of tropical rivers, with their extensive network of swamps, lagoons, lakes, and ponds, have great potential for increased fish yields through better and more efficient management using either capture or culture techniques, or a combination of both.
Floodplain fisheries is a seasonal activity depending on the duration and amount of flood filling the low areas. Management of the floodplains for aquaculture and/or culture-based fisheries therefore needs to be properly timed to coincide with the seasonality of the fisheries and the water level in the floodplain.
In its simplest form, floodplain management/intensification involves merely connecting the primary channel of the river with adjacent flood plains by cutting a channel through the levy. As water levels rise, water and fish are swept outward through the channel, being caught via various gears when they return to the main river as the flood waters recede.
Floodplain management is widely practised in Africa where there are large riverine systems and associated floodplains. The practice is believed to have started back in the 1940s in Sudan (Scudder and Conelly, 1985). In the Ubangi River in Zaire, natural levees were raised with channels left open to allow fish to enter adjacent pools, and then closed off with wickerwork to form an immense fish trap. The pools could be stocked so heavily, it would be necessary to feed the fish (Leynseele, 1979 as cited in Scudder and Conelly, 1985).
In Benin, rectangular fish ponds with the long axis often running perpendicular to the river, are actually dug to increase the habitat available to the fish and to ease their capture as flood waters fall. After the annual flood has filled the ponds, the entrances are fenced off from the main river, with the pools fished toward the end of the dry season at which time vegetation growing in the ponds is removed and fences are advanced inland to concentrate the fish before they are captured (Welcome, 1979 as cited in Scudder and Conelly, 1985).
5.4.1 Brush parks or acadjas
Another form of floodplain management involves the installation of brush parks or acadjas, as has been practised in several countries in West Africa (Kapetsky, 1981), and in Kampuchea and Myanmar in Asia (Hickling, 1961 as cited in Scudder and Conelly, 1985).
Brush parks involve placing vegetation in shallow water areas of floodplains to attract fish. The "park" is subsequently surrounded with netting prior to the capture of the resident population. In simpler cases, floating vegetation may be placed in the water to attract fish in search of food and refuge, and are fished within a few days. In more sophisticated cases, the floating vegetation is surrounded by stakes or branches which are driven into the river or lake bottom. Construction occurs after the annual flood with the structures fished at intervals of several weeks to several months depending on conditions. Yields as high as 28 t/ha/y were reported by Welcomme (1979), for brush parks in the Oum River in Benin, without apparently affecting the catch by other fishing methods in the area.
It is believed that floodplain management, because of the low cost of establishment of brush parks and other installations to modify the floodplain, presents an interesting alternative for increased fish production from extensive, still largely under-utilized water bodies, especially in regions of the world where aquaculture per se may not be that acceptable on account of the prevailing customary tradition of fish capture.
<section>7</section>
6. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSIONS
The past two decades have seen the growth of the aquaculture industry from an experimental/pilot stage to a fully grown, important fisheries sub-sector in a number of countries the world over, but particularly in Asia where the bulk of world production comes from.
This does not, and should not come as a surprise, however, considering that aquaculture:
- can provide a cheap source of animal protein for the masses in rural areas, including those countries with no access to the sea;
- can be developed on land which is no longer suitable for farming and/or on land in conjunction with other farming systems;
- can be operated either on a small scale, at low cost, and utilizing family/community labour, or on a large scale, at high cost, and utilizing more machines and less hands and in both instances fulfill the objectives for which it was established;
- can complement capture fisheries in bringing about increased production of fish in open waters like coastal lagoons, man-made lakes, and floodplains;
- can provide a viable socio-economic alternative to capture fisheries, especially in over-fished municipal waters; and
- can serve to enhance the fishery resources in major water bodies whose natural productivities have shown signs of decline from over-exploitation or environmental degradation.
Aquaculture offers a number of options. It can be small- or large-scale. It can be carried out on land-based sites and in fresh, brackish, or saline environments. It can make use of extensive, semi-intensive, or intensive methods for a great variety of culture species with different economic values.
Its products can be sold fresh or processed in either domestic or international markets.
This flexibility notwithstanding, the success of any aquaculture undertaking is possible only if:
- the market for the product is assured;
- the selected species is amenable to culture and fulfills the standard criteria for a good candidate species;
- the site selected is suitable for the species to be cultured;
- the technology for the selected species and type/method of culture is available;
- the production and support facilities are properly designed and built;
- the operation is efficiently managed so that the various production inputs are properly utilized and are made available at the right time;
- adequately trained and skilled labour is available to run and operate the enterprise; and
- adequate funding is in place and/or credit is available for development and operation.
Clearly, the success of aquaculture can only be obtained through proper management based on a knowledge/understanding of the culture environment and the biological processes involved in the culture operation, as well as on the existence/availability of certain vital infrastructure - such as fry, feeds, labour, funds, and a market.
On the national level. Government has to ensure that the fish farmers are provided with the necessary support in their production endeavours, mainly by way of:
(i) adequate market infrastructure facilities and services (e.g., farm-to-market roads, fishing ports, processing plants, ice plants and cold storage facilities);
(ii) effective training and extension services;
(iii) continuing research and development efforts; and
(iv) credit/funding assistance, including the provision of financial incentives like tax credits and the tax-free import of essential equipment/machinery and supplies and materials.
The introduction of improved culture systems, highly productive strains, highly improved feed formulations in intensive farming systems, highly improved techniques in the hatchery production of fry, and the expansion of production areas, have all contributed significantly to the exceptionally fast growth of aquaculture in many countries of the world. This rapid expansion of the industry shall undoubtedly be sustained, if not surpassed, in the years to come as improved techniques are refined, even better feeds are developed, and higher yielding strains are genetically engineered. And as highly aquaculturally developed nations extend assistance to those less developed than they, the global aspiration of fish on every table may yet become a reality.
<section>8</section>
LITERATURE CITED
Ackefors, H., 1986. The structure of the salmonid production and development in Nordic countries. In: Council Meeting of the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea (ICES), 1986 (Collected Papers), ICES, Copenhagen, Denmark. 13 p
Ackefors, 1989. A regional survey of the aquaculture sector in Eastern and Northwestern Europe, Rome, FAO, ADCP/REP/89/38
Adisukresno, S., 1982. Criteria for the selection of suitable sites for coastal fish farms. In: Report of the Consultation/Seminar on Coastal Fishpond Engineering, Surabaya, Indonesia, 4-12 August 1982. SCS/GEN/84/42:67-71
Alferez, V.N., 1977. Engineering aspects and problems in the design and construction of fish pens and fish cages in Laguna Lake, Philippines. In: Joint SCSP/SEAFDEC Workshop on aquaculture engineering (with emphasis on small-scale aquaculture projects). Vol. 2, Technical Report. SCS/GEN/77/15:373-88
Alih, E.M., 1989. Seaweed Farming for Rural Development: A case study. Paper presented at the Second Asian Fisheries Forum, Tokyo, Japan, 17-22 April 1989. 12 p
Annett, W., 1989. Farming's new frontier. Venture. March 1989. 35-40
Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (ADCP), 1989a. Aquaculture Regional Profiles, Rome, FAO
Aquaculture Development and Coordination Programme (ADCP), 1989b. Planning for aquaculture development. Report of an Expert Consultation held in Policoro, Italy, 26 July-2 August 1988. Rome. FAO, ADCP/REP/89/33, 68 p
Ardizzone, G.D., S. Cataudella and R. Rossi, 1988. Management of coastal lagoon fisheries and aquaculture in Italy. FAO Fish. Tech. Pap, (293):103 p
ASEAN/SCSP, 1978. Manual on pond culture of penaeid shrimp. ASEAN National Coordinating Agency of the Philippines. Manila: Ministry of Foreign Affairs. 132 p
Baguilat, T., 1979. The fish pen industry (of the Philippines): An Overview. In: Proceedings of the SEAFDEC/IDRC International Workshop on Pen and Cage Culture of Fish. Tigbauan, Iloilo, Philippines, 11-22 February 1979. 134-138
Balarin, J.D., 1984. National reviews for aquaculture development in Africa. 1. Zimbabwe., FAO Fish. Circ. (770.I):69 p
Baluyut, E.A., 1983. Stocking and introduction of fish in lakes and reservoirs in the ASEAN countries. FAO Fish. Tech. Pap. (236):82 p
Baluyut, E.A., 1989a. A regional survey of the aquaculture sector in East Asia. Rome, FAO, ADCP/REP/88/31, 74 p
Baluyut, E.A., 1989b. An Overview of the Philippine Fisheries Sector. Paper presented at the ADB Agricultural Projects Workshop, Davao City, Philippines, 19-24 June 1989
Beveridge, M.C.M., 1984. Cage and pen fish farming. Carrying capacity models and environmental impact. FAO Fish. Tech. Pap. (255):131 p
Beveridge, M.C.M. and M.J. Phillips, 1988. Aquaculture in reservoirs. In: Reservoir fishery management and development in Asia. Proceedings of a Workshop held in Kathmandu, Nepal, 23-28 November 1987 (S.S. De Silva, ed.). 19-28
Bombeo-Tuburan, I. and D. Gerochi, 1988. Nursery and grow-out operations and management of milkfish. In: Perspectives in Aquaculture Development in Southeast Asia and Japan: Contribution of the SEAFDEC Aquaculture Department. Proceedings of the Seminar on Aquaculture Development in Southeast Asia, Iloilo City, Philippines, 8-12 September 1987. (J.B. Juario and L.B. Benitez, eds.). 269-280
Camacho, A.S. and N.M. Lagua, 1988. The Philippine Aquaculture Industry. In: Perspectives in Aquaculture Development in Southeast Asia and Japan: Contribution of the SEAFDEC Aquaculture Department. Proceedings of the Seminar on Aquaculture Development in Southeast Asia, Iloilo City, Philippines, 8-12 September 1987. (J.B. Juario and L.B. Benitez, eds.). 91-116
Cayco, P.P., 1988. Are sugarmills polluting prawn farms in Negros? Agribusiness Weekly. 1-7 July 1988
Cheong, L., 1988. Aquaculture Development in Singapore. In: Perspectives in Aquaculture Development in Southeast Asia and Japan: Contribution of the SEAFDEC Aquaculture Department. Proceedings of the Seminar on Aquaculture Development in Southeast Asia, Iloilo City, Philippines, 8-12 September 1987. (J.B. Juario and L.B. Benitez, eds.). 117-128
Chua, T.E., 1979. Site selection, structural design, construction, management, and production of floating cage culture systems in Malaysia. In: Proceedings of the SEAFDEC/IDRC International Workshop on Pen and Cage Culture of Fish, Tigbauan, Iloilo, Philippines, 11-22 February 1979. 65-80
Corre, K.G., 1988. Nursery and grow-out operation and management of Penaeus monodon Fabricus. In: Perspectives in Aquaculture Development in Southeast Asia and Japan: Contribution of the SEAFDEC Aquaculture Department. Proceedings of the Seminar on Aquaculture Development in Southeast Asia, Iloilo City, Philippines, 8-12 September 1987 (J.B. Juario and L.B. Benitez, eds.). 249-267
De Silva, S.S., 1988. The reservoir fishery of Asia. In: Reservoir fishery management and development in Asia. Proceedings of a Workshop held in Kathmandu, Nepal, 23-28 November 1987, 19-28
Dhebtaranon, Y., S. Maneewongsa and S. Wongsomnuk, 1979. Net cage culture of Lates calcarifer Block and other marine animals in Thailand. In: Proceedings of the SEAFDEC/IDRC International Workshop on Pen and Cage Culture of Fish, Tigbauan, Iloilo, Philippines, 11-22 February 1979. 129-131 p
FAO, 1986. Report of the Fourth Session of the Commission for Inland Fisheries of Latin America (COPESCAL). Havana, Cuba, 20-25 January 1986. FAO Fish. Rep. (356):42 p
Felix, S., 1982. Fish pen design and construction. In: Report on the Consultation/Seminar on Coastal Fish Pond Engineering, Surabaya, Indonesia, 4-12 August 1982. SCS/GEN/82/42:7-15
Gargantiel, E.J., 1982. Programme on cage culture of finfish of the SEAFDEC Aquaculture Department. In: SCSP Report of the Training Course on Small-Scale Pen and Cage Culture for Finfish, Laguna, Philippines, 26-31 October 1981 and Aberdeen, Hong Kong, 1-13 November 1981. SCS/GEN/82/34:191-195
Girin, M., 1981. State and future development of marine extensive fish culture in European and Mediterranean countries. In: Ocean ranching and restocking. Actes Collogues Pub. CNEXO (12):113-120
Guerrero, R.D. III, 1982. Species selection for pen culture and sources of stock. In: Report of the Training Course on Small-Scale Pen and Cage Culture for Finfish, Laguna, Philippines, 26-31 October 1981 and Aberdeen, Hong Kong, 1-13 November 1981. SCS/GEN/82/34:53-55
Hechanova, R.G., 1982. Some notes on site selection for coastal fish farms in Southeast Asia. In: Report on the Consultation/Seminar on Coastal Fish Pond Engineering, Surabaya, Indonesia. SCS/GEN/82/42:72-75
Honma, A., 1980. Aquaculture in Japan. Tokyo: Japan FAO Association. 81 p
Huet, M. and J.A. Timmermans, 1972. Textbook of fish culture. Breeding and cultivation of fish. London, Fishing News (Books) Ltd. 436 p
Jamandre, D., 1988. Commercial Production Systems: An Overview. Paper presented at the Conference on Aquaculture Research Needs for the Year 2000, Maurya Sheraton Hotel, New Delhi, India, 14-19 November 1988
Jamandre, T.J., Jr. and H.R. Rabanal, 1975. Engineering aspects of brackishwater aquaculture in the South China Sea Region. SCS/75/WP/16:37 p (plus annexes)
Kapetsky, J.M., 1981. Some considerations for the management of coastal lagoons and estuarine fisheries. FAO Fish. Tech. Pap. (218):47 p
Kapetsky, J.M., 1982. Some potential environmental effects of coastal aquaculture with implications for site selection and aquaculture engineering. In: Report on the Consultation/Seminar on Coastal Fish Pond Engineering, Surabaya, Indonesia. 4-12 August 1982. SCS/GEN/82/42:76-82
Kungvankij, P., L.B. Tiro, Jr., B.J. Pudadera, Jr., I.O. Potestas, and T.E. Chua, 1986. An improved traditional shrimp culture technique for increasing pond yield. NACA Technology Series. NACA Regional Lead Centre in the Philippines. 14 p
Liao, I.C., 1988. East meets West: An Eastern perspective of aquaculture. Paper presented at the 19th Annual Meeting of the World Aquaculture Society, Honolulu, Hawaii, 4-8 January 1988. 17 p
Ling, C., 1977. The biology and artificial propagation of farm fishes. IDRC/MR 15
Liong, P.C., H.B. Hanafi, Z.O. Merican and G. Nagaraj, 1988. Aquaculture development in Malaysia. In; Perspectives in Aquaculture Development in Southeast Asia and Japan: Contribution of the SEAFDEC Aquaculture Department. Proceedings of the Seminar on Aquaculture Development in Southeast Asia, Iloilo City, Philippines, 8-12 September 1987 (J.B. Juario and L.B. Benitez, eds.). 73-90
Lu, X., 1986. A review of reservoir fisheries in China. FAO Fish. Circ. (803):37 p
Mane, A., 1982. Management and maintenance of fish pens in Laguna de Bay. In: Report of the training course on small-scale pen and cage culture for finfish, Laguna, Philippines and Aberdeen, Hong Kong, 26 October-13 November 1981. SCS/GEN/82/34:57-63
McNeil, W.J., 1975. Perspectives on ocean ranching of Pacific salmon. In: Proceedings of the Sixth Annual World Mariculture Society Meeting (J.W. Avault, and J.R. Miller, eds.). 299-305
McNeil, W.J., 1980. Salmon ranching in Alaska. In: Salmon Ranching (J.E. Thorpe, ed.). London: Academic Press 13-27
Mito, S. and O. Fukuhara, 1988. Aquaculture Development in Japan. In: Perspectives in Aquaculture Development in Southeast Asia and Japan: Contribution of the SEAFDEC Aquaculture Department. Proceedings of the Seminar on Aquaculture Development in Southeast Asia, Iloilo City, Philippines, 8-12 September 1987 (J.B. Juario and L.B. Benitez, eds.). 39-72
Mukhopadhyay, P.K., D.N. Das, and B. Roy, 1989. Integrated rice-fish culture. NAGA: The ICLARM Quarterly. January 1989. 6-7
Muller, F., 1979. The European and Hungarian results of cage culture of fish. In: Proceedings of the SEAFDEC/IDRC International Workshop on Pen and Cage Culture of Fish. Tigbauan, Iloilo, Philippines, 11-22 February 1979. 33-40
Natarajan, A.V., R.K. Sirisena and N.K. Srivastava, 1979. Experiments on raising quality fish seed in floating nurseries and its role in aquaculture in India. In: Proceedings of the SEAFDEC/IDRC International Workshop on Pen and Cage Culture of Fish. Tigbauan, Iloilo, Philippines, 11-22 February 1979. 45-49
Nelson, S., 1988. A regional survey of the aquaculture sector in the Pacific. Rome. FAO, ADCP/REP/88/32: 48 p
Pagcatipunan, R.N., 1987. Engineering problems in sea farming in the Philippines. Paper contributed to the Annual Meeting of the Society of the Aquaculture Engineering Practitioners of the Philippines, Don Tim Building, Makati, Metro Manila, Philippines, 5 December 1987
Pullin, R.S V., 1989. Third world aquaculture and the environment. NAGA; The ICLARM Quarterly. January 1989
Rabanal, H.R., 1988a. Development of the aquaculture industry in Southeast Asia. In: Perspectives in Aquaculture Development in Southeast Asia and Japan: Contribution of the SEAFDEC Aquaculture Department. Proceedings of the Seminar on Aquaculture Development in Southeast Asia, Iloilo City, Philippines, 8-12 September 1987 (J.B. Juario and L.B. Benitez, eds.). 31-38
Rabanal, H.R., 1988b. History of aquaculture. ASEAN/UNDP/FAO Regional Small-Scale Coastal Fisheries Development Project. Manila, Philippines, ASEAN/SF/88/Tech. Pap. 1:13 p
Reksalegora, D., 1979. Fish cage culture in the town of Jambi, Indonesia. In; Proceedings of the SEAFDEC/IDRC International Workshop on Pen and Cage Culture of Fish. Tigbauan, Iloilo, Philippines. 11-22 February 1979. 51-53
Rifai, S.A., 1979. The use of aquatic plants as feed for Tilapia nilotica in floating cages. In: Proceedings of the SEAFDEC/IDRC International Workshop on Pen and Cage Culture of Fish. Tigbauan, Iloilo, Philippines. 11-22 February 1979. 61-64
Saint-Paul, U., 1989. Aquaculture in Latin America. NAGA: The ICLARM Quarterly. January 1989. 3-5
Saito, 1984. Ocean ranching of abalone and scallops in northern Japan. Aquaculture 39(1-4):361-373
Satia, B., 1989. A regional survey of the aquaculture sector in Africa South of the Sahara, Rome, FAO, ADCP/REP/89/36:60 p
Scudder, T. and T. Conelly, 1985. Management systems for riverine fisheries. FAO Fish. Pap. (263):85 p
SEAFDEC/IDRC, 1979. Proceedings of the International Workshop on Pen and Cage Culture of Fish. Tigbauan, Iloilo, Philippines, 11-22 February 1979. 164 p
Shang, Y.C., 1986. Status, potentials, and constraints to development of coastal aquaculture in Asia. INFOFISH Mktg. Dig. 5:10-13
Sharma, R.N., 1979. Cage fish culture in Nepal. In: Proceedings of the SEAFDEC/IDRC International Workshop on Pen and Cage Culture of Fish, Tigbauan, Iloilo, Philippines, 11-22 February 1979. 93-96
Sirikul, B., S. Luanprida, K. Chaiyakam and R. Sriprasert, 1988. In: Perspectives in Aquaculture Development in Southeast Asia and Japan: Contribution of the SEAFDEC Aquaculture Department. Proceedings of the Seminar on Aquaculture Development in Southeast Asia, Iloilo City, Philippines, 8-12 September 1987 (J.B. Juario and L.B. Benitez, eds.). 129-148
Sitoy, H.S., 1988. Mussel and Oyster Farming. In; Perspectives in Aquaculture Development in Southeast Asia and Japan: Contribution of the SEAFDEC Aquaculture Department. Proceedings of the Seminar on Aquaculture Development in Southeast Asia, Iloilo City, Philippines, 8-12 September 1987. (J.B. Juario and L.B. Benitez, eds.). 231-248
Sitoy, H.S., A.L. Young and M.Y. Tabbu, 1983. Raft culture of mussels. SEAFDEC Extension Manual No. 8. SEAFDEC Aquaculture Department, Tigbauan, Iloilo, Philippines. 12 p
South China Sea Development and Coordinating Programme (SCSP), 1982a. Report of the Consultation/Seminar on Coastal Fish Pond Engineering, Surabaya, Indonesia, 4-12 August 1982. SCS/GEN/82/42:211 p
South China Sea Development and Coordinating Programme (SCSP), 1982b. Report of the training course on small-scale pen and cage culture for finfish, Laguna, Philippines, 26-31 October 1981 and Aberdeen, Hong Kong, 1-13 November 1981. SCS/GEN/82/34: 216 p
South China Sea Development and Coordinating Programme (SCSP), 1982c. The feasibility of oyster and mussel farming by municipal fishermen in the Philippines. SCS/82/WP/103:48 p (plus annexes)
Tangtrongpiros, M. , 1979. Cage culture in Thailand. In: Proceedings of the SEAFDEC/IDRC International Workshop on Pen and Cage Culture of Fish. Tigbauan, Iloilo, Philippines, 11-22 February 1979. 127-128
Thorpe, J.E., (ed.), 1980. Salmon Ranching. London: Academic Press.
Thorpe, J.E., (ed.), 1989. Seaweed farming for rural development: A case study. Paper presented at the Second Asian Fisheries Forum, Tokyo, Japan, 17-22 April 1989. 12 p
Trono, G. C., Jr., 1986. Seaweed culture in the Asia-Pacific region. FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, Bangkok, Thailand. RAPA Pub. 1987/8:41 p
Trono, G. C., Jr., 1988. Review of the status of aquaculture in the Philippines. Paper presented at the Seventh Session of the IPFC Working Party of Experts on Aquaculture, Bangkok, Thailand, 1-6 August 1988.
Trono, G.C., Jr. and E. T. Ganzon-Fortes, 1988. Philippine seaweeds. Manila: National Bookstore Pub. Co.
UNDP/Norwegian Ministry of Development Cooperation (NORAD)/FAO, 1987. Thematic Evaluation of Aquaculture. Rome, Italy. 85 p (plus annexes)
Velasco, A.R.V., 1988. Eucheuma farming in the Philippines. Paper presented at the Workshop on Mariculture, Silliman University, Dumaguete City, Philippines, 15-22 October 1988
Watson, D.J. and P. Tingang Raja, 1979. A review of the present state of fish cage culture in the Baran District of Sarawak. In: Proceedings of the SEAFDEC/IDRC International Workshop on Pen and Cage Culture of Fish, Tigbauan, Iloilo, Philippines, 11-22 February 1979. 89-92
Welcomme, R.L., 1972. An evaluation of the acadja method of fishing as practiced in the coastal lagoons of Dahomey (West Africa). J. Fish. Biol., 4:39-55
Welcomme, R.L., 1979. Fishery management in large rivers. FAO Fish. Tech. Pap. (194):60 p
Yap, W.G., A.L. Young, C.E.F. Orano, and M.T. De Castro, 1979. Manual on mussel farming. SEAFDEC Extension Manual No. 6. 17 p
Yu, O.K., A.T. Vizcarra, and H.S. Sitoy, 1979. Development of circular floating cages for milkfish broodstock at the SEAFDEC Aquaculture Department. In: Proceedings of the SEAFDEC/IDRC International Workshop on Pen and Cage Culture of Fish, Tigbauan, Iloilo, Philippines, 11-22 February 1979
