<title>A field guide for project design and implementation - Women in community forestry</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
The Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations (FAO) has a long standing interest in forestry as a resource for rural development. Within the last decade, industrial exploitation and population pressure have led to the degradation of large areas of forest land. Rural peoples who rely on these forests and their outputs have been put at risk. In 1977, FAO started a special action programme, Forestry for Local Community Development, that sought to address the needs of rural people. The programme's philosophy was to support rural people who could benefit from forestry related activities in their efforts to improve their well-being. Conceptually, policy for forestry was about, for and by the people.^1
Rural women are major caretakers and users of forests. Each day they walk long distances to gather fodder and fuelwood. They seek out fruits, nuts and small creatures for food for their families. They use bark, roots and herbs for medicines. Trees provide shade, beauty and environmental protection for their homes. Thus, trees and forests play a major role in their daily lives. Unfortunately, most forestry programmes are organized by men who may not understand women's relationship to forests. Forestry has typically been a man's profession and it is hard for many foresters to perceive of women as being competent in this field. Moreover women's needs regarding the forest often differ from those of men.
Rural women confront obstacles that limit their ability to participate in community development programmes. They frequently lack the self-confidence or a forum in which to speak up publicly for themselves and for their families. They often lack access to child care, credit, education and land tenure, which limits them more than it limits the men of their own families. These obstacles prevent them from being heard and from achieving a more powerful role in accessing and making decisions about tree and forest resource management.
In 1986 the FAO Community Forestry Unit developed a publication for policy makers, Restoring the balance: women and forest resources, that identifies issues and points out the importance of considering gender when designing community forestry programmes.^2 This field guide translates Restoring the balance into a manual for those who design and implement forestry projects. It focuses on practical ways to include women in project design and implementation and is meant to be a tool to facilitate discussion, offer options and promote action on behalf of women and forestry. It has been produced by the Community Forestry Programme as part of the FAO Plan of Action for the Integration of Women in Development.
<section>2</section>
Acknowledgements
This field guide was written by Mary Rojas, Associate Director of International Programmes at the Virginia Polytechnic Institute and State University, USA. It is one of a series of studies and publications by the FAO Community Forestry Programme, with support from the FAO/SIDA Forests, Trees and People Programme, a trust fund programme coordinated within FAO by Marilyn W. Hoskins, Community Forestry Officer. Funding for publishing was also provided by the Norwegian Agency for International Development (NORAD).
<section>3</section>
What is community forestry and why include women?
Ideally, community forestry activities are those that:
- recognize the intimate relationship of women, men and the trees that surround them;
- build upon local knowledge of women and men about management and uses of forest resources;
- take into consideration the forest and tree resource needs of the various community members and focus on increasing the benefits from forests for rural women and men, especially the poor;
- involve rural women and men in project identification, design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation.
Community forestry has challenged foresters, forest services and forestry schools to re-think their roles and broaden their concept of forestry to include goals relating to trees as a resource to satisfy local needs. For many foresters this means a new perspective; one that enables them to design forestry programmes that are more relevant to their countries' overall development priorities.
Throughout community forestry, there are two themes:
- community forestry uses a systems approach and draws on many fields such as anthropology, agriculture, nutrition and law;
- community forestry focuses on the interaction of people with trees and forests.
The long walk home - gathering fuelwood in Nepal
The links between trees and economic, cultural and environmental factors of people's lives are seen in three crucial areas:
- Trees have an impact on rural women and men by providing products which satisfy basic needs of the family;
- Trees affect the economic lives of rural peoples by providing income and jobs;
- Trees have an important role in protecting and enriching the environment.
The ways trees perform these three functions for people may be different, depending on the person's socio-economic status, age and socio-cultural environment. Additionally there are some differences which are largely gender specific.
For example, in some cultures certain tree species are considered men's trees; others are considered women's. Women and men often have different views of the importance of various forest resources. A woman's first concern may be to find enough tree and forest products to satisfy the immediate family needs. Men's first concern may be for forest products that are primarily sources of cash.
Although many women are also interested in cash, in some areas they may not be allowed to participate in forest based income generating activities. In fact, even where both men and women may earn money from forest products, those sold by men and women often differ. But there is no universal generalization and information cannot be transferred from one area to another even about which gender will harvest or sell a specific product.
Watering seedlings in a Thai nursery
In Indonesia, for example, rattan is harvested in certain areas by women alone, in some areas by men alone and in still other areas by men and women together. A rattan project in any area would need to confirm the gender of their specific client. Although women generally collect domestic fuelwood, in some areas men are involved in this task. Studies show, however, that men generally have a less active role in collecting wild foods (other than hunting wild animals) and use tertiary tree products somewhat less than women. The point is that, in light of important differences in men's and women's use of forest resources and the general lack of project input on the part of women, it is essential that women's needs be specifically examined.
Jamaican women have persuaded men to support reforestation
Women's needs require special consideration:
- because women are active users and managers of forest and tree resources, but as forestry is considered a man's field, women's roles are often invisible to project designers and to policy makers;
- because women and men often have differing uses for forest resources, which influence their motives for participating in various forestry activities;
- because women may have special cultural constraints in regard to land and natural resources (beyond those that men have), which may hamper their ability to participate in decision making and project activities;
- because of simple justice and equity.
This document assumes that the reader is familiar with data gathering tools and project design and does not pretend to be a guide to rapid appraisal or project formulation. Instead it gives ideas on how those designing and implementing community forestry projects can enhance their work by more actively considering women.
If community forestry activities and programmes are to be successful they have to be designed in a manner sensitive to the range of needs of women in mind. In order to ensure that projects achieve their immediate purposes and their broader socio-economic goals, and in order to maximize the economic returns on project investment, those who design and implement projects will need to:
- see women;
- ask women the right questions;
- implement a process to include women.
<section>4</section>
Seeing women...
Seeing women through secondary sources
Seeing women through community observation
Seeing women in local systems
Seeing women through other disciplines
Women have been called "invisible labourers". Their work is often not counted in formal labour statistics because:
- women's work is often home-based or within the "informal sector", such as street vending;
- both women and men may deny that women "work" in some regions, due to custom;
- much work is simply assumed to be done by men, such as farming and forestry, and women's participation is overlooked.
Secondary sources, community observations, learning about local household systems and using other disciplines besides forestry can all help make women visible.
Seeing women through secondary sources
As much as possible, consult secondary data which show seasonal labour, resource availability and support services for women and men.
Many times, however, this information will not be available at all and, if it is, it is not disaggregated by gender. Recognition of the importance of this data is a first step toward making it available and a first step in making women, their work and needs, more visible.
Hut construction in Senegal - making use of natural materials
Seeing women through community observation
Driving, walking, or riding through an area in a leisurely manner with the outline of a project in mind and some pertinent questions to consider can yield a great deal of information.
Simply looking and knowing what to look for can give a project design team a new view of women's roles within the community.
THE TOWN OR VILLAGE
The first questions are: Who are the people? Who looks prosperous and who less prosperous? What are women, men and children doing? Also, what institutions such as schools, religious buildings, health facilities and markets - are visible? Who works in these institutions - men or women? - and who uses them?
ALONG BACK ROADS
The project planner should observe: Who are the people? Who are in the fields? What are the women doing? What natural resources are visible? What trees, bushes, plants and flowers? And which of them seem to be close to the homestead?
THE TREES
If trees are in fields or around homes, which trees are they and what are their functions? Were they planted, protected or just left there? If they were planted, were they planted by seed, cutting, transplanted from elsewhere or seedlings raised or purchased from a nursery?
Who in the family selected the trees, who planted them and who has the right to fruit, leaves, branches? Who can cut the trees down? Who in the family has control over land use decisions?
Seeing women in local systems
In designing a community forestry activity, the local systems and the responsibilities and benefits for women and men within those systems will need to be understood. Only then can one be aware of motives for and constraints to participation by different community members.
Insights can also be gained regarding the possible effects of participation.
A rural family lives within a system composed of four basic parts:
- the household and its individual members
- the livestock and in some cases wildlife;
- the crops; and
- the natural vegetation including trees and forests.
These parts interact with one another and with the community at large. Asking certain questions can help clarify each part and its relationship to women and trees.
THE HOUSEHOLD
The planner needs to know who makes up the household: husband, wife and children? Husband, wives, grandparents and children? A woman and her child?
In many regions, the extended family makes a definition of "household" difficult. In one area of Africa, the definition became "those people who eat from the same pot" or "use the same cooking fire". Whatever the definition, it should be used consistently by planners.
Female heads of household need to be counted. However, in many parts of the world it is a matter of honour that a man be counted as head of household even though he may be absent because of death, divorce, migration, or abandonment. Different forms of living arrangements, monogamy, polyandry, consensual unions and polygamy, have different implications for different family members depending on age and gender.
The planner needs to know who makes up the household
A first wife may have privileges of land tenure that the third wife does not have. An older woman often has more freedom and decision making power than does a woman of childbearing age. A man may own a tree, but the women may control its leaves or fruit.
Further questions: what household tasks are performed - for example, provision of water and fuelwood, cooking, child and health care - and by which members? Are the right persons being asked for information?
Men, perceived as heads of house hold, are often interviewed for projects. In Haiti, many men identified no household problem in obtaining water or fodder. Only by interviewing their wives was it learned the women walked five kilometres in search of both. In the hill areas of Nepal, men are responsible for house and furniture construction that depend on one species of tree. But women collecting fuelwood for cook stoves and fires depend on two other species.^3
Rural women are mainly responsible for health care and child care and may depend, during dry seasons or periods of food scarcity, on food found in forests or bush, or on fallow land.
THE LIVESTOCK AND WILDLIFE
Key questions here are: What livestock are kept and for what are they used? Are they large or small animals? And why are they kept: for milk, eggs, dung, religious reasons, status, bride wealth? Are wild animals used?
Taboos surrounding the use of animals and animal products are frequent. In many areas, very little meat is eaten, especially by women, and parts of the animal, even a chicken or fish, is relegated by gender, age and status. Among the Shona in Zimbabwe, for example, cattle are used for manure, for ploughing, to enhance male status and as payment to a bride's father. Seldom are cattle used for beef.^4
In parts of Sudan, meat comes chiefly from wild game, antelope, elephant, buffalo, lizards, rabbit and warthogs. Traps, spears, arrows and nets all are made of tree products m one way or another.^5
Who in the household has responsibility for livestock?
In parts of West Africa, farmers report earning more family income from hunting wild rodents and small game that depend on the forests than from crops. In Sierra Leone, women who fish remark that there are fewer fish as tree cover is removed and streams and ponds become silted.
It is important to discover who in the household has responsibility for the livestock. Do women and men have control over different animals? Who milks them and collects fodder and dung? Who builds pens and what type of material do they use? Who benefits from the livestock and in what way? If women are in charge, does the fodder need to be available close to the household compound? Who hunts, processes and benefits from large game, small animals, insects and fish?
Women frequently care for small livestock - calves, chickens, rabbits - while men care for large animals. One reason is that women may manage animals that stay close to home while men may be more mobile, going greater distances with the herds for fodder and water.
A papaya tree in Indonesia
When projects suggest stall feeding instead of free ranging animals in order to protect the environment, someone must add fodder and water collecting as well as stall cleaning to their daily tasks. In many cases, cattle herding is the work of men or boys but these new chores are in the woman's domain and must be added other daily chores.
Often in fishing communities men do marine fishing although women may fish in streams and women smoke fish for sale.
THE CROPS
Observe: What crops, both annual and perennial, are raised and how are they used? Which are for sale and which are for home use? How are trees used to manage soil, water, or wind in support of annual crop production? When trees are introduced as crops whose land will be used? Will it change food or income patterns?
In many rural areas of the world, households have fruit trees - banana, mango, coconut, jackfruit, breadfruit, papaya, guava, cashew, apples, berries - near the homestead and accessible to the woman.
Who in the household works with the crops? Who plants, who cooks and who markets? Do men and women work with different crops?
Specific crops are often closely related to gender. In many parts of sub-Saharan Africa, women are responsible for certain crops and have their own fields. Often these are subsistence crops, such as cassava, millet, vegetables. Men are more involved with cash crops, rice, coffee and tea.
However, at times both grow subsistence crops: in parts of Nigeria, for example, women grow cassava and men concentrate on yams. If tree growing is introduced, how will land and labour distribution be affected?
Even when crops are grown by women and men together, the tasks associated with agriculture may be gender-specific. In Sri Lanka, both men and women are active in agriculture. Men, however, are primarily responsible for land preparation and chemical application, whereas women dominate in other tasks - seeding, transplanting, weeding, harvesting and processing.
When a tree plantation is introduced, therefore, women may have responsibility for carrying water. When agroforestry is introduced, women may need to spend extra time weeding around the trees.^6
In one region of Colombia, women have few tasks in the field. However, decisions on what to grow are often shared by men and women. This is because the type of bean grown for export does not have the flavour or cooking characteristics demanded by the farm woman, who is responsible for feeding hired agricultural labour: if the food is not good, the labour does not come and the crops are not harvested.^7
Many decisions on harvesting or selling family or communal trees are discussed at home although the men may present the decision in public meetings. In a case study in Peru women complained that a meeting about selling community owned trees was held with the men without prior information and warning. Women felt it unfair that they were unable to take part in the decision making process by discussing the issues with their husbands. This type of women's informal participation in decision making is apt to be overlooked by outsiders.^8
NATURAL VEGETATION AND TREES
Natural vegetation and trees
Questions here are: What areas of natural vegetation are available and how are they used? Is there communal land and what are the rules on its use? Is there any forest reserve land and who has access to which products from this land? Are there products that could benefit rural families if made available?
Could these areas be managed to provide more benefits, especially to the poor, without disadvantaging others? Who in the household collects and uses these products?
Landless and land poor families everywhere take advantage of forest and tree resources when they are available. A study shows that farm families in Northeast Thailand obtain 60% of their food from nearby forests.^9 In India, landless women often depend on government forests for food, fuel and fodder for family use and for forest products they sell.
For example, many women in Madhya Pradesh generate income only through forest harvesting of tendu leaves, which are used in the production of low cost cigarettes called bidi. Previously, middlemen bought permits to harvest these leaves, and harvesting was done largely by women, who earned very little.
A typical home garden in Southeast Asia
In 1988 the Forestry Department of Madhya Pradesh took control of tendu harvesting and doubled the price paid for harvesting the leaves. The Department also introduced quality controls that rejected broken leaves. The experiment paid off: thanks to the increase in leaf quality, bidi manufacturers are willing to pay a prime price, which has doubled the income of the women harvesters and made the Department an unexpected profit.
Further questions: What trees are found on the farm and in household areas, who has the rights to them and who actually uses them?
Are they used for fodder, medicines, fuelwood, food or soil, water or wind management.? Are they for household use or income-generation? Are they used to provide shelter for animals, as building materials or to make household utensils?
A study in a rural area of Java - where families have no access to forests showed 60% of the family food comes from home gardens (illustrated above) in which trees play an integral role.10
Seeing women through other disciplines
Those who design forestry projects are accustomed to working within technical disciplines: for example, forestry, agronomy and animal science. Many times these disciplines focus on a product, such as timber or a specific crop, while the interaction of the product and the rural people - particularly women - who use it is given only secondary importance.
By involving other disciplines that focus on this interaction, women can be made more visible in the process of project design.
Women must be consulted about forestry projects
ANTHROPOLOGY/SOCIOLOGY
In Bangladesh, the economic and technical subtleties of a community forestry project were designed by an economist and a forester. The sociological issues were dealt with in a cursory fashion, through a household survey done by male interviewers with male heads of households. In their report. the project designers noted that "the involvement of women in forestry is very limited".
In fact, unknown to the project designers, women's involvement in forestry was substantial. So many problems resulted from this misunderstanding that the project's mid-term evaluation team included an anthropologist to discover why women's participation in forestry activities had not been forthcoming. The evaluation team's report concluded that women should have been consulted during the project design phase and recommended a series of immediate practical steps to correct this "oversight".^11
NUTRITION
Designers of forestry projects should confer with women in particular so that their perception of the food, fuel and fodder trees they depend upon can be used in selecting species for tree nurseries.
The project should also identify the time of year when local food supplies are most in deficit, and conduct a survey of local people's preference for food-bearing trees that produce during that season. This approach could help women improve the resource base from which they feed their families.^12
EDUCATION
In Nepal, staff of a large reforestation project realized that women needed to be trained as foresters and extension agents in order to provide information to other rural women who were the primary users of the forests. Women had never been trained in forestry before and only 5% of the women in Nepal are literate.
Nevertheless, through careful planning by educators and social scientists, training facilities were revamped to accommodate women, taking into consideration both the physical facilities and the cultural implications of including female trainees.^13
LAW
Legal studies can make visible gender differences in rights to use land and trees, and can highlight the potential impact of proposed legal changes on different groups. For instance, the Luo women in Kenya lost many of their traditional rights to land when statutory law gave title only to male heads of households. Nevertheless, they retained exclusive rights to the nuts and fruits of trees which they traditionally used, although not to the land on which the trees grew.^14
<section>5</section>
[Asking women the right questions]
What do women already know about trees, their products and management?
What problems are women experiencing in relation to tree resources?
What constraints do women face in addressing tree and forestry problems?
How can we find out what women know?
How can women organize themselves?
[Once women and their roles, and uses of trees, are made visible, there remain some specific questions to which only local women can give the answers:]
[- What do women already know about trees, their products and management?
- What problems are women experiencing in relation to trees resources?
- What constraints do women have in addressing these problems and how can the project help women overcome these constraints?
- How can we find out what women know?
- How can women organize themselves?]
[What do women already know about trees, their products and management?]
[Women can explain the uses of trees and the rationale behind traditional tree management. This local knowledge is essential for designing new activities.]
[In Sierra Leone, women knew 31 uses of trees on fallow land and in forests and knew what forest products would be produced in a particular fallow year men identified only eight different uses.]15 [In Zambia, it was noted that women made oil from a local tree that foresters had never considered putting in a nursery. In Thailand, women select different species of wood for cooking different items, according to their different heating qualities. One type of wood with specific burning qualities is considered essential by these women for processing good quality silk.]16[ In Cameroon, women use branches from trees that regenerate to build animal corrals and fences. When these poles grow they form semi-permanent "living fences" that are regularly pollarded, the branches being used for building other fences, house construction or repair, basketry and fuelwood.]
[Where women are heads of households - as here in the Andes - they must take on men's jobs as well as their own]
[What problems are women experiencing in relation to tree resources?]
[When scarcity is felt, women can often describe their problems, make proposals to address these problems and act upon them, once constraints are removed.]
[In Burkina Faso, women spoke out against monoculture forestry plantation projects. Although such plantations provided a source of wood for urban markets, the women said, they also removed access to "useless bush" for neighbouring families and thus removed important sources of fuelwood, food and plant material. The women asked for more multi-purpose trees as well as guaranteed access for local residents.]
[In many rural areas, older women complain that they can no longer prepare medicines because medicinal trees that were formerly available have been removed. They can help identify and reintroduce these trees.]
[In India, halewood used by the lacquer industry is becoming increasingly scarce, mainly because it is being indiscriminately cut for fuelwood. The forest service has suggested the use of another species, but female artisans have found it does not produce as fine a product. They have suggested an alternative solution: protect the valued species when permits to cut fuelwood are given out.]17
[Finally, in Sierra Leone, women speak of problems caused by heavy cutting of trees: the loss of predators' high forest habitat has led to an increase in the number of grain eating rodents, while fishing yields are down due to increased silting of waterways. The women have called for the introduction of agroforestry and rat control, rather than the woodlots proposed by project designers.]18
[What constraints do women face in addressing tree and forestry problems?]
[A number of constraints are location specific but women can describe them if asked. Some common constraints are: time, mobility, customs, lack of access to land and lack of organization.]
[Men clear the land, turn the soil - women do most of the rest]
[TIME]
[Being responsible for various tasks both within and outside the home, women are forced to work a "double day".]
[Projects must be careful that they do not add unduly to women's workload. Some forestry projects add to women's work simply because watering and weeding are traditionally women's tasks. Where women are busy, men may be able to plant and tend trees that women have helped select, and will use and help manage.]
[In Guinea, women said they wanted projects to be joint efforts, involving both men and women. They felt that men had more time to contribute and that men would appreciate women's input more if it was an all-community effort.]
[Better organization can also reduce women's workloads. In Senegal, women found that by organizing they were able to share tasks and find time to plant a woodlot. Unesco has assisted by introducing donkey carts and grain mills.]
[MOBILITY]
[Women in many societies have limited mobility. Most activities must be located near the household so that women can carry out their household activities. Customs also limit women's mobility: it is important to understand these customs fully so that modifications can be made if necessary.]
[Women who go for training or work away from home must often travel in pairs or in a group in order to gain family or community approval. In Nepal, the election of women to serve on regional resource committees provided the legitimacy needed for them to travel.]
[In Sudan, a project overcame customs that secluded women by using women extensionists and concentrating initially on activities that could be done inside the family compound. In this way, women were able to produce seedlings in backyard nurseries and eventually joined in planting woodlots.]19
[CUSTOMS]
[Customs regarding the use of trees are very location-specific. In an area of Kenya where trees denote land ownership, women were forbidden to plant or cut trees because land belonged only to men. A fuelwood project overcame this obstacle by introducing shrubs and exotic trees not traditionally identified as denoting land ownership. Thus, women were free to plant and cut these species. A second approach was to present the issue through amusing plays that provoked village discussions between men and women on how to solve the fuelwood problem.]
[LAND]
[Land use and tenure reflect status, inheritance patterns, family and community structure, and national policy. Women may prize land close to home, but it may be difficult for them to obtain. They may have only customary rights to land, or they may be given land use only for dry season gardens. Where men have migrated, women may be left with land to manage but no rights over changing land use. If they have no assured land tenure they may not be interested in planting.]
[Projects must be careful to guard against land distribution schemes which offer no assurance of land use to women or take away their traditional access to land. Some projects help women organize groups in order to negotiate for land over which the group will have long-term use rights.]
[INFORMATION, TRAINING, EDUCATION]
[Figure]
[Information, training and education must be made available to women at convenient times.]
[Women may not be able to attend meetings during the day. Extension agents must therefore hold sessions when women are free, perhaps after the evening meal. It is also essential that the information given is appropriate to the real conditions they face. Women can often identify what they want to learn and how.]
[In southern Burkina Faso, for instance, women were asked at a formal meeting how they wished to be involved in the management of a previously closed forest reserve. When they did not answer, they were chided and told if they did not speak up they would lose access to all potential forest products. At this point one woman rose and said, "We are not familiar with what the forest currently contains. We do not know what your project has to offer. We do not know the costs or the benefits of participation. Once we know these things, we tell you what we wish to do."]
[Extension advice for Zambian women]
[In the informal discussions that followed. the women asked to go into the reserve accompanied by the project staff to identify forest products available for collecting or harvesting. They asked if the project could provide them with market information on medical plants, fruits and nuts, and if they could learn about machines for extracting honey.]
[In India, a project recommended that women adopt a particular silkworm that produces a large quantity of silk. However, the women objected, saying that "it is better to have a baby than to let these silkworms into your house"- the worms needed to be fed every three hours both day and night.]
[As in all extension, messages from outside must be extremely carefully tailored to the audience. A puppet show in Sudan that highlighted the advantages of raising trees inspired women to ask for a piece of land from a rich landholder and to request assistance in planting a multipurpose stand. In a village less than 10 km away the same puppet show caused only frustration: the villagers said that since they were landless they could only plant trees if the project could provide land for food crops as well as trees.]
[How can we find out what women know?]
[Project designers or implementors, particularly when they are solely men, may have difficulty learning from village women. When questions are asked in public meetings, men may respond even when the questions are addressed to women. It is often inappropriate for a male outsider to talk alone with women.]
[There are a number of ways to help strengthen communications with local women. Often older women can speak freely with men from outside the community. Sometimes wives of school teachers or women social or health workers can act as intermediaries between the project staff and shy women.]
[In taking a survey in Niger, young women and men worked in pairs and spoke separately to the male and female family members at the same time so as to assure that women were able to answer questions freely.]
[In Nepal, a female project designer insisted on having local women gather data, despite warnings that they would never be able to work in villages away from home. It proved much less difficult than expected to find women assistants once it became apparent that this was essential to the work that had to be done. It was found that the women were perfectly willing to speak with men from outside the community, once they saw that the subject was of interest.]20
[How can women organize themselves?]
[Women frequently lack political power to ensure continuing services and access to land, credit, decision making processes and the benefits of development. Frequently this power can he obtained only through organization.]
[Explore existing women's groups and leadership, or NGOs that work at the village level and include women in their activities. This may help identify existing structures that can support community forestry.]
[In India, for example, a group of landless women belonging to the Self-Employed Women's Organization formed a milk cooperative and sought permission to grow fodder trees on "wasteland". Because it was supported by a well-organized group, the cooperative was able to win access to the land and resisted attempts to expropriate the trees once they began to grow.]
[Protests by members of the Chipko movement in India led to a 10-year ban on tree felling in Uttar Pradesh state]
[In central Nepal a village forest committee formed by women, successfully modified legislation that sought to delegate forest management to the panchayat, an administrative unit that includes many villages. The organized women argued that management should have been in the hands of a sub-unit of the panchayat as had been the tradition. This smaller unit was closer to the women and would allow women to participate more fully.]21
[Organized women in Kenya have raised funds to support large scale tree planting and nursery development, while in India groups of women have helped change legislation on forest harvesting by "hugging" trees, thereby drawing public attention to economic and environmental problems caused by overexploitation.]
<section>6</section>
Implementing a process to include women
The type of project
Project benefits
The eight steps
Once women's roles are visible and their knowledge about and dependence on tree and forest products recognized, ways to design and implement community forestry projects which include women become more apparent.
The type of project
Generally, projects work best when they include women as an integral part of their family or community group, while remaining sensitive to women's special needs and resources. However, occasionally "women only" activities are needed. Ruth Dixon has developed a list to help designers evaluate when a "women-only" project may be required:^22
- when there are strong taboos against unrelated males and females working together;
- where the effects of past discrimination need to be overcome;
- where many or most households are headed by women;
- where women specialize in tasks that could be made more productive with outside help;
- where women request a measure of self-reliance to avoid conflict or competition with men.
A reforestation project in China. Between 1949 and 1978, China's forested area expanded from 5 to 12.7 percent of total land area
However, planning "women-only" activities may tend to isolate women and threaten their access to resources that men control. "Women-only" activities and projects can also be poorly funded and out of the mainstream of development activities. Some forestry projects that have a great-impact on the productive resource base upon which women depend, deal only with men.
In some cases a component such as improved fuelwood stoves is added for the sake of "including women". Care should always be taken to ensure that additional activities that are seen as being of interest to women do enter their priority areas of concern and do not exclude them from being considered in the project's main activities.
Project benefits
The main goal of including women in project design, implementation, monitoring and evaluation is to assure that they have access to benefits that they value and that they are able to manage the resource base in a sustainable manner. It is of central importance that any project ensures that those involved will, in fact, benefit.
Project designers have tended to believe that if the project benefits men, then women will see it as a benefit to themselves through a "trickle over" effect. This has frequently proven a faulty assumption. Women are short on time, land, and money.
Participation in a community forestry project may contribute to their burdens. Therefore, the benefits they will reap must be made very clear to them. Perceived equitable distribution of project benefits cannot be overestimated in analyzing participation and activity sustainability. It is especially important to consider needs of the women who are in the poorest segment of the villages, for whom forest resources can be crucial. Two questions to be answered: What is the potential impact of the project on women, and how can benefits for women be encouraged?
Women in Lesotho planting out saplings in a reforestation programme
WHAT IS THE POTENTIAL IMPACT OF THE PROJECT ON WOMEN?
Project planners and local women must communicate in a two-way process before the introduction of a new technology, whether it be a new tree species or a forest management plan. Women will have important insights as to how the technology may affect them.
The more clearly women's circumstances are understood and reflected in the project's design, and the more women are involved in the design process, the more positive the impact of the project can be.
Sorting seedlings in Thailand
Gender analysis, by its very nature, demands interaction of the researcher, women and men at the local level. Their interaction helps to strengthen the project planning process and ensure that any planned activity is appropriate given local conditions.
HOW CAN BENEFITS FOR WOMEN BE ENCOURAGED?
Women, as well as men, respond to incentives - larger production from annual crops, multi-purpose trees providing needed products, a market for produce such as fruit or wood poles, and potential for local employment. The incentive must, however, reflect women's financial realities. For example, seed may be more cost effective than seedlings.
Knowing about the control and use of cash within the family is crucial to understanding who will benefit from project income. In some households, women control their own money; in others, men control household funds. When the latter is the case, women may want to pool funds or set up cooperatives in order to retain control of income from their activities.
Women without legal rights to land have no collateral to offer to obtain loans for equipment, seed, or fertilizer. When loans are necessary and women have no collateral, other means for women to obtain credit must be found.
The eight steps
In summary, implementing a process to include women in project design includes the following eight steps. In Restoring the balance: women and forest resources, these steps were outlined for consideration in developing community forestry programs. These should be reviewed by project designers as well as project implementors to be sure their work will also help restore the balance.^23
1. Explore gender issues through two-way communication with rural women, recognizing that the needs of women and men may not be the same and that the impact of projects on them may therefore be different.
2. Investigate customs, taboos and time constraints that women face: knowledge and common sense can go a long way to overcoming these constraints.
3. Promote the role that women do and can play in forestry activities at each level, and analyze the ways in which projects either include or exclude them.
4. Exchange information with individuals at every level, with local women on forestry activities, with practitioners on involving women in forestry, with policy makers on women's roles in forestry.
5. Support women's groups and encourage the formation of new ones that help women gain access to decision making and the political process, and strengthen women's support for one another.
6. Work together to provide access to land and trees recognizing customary and traditional women's holdings, ensuring women are included where land is privatized, and seeking creative solutions for landless women.
7. Consult with women before introducing new technologies or species ensuring that women's needs have been considered, and the impact of new techniques or trees on women's lives have been evaluated.
8. Collaborate to make credit and income available to women either individually, or through women's groups.
<section>7</section>
Annexes
Annex 1 - an example from India: a women's groups' suggestions for women's participation in projects
Annex 2 - planning issues, design features and information needs of forestry project activities
Annex 1 - an example from India: a women's groups' suggestions for women's participation in projects
Figure
The ideas presented here were developed by the People's Education and Development Organisation (PEDO) in 1988. They were reported in an unpublished paper by M. Sarin, C. Sharma, R. Khanna, I. Pathak and T. Vijayendra.^24
Gaining the support of women...
There are many reasons why women do not participate: lack of time, lack of self-confidence, lack of information, resistance by families, misunderstanding of project goals. In a project in India, several ideas for increasing participation came from the women themselves:
- Using folk or prayer songs and role plays to increase women's awareness about environmental problems make meetings more interesting.
- Organizing visits by groups of local women to successful environmental programs to expose them to what can be done.
- Ensuring that the timings fixed for meetings are convenient for women. - Using only the local language in village meetings.
- Organizing leadership training programs for local women so that they can motivate and mobilize other women.
- Organizing awareness generation camps for local women so that they can understand the multiple impacts of environmental degradation on their lives.
- Providing information about forest laws and people's rights to reduce fear and exploitation.
- Assisting women in building their own organizations and understand the strengths of collective action.
- Providing equal access to information as men and educating them about their rights.
- Providing local women training in managing nurseries and raising plants in baskets.
- Training women in soil and water conservation techniques.
Education
...and gaining the support of men
Men are often apprehensive about women's participation in forestry projects and women find this apprehension an obstacle to their participation. In many of the areas of the world, women have had few opportunities to participate in local affairs. In programs and projects aimed at increasing women's participation in community forestry one major obstacle can be the opposition of men. This same group of women in Northern India suggested the following ways to reduce this opposition.
- Keep the men informed about the objectives of holding separate meetings with women to reduce their apprehensions and to check the spread of wild rumours.
- Motivate men to support increased participation by women.
- Motivate men to share women's work burden so that they have more time to participate in the program.
- Male staff members of the organization should set an example for the above by sharing the work of women in their families.
- Ensure participation of both male and female staff members in village meetings.
- In each village meeting, discuss the reasons why women's participation in all group work is so important.
- Repeatedly emphasize that no development is possible without equal participation by men and women.
- Emphasize the fact that women face some special problems for which separate meetings with women are necessary.
By considering selection and distribution of project benefits, how women can best participate, and how to gain the support of men, the chances are increased for projects to be successful. By giving women chances to gain confidence projects can increase the future effectiveness of women's participation.
The increase in confidence was clear in this Indian project designed to reduce fuelwood consumption through fuel efficient cook stoves called Chulhas. With the confidence built through this project the women have moved from a project focusing solely on stoves to one planning cooperative tree resource improvement and management as well as disseminating stoves.
The evolution of this project was possible because the field workers, and the local women themselves, gained the confidence of others and built self-confidence through the leadership role they were given. This is described very clearly in the following summary statement:
"The women who were trained as leaders had practically no opportunity to earn income before they joined the Chulha program. Most of them were shy and apprehensive about their ability to learn a new skill. But most of them needed an income desperately and found the courage to step out of their secluded lives. All of them have displayed improved levels of confidence, and the transformation in some of them has been truly remarkable."
Annex 2 - planning issues, design features and information needs of forestry project activities
Women and forestry: operational issues
The following charts are adapted from Annex IV of the World Bank Working Paper Women and forestry: operational issues, by A Molnar and G. Shreiber. The charts identify planning issues, possible design features and information needs for projects that include the following activities:
- private tree planting/farm forestry/agroforestry
- community woodlots/plantations
- watershed improvement/wasteland management
- forestry extension
- improved wood-burning devices
Women and forestry: operational issues is available free of charge from:
The Women in Development Division
Population and Human Resources Department, Room S9-127
The World Bank
1818 H Street NW
1. Private tree planting Farm forestry Agroforestry
Planning issues to consider
Information needs and possible design features
Are women or men responsible for decisions on financial and labour investments in, and management and utilization of, trees and family livestock? Are women or men responsible for family fuel supply, for livestock fodder, for grazing animals?(r) a., b. a. Collect data on men's, women's, boys' and girls' time allocation in the household and on the farm.
Are women expected to water and tend seedlings that men raise in private nurseries and trees that men have planted? Are women convinced of the utility of these species, of their labour input into this work, and of the programme as a whole? Are women's workloads likely to increase or are other women's tasks likely to be curtailed or abandoned due to increased time needed for forestry work? (r) a., b., c. b. Ensure targeted extension for women, and advise them how to reallocate their time.
Do women want to plant different species (and at different locations) than men? Do they have the right to decide what to plant and where (especially around the homestead)? (r) c., d., e. c. Collect information on men's and women's species preference and on their tree/ forest product uses by species and season, and consult with men and women about the species to be raised for distribution/planting.
Do seedlings of the species women want (e.g. fodder, fuel and fruit species) cost more to produce than those men want? (r) d., e. d. Can project nurseries produce sufficient quantities of the species wanted by men and women?
Do women have rights to certain products, in certain quantities, and at certain times from multi-purpose species, where men prefer other products? (r) f., g. e. If species wanted by women in large numbers have high production costs, not enough of these are likely to be raised in nurseries for free or subsidized distribution. Therefore, seedlings should be priced to cover production costs, or private nurseries should be set up to produce the desired species.
Are there trade-offs in selecting products to be obtained from species planted, and are some products more desired by men than by women and vice-versa? (r) g., h. f. Investigate women's rights to tree products.
Are there women's groups in the project area that could be utilized as facilitators? (r) i. g. Research tree management and harvesting practices that maximize yields of different products from multi-purpose species.
Are there traditional women's work groups or women's labour pooling/sharing arrangements in the targeted communities? (r) j. h. Investigate the economics of species mixtures to accommodate men's and women's needs, design extension messages accordingly, employ female motivators/extension staff, and train male extension staff regarding women's roles, needs and potential contributions.
Are there female nursery workers? (r) k. i. Involve women's groups in organizing planting and nursery establishment, seedling distribution, extension and credit programmes.
Do women have access to land for establishing private/cooperative nurseries? (r) l. j. Utilize women's work groups for cooperative planting efforts so that women can share the labour burden.
Do women have access to water for operating private/cooperative nurseries? (r) m. k. Can they be provided with access to land, water, training and inputs to establish and operate private/cooperative nurseries?
l. If yes, can they be trained in nursery work/management and supported in setting up private/cooperative nurseries? If no, can the project arrange to lease land?
m. If not, can the project provide or arrange for a reliable source of water?
2. Community woodlots
Community forest plantations
Planning issues to consider
Information needs and possible design features
Do women collect products that are important to them (nuts, fruits, fuel shrubs, fibres for local industries, grass) from the common property land that is to be cleared and/or planted, and will they lose access to it? (r) a., b., c. a. Ascertain which products women collect, in what quantities and when. What are these products used for? What income is generated? Which women depend on these products?
Do women rely on this land as an important foraging area for their animals? (r) b., c., d. b. Plan for management systems that yield benefits regularly (e.g. annual harvesting, understory shrubs or legumes that can be cut more often; wider spacing of trees).
Will women have to spend more time on fodder collection for stall-feeding or on grazing their livestock at more distant locations? (r) d., e. c. Two years before plantation establishment, plant live hedge fences that women can lop for fodder and fuelwood.
Are women expected to switch to stall-feeding with fodder raised in initial plantation years? (r) d. Plant and harvest the area in blocks so women retain access to some of the area at any given time.
Will children have to help their mothers cope with a work load increased by having to switch to stall-feeding of livestock and will this affect their attendance at school? (r) f. e. Provide targeted extension advice explaining the advantages of the new planting and management system, so that women do not refuse to cooperate because they perceive it to be too labour-intensive and/or impractical.
Do women and men differ on species to be grown in community plantations? (r) g. f. Introduce labour-saving devices for other household activities that ease demand for children's labour.
Are women likely to be the main labourers in plantation establishment?
- What tools are comfortable and efficient for use by women? (r) h. g. Include a range of species that will meet the requirements of both men and women.
- What is women's time availability over the seasons?
- Does tree planting conflict with women's time requirements for other essential activities? (r) i. h. Plan for tools for pitting/land preparation work that can be used by women.
Are women's groups active in the area? (r) j. i. Adjust planting techniques and schedules to meet labour constraints or choose models that most easily fit these constraints.
Do women/women's groups express strong interest in first obtaining other critical services/facilities (e.g. drinking water) before providing their labour or otherwise cooperating in project operations? (r) k. j. Mobilize such groups to take an active role in community management decision making.
k. Can project resources be allocated for providing such services/facilities in return for obtaining the community's or women's groups' voluntary labour and cooperation?
3. Watershed improvement
Wasteland management
Planning issues to consider
Information needs and possible design features
Are significant numbers of households without adult males (permanently or seasonally?) (r) a., b. a. Evaluate if women are less able to take up land improvement activities due to labour constraints, lack of capital/credit, exclusion of desired species from programme.
Are there nomadic grazing groups where women are responsible for field and tree crops since the men spend more time in herding? (r) b., c. b. Include women in training programmes regarding new practices.
Do women control specific aspects of the farming system (land-use patterns, cash/ subsistence crops, fodder crops, field boundary utilization, homestead planting, small or large livestock, trees on homesteads/field boundaries)? (r) d. c. See that women as well as men have access to inputs, extension advice and credit programmes.
Do women and men collect/use different products from forests and grasslands within the watershed? (r) e. d. Include women in training programmes regarding new practices.
Provide women with extension advice covering all aspects of the farming system that they control.
Interview women to ascertain how their preferences for types of trees. fodder, legumes and grasses differ from those of men for various aspects of the local farming system.
Discuss with women possible trade-offs between alternative strategies and credit needs or incentives.
Does the project plan to introduce stall-feeding or other improved, but for women more time-consuming, land resource management practices? (r) f. e. Evaluate collection patterns; identify existence of traditional conservation practices (e.g. rotation) and/or harvesting techniques that are intended to preserve supply over time.
Do different socio-economic groups use the same land areas? (r) g. f. Assess likely changes in family labour allocations. Is it possible to promote dairy development (market linkages?) to increase returns from improved livestock management in case women lose time available for other productive/income-generating activities?
g. Assess variations in women's roles in these groups.
Do women traditionally pool/share labour resources among households for work on individual holdings? (r) h. h. Investigate if women can be mobilized in groups to pool their labour for land improvement activities on individual holdings.
Are there women's groups in the target area that could be used as facilitators? (r) i. i. Involve women's groups in facilitating extension and credit programmes for women.
4. Forestry extension
Information needs and possible design features
Information needs and possible design features
Do the executing agencies have an interest in, or awareness of, women's issues? (r) a., b. a. Carry out a study of women's roles in the prevailing household and farming economy, of the time and labour contribution of each family member, and of gender roles in forestry activities.
Does the project provide for additional staff, and does the executing agency have budgetary resources for this? (r) a., b. b. Use this study as basis for training courses for male and female extension staff on ways to address women's needs, mobilize female resources, and include women's perspectives in planning.
Is there a willingness to make a concerted effort to involve women, but there are no women in upper levels of management? (r) c., d. c. If the project includes training camps for farmers, hold special training camps for groups of women.
Are project staff interested in, and experienced with, involving women? (r) d., e. d. Recruit a cadre of female motivators and design a concrete programme of specific messages they are expected to convey.
Is women's mobility limited/constrained in the societies included in the project? (r) f. e. Recruit women at professional levels in the implementing agency and the extension service to help design programmes and supervise other female staff
Are there differences in the public fore that men and women can attend, and differences in their leisure time? (r) g. f. Recruit/employ female extension staff at all field levels.
Are there women's groups in the project area? (r) h. g. Give female motivators appropriate transport facilities (or travel funds) to cover their extension area as effectively as male staff Deploy female extension staff in pairs if socially necessary. Assign to female staff working areas that they can realistically cover, given their degree of mobility.
h. Ensure that extension activities - film showings, group discussions, etc. - are held at times women can attend and in fore where it is socially acceptable for women to come (local markets are one possibility).
i. Involve women's groups in extension delivery.
5. Improved wood-burning devices
Planning issues to consider
Information needs and possible design features
How often do women cook and for what periods of time during day and evening?
What other activities do women undertake at the same time?
What fuels are used? What mixtures of fuels? How are these prepared?
Are stoves used for heating, for cooking, or for heating and cooking?
What kinds of food are prepared, and what are the cooking conditions required for their preparation? (r) a., b., c., d., e. a. Make sure improved models are adapted to local use and maintenance capabilities.
Do women perceive cooking fuel to have a "cost" in terms of labour and cash and do they, therefore, perceive a value in the "savings" from improved stoves? (r) f. b. Make sure stove size, height and capacity are appropriate to women's cooking patterns and other activities that are carried out at the same time.
Is the time required to cook with the new device acceptable to women users? (r) g. c. Evaluate the cost efficiency of the improved device under local conditions, with women cooking normal types of meals and for different sizes of household, using available fuels in normal mixtures.
Are there artisans or entrepreneurs in the project who could reproduce the model device? (r) h. d. Budget for adequate training and follow-up, including the required number of trained promoters.
What variation is there in the quality of raw materials (clay, mud, bricks, etc.) used to make the new devices? (r) i. e. Prepare to modify designs if project monitoring reveals unexpected problems.
f. Make sure the stove can be easily cleaned by women if this is necessary.
g. Investigate cooking pattern changes that lead to fuel saving without disrupting women's schedules.
h. Make sure the programme maintains a supply line for the devices, including replacement parts and adequate raw materials (if the device is low-cost and of local materials it may have a short lifespan).
i. Develop plans at the outset to make the intervention sustainable. Provide extension and training to potential private producers and marketers of the device. Evaluate the marketability of the device.
Obtaining information
1. Private tree planting Farm forestry, Agroforestry
2. Community woodlots Community plantations
3. Watershed improvement Wasteland management
4. Forestry extension
5. Improved wood-burning devices
Available data o types of trees preferred and raised, locations, tree/ forest products desired by household members
o access of men and women to extension media/services
o reports/monitoring data from other projects in the area may describe women's current roles
o survey data on family farm/ household division of labour and school enrolment rates by age/ gender
o reports/monitoring data from other projects in the area may describe women's current roles
o survey data on family farm/ household division of labour and school enrolment rates by age/ gender
o documents in country or project areas (e.g. M&E reports, studies)
o ethnographic studies of project area to identify kinds of women with influence/ mobility and gender roles in decision making
o experience with other stove programmes
o studies on the experience of other programmes in the project area
o government agencies or NGOs with experience in these areas
Quick surveys o relative decision making roles and responsibilities in farm/household activities
o sources of household cash income, and spending patterns of men's and women's earnings
o mans/women's knowledge of, skills in tree and fodder growing and collection
o visit local NGOs and research institutions that focus on these issues
o interview female plantation and nursery workers about their household responsibilities and practices and time/labour allocation
o After a community meeting, talk to a group of women about their activities
o interview women community "leaders" at home
o labour availability (male and female separately) in households of different socio-economic status, including specifically female headed households and migrant households, with special regard to labour required for recommended land management practices o local women leaders and members of local women's organizations, political fore for women
o NGOs in the project area with experience working with women
o cost efficiency of the improved stoves under local conditions - with women preparing their usual meals with commonly available and used fuels - for different socio-economic groups
o time required to cook traditional meals with the new stoves
Special studies o Mens/womens/children's relative time allocation in household/farm activities
o number/percentage of households without adult males in the project area
o fuel/fodder collection patterns and impact on forest and rangeland resources
o sources of cash income of households with different socio-economic characteristics in project area, and spending patterns of mens/women's cash incomes
o gender-specific differences in existing land rights
o monitor project benefits to women, to facilitate design adjustments
o study forestry sector and women, forest-based industries, rural energy, livestock management, and issues where information is scarce and a problem may exist
o economics of land use interventions from farmer's perspective, with site-specific economic analysis of farmers' perceived opportunity cost of labour, underemployment and farmers' perceptions of returns
o prevailing uses of private/ common land for grazing, fuel/fodder supply, supply of minor forest products, exercising area for cattle, etc.
o access to credit facilities and capital for men and women of different socioeconomic status
o review informal women's work groups or organizations that could be mobilized in the project o research on better kitchen management techniques
o research on fuel savings using different (including traditional as well as newly recommended) mixtures/ combinations of various traditionally and newly available fuels
<section>8</section>
Notes
1. Forestry Paper No. 7. Forestry for local community development. Rome, FAO. 1978.
2. Restoring the balance: women and forest resources. Rome, FAO. 1987.
3. J. Hourihan. Gender issues in the preparation and implementation of forestry products. Manila, Asian Development Bank. 1987.
4. S. Deem. "A study of veterinary services and the women of Zimbabwe." Unpublished paper. Blackburg, Virginia Tech. 1965.
5. J. Perssou. "Trees, plants and a rural community in the Southern Sudan" in Unasylva, Vol. 38. Rome, FAO. 1986.
6. J. Hourihan. Gender issues in the preparation and implementation of forestry products. Manila, Asian Development Bank. 1987.
7. J. Ashby. "Production and consumption aspects of technology testing". Unpublished case study. Cali, IFDC/CIAT. 1986.
8. L. Gusman. Participatin campesina y reforestacin comunal: el caso de cuatro comunidades del Cusco. Lima, Ministerio de Agricultura and FAO. 1988.
9. S. Saowakontha et al. Roles of food gathered from forest on self-reliance and nutritional status of northeast villagers. Paper presented at FAO Khon Kaen University Workshop on Nutrition in Forestry, Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen, 18-21 October 1988.
10. Forestry and nutrition: a reference manual. Rome, FAO. 1989.
11. J. Hourihan. Gender issues in the preparation and implementation of forestry products. Manila, Asian Development Bank. 1987.
12. E. Campbell-Asselbergs. "Nutrition, forests and trees: linkages, concerns and indicators". Unpublished paper. Rome, FAO. 1986.
C. Ogden. "Incorporating nutrition concerns into forestry projects: a field guide". Draft manuscript. Rome, FAO. 1989.
13. M. Hoskins. Strategies for involving women in RCUP activities and benefits: Nepal. Blacksburg, Virginia Tech. 1982.
14. D. Rocheleau. "Women, trees and tenure: implications for agroforestry research and development". Unpublished paper for International Workshop on Tenure Issues in Agroforestry. Nairobi. 1985.
15. P. Goswami and M. Hoskins. Assistance to local community forestry: report to the Government of Sierra Leone. FAO/SIDA Forestry for Local Community Development Programme. Rome, FAO. 1980.
16. S. Subhadira et al. "Fuelwood situation and farmers' adjustments in northeastern Thai villages" in G. Lovelace et al. (eds) Rapid rural appraisal in Northeast Thailand: case studies. Khon Kaen, Siriphan Press. 1988.
17. J. Campbell (ed). Dynamics in forest based small scale enterprises. Women's roles: two examples from India. Rome, FAO. 1990. In press.
18. P. Goswami and M. Hoskins. Assistance to local community forestry: report to the Government of Sierra Leone. FAO/SIDA Forestry for Local Community Development Programme. Rome, FAO. 1980.
19. Women and community forestry in the Sudan. Film strip and text. Rome, FAO. 1988.
20. N. Siddiqi. Technical Note 1/89. Towards effective participation: a guide for working with women in forestry. Kathmandu, Nepal-Australia Forestry Project. 1989.
21. A. Molnar. "Forest conservation in Nepal: encouraging, women's participation" in Seeds. New York, The Population Council. 1987.
22. R. Dixon. Quoted in Restoring the balance. women and forest resources. Rome, FAO. 1987.
23. Restoring the balance: women and forest resources. Rome, FAO. 1987.
24. M. Sarin et al. "Report of a training programme for environmental reconstruction." Unpublished paper. Rajasthan, People's Education and Development Organisation (PEDO). 1988.
