<title>CF Note 6: The Major Significance of Â‘MinorÂ’ Forest Products: The Local Use and Value of Forests in the West African Humid Forest Zone. The Major Significance of â€˜Minorâ€™ Forest Products: The Local Use and Value of </title>
<section>1</section>
PREFACE
The magnitude of the forests contribution to the lives of rural people is now understood in general terms. The forest provides a wide range of direct and indirect benefits. However, to comprehend forest resources' contribution to communities' income and well-being, their individual and collective value must be accurately assessed on the local and regional levels. The Community Forestry Programme of the Planning and Institutions Service, Forestry Department is working to develop the understanding of the social, economic and cultural importance of non timber forest products in different regions throughout the developing world.
Evaluating the use of forest products will provide a solid base of knowledge. As such, this paper is a beginning; one which, it is hoped, will serve as an example for other regional studies that stress the importance of this type of information and provide a foundation upon which participatory development projects advocating multipurpose forest management can be designed. By implementing programmes that meet traditionally important needs, non-consumptive, sustainable use of forest land will become more attractive to forest users.
The research for this study was carried-out by Julia Falconer in West Africa, Paris, and at the FAO in Rome. Her work has greatly added to the understanding of the variety and range of products used in the humid zone of West Africa. The book was edited by Carla R.S. Koppell. Funding for this work was provided by the FAO/SIDA Forests, Trees, and People Programme. The Forest, Trees, and People Trust Fund Programme develops methods, approaches and tools that support rural peoples' efforts to improve their own well-being through tree and forest management. Within FAO the Programme is coordinated by Marilyn W. Hoskins, Senior Forestry Officer for Community Forestry, Planning and Institutions Service, Forestry Department.
M.R. de Montalembert
Chief
Planning and Institutions Service
Forestry Department
<section>2</section>
INTRODUCTION
Forests have traditionally been valued as a source of timber, pulp, and, more recently, fuel. All other products, regardless of their value to local people or the national economy, have been classified by foresters as "minor forest products". Yet even this term (minor forest product) often refers only to those products for which there is an industrial market such as gums, resins and tannins. For rural West Africans from the forest region, the forests are valued for a vast array of products. They form an integral part of the household economy. Forests provide the resources for a multitude of products which feature in people's day to day lives. The West African humid zone region is extremely diverse incorporating many different political and economic systems, cultures, histories, and land use practices. The forests (and fallow land areas) are as diverse as the ways in which people use them. Forests provide food, medicines, household equipment and building material, raw
materials for processing enterprises, materials for agricultural and other production equipment, as well as products for cash sale. Forests and trees are also socially and culturally important, serving as temples, cultural symbols, social gathering places and locations for social rites such as initiation ceremonies. Forest products are used in support of other productive sectors such as agriculture, providing the materials used for making implements, harvest and market transportation equipment, crop storage containers, crop dryers as well as fuel used for crop processing.
Ceiba pentranda, the multi-purpose tree
The multitude of "minor" ways a single forest species may be used is well illustrated in an example from Ho, Ghana, where Ceiba pentandra's fibrous fruit are used in medicines, domestically for pillow-making and commercially sold to help plug up holes in canoes; its seed oil is taken against rheumatism, is sold commercially for soap making and is used as a fire-lighter; its leaves are consumed in soups and also provide goat fodder; its ash provides a good mulch; the bark and stem are used as a medicinal mouthwash; the roots are used in the treatment of leprosy. A favoured mushroom grows at its base. It is also valued as a bee fodder tree (for honey production). Finally, it is a sacred tree; its leaves and bark are believed to expel evil spirits (Asamoah 1985).
This study examines all forest products, both tangible and intangible, that are garnered from forests by local people both for home consumption and sale. The study refers to them as non-timber forest products (NTFP). NTFPs are therefore defined as those forest products, including by-products such as bushmeat and mushrooms, that are not processed by large forest industries. The boundary between cultivated and uncultivated forest land is often not distinct in this ecological zone; as a result the use of fallow land and on-farm trees will also be considered. Forest product processing by households and small enterprises is examined.
Finally, the study examines the ways that increasing population pressure, changes in agricultural and hunting practices, and increasing commercialisation are affecting forest areas, their use and utility. More intensive forest management systems geared to meeting the needs of local people are required. Yet, little is known about how forest resources are currently used and valued locally, nor about the impact of forest decline on households in this region. This study begins to bridge the knowledge gap that currently exists.
<section>3</section>
THE PURPOSE AND SCOPE OF THE STUDY
This study focuses on the following issues:
- How are forest resources used at the local level, and how do they contribute to the sustenance of the household?
- In what ways do different communities value (both tangibly and intangibly) forest resources in this region? How are these values changing with the extreme environmental and economic evolution taking place throughout the region?
- How has commercialisation of rural economies affected exploitation of forest resources?
Little information exists in the forestry literature to directly address these issues. However, as forest resources are used in so many ways, they are discussed (if somewhat incidentally) under many guises: evaluations, socio-economic surveys, market studies, food consumption surveys, ethnobotanic studies, studies of the "informal" sector, and studies of farming practices. Information can therefore be gleaned indirectly. For example, information on the forest products that are used for house construction can be found in housing surveys and socio-economic evaluations (which include information on different housing types and their prevalence); economic studies (which can estimate the costs of living and often include information on the quantity of material required (or costs) for different house types); ethnobotanic studies (which can also include information on the materials used for house building).
The study draws on research conducted in many disciplines: anthropology, botany, economics, ethnobotany, ethnomedicine, farming systems, forestry, wildlife management, geography, nutrition, and rural development. In addition, it includes information from a variety of different government agencies and ministries as well as in-country NGOs and international development agencies. It draws together this information to examine the practical and symbolic importance of forest resources to rural households. It assesses the kinds of information that are available, and explores the ways in which forestry activities could better incorporate the needs and interests of local people.
The study is divided into two parts. Part I serves two purposes. The first four chapters review what is known about the way people use and value the forests of the region. It divides the uses of forest products by function. The second set of three chapters is analytical in nature. It examines: the way forest product use has changed and is changing; how the importance of non-timber forest products can be assessed; and those forestry activities that could be developed in order to incorporate the values and needs of people.
This is followed by Part II, an extensive annotated bibliography that includes an overview of the literature and assesses the availability of information. More than 300 sources are reviewed to provide more specific information about the studies and publications that are cited in the text. As many of the information sources are unpublished and difficult to locate, these summaries will often be structured to serve as detailed outlines of the works.
The shea butter tree yields a valuable vegetable oil
<section>4</section>
1. THE HOUSEHOLD CONSUMPTION OF FOREST RESOURCES
1.1 The consumption of wild animals
1.2 Household consumption of forest plant foods
1.3 The use of forest resources in traditional medicine
1.4 Household consumption of fuelwood
1.5 Forest resources used for house construction
1.6 Household equipment and utensils made from forest products
There are a diverse range of ways the people from different parts of humid West Africa exploit their surrounding forests and fallow lands. Forests provide food, medicines, household equipment and building materials, raw materials for processing enterprises, and materials for agricultural and other equipment. While the extent of forest resource use varies by household in the region, it is clear from existing reports that forest products are still widely consumed. Regionally, bushmeat, palm products such as oil and wine (and in some regions other supplemental foods), medicines, fuelwood, and building materials are the most highly utilized forest products.
Annona senegalensis - a delicious fruit
1.1 The consumption of wild animals
1.1.1 Commonly consumed bushmeat species
1.1.2 The consumption of gathered animal resources
1.1.3 The nutritional value of bushmeat
1.1.4 Seasonal changes in bushmeat consumption
1.1.5 Regional variations in bushmeat consumption
Although foresters rarely consider animals forest products, for many rural people from the West African region wild animals (known as "bushmeat" throughout the region) are highly valued forest products. They provide an important source of meat in both rural and urban household diets. Forests and fallow field areas provide the habitat for many commonly consumed wildlife species. Additionally, they ensure stream habitats for freshwater fish and crustacea; and mangrove areas which are essential for coastal fisheries. Forest dependent animals are of particular importance in humid West Africa as substitutes for wild meat are often not available. (Tsetse flies (a carrier of the cattle disease trypanosomyasis) are endemic to this ecological zone and make cattle production difficult.) While many households already have a few domestic animals (such as goats, sheep or chickens), these animals are generally consumed only on ceremonial and festival occasions and do not supply a regular
source of food (Ajayi 1979, Asibey 1974, and deVos 1977).
It is clear from the available evidence that bushmeat has been and still is a major food item (contributing from 20% to 90% of the total animal protein consumed) for most rural West Africans from humid regions. (A summary of information arranged by country is presented in Table 1.) The importance of wild animal meat in the diets of both rural and urban dwellers varies considerably depending on the availability of supply. The consumption and value of bushmeat is rapidly changing in many regions because of increased demand from urban areas and dwindling supplies of wild animals in rapidly degrading rural environments. As a result, in many cases, bushmeat consumption is declining. In many urban areas it has become a luxury food. The most commonly consumed species are now fish, small mammals, reptiles, birds and insects, where formerly large mammals were also consumed.
There is a growing body of literature on the importance of bushmeat in the West African forest region. Information on consumption is often based upon an estimate of the number of people who consume bushmeat (e.g. 72% of Southern Nigerians consume giant rat (Ajayi et al 1974)) or the percentage contribution of bushmeat to the diet (e.g. in the Cameroonian forest zone, bushmeat supplies 70-80% of the annual animal protein (Prescott-Allen et al 1982)). These kinds of estimates give a general idea of the importance of bushmeat in a region but give little indication of their importance at the household level. In most cases data from household level nutrition and anthropological studies indicates that the quantity of bushmeat being consumed is small. Bushmeat does, however, have an important nutritional role in the diet. It adds flavor and diversity, and encourages people to consume greater quantities of staple foods while providing them with vitamins and minerals (Annegers 1973,
Laburthe-Tolra 1981).
Perhaps the most important measure of the local value of bushmeat comes from studies which ask people what they value most from forests. In an evaluation of the Subri forestry project in Ghana, Korang (1986) found that 94% of those surveyed considered the worst impact of forest conversion to be the loss of bushmeat in the area. Villagers remarked that this decline was caused primarily by the loss of wild animal food resources (conversion to a plantation lowered species diversity).
Table 1: Consumption of bushmeat in the West African forest zone
COUNTRY
SOURCE
BENIN
Bushmeat is preferred over domestic meat and is commonly sold in markets. Grasscutter is the most favoured and widely sold species. Giant rat is common, but less popular (Baptist and Mensah 1986).
CAMEROON
Ajayi (1979) reports that bushmeat provides 70-80% of the animal protein consumed annually in the southern forest regions. An estimated 2000 tonnes of bushmeat are consumed annually in the country (Balinga 1977). In the southern regions, wild game provides the main source of animal protein. On average, Cameroonians consume 2.5 kg./yr./capita (Belisle 1987). Gartlan (1987) reports that in 1981 Cameroonians ate an average of 9 grammes of bushmeat a day per capita. One village level study in southern Cameroon found bushmeat (including fish) to be the sole source of animal protein in the diet. It found that men in all the study villages hunt for home consumption (Faure et al 1980). Another village study in southern Cameroon found that hunting was still an important activity, especially during the rainy season. It notes that the most common hunting method is trapping. It adds that snails, caterpillars, ants, and other insects are regularly gathered and consumed (Amat et al 1972).
CENTRE AFRIQUE
In the Kwanga district, an estimated 300 tonnes of dried caterpillars are traded yearly. 30 different caterpillar species are consumed (Leleup et al 1969).
CÔTE D'IVOIRE
Bushmeat provided an estimated 70% of the annual protein consumed in the southern rainforest area before hunting was banned in 1974 (Asibey 1986). Lacrouts and Tyc (1961) estimated that people consumed 9.7 kg. of wild meat a year - more than the consumption of all domestic meat, chicken, and milk. In a study in Bongouanou, they found that people consumed on average 87 g./day/capita of bushmeat in their field camps and an average 32 g./day/capita in their villages. In this region alone, they estimate that 2,000 tonnes of snails are eaten annually. A more recent study showed that in rural areas bushmeat consumption is still important, an average 11.3 kg./yr./capita compared with 4.3 kg./yr./capita among urban consumers. The same study notes that production of bushmeat is still greater than total domestic meat production. Bushmeat prices in Abidjan are at least 80% higher than beef prices (Asibey 1986). The Ministry estimates the total value of bushmeat in the southeastern
rural region at FCFA 630.4 million. Smoked bushmeat is far more common than fresh meat (an estimated value of FCFA 385 million, compared with FCFA 172 million) (Ministère des Eaux et Forêts, Côte d'Ivoire 1987).
GHANA
Approximately 75% of the population regularly consume wild animals, mainly game meat, fish, insects, caterpillars, termites, and snails (Asibey 1986). The Department of Wildlife and Game estimates that 80% of the rural population depend on game meat (Asibey 1987b). The most commonly consumed species are small animals such as grasscutter and duiker (Asibey 1978). For example, approximately 62,000 grasscutters were sold over a six year period in one Accra market (Asibey 1986). In two southern districts, Asibey (1986) reports that bushmeat contributed 44% and 31% of the protein consumed (fish contributed 35% and 31%, respectively). In a six year survey of one Accra market, Asibey (1987a) reported that a minimum 79,000 kg. of bushmeat was traded every year. Approximately 52,500 kg. of bushmeat was sold in a single Accra market in 1985 (Ntiamoa-Baidu 1987). Bushmeat is consumed in urban as well as rural Ghanaian households: for the country as a whole an average, 1.8 g. of
bushmeat is consumed per capita per day (Clottey 1969). Asibey (1974) estimates daily consumption at 1.7 g. for bushmeat and 1.6 g. for domestic meat. Clottey (1969) asserted that 61% of the animal protein consumed in Ghana came from "wild" sources which included both fish and game. A nutrition study conducted in 1968 estimated that Ghanaians consumed 9 g. of bushmeat and 1 g. of snails daily per capita in rural forest areas, 1 g. of bushmeat and 9 g. of snails per capita daily in coastal areas, and 8 g. of snails per capita per day in urban areas. The study estimated that the total annual consumption of bushmeat was 27,700 tonnes (Genelly 1968).
LIBERIA
Bushmeat contributes between 80 and 90% of the animal protein consumed throughout this country (Ajayi 1979). Another study estimates its contribution to be 60-70% (Sale 1981). Small antelopes and various species of monkeys are the most popular species (Jeffrey 1977). Robinson and Peal (1981) note that there are no controls on hunting and wildlife resources are being rapidly depleted. Bushmeat is even imported from Sierra Leone and Guinea.
NIGERIA
The Federal Department of Forestry (1987) notes that wildlife is most highly valued as food. A number of studies have been conducted in Nigeria on bushmeat consumption. For example, Ajayi (1971) estimates that 80% of the people in southern regions consume bushmeat and that bushmeat supplies an average 20% of the animal protein consumed. Based on results from a market survey, some 53% of rural people and 40% of the urban population consumed bushmeat regularity (more than once a month) (Martin 1978). In another survey, Martin (1983) found that 95% of the people consumed bushmeat.
The most commonly consumed species are small animals. In a study of roadside bushmeat markets in Benin state, Nigeria, Martin (1978) found that grasscutter and small antelopes were most commonly sold. Ajayi and Olawoye (1974) learned that giant rat was consumed by the majority of both urban and rural people. And Akande (1979) found that 93% of those surveyed in the southwest like bush fowl (francolins). In another study of bush fowl consumption, Ayeni (1980) asserts that 79% of the people that were interviewed consumed guinea fowl. He estimates that there are 44 million semi-domesticated guinea fowl in Nigeria.
In rural areas the consumption of bushmeat is closely associated with the conditions of the surrounding forest resources. For example, Charter (1973) discovered that in Onitsha, a densely populated region with few forests, bushmeat contributes only 7% of the total meat consumed, whereas in forested regions, bushmeat provides the majority of meat consumed: 82% in Benin and 84% in Oyo.
In a recent study of meat consumption in southern Nigeria, Dietworst (1987) found that snails were regularly consumed (several times a week) by more than a third of the households interviewed in one community, while in another community in Oyo state, 80% of the households consumed bushmeat at least several times a month and 20% consumed it daily. However, bushmeat and snail consumption is less common in a third Oyo community. In 1983, Ajayi reported that average bushmeat consumption increased from 10.1 g./capita in 1968 to 13.2 g./capita (or an estimated 421,000 tonnes a year) in 1980. Olatunbusom (1972) estimates bushmeat supplies an average 9.7 g. of protein per capita per day and fish supplies 29 g. of protein per capita per day in rural areas. In an interesting study on the quantities of bushmeat produced by farmers in three different ecological zones, Adeola and Decker (1987) found that an estimated 1,320,000 tonnes of bushmeat were produced over a six month study
period.
SENEGAL
Cremoux (1963) estimates a minimum consumption rate of 373,600 metric tonnes of wild mammals and birds per year. Vincke, Singleton, and Diouf (1987) found that the Sereer (Sine region) consume an average 12.9 g. of bushmeat per person per day. The most commonly consumed animals were birds. They note that children consume the greatest quantities of bushmeat.
SIERRA LEONE
Bushmeat was once a staple food in the Sierra Leonian diet. However, wildlife has become scarce in all regions of Sierra Leone and, as a result, it is less regularly consumed. Nonetheless, it is available in most rural and urban markets (Teleki et al 1981). A farming survey revealed that 22% of the households considered hunting an important off-farm activity and 40% considered fishing an important off-farm activity. According to a household nutrition study bushmeat is consumed by an estimated 55% of all Sierra Leonian households (Smith 1979). It notes that bushmeat and fish are the most common sources of animal protein.
TOGO
Den Hartog and deVos (1973) report that the estimated per capita consumption of rodent species in rural regions ranges from 0.5 g. to 12 g. per day.
1.1.1 Commonly consumed bushmeat species
By most accounts, the availability of game meat has declined in most parts of the West African region because of dramatic changes in the rural wildlife habitat and over-hunting. This is a result, in part, of an expanding urban market for bushmeat (Ajayi 1971, 1978, Asibey 1977, 1986, Blanc-Pamard 1979, Federal Department of Forestry, Nigeria 1987, Jeffrey 1977, Ntiamoa-Baidu 1987, Teleki et al 1981). Larger game species are no longer available (with the exception of some regions of Cameroon and some remote forest regions). As a result, the range of species that are consumed has increased (Asibey 1965, 1974); this indicates that people have become less selective about the types of wild animals they consume. Although taboos and restrictions prevent consumption of specific species by certain groups, over the region as a whole all types of animals are exploited for food.
The most commonly consumed species are small mammals such as the grasscutter and other rodents, duikers and other small antelopes, monkeys (where they are still plentiful), bushfowl, and reptiles. Grasscutters and other rodents have proven to be well-adapted to heavy exploitation (Asibey 1986, Ntiamoa-Baidu 1987, Jeffrey 1977, Martin 1983). In fact, the natural range of the grasscutter has increased with increased opening of forest areas (Asibey 1986). These small animal species are naturally more plentiful than larger species, as they have higher reproductive rates. Furthermore, hunting them is rarely restricted by protection laws (deVos 1977).
A study of farmers' hunting in different areas of Nigeria shows that the most commonly hunted species are bats, giant rat, grasscutter, squirrels, guinea fowl, lizards and snakes (Adeola and Decker 1987)'. Asibey's market studies in Ghana reveal that grasscutter is the most commonly marketed species (1965, 1974, 1987). In Senegal, birds are most commonly consumed (Vincke, Singleton, and Diouf 1987). Finally, in the forest zone of Côte d'Ivoire, duiker, squirrel, porcupine and rodents are the most commonly hunted (Blanc-Pamard 1979). (See Appendix 1 for a list of species commonly exploited in the region.)
1.1.2 The consumption of gathered animal resources
Many authors note that gathered animals (as opposed to hunted species) such as snails, turtles, termites, caterpillars and other insects also contribute significantly to the West African diet (Ajayi-1971 in Nigeria, Asibey 1974 in Ghana, Blanc-Pamard 1979 in Côte d'Ivoire, Dietworst 1987 in Nigeria, Dongmo 1985 in southern Cameroon, deVos 1977). Their consumption is only occasionally recorded, even in nutrition studies (Annegers 1973). They are especially valued for the flavouring and diversity they add to the diet (1973, Laburthe-Tolra 1981).
Some authors mention that these small animals are often eaten as "snacks" that are especially favoured by children. Children frequently catch and consume small animals such as insects, birds, and rodents (Blanc-Pamard (1979), Vincke et al 1987).
Snails are perhaps the most popular and widely consumed forest animals throughout the West African forest zone. They command high market prices in Côte d'Ivoire (Lacrouts and Tyc 1961), Nigeria (Martin 1983), and Ghana (Asibey 1986). In the southern part of Nigeria snails are the most popular "meat" consumed (Ajayi 1971). They are generally consumed during the rainy season. In a recent household study in southern Nigeria, Dietworst (1987) found that, in one community, snails were consumed regularly (several times a week) by more than a third of the households, and monthly by more than two thirds of the households.
1.1.3 The nutritional value of bushmeat
Many researchers emphasise the importance of bushmeat as a source of animal protein (Olatunbosum et al 1972, Asibey 1986, Ajayi 1979, Belisle 1987). Though there is little data on the nutritional composition of commonly consumed bushmeat species, what is known suggests that bushmeat provides an equivalent and in some cases greater quality food than domestic meats (see Appendix 2). Ajayi (1979) notes that wild animals are good sources of carbohydrates (ranging from 1% in river hog to 6% in forest genet) compared with domesticated animals from similar environments (ranging from 0.8% in pork and beef to 1.3% in mutton). He adds that the protein content of bushmeat ranges from 16-55% (compared to 11-20% for domestic animals). Snails, for example, provide a good source of protein, are low in fat, and are exceptionally high in iron, calcium and vitamin B. In addition, bushmeat is often a good source of minerals and vitamins. Generally, however, wild animals foods are consumed in
very small quantities; thus their contribution to overall protein needs may be minimal.
In a study examining the nutritional importance of forest foods, Hladik (1987) argues that bushmeat provides, most importantly, calories. Many highly prized bushmeat species are preferred for their fatty consistencies. In Southern Cameroon domestic meat is only consumed on festive occasions, whereas bushmeat supplies a regular source of food (Hladik 1987).
1.1.4 Seasonal changes in bushmeat consumption
Hunting and bushmeat collection are seasonal activities reflecting both seasonal availability of forest products and seasonal variations in agricultural labour requirements. Throughout the West African region, greater quantities of bushmeat are generally consumed during the rainy season than in the dry season (Hladik et al 1987, Dongmo 1985). In Southern Cameroon Amat and Cortadellas (1972) found that hunting (especially with traps) was most common during the rainy season. Gathering of animal foods and fishing (both generally women's activities) were also at their height during this time.
For many rural male farmers hunting is an important activity during the off-peak agriculture period. In Casamance, Senegal, Pélisser (1966) found that hunting was an important activity both for home consumption and bushmeat sale during the agricultural slack period. In Zaire, hunting is at its peak in the slack period in agriculture and is least common during the planting season (Mankoto ma Mbaelele et al 1987).
It should finally be noted that some forest animal products are only available seasonally; for example snails are available only in the rains (Dongmo 1985) while caterpillars are generally collected in the dry season (Hladik et al 1987). In his study of the Cameroonian pygmies, Bahuchet (1978) found that hunting techniques and hunted species varied by season.
1.1.5 Regional variations in bushmeat consumption
There are great regional variations in bushmeat consumption. Variations result primarily from differences in availability. Thus, the conditions of the forest resource have a direct impact on bushmeat consumption (deVos 1977). In Nigeria, where wild game is available, it supplies a great portion of the meat people consume (see Table 1). Similarly, in Cameroon, bushmeat contributes an estimated 70-80% of the total annual animal protein consumed in the southern forest region, compared with 2.8% for the country as a whole. In a consumer survey in southern Nigeria, Martin (1978) found that 62% of the rural and urban people interviewed stated that the lack of bushmeat limited their consumption.
Consumption also varies from village to village and household to household. Dietworst's (1987) meat consumption survey in Nigeria showed that bushmeat preferences, purchasing, and consumption varied considerably not only village to village but also household to household. (See also Orraca-Tetteh (1987) for similar information on Ghana.)
Conclusion
There are few studies which focus on the frequency with which bushmeat is consumed (such as Dietworst's study) or on the nutritional importance of bushmeat in the diet (e.g. Hladik study). General consumption figures can only be taken as indicative; they do not elucidate the role of bushmeat in the household diet. However, the information that is available does demonstrate that wild animal resources are still important components of the majority of rural and urban consumers' diets. The most commonly consumed animals are rodents such as grasscutters and antelopes such as duiker; bushfowl and snails are also extensively consumed. Smoked and fresh fish are the most common source of protein throughout the region. Generally, fish is consumed daily in small quantities (Orraca-Tetteh 1987). It is not, however, possible to distinguish between consumed species which are dependent on forest habitats, and those that come from other environments. In most areas bushmeat is preferred over
domestic varieties of meat, but its consumption is limited by dwindling availability and high market prices.
1.2 Household consumption of forest plant foods
1.2.1 Diversity of forest foods consumed by rural households
1.2.2 The contributions of forest foods to diets
1.2.3 Oil palm foods
1.2.4 The seeds of Irvingia gabonensis
There are vast numbers of edible plant products garnered from forests, including seeds and nuts, leaves, fruits, roots and tubers, fungi, and salt. Collectively they add diversity and flavour to the diet while providing protein, energy, vitamins and essential minerals. The contribution of forest foods to diets varies considerably from region to region. Throughout West Africa, however, they supplement staple foods and are consumed during seasonal food shortages when agricultural crop supplies dwindle. Forest foods, especially leaves and nuts, supplement rural diets by contributing to sauces that accompany carbohydrate staples. Some forest fruits are often consumed throughout the day as snacks. They also supply buffer food sources during emergency periods (Irvine 1952, Okigbo 1986). In some regions, forest species that are valued for their food products are protected in farm and fallow fields (see Appendix 3 for a list of commonly consumed forest species).
There is a great deal of descriptive information available on edible forest foods (Okigbo 1985, 1986, Gbile 1983, Irvine 1952, Ake Assi 1984, Abbiw 1989). However, few studies have attempted to examine the frequency with which foods are consumed, the nutritional value of various foods, the prevalence of foods' use, or how resident populations value foods. There are a few household level analytic studies which help to illustrate the importance of these resources to local populations (Department of Forest Resource Management 1986, Hladik et al. 1987, Koagne 1986, Okafor 1981, Osei-Manu 1980).
A considerable number of historic and present day botanical studies point out the multitude of food resources found in the region's forests (Dalziel 1937, Irvine 1961, Walker et al 1961, Burkhill 1985). Okigbo (1983) notes that more than 1500 species of wild plants are (or have been) consumed by different African peoples. Grivetti, Frentzel, Ginsberg, Howell, and Ogle's works (1987) synthesize the literature on the uses and nutritional values of wild food resources throughout Africa: they conclude that wild plants are an essential component of many Africans' diets. Forest inventories can also provide information on useful tree species. For example in Ghana, Abbiw (1989) describes 62 edible wild fruit species, 60 species used as salt substitutes, 100 species used for their leaves, and 19 species whose roots are consumed. (See also Okafor (1979), Nigeria; Vivien (1988), Cameroon; Irvine (1956), Ghana.)
1.2.1 Diversity of forest foods consumed by rural households
Compared with regional botanic surveys, detailed village-level studies present more specific descriptive information, providing insight into the varying importance of different edible species and the ways in which they are used. When taken as a whole, these recent case-specific accounts indicate that some forest foods are still used in many communities. In a village study in southern Cameroon, for example, Amat and Cortadellas (1972) found that palm nuts, palm wine, Irvingia sp. seeds, and the fruits of Dacryodes edulis and Pachylobus edulis were all commonly consumed.
In villages in Côte d'Ivoire, gathered products include cola nuts, palm fruit and wine, mushrooms, wild fruits and other foods. These are especially appreciated during field work and when staple food supplies have diminished (Blanc-Pamard 1979) (see also Téhé 1980). The Guéré and Oubi (in Côte d'Ivoire) also gather many foods from forest areas. These foods are eaten as snacks (e.g. Coula edulis, and Mammea africana) added to sauces that are consumed at the main meal (e.g. seeds of Irvingia gabonensis and Ricinodendron heudelottii), and sometimes used for salt (e.g. Ficus exasperata) (Téhé 1980). A village study in the Ashante region of Ghana (Osei-Owusu 1981) reveals that 28 wild food plants were commonly gathered and consumed (see Appendix 4). The majority were eaten "in the bush" as snacks, or added to soups and sauces for flavoring.
In many cases the forest trees that are valued for their foods are left in farm and fallow fields. In the Ho district, Ghana, Asamoah (1985) found that forest trees left on farm and fallow lands were valued for their food products (see also Sections 5.3, 6.6). For example, the young leaves of Chlorophora excelsa and Ceiba pentandra were added to sauces. Similar findings are reported in many farming system studies (see, eg., Okafor and Okigbo).
1.2.2 The contributions of forest foods to diets
Forest foods contribute to the diet, supplementing staple foods and providing foods during seasonal and emergency food shortage periods. According to one study from southern Cameroon the leaves of Triumfetta rhomboidea are used in an average 19 out of 20 meals, the fruits of Cola acuminata are consumed daily in most households, and the fruit of Pachylobus edulis is common in sauces which accompany main meals (Koagne 1986). Pélé and Berre (1967) also provide considerable descriptive information on the uses of forest foods in southern Cameroon. They describe the different ways in which forest foods are consumed: as snacks (e.g. Detarium senegalense), as meat substitutes, as staple main dishes (e.g. fruit of Pachylobus edulis), for their oil (e.g. nut of Mimusops djave), in sauces (e.g. leaves of Vernonia amygdalina) and as condiments (e.g. the bark of Scorodoploeus zenkeri is used to add a garlic like flavouring). (For similar information on southern Nigerian consumption see
especially Okafor 1979, 1981.)
Pélé and Berre (1967) further note that some species are of exceptional nutritional value: for example the fruit of Detarium senegalense are rich sources of vitamin C (1000-2000 mg./100 g.),and the seeds of Ricinodendron africanum provide 570 calories/100 g. and are 28% protein. They add that plants gathered from forest and bush areas are valued most at times when other food sources fail (e.g. dry season).
In this region fruits are consumed throughout the day as part of meals and as snacks, especially by children. But consumption of forest foods (as well as the incorporation of certain species into farm fields) varies considerably from one group of people to another. This is well illustrated in studies which include information on food taboos (e.g. Hladik et al 1987, Motte 1982, Abbiw 1989).
Some species are widely consumed, such as palm oil and wine and the seeds of Irvingia gabonensis. While few studies examine the quantities of forest foods that are consumed, some consumption data does exist on oil palm foods and Irvingia gabonensis seeds. They can serve as examples of how important some forest produce may be.
1.2.3 Oil palm foods
Oil palms (Elaeis guineensis) are the most widely exploited forest species (from secondary growth) in the entire region. Their fruit and kernel are processed into edible oil and their sap is used to make wine and alcohol. Nicol (1972) estimates that palm products account for 10% of the total energy consumed in West African diets. Furthermore, they are an important source of vitamin A.
Smith (1979) estimates that 96% of the rural households in Sierra Leone consume palm oil while 69% of them consume palm kernels. Palm oil provides 14% of total energy intake in the Sierra Leonean diet (Longhurst 1985). Another study estimates that households on Turner's peninsula, Sierra Leone consume, on average, a litre of palm oil a day (Commonwealth Secretariat 1980).
In southeastern Nigeria, Nweke, Walker, Okoro, and Hanu (1985) found that 89% of the households surveyed consumed palm oil. In 1982 Nigerians consumed an estimated 27 g./person/day of palm oil and an estimated 69g./capita/day of palm wine (Ajayi 1983). Palm oil is also commonly used in southeastern Côte d'Ivoire, where its consumption was valued at FCFA 177 million in 1967; of this an estimated 72% is home-produced. Palm wine consumption was valued at FCFA 271.5 million. Unlike palm oil, the greater portion (63%) of palm wine is purchased (Ministère du Plan 1967). (For information on Cameroon see Koagne 1986, Moby-Etia 1982.)
1.2.4 The seeds of Irvingia gabonensis
The seeds of the forest tree Irvingia gabonensis are also commonly consumed throughout the region, especially in southern Nigeria. A considerable amount of research has been conducted on the consumption of this species (Okafor 1981 and 1979, Agbor 1986, Department of Forest Resource Management 1986). Its seeds are used in sauces and soups, giving them a desirable glutinous consistency. In their feasibility study on forest fruit trees, the Department of Forest Resource Management in Ibadan (1986) estimated that annual consumption of Irvingia seeds in southern regions of Nigeria ranged from 3.2 to 14.13 kg./yr./household. They noted that consumption was greatest in rural areas, but that there was a growing demand for the seeds in urban centres (they are even imported from Cameroon). Oyakhilome (1985) estimated that Irvingia seeds are used in one third of all soup preparations in Nigeria's southern region. An analysis of the nutritional composition of Irvingia seeds reveals
that they are an exceptional source of fat (72%) (Okafor 1981). The fruit of the sweet variety are consumed raw; often 15-20 fruits at one time. Consumption is highest during the rainy season. (See Agbor 1986, includes information on fruiting patterns and productivity at different ages.)
Conclusion
It is clear that the consumption of at least some forest foods is still extremely common throughout the region. The significance of forest foods should not be understated. One study of five Gambian villages (Phillis et al 1982) found that forest snacks alone contributed between 3% and 10 % of total energy and protein consumed. However, many authors note that the diversity of foods garnered from forest areas is declining (Okigbo 1980, 1986, Gbile 1983, and Laburthe-Tolra 1981). Laburthe-Tolra (1981) has suggested that declines in the nutritional quality of the diet may result from decreases in diet diversity.
A study on the local use of forest resources in eight villages in southern Cameroon provides perhaps the clearest illustration of the value of forest resources (Faure et al 1980). It found that every studied village exploited forests for edible fruits, nuts, leaves, bark, and roots. However, in one of the study villages a far greater diversity of forest foods were described by villagers, who identified 41 popular forest fruits, compared to an average 12 fruit species identified in other nearby study communities. This village had recently "lost" its surrounding forest to rubber plantations and a national forest reserve. The researchers argued that these people could identify more species because they became more aware of the value of the surrounding resources after they had been taken away.
1.3 The use of forest resources in traditional medicine
1.3.1 Plant resources used as medicines
1.3.2 Studies of plant medicines used by specific groups of people
1.3.3 The day-to-day use of plant medicines
1.3.4 Rules for plant medicine production and use
1.3.5 The extent of plant medicine use
1.3.6 Effectiveness of plant medicines
1.3.7 Availability of plant medicine resources
Forests provide essential components of the traditional health treatments used throughout the West African forest zone. They supply the medication for the vast majority of both rural and urban dwellers (an estimated 75-90% of the population rely on traditional medical treatments). Although there are a great variety of healing practices and beliefs, common to roost systems is the use of plants in conjunction with ritual and mystical practices. These systems do not distinguish between physical and psychological elements of an illness, and thus rely largely on faith (Cousteix 1961). It is important to note that forest plants are components of a medical system, rather than the sole medicinal resource. Common plant treatments are known and used by the majority of rural people in addition to those used by specialist healers. Few studies distinguish between these day-to-day uses of forest plants and those of healers.
In many cultures the distinction between what is consumed as food or medicine is not clear: foods are thought to have different healing qualities. Plants are often added to foods or are taken as tonics to promote good health (Cousteix 1961). Some authors note that in addition to their healing qualities, plant medicines can contribute important minerals and vitamins to the diet, thus favouring overall health.
The literature on traditional plant medicines is vast. Botanical studies describe the plants used and diseases treated in a country or region, or by a specific population group. Chemical and pharmacological studies present information on chemical composition of commonly used medicine plants (thus analysing the possible effectiveness of a particular plant substance). However, these studies rarely focus on the effectiveness of traditional treatments and do not assess plant material as it is traditionally prepared (e.g. in conjunction with other plant materials), nor do they examine the extent to which treatments are used. No studies attempt to place a value on the health care provided by traditional healers and traditional plant medicines in terms of the costs of their modern equivalents. Thus, while their is a vast amount of information on which species have been or are currently used in traditional medical treatments, there is little information to assess their
effectiveness. Nevertheless, discussions of the prevalence and evolution of traditional healing systems give an indication of the extent to which forest resources are still relied upon for medicines (e.g. Kerharo et al 1974).
In several countries of the region (e.g. Cameroon, Nigeria, Ghana) efforts are being made to develop traditional as well as modern (Western) medicine practices. In these countries research centers have been established expressly for the study of traditional plant medicines and traditional healing practices. Their efforts so far have concentrated on identifying the myriad of plant medicines used in different cultures, identifying healing practices associated with particular illnesses and conducting chemical and pharmacological analyses of commonly used plant medicines. In addition, unions and registries have been established to promote traditional health practices: in Ghana there were 3,360 registered traditional healers in 1978; in Cameroon, more than 3,000 traditional healers are members of a traditional medicine union.
This study only touches on some of the research that has been carried out on plant medicines in the region. There is a great deal of botanic information available on plant medicines, and a growing body of literature on their chemical composition (some of which is summarised in the Literature Overview). The structure of the following discussion reflects, in part, the kind of information that is available.
1.3.1 Plant resources used as medicines
While botanic studies have identified a vast array of medicinal plants in the region, it is difficult to distinguish between past and present medicinal uses of plants. This makes it difficult to evaluate the extent to which forest resources are currently used as medicines and to identify the species which are most important (Oliver-Bever 1986, Abbiw 1989, Ake Assi various, Adjanohoun et al 1979). Nonetheless, the botanical studies which examine the medicinal use of plant resources indicate that there is great diversity in the number of plant resources that are available in the region, and that these plants are widely exploited for their for their medicinal qualities.
Most botanic studies include descriptions of each plant, its habitat, and information on its use in traditional medicine. Collectively the botanic studies describe thousands of plants medicines that are found in the region as well as treatments for hundreds of ailments. A list of the commonly used plant medicines from the West African region is included in Appendix 5.
Some studies focus on ailments and their associated plant remedies. For example, Ake Assi (1980) discusses some treatments for female sterility commonly employed in Côte d'Ivoire. Kerharo and Adam (1974) discuss treatments used by healers in Senegal for treating common diseases. For example, one healer's treatment for syphillis included drinking a decoction of the roots of ten plant species (Guiera senegalensis, Faidherbia albida, Maytenus senegalensis, Leptadenia hastata, Piliostygma thonningii, Strophanthus sarmentosus, Cordyla pinnata, Annona senegalensis, Bauhinia rufescens and Stereospermum kunthianum).
In many cases one plant species is used for treating a variety of ailments (MacFoy (various), Kerharo et al 1974, Abbiw 1989). For example, in the forest zone of Côte d'Ivoire, Ake Assi (1984) notes that Cassia occidental is used in eleven medicinal recipes. Decoctions of its leaves and roots are used as a diuretic, laxative, tonic and abortificant, as well as in treatments for asthma, cataracts, jaundice, and kwashiorkor. Cassia is also used in conjunction with other plant species (Kamara-Ajaron 1980).
1.3.2 Studies of plant medicines used by specific groups of people
While regional studies illustrate the breadth and variety of species which are exploited over the region, in-depth household studies provide more information on how and when different species are actually used. Many anthropological, ethnobotanical and geographic studies provide insight into commonly exploited medicinal plants. The following are examples of the kinds of information available from these areas of study.
Amat and Cortadellas' (1972) village study of the Beti in southern Cameroon includes a great deal of information on traditional medical practices. The traditional values ascribed to trees are generally associated with their healing or magical qualities. The Beti classify sickness as "simple" (treatable by family members or with Western medicine) or Beti (where traditional healers are required). Simple illnesses are normally treated in the family (e.g. stomachaches, toothaches, and diarrhoea). Twenty-five commonly known plant remedies for these kinds of ailments are described. Traditional healers often have specialties (e.g. specialists for fractures, jaundice, obstetrics). Some healers specialize in "Beti" ailments where sorcery is involved. Some plant medicines may only be used by these specialist healers (see also Section 3). (For other Cameroon information see Biyiti et al 1983; Mbi et al 1986.)
In his study of the Ewondo in Cameroon, Cousteix (1961) identifies more than 200 plant species used in medicinal treatments. He describes different types of ailments and their associated plant treatments (e.g. illnesses of the intestines, problems specific to women, and health of newly born). For example, women's sterility is treated with a decoction of the bark of Baillonella toxisperma (in a vaginal injection); the bark of Pycnanthus kombo (which has exceptionally high oil content) is drunk by mothers to improve the quality of their milk; and the bark of Chlorophora excelsa is used successfully against fungal skin infections. A decoction of the bark of Mitragyna stipulosa is taken as a heart tonic; its chemical composition (which includes mitraphylline and mitraversine) explains its efficacy.
In a village study in Sierra Leone, MacFoy (1986) identifies 70 plant species used by healers and villagers to treat a multitude of diseases. He notes that many treatments involve a combination of plants: i.e. the roots of Maranta arundinacea (high in starch) and the leaves of Ocimum gratissimum are used in treatments of diarrhoea. There are several common remedies for bacterial sores: for example the leaves of Aspilia africana or Jatropha curcas are ground and applied as a poultice.
These studies and similar ones all indicate that plant medicines continue to be commonly used by households throughout the region (see Tall 1984, Motte 1982, Blanc-Pamard 1979, Gill et al 1986).
1. Heliconia rostrata; 2. Bixa orellana; 3. Passiflora coccinea; 4. Jatropha gossypifolla
1.3.3 The day-to-day use of plant medicines
Plant medicines are also widely used by non-healers. In an Ashante village (Ghana) Amponsah (1980) found that all villagers regularly employed traditional plant medicines. He identified 105 commonly used medicinal plant species, noting that most were used to treat more than one ailment and that there were generally several treatments for the same disease.
Generally people distinguish between those plant species or remedies common to all and those known only by (or restricted to) healers. The Beti (in Cameroon) distinguish between treatments in this manner (see Section 1.3.2). As do the Ando of Côte d'Ivoire (Visser 1975). In this region women are especially knowledgeable regarding common medicines; they manage their collection, preparation, and administration. Women generally learn about plant medicines from their mothers or other elders. Specialists (generally men), on the other hand, go through long apprentice periods learning about different plant treatments.
Traditional health systems are thought to rely principally on curative rather than preventative practices. There are, however, many household treatments that are both preventative and curative. In a survey of 200 mothers attending a Lagos health clinic, Abosede and Akesode (1986) found that 80% gave an herbal cure for infant dysentery (called Agbo-Jedi) to their children. Seventy-four percent of the mothers stated they were administering Agbo-Jedi for dysentery, forty-seven percent fed it to their children as a preventative measure. Visser (1975) has also identified several treatments which were administered daily as preventative measures (especially to young children) by the Ando in Côte d'Ivoire. Plants may be taken as general tonics, either in infusions or baths: in Sierra Leone, the Mende bathe their children in a decoction of the leaves of Alternanthera sessilis to make them healthy (MacFoy 1983) (see Sarpong 1986, Ghana).
Chewsticks are probably the most widely used plant "medicine" in the entire West African region. They provide the primary form of dental care. Sticks made from stems, bark, or roots of several different species are chewed several times daily to clean and freshen teeth. Chewsticks are popular both in rural and urban areas (see Section 4.4). There are many tree species which are used for Chewsticks (Portère (1974) identified 123 species, Adu-Tutu et al (1979) 107 species, Isawumi (1978) 24 species, and Abbiw (1989) 28 species). The most commonly used species include: Garcinia afzelii, G. kola, G. epunctata, Acacia kamerunensis, Teclea verdoorniana, Massularia acuminata, Morinda lucida, Baphia nitida, Phyllanthus muellerianus, Fagara zanthoxyloides, Vernonia amygdalina, and Acioa barteri. Species have particular flavours (bitter, sweet, and antiseptic) and qualities (hard and soft). Chemical analyses indicate that these common species have some anti-microbial properties,
explaining their effectiveness against tooth decay (Isawumi 1978, and Adu-Tutu et al 1979). Some chewstick species are also used for treating a variety of medical ailments: Paullinia pinnata is used for treating chest and abdominal pains and coughs; Vernonia colorata is taken for nausea and abdominal pains; and Azadirachta indica (Neem) is used for toothaches and fevers.
1.3.4 Rules for plant medicine production and use
There are often rites associated with the gathering and use of different plant medicines. For example, some plants may be collected only at certain times of the day or from specific locations. MacFoy (1986) notes that Mende healers believe some medicines are less active if they are gathered after the dew falls. Visser (1975) remarks that for Ando healers (in Côte d'Ivoire) the timing and manner in which plant medicines are collected determine their medico-magical power. Leaves cannot be collected mid-day (because the plants' spirit might be out walking), and are most effective when collected in the early morning or at sundown. In some cases sacrifices must be made before medicines can be gathered from a particular plant.
Often medical effectiveness is thought to be highest from plants collected in the wild and in particular locations. Plant medicines that are collected from deep in the forest are thought to be stronger. For example, the medicinal qualities of the herbaceous weed Euphorbia hirta are stronger when gathered from the wild rather than cultivated areas (they contain higher concentrations of active constituents in the wild) (ENDA 1987). Generally, medicines are collected and prepared when they are needed rather than being stored (Visser 1975).
1.3.5 The extent of plant medicine use
Although many studies assert that traditional healers and their plant medicines provide the only health care to the majority of people throughout the region (Boye no date) few of them assess the extent to which plant medicines are still used. Information on the general popularity of plant medicines can only be deduced from studies assessing traditional healing practices. Only in the last few years have governments in the region begun to recognize the importance of traditional healers and integrate their work with those practicing "western" medicine. There is no information on the extent to which medicinal plants are used by people themselves as opposed to being provided by traditional healers. But, despite the lack of concrete studies, researchers express little doubt that plant medicines are still widely used. Indeed, in some regions, the use of plant medicines is thought to be increasing due to the rising cost of western drugs and negative experiences (or disillusion) with
modern drugs and the modern health care system (Boye n.d, INADES 1984, Gbile 1988, Wood 1987, Nkodo 1988).
In an Ashante village in Ghana, Amponsah Agyemang (1980) found that traditional medicine was still of great importance. Despite the fact that half of the village population is Christian and there is no fetish priest in the village, all the villagers that were interviewed regularly employed traditional plant medicines. In a study of traditional health care in Senegal, Engelhard and Robineau (1981) found that 62% of "modern" doctors (interviewed) in Dakar refer their patients to traditional healers. In Pejehun District, Sierra Leone, MacFoy (1986) notes that traditional cures are often used before turning to western medicine (sometimes the reverse is true). Similarly, in a village near Freetown, Sierra Leone, MacFoy and Cline (1986) find that plant medicines are the most commonly used treatments despite people's proximity to "modern" facilities (Freetown health clinics and the University). The majority prefer herbal medicine because it is familiar (tradition and past
experience) and less expensive than antibiotics in pharmacies and markets (see also INADES 1984).
1.3.6 Effectiveness of plant medicines
Studies which address the effectiveness of different traditional medicinal treatments generally evaluate their potential for pharmaceutical development. Thus, information can be found in chemical and pharmacological studies which analyse the phytochemistry of different species. However, these studies generally present their results in terms of a plant's chemical composition. They do not link the presence of a particular substance (e.g. flavanoids) with its traditional use (e.g. Puri et al 1964, Mbi 1985, Gill et al 1986, Cline 1985, Dwuma-Badu 1986). They rarely examine the combined effects of many treatments. In addition, the potential health benefits that plant minerals and vitamins provide are not considered. Thus the layman is at a loss to judge the effectiveness of a particular plant for treating a particular illness or as one element of the complete traditional healing system (deRosny 1981).
There are however some interesting research programmes underway. In Ghana at the Mampong-Akwapim Center for research into plant medicines, traditional healers and western trained doctors are working together on research into the potential for development of plant medicines. They are focussing on the treatment of asthma, diabetes, malaria, jaundice, epilepsy, and aenemias (Sarpong 1986). Researchers at the Faculty of Pharmacy (University of Science and Technology, Kumasi) have focused on analysing the chemical constituents of the plant medicines derived from Cryptolepis sanguinolenta, Rhigiocarya racemifera, Triclesia sp., and Griffonia simplicifolia (Dwuma-Badu 1986). In Nigeria, at the University of Ibadan (Nigeria) researchers have analysed the chemical composition of some widely used medicinal plants and found them to have properties which explain their traditional uses (Ekong 1979). The Center for Research on Plant Medicines in Cameroon has also been conducting research
on medicinal plants, combining the talents of botanists, chemists and pharmacologists (Djoko et al 1983).
Moreover, a substantive amount of independent research is taking place. Gbile and Adensina (1987) provide an insightful review of some common Nigerian plant medicines. They combine information on the traditional uses, chemical constituents and potential efficacy of different products (see also Gbile 1986). And Dwuma-Badu (1983) reports that a decoction of the roots of Combretum mucronatum is a very effective treatment against guinea worm in Ghana. In a clinical test of 44 patients, 43 (98%) were successfully cured by drinking aqueous decoctions of this root for one week.
A great deal of research has been conducted on the effectiveness of different plant species as molluscicides - especially valued for combatting schistosomiasis (see the collection of papers edited by Essien et al 1983). Several plant species have properties which kill snails, the intermediary hosts of schistosomiasis. Since infestations of the parasite are often localised around village washing places and irrigation canals, frequent treatment of the water with molluscicidal plant chemicals could provide a possible control mechanism. Experiments have been conducted on the applicability of treating water near villages with molluscicidal plants. Some experiments show effective results, although it is noted that the concentrations of molluscicides can vary considerably from plant to plant and site to site (Adewunmi et al 1983).
The preceding examples only reveal some of the findings of the work being carried out on the phytochemical properties of traditionally used plant medicines (see also Anyiwo et al 1986, Sofowora 1982, Kerharo 1970, Mbi et al 1986, ENDA 1987, and the "Conseil Africain et Malgaches pour l'Enseignement Supérieur" 1977). They also focus on results that have shown positive correlations between pharmacological tests and traditional uses. Not all traditional medicines have proven effective (in the scientific sense). It is clear, however, that in some cases, the plants that have traditionally been used in treatments (especially bacterial and fungicidal infections) contain chemical constituents which explain their effectiveness.
1.3.7 Availability of plant medicine resources
Plant medicines have traditionally been gathered from forest areas, fallow lands, village common lands as well as from agricultural fields. Plant species used by traditional healers often come from specific locations which may be at great distances from villages. One healer remarked that the availability of plant medicines was seasonal, they were often very rare during the dry season and plentiful during the rains (INADES 1984). In some instances, traditional healers are centered in regions known for their exceptional plant medicine resources. For example, the Oku mountain area of southern Cameroon is renowned for its medicinal plants, as well as its traditional health practitioners (Macleod 1987).
In assessing the extent to which forest resources are used by local people in the Littoral region of Cameroon, Faure and Vivien (1980) examined the spatial area used for the collection of different forest products. They compared the distances people would go into the forest in search of fuelwood, fruits, bushmeat, construction materials and medicines, and found that people regularly travelled great distances (10 to 20 kilometers) in search of particular plant medicines.
Euphorbia hirta: Plant used in treatment of amoebic dysentery
Studies which examine the uses of on-farm and fallow land trees sometimes indicate the ways people use their surrounding environment for medicinal products. In some cases farm tree species are left in fields because they are valued medicinally (however, farm trees are generally protected for a multitude of reasons, making it difficult to single out a particular use) (see also Asamoah 1985, Ghana; Okafor et al 1987, Nigeria). Visser (1975) notes that many women cultivate or protect near their settlements species which they use daily. For example, Jatropha curcas is often planted near Ando houses (in Côte d'Ivoire); its leaves are used for treating wounds and abcesses and the latex is used for treating wounds.
Conclusion
Forest resources provide the main source of medicines for the majority of people in the West African humid zone. Research on the effectiveness of these traditional systems is only just beginning. No studies have examined how people themselves view their traditional health systems, their associated problems, and the ways they might be improved upon. And there is not enough information to assess whether these losses can be compensated for with other plant substitutes, or by incorporating medicinal plants into farming areas as often the potency and value of plant treatments are associated with their location and particular habitat.
As the forest areas continue to decline throughout the region, it is likely that the availability of plant medicines will also decline. The INADES illustration included in Appendix 6 reflects this common concern. In a village study in Sierra Leone, MacFoy (1986) learned that healers now have to search farther into the forest areas for "effective" plant medicines (those found at the periphery or on disturbed sites are often believed to be less potent).
1.4 Household consumption of fuelwood
Throughout the entire West African region fuelwood provides the main source of energy for rural households and the main source of cooking fuel in urban areas. Fuelwood and charcoal provide the predominant source of energy for small-scale processing enterprises such as palm oil production and fish smoking. Estimates of fuelwood consumption exist for most urban centers in the region, especially for fuelwood consumption in arid regions (Davidson 1985, Ministère des Affaires Sociales 1986, Njomgang 1987, Oguntala 1986, Energy Initiatives for Africa 1986, Direction des Eaux et Forêts 1982). Fewer studies have been conducted on fuelwood consumption of rural households in the humid forest zone. It is generally assumed, however, that rural households from this region do not suffer from fuelwood scarcities (with the exception of some areas surrounding urban centers).
Fuelwood production is often associated with agriculture - when bush is cleared it provides a source of fuelwood and, for those near urban centers, a source of cash income. In his study of fuelwood production and marketing in Enugu (southern Nigeria), Enunwaonye (1983) found that 15 species were especially valued as fuelwood, among them Bridelia atroviridis and Pycnanthus angolensis. Many studies note that trees left on farm and fallow lands are valued as sources of fuel (see Depommier 1983, Asamoah 1985, Elletey 1986, Herren-Gemmill 1988, Umeh 1985, Okafor et al 1987). (Species valued especially as fuel are listed in Appendix 8.)
Table 2: Regional fuelwood consumption estimates
COUNTRY
SOURCE
CAMEROON
Njomgang (1987) estimates that fuelwood consumption is 1.6 kg/day per person. Sixty percent of the Yaoundé households use fuelwood and charcoal for cooking; an even higher percentage are fuelwood users in rural areas. In southern Cameroon, Faure and Vivien (1980) have found that fuelwood (23 species) is the only source of energy in the study villages. It is used for all cooking, crop drying, fish smoking and bushmeat smoking. Charcoal is used for ironing. Fuelwood is gathered daily, primarily from farm clearings. People do not collect fuelwood at distances beyond their fields (approximately 2 km.). They estimated that households consume between 0.025 and 0.25 m^3/day/household (the highest consumption being in households in a fishing village which is involved in fish smoking). For the study region they estimated that the average household consumed 0.1 m^3/day of fuelwood. Thus, for the Littoral region as a whole, households consume between an estimated 200,000 and 300,000
m^3 a year.
Moby-Etia (1982) reports that mangrove forests are especially valued by the Wouri in southern Cameroon for fuelwood for fish smoking.
CÔTE D'IVOIRE
Here, fuelwood provides 83% of the country's total household energy (charcoal is, however becoming increasingly popular). In Abidjan charcoal is preferred as women find that charcoal is often cheaper than fuelwood; in addition it can be purchased in smaller quantities. Overall fuelwood consumption is estimated to be 6.25 million m^3/yr. (Ministère des Affaires Sociales 1986). Another energy study estimates the total fuelwood consumption to be 2 million m^3/yr. In regions near urban centers, fuelwood and charcoal production are important sources of income for farmers.
LIBERIA
In Liberia charcoal accounts for 30% of rural energy consumption and 50% of urban consumption (Energy Initiatives for Africa 1986).
NIGERIA
Ardayfio (1983) identified 11 species which were commonly used. Most fuelwood was collected dry and generally as a by-product of farming. She found that people consumed from 1.9 kg. to 4 kg./day/capita (depending on household size). Though people had species preferences (e.g. wood that had a long lasting burn), choice was generally based upon proximity. Preferred species included: Ficus asperifolia, Celtis zenkeri, and Funtumia elastica.
SIERRA LEONE
Fuelwood provides 72% of the total energy consumed by all sectors in Sierra Leone. Charcoal provides another 10% (Davidson 1985). In a fuelwood study in Bo and Makeni Districts Kamara (1986) found that fuelwood was the primary source of energy for all rural and urban households. Rural households in Bo consumed an average 3560 kg./yr. of fuelwood and in Makeni they consumed an average 3485 kg./yr. (see Tables in Appendix 7). Considerable quantities of fuelwood were used for processing farm produce (accounting for 13% of the total energy consumed). Most wood was gathered from farm and fallow fields. On average half of what was collected was marketed (indicating a strong urban demand).
In the coastal areas mangroves provide the only source of energy for domestic uses as well as for fish smoking activities (Chong 1987). They are also an important source of charcoal.
1.5 Forest resources used for house construction
In most rural communities of the West African forest zone, forests supply the materials for house construction: primarily poles, leaves (for roofing) and palm petioles ("bamboo"), lianas and bark. Descriptive information on "traditional" housing materials and methods of construction can be found in studies of many different kinds: botanical, anthropological and geographic. In some cases socio-economic studies and surveys include information on housing types. It is difficult, however, to find data on the quantities of these materials that are used, discussions about people's problems finding desired materials, or estimates of the building materials used and needed locally.
Although house construction styles have changed in some areas, the majority of rural people still rely on their surrounding forest resources for the bulk of their house construction needs. Palm products (especially Raphia sp.) are commonly used throughout the entire region for wall and roof construction. Blanc-Pamard (1980) notes that Raphia palms are most prized for house construction in Côte d'Ivoire. And, in western Cameroon, Depommier (1983) estimates that 60% of the material used to construct a house derives from Raphia palm.
Mud and wattle constructed houses ("Poto-poto" style) are the most common in the humid West African region. Gartlan (1987) found that in southern Cameroon of a total 253 buildings surveyed, 223 (88%) were traditional houses built from local materials with thatched roofing. However, throughout the region the forest plant species that are used in house building vary depending upon resource availability and cultural practice (see Téhé 1980 & Blanc-Pamard 1979, Côte d'Ivoire; Okigbo 1980, Nigeria; Profizi 1983, Benin). The Poto-poto style houses use wattle cross-slats (generally the leaf petioles of raphia palm, other palms, or bamboo) tied with lianas to standing poles (which are young tree stems). The generally preferred species is Coula edulis because it is termite resistant. The resulting frame is then filled in with mud. The roofs are built using palm leaves folded into tiles and palm leaf petioles (for the roofing beams). In many regions, traditional thatched roofs are
being replaced with galvanized metal sheet roofs. (See Appendix 9 for a list of species commonly used for house construction.)
Villagers reconstructing the roofs of their houses in Togo
In a study on the evolution of rural housing in southern Cameroon, Franqueville and Tissander (1975) state that traditional rural houses were constructed with leaves, bark, palm leaves and leaf petioles, and tree stems (poles). They note that, during the colonial administration, residents were forced to changed their house construction style to poto-poto because it was considered more permanent.
In a geographic study in Foumbot (Western Cameroon), Tanga (1974) investigated the quantities of materials used in building traditional houses. A one-room poto-poto house used on average 35 poles, 600 palm petioles (or bamboo stems), and 500 palm leaves as thatch roofing. These houses last approximately 8 years. Also in Cameroon, Wundo (1977) evaluated the comparative costs of house building: a poto-poto house (one room) costs approximately FCFA 80,000 (assesses the cost of forest materials, e.g. poles, palm petoiles, twine at FCFA 50,000). He estimated that a semi-permanent house (sun-dried brick walls) costs more than three times that of a traditional house, while a permanent structure (cement construction) would cost more than 15 times that of a traditional dwelling (See also Faure and Vivien 1980, Gartlan 1987, Turay 1987, Laburthe-Tolra 1981).
1.6 Household equipment and utensils made from forest products
Forests supply the raw materials used to make a wide range of household utensils. These products can broadly be classified as household furnishings, cooking equipment and utensils, or tools. Many different species are used to make a wide range of different utensils (see Appendix 10). However, information about these uses is scanty and generally descriptive. The best sources of information are ethnobotanical and anthropological studies. The following examples illustrate the ways in which forest vegetation may be used to meet day to day household needs. While some uses are undoubtedly disappearing with the introduction of "imported" substitutes, it is clear from contemporary accounts that people still rely on their surrounding environment to produce objects needed daily.
In southern Cameroon, Faure and Vivien (1980) found that there were a myriad of household uses for the surrounding forest vegetation. They discovered new uses for forest species in every village they investigated. They identified 8 species commonly used for furniture making (e.g. Detarium microcarpum), 12 species for making tool handles (e.g. Alchornea sp.), and 13 species for cooking utensils (e.g. Alstonia boonei). Abbiw (1989) describes a similar diversity of species used for household goods in Ghana: he identifies 20 species used as binding materials such as ropes and ties, 47 species exploited for their fibre, as well as a multitude of species used for making pestles and mortar, resins and gums, furnishings, tools, basketry, matting material and cooking utensils.
Multiple use of basketry as household equipment and construction in Mali
Gollnhofer, Salée, and Sillans (1975) note that in Gabon specific objects are often made from a particular species. And different groups of people also use particular species for different household items: for example, the Wouri (Côte d'Ivoire) make oil pressers with wood of Pterocarpus soyauxii, they use Khaya anthotheca for furniture and Alstonia congensis for making bowls, ladles, mortar, and furniture. The Igbo from southern Nigeria use Landolphia sp. and the bark of Triumfetta sp. for ropes, Marantochloa flexuosa and Thaumatococcus daniellii leaves for packaging and food wrapping, and the bottle gourd fruit (Lagenaria siceraria) for containers, bowls and ladles. Ladles and spoons are also carved from the wood of Alstonia boonei, and sponges are made with the stems of Momordica angustisepala (Okigbo 1980).
In some cases one plant species is used to make a multitude of different household items. In Ghana, for example, the leaves of Chlorophora excelsa are used for sandpaper, the wood is used for mortars, furniture, and coffins, its gum for binding and mending; Funtumia elastica's seed floss is used for stuffing, padding and cushions, its wood for pestles, spoons and other implements, and its forked stem in house construction (Asamoah 1985).
Throughout the West African forest zone, household items are most commonly composed, at least partially, of palms (especially Raphia sp. and Elaeis guineensis). They are used in all basketry (e.g. for food storage, transportation and harvest baskets), mat and bag making (for crop drying or as mattresses), brush, broom, and furniture production (e.g. chairs, beds, tables) (Profizi 1983, Walker et al 1961, Etienne 1974, Okigbo 1980, Blanc-Pamard 1980).
While there are many cooking utensils that are widely used in West Africa, the mortar and pestle are perhaps the most ubiquitous. They are common in both rural and urban households, employed to pound yams, cassava, plantain and other staple foods (Etienne 1974). The types of wood that are preferred in mortar and pestle production vary by region as well as country (Asamoah 1985, Abbiw 1989, Ghana; Agbor 1986 & Okigbo 1980, Nigeria; Téhé 1980, Côte d'Ivoire; Gollnhofer et al 1975, Gabon). However the wood used for the pestle is always hard (generally 0.8 to 1.5 m long with a diameter making it easy to handle).
Many household items are "home-produced". Production is generally concentrated in the off-peak agriculture season. Amat and Cortadellas (1972) note that among the Beti in southern Cameroon there are clearly defined tasks for men and women in the production of household equipment (e.g. only men are involved in basketry). There are also traditional artisans who specialize in the production of household furnishings or cooking utensils (such as the mortar and pestle). The authors found that artisan craft was passed through generations, thus certain families within a village might specialise in the production of particular objects. Increasing commercialisation has led, in some cases, to a concentration of artisanal activities: to villages or regions specialising in the production of different household items (generally geared to an urban market): basketry in Agboville, Côte d'Ivoire (Boni 1982), and wood-working in Ahwia, Ghana (Addey 1982).
<section>5</section>
2. THE SUPPORT ROLE: THE USE OF FOREST RESOURCES IN OTHER PRODUCTION SECTORS
2.1 Support for agricultural production
2.2 Support for fishing and hunting activities
2.3 Support for livestock production
Forest products are used in numerous ancillary ways, supporting production sectors such as agriculture and fishing. Surrounding forest resources are used to fabricate the tools needed in agriculture, fishing, hunting, and livestock production. They also support many small-scale processing enterprises by supplying the main energy input (primarily fuelwood).
There is a considerable amount of information to be gleaned from socio-economic and geographic studies, primarily from those which attempt to assess people's production activities and their socio-economic status. Ethnobotanical studies provide descriptive information on the use of ` forest resources in production of farm, fishing, and hunting equipment. No studies, however, consider the value of these assets to local people in terms of the costs of substitutes or the benefits they bring to local users.
Pods on a Prosopis spp.
2.1 Support for agricultural production
The role forests and trees play in improving agricultural productivity has long been recognised: forests and trees help to maintain and restore soil fertility and stability and they help protect water supplies (many studies on shifting cultivation and agroforestry examine this function). But forests and farm trees also supply important material support to crop production: they provide the raw materials for crop supports (e.g. yam stakes), agricultural implements (e.g. hoe handles), harvest and transport equipment (e.g. baskets), crop processing equipment (e.g. cocoa drying racks), crop storage containers (e.g. yam storage stakes), and crop marketing equipment (e.g. baskets and sacks). Forest products can also be instrumental in protecting crops (e.g. fencing and plant-based insecticides) and food stores (e.g. wood ash placed in storage bins). While these products may be rudimentary by modern agricultural standards, they are generally the only resources available to the
majority of farmers in the region. Some farming systems studies include details about the farm implements (assets) commonly used by farmers in the region.
Atsu and Owusu's (1982) study on farming systems in eastern Ghana includes a detailed analysis of the socio-economic situation and farming practices of two households. And Ijalana's (1983) farming systems study, in Ondo state (Nigeria), describes the agricultural equipment available to most farmers in the region: on average, a farming household owns 2 hoes, 3 cutlasses, and 5 baskets. It has been found that farmers spend approximately 96 Naira a season to purchase a hoe, cutlass and baskets in Nigeria (Umeh 1985).
Palm products (e.g. leaves and petioles of Oil and Raphia palms), rattan, and forest lianas are the most common raw materials used in basketry. Blanc-Pamard (1980) notes that people in the Boualé region, Côte d'Ivoire, use Raphia palms for making coffee dryers and sacks. They use the leaves and petioles of Oil palms (Elaeis guineensis) for making harvest and transport baskets, cage-carriers for transporting chickens to market, and crop storage containers. In Western Cameroon, raphia palm leaf petioles and Hybophrynium braunianum leaves are used to construct harvest baskets, crop dryers, storage bins, and transport baskets (Dongmo 1985). And in Gabon, baskets of different shapes and sizes are made with specific materials to serve particular functions (Gollnhofer 1975) (See also Soup Nguifo (1982), Cameroon).
An example of a raised storage container next to a family dwelling
In Ghana, Asamoah's study (1985) found that 92% of the trees on fallow lands helped satisfy domestic needs such as agricultural implement provision. Okigbo (1980) relates that the Igbo seek plants which branch in ways suitable for the hooked handles of hoes: primarily they use Pentaclethra macrophylla, Acioa barteri and Dialium guineense. The wood of some species, Diospyros sp., and Newbouldia laevis, are used for knives, machetes, and axe handles. Iron-tipped yam digging sticks can be made from Dialium guineense or Newbouldia laevis, while traditional yam digging sticks require Acioa barteri. (See also Téhé 1980, Côte d'Ivoire; Abbiw 1989, Ghana).
Throughout the region trees left in farm fields are often valued for crop stakes, especially yam stakes. Elletey (1986) found that farm trees are used for crop stakes, for fences, to improve crop yields, and for shade in Ashante, Ghana. And in forest regions of southwestern Nigeria, Herren-Gemmill (1988) has found that fallow land trees are also valued as yam stakes. (See also Ijalana 1983, Nigeria, Sections 5.3, 6.6)
In his survey of traditional methods of food storage and preservation in villages in the Accra district (Ghana), Sackey (1977) found that people stored maize and other grains in storage containers. These containers consisted of covered raised platforms made with poles (bamboo cane, rattan, or raphia) tied together with lianas. The crops were sprinkled with wood ash as an insecticide. In some cases, wood ash was also used as a fruit ripening agent. Tree stems were also used for building yam storage structures (yam "barns") in Ondo State, Nigeria. Poles (species which easily root are preferred) are set vertically and yams are tied to them (Ijalana 1983).
Farmers taking sorghum from a silo. The nearest one is made of plaited reed.
Forest products are also traditionally utilized to package and process food (Mensah 1982, Ghana; Ijalana 1983, Nigeria; Vérnière 1969 Senegal). In southern Ghana, many traditional foods (e.g. kenkey and dokon) are cooked and stored in large leaves. These leaves are often gathered from forest areas, smoke dried, and saved for later use. They are especially valued for the flavor they give to the wrapped food, for their preserving qualities, and their ability to withstand boiling. The shelf-life of these wrapped products varies from a few days to a week, depending on the leaves used. Many traditional foods are wrapped in the leaves of specific species.
In Nigeria the Igbo commonly store cola nuts in the leaves of Onchocalamus sp. They use the leaves of Marantochloa flexuosa, Sarcopharnium sp. and Thaumatococcus daniellii to wrap and preserve several prepared foods (e.g. agidi, ukpo, and elele) (Okigbo 1980). In southern Côte d'Ivoire the leaves of Thaumatococcus daniellii are also used for food processing, packaging, and selling - in this case attieke (a common manioc-based food). The leaves are gathered from forest areas, and sold in markets for 10 FCFA/packet of 60 leaves (Berron 1980) (see also Mensah 1982, Ghana).
In an interesting study of women and agricultural production in Nigeria, Adeyokunnu (1981) examined the types of containers and packaging materials used for marketing agricultural products in different regions of the country. He found that, for the entire country, baskets (29%) and bags (29%) were the most common containers. Calabashes (16%) and bowls (20%) were also common. There were some interesting regional differences in packaging materials. In the west, bags and baskets accounted for 80% of the containers. In the east, baskets were most prevalent, while in the north, calabashes (containers made from the fruit of the calabash tree (Lagenaria siceraria)) were most common. Most baskets were manufactured locally from palm and rattan products, as were some bags.
The large leaf species (discussed above) gathered from forest regions are widely used for food packaging and storage and can be found in many regional markets. In several countries of the region, Forest Departments regulate the collection of these leaves - an indication of their widespread use. In Côte d'Ivoire and Ghana, for example, a commercial collection permit is required (costing 25,000 FCFA). In Senegal, the tax on collection of leaves is 5 F/kg. (Direction des Eaux et Forêts 1982).
2.2 Support for fishing and hunting activities
Throughout the West African region, fish supply the greatest quantity of animal protein to the diets of both urban and rural populations. Most locally consumed fish are still caught by artisanal, as opposed to commercial (industrial) fishermen (Berron 1980). Forest resources support fishing activities in many ways, as raw materials for boats, nets, traps, poles, poisons, and fuelwood for fish preservation.
The most common fishing vessel throughout the entire West African region is the dugout canoe (Collart 1986). In Cameroon, for example, there are an estimated 4,450 canoes and in Sierra Leone there are more than 7,000. In Ghana, dugout canoes are still the main fishing vessels. Ewusi (1986) reports that in 1962 an estimated 78% of the total fish catch was caught from dugout canoes. In 1982, 83% (14,900 tonnes) of the total catch was caught from dugout canoes. Over the last 20 years, the (recorded) number of dugout canoes in Ghana has remained approximately the same: 8,700.
The Wouri in southern Cameroon use different types of wood for different canoes. A light wood is good for large canoes while a heavier wood is preferred for smaller boats (Moby-Etia 1982). (See Appendix 11 for a list of forest species commonly used for canoes.)
On a commercial scale Ghana produces the greatest numbers of dugout canoes in the region. They are generally made from the trunks of Triplochiton scleroxylon. A new type of canoe has been developed in Senegal using board planks. These new canoes cost about three times as much as the traditional dugout canoes (the cost of a traditional 11 meter dugout canoe was estimated at approximately $2,000).
Rattan and Raphia palm petioles are commonly used for making fish traps and poles (Amat et al 1972, Profizi 1983). The leaves of Raphia palms provide material for fish nets and ropes in Western Cameroon (Koagne 1986). And the Banen (in Cameroon) use the bark of Raphia palms for making fish traps. Plant poisons are commonly used by women in fishing (Dongmo 1985 & Laburthe-Tolra 1981, Cameroon; Amat et al 1972). The Igbo (from southern Nigeria) commonly use the leaves of Tephrosia vogelii and the fruit of Lagenaria breviflorus (syn. Adenopus breviflorus) and Blighia sapida as fish poisons (Okigbo 1980).
Fish trap of rattan
Chong (1987) reports that in coastal Sierra Leone, wood from mangrove regions is used for making fish traps, shelters designed to attract fish, poles, stakes, and boats. Tannins extracted from mangrove species still help preserve lines and nets (although this is diminishing). Poles of Rhizophora sp. form the frames of fish-smoking ovens. And finally, mangroves provide the only source of fuel for fish-smoking.
Forests (and trees from fallow farm areas) generally provide the fuelwood needed by fish-smoking enterprises throughout the region. Berron (1980) notes that most of the fish sold in Abidjan and its regional markets are caught by small-scale fishermen and smoked locally using fuelwood. Fuelwood is an important cost for fish smokers, but he remarks that the value of fish increases two to threefold when smoked.
Forests also supply the materials for hunting equipment: for traps, snares, arrows, bows, poisons. Guns have replaced traditional hunting gear in some regions (especially Liberia and Nigeria), but many rural dwellers still rely on their traditional equipment. Rattan, Raphia and other palm products are commonly used for making traps that sometimes serve the dual function of pest control and provision of bushmeat.
Forest resources also often supply the materials for the construction of bee hives for honey production. In western Cameroon, hives are made with liana and palm products (Macleod 1987). Forests also provide a year round source of "fodder" for bees, making honey production possible.
2.3 Support for livestock production
The few studies which have been conducted on livestock production in the region show that forests, and especially fallow and farm trees, are important sources of fodder, thus supporting the limited livestock production in the region. Livestock production is not well developed in the region; it is, however highly valued. Cashman (1987) found that many Yoruba women (from southwestern Nigeria) "fix" their earnings from palm oil-processing and other cash-earning activities in livestock as a form of savings.
In the West African forest region fallow areas provide common sources of livestock fodder (Reynolds et al 1987). Animals are generally free ranging though "cut and carry" fodder systems do exist in southern Nigeria. Most browse is gathered from forest bush areas. One study in southwestern Nigeria found that fallow trees were widely used for livestock browse by farmers (Herren-Gemmill 1988). (See also Nweke et al 1985, Okafor et al 1987.) Commonly harvested species are Ficus thonningi, F. exasperata and Microdesmis sp.. In Ashante, Ghana, Elletey (1986) notes that on-farm trees are also used for fodder. (Appendix 12 provides a list of common browse species from the region.)
Plants are also widely used as livestock medicines. However, very little research has been done on this subject in the humid areas of West Africa. Ucha (1988) found that certain browse species were fed to livestock (primarily goats) for particular illnesses. For example, Manniphyton fulvum is used for treating diarrhoea, Microdesmis puberula relieves stomachaches and Spondias mombin is used as an abortive and to aid in the expulsion of the placenta after birth. (See also Atta Krah 1987.)
Though little information exists on the use and importance of browse the limited data suggests that in areas of low population density goats and other livestock graze freely on the surrounding vegetation; but as population pressure intensifies (e.g. regions of southern Nigeria) animals are confined and fodder collection activities increase. Throughout the region, forest and farm trees are important browse sources both for gathered fodder and grazing.
Spondias mombin L.
<section>6</section>
3. THE CULTURAL AND SYMBOLIC IMPORTANCE OF FOREST RESOURCES
3.1 The tree's significance as a link to culture and belief
3.2 The forest as a location for social, cultural and religious activities
3.3 The symbolic and sacred significance of particular forest resources
3.4 The judicial function of trees
3.5 The use of forest products in social, cultural and healing ceremonies
The variety of cultural values and symbolic functions ascribed to the forests are as numerous and diverse as the communities and cultures of the region. Physically and mystically forests have defined the environment of communities in the region throughout time. The distinction that has been made between cultural values and the forest's functions is actually an artificial one. Tangibly and intangibly, forests feature in all aspects of culture: language, history, art, religion, medicine, politics, and even social structure itself. Forest trees may house the spirits of ancestors as well as those of the newborn. And forests are viewed in both positive and negative lights as sources of evil as well as power and munificence, as providers for, and hindrances to development. The mystical qualities of specific forest resources often play a crucial role in traditional healing practices. Forests provide the venue for religious, social, and healing ceremonies. Forest products such as
tam-tams and forest foods such as palm wine are used in many ceremonies. Assessing the myriad of symbolic and cultural values of forests goes far beyond the scope of this study. However, this does not diminish their importance in terms of the value people place on forests and forest resources. The following discussion can only illustrate some of the ways in which forests are culturally and symbolically valued.
Information on the cultural significance of forest resources can be gleaned from anthropological, ethnobotanical, geographic, ethnomedical, and linguistic studies. Such studies generally focus on a particular community or ethnic group. Thus it is difficult to compare the cultural use of forests across the region. The literature does however provide invaluable insight into peoples' often seemingly contradictory views regarding forests.
Abbiw (in progress) provides an interesting collection of information on the diversity of traditional values ascribed to forest resources throughout the region (more than 1000 species are described). For example, plants associated with marriages may be used to attract a potential spouse, during the marriage ceremony, to protect marriages, or to improve them (a talisman of Datura metel is believed to give patience so as to tolerate one's spouse). (The Table in Appendix 13 shows the range of symbolic uses described by Abbiw.)
3.1 The tree's significance as a link to culture and belief
Forest trees, the links between the sky and earth, often symbolise links between the spiritual world of ancestors and people. Rituals and ceremonies which draw on forest symbols often serve to link people with their cultural heritage, as well as their ancestral past (Calame-Griaule 1969, 1970).
In an extremely interesting study, Calame-Griaule uses traditional stories and myths to analyse the symbolic function of trees in African oral tradition. The tree features in many myths and tales. It consistently reflects a few important symbolic images. The tree stands between heaven and earth and is associated with creation as well as the underworld ("cosmic" tree). The tree is a maternal symbol: a protector and provider who gives fruit, other foods and medicines, provides a reservoir for water, protects against the elements and evil spirits. The tree often symbolizes human fecundity. It may also be a phallic and paternal symbol, symbolically linking people with their ancestors while being a symbol of political unity.
Finally, the deciduous characteristic of the tree gives it an ambiguous image which reflects the tree's power to give life and rebirth as well as to bring about death. In many African myths and stories, the tree is portrayed as an ancestral symbol of wisdom, authority and custom, providing a bond between the dead and the living (Studstill 1970). Similarly, in other stories Gorog-Karady (1970) relates that the tree is often symbolises a mediator and judge.
Trees play a role in all facets and periods of West African peoples' lives. The Oubangui (Centre Afrique) plant a tree in the bush for a newborn child. For female children a fast-growing profuse fruiter is planted. The child's development is linked to the growth of the tree. If tree growth declines, people fear for the health of the child and a healer is called upon. When the child is sick it is brought to the tree for treatment. When the tree begins to fruit, the time will have come for the child to marry. Throughout a person's life, gifts are occasionally left for the tree. When someone dies their spirit goes to reside in their personal "birthright" tree (Vergiat 1969).
Ficus sycamorus: a sacred tree which grows by rivers
3.2 The forest as a location for social, cultural and religious activities
Forests provide the venue for many cultural events. In many parts of West Africa, forest areas and specific trees are protected and valued for particular cultural occasions and as historic symbols. Each community has its own traditions associated with sacred areas and, as a result, the species that are found in them vary greatly.
In an analysis of traditional African political institutions, Niangoran-Bouah (1983) notes that there are two traditional sacred locations for reunion: sacred groves and "arbres a palabre." The "arbre a palabre" is the venue for political and social meetings: the location where "elders sit under the big tree and talk until they agree." It is the location where political, judicial, and social decisions are made. Visser (1975) notes that among the Ando of Côte d'Ivoire there are specific tree species which serve as "arbres a palabre" such as Microdesmis sp., Blighia sapida (also a symbol of fecundity), Cordia millenii, and Bombax buonopozense.
Sacred groves are the site of ritual and secret society initiations, a locale where social and political values, morals, secrets, and laws are passed on to the younger generation. Sacred groves house the most important religious and ritual relics. They are often the site of ancestral burials or places where people can communicate with their ancestors. Sanago (1983) describes sacred groves in Côte d'Ivoire, noting that they are places where moral values are taught and passed on from one generation to the next. The trees within these groves are viewed as sacred trees, housing spirits, and providing links to ancestors. In some areas, sacred groves are the only forested areas that remain (Koagne 1986). Although many cultural traditions are disappearing with the rapidly changing social and physical environments, sacred groves often remain as valued elements of cultural heritage. The groves are also often the site for ritual healings and the location where villagers find
particular plant medicines. (The species that are often associated with sacred groves throughout the region are listed in Appendix 14.)
In a village in Northern Ghana, Ntiamoa-Baidu (1987) describes a sacred region protected by traditional beliefs: the villagers' ancestors were saved from enemies when they hid in this sacred area. Now the spirits of these ancestors and gods live there. The area is never farmed and is burnt once a year to protect it from accidental fires.
Binet (1974) describes the symbolic and mystical use of forest areas valued by the Fang of Southern Cameroon. The `temple' (the site of initiation ceremonies and rites) is always situated at the foot of a large forest tree where medicinal plants are often cultivated. This tree symbolises the forest which houses the body of god and was once the source of people's food. During initiation ceremonies, the root bark of the species Tabernantha iboga (a hallucinogen) is consumed by ail initiates, so that they can see god. In this culture, the tree and forest medicines are believed to be vehicles through which people communicate with god.
In the Casamance region of Senegal, a traditional healer founded a healing village for mental patients at the foot of a large cottonwood tree (Ceiba pentandra). The village location was chosen because the tree and surrounding forest symbolised healing and protection, a peaceful place that linked people with their god and ancestors. Village dwellings are now built around the tree (Trincaz, J. 1980). And every day, at the foot of this large tree, patients discuss their problems, undergoing the equivalent of group psychotherapy. The study concludes that this `healing' village demonstrates the fundamental mystical, religious, and social importance of trees in their culture.
3.3 The symbolic and sacred significance of particular forest resources
In some cases, specific resources serve as cultural symbols, linking people to a particular past. Some resources are valued throughout the region; others are only significant to specific groups (Ntiamoa-Baidu 1987).
In a study comparing the religious significance of different forest species for different West African cultures, Schnell (1946) found that Chlorophora excelsa was a sacred tree throughout the region. It was often protected, and sacrifices and gifts were given to it. Villages were often located near it, and in some cases the C. excelsa was planted in the village. The tree was especially associated with fertility and birth. For example, the Ibo (Southern Nigeria) believe that it furnishes the souls for the newborn (Andoh 1986). And in the Ho region of Ghana, it is (Asamoah 1985) believed to be dwelling for dwarfs; underneath it ritual sacrifices are performed. And its wood is used for making sacred drums and coffins. For the Gueré and Oubi (Côte d'Ivoire), C. excelsa is also the location for ritual sacrifices (Téhé 1980).
Ceiba pentandra is also a sacred tree throughout the West African region. It is usually associated with burials and ancestors (Schnell 1946). Asamoah (1985) notes that in the Ho region of Ghana, its bark and leaves are believed to expel evil spirits. (See also Cousteix 1961, Cameroon; deRosny 1981.)
Among the Beti of Southern Cameroon, Amat and Cortadellas (1972) report that the `oven' tree Didelotia africana is sacred. It is thought extremely powerful and is used in many traditional healing treatments, especially those involving sorcery. It is approached for help with difficult problems (e.g. broken marriages), but can only be used by healers who have the power to communicate with it.
Mallart Guimera (1969) examined the symbolic importance of the "oven" tree (in this case Copaifera religiosa and sometimes Guibourtia tessmannii) to the Evuzok people of Southern Cameroon. For the Evuzok the "oven" tree is the most important of ail forest trees. Both C. religiosa and G. tessmannii are emergent species of the equatorial rainforest and occur at low densities. C. religiosa has a large red straight trunk. G. tessmannii is also an extremely tall species with large buttress roots. Its height, force, and uniqueness as compared to other species lend the `oven' tree its title of "chief of all trees," controlling fecundity, wealth, power, and fame. However, the Evuzok "oven" tree is also a fearsome tree whose force can be used by evil spirits. Thus, it is an ambivalent symbol: it can give life, but also bring death. This duality features in many Evuzok stories and myths.
3.4 The judicial function of trees
Trees serve both practical and symbolic judicial roles. Symbolically, they can represent mediators or decision makers. Practically, they are physical boundary markers that define property and provide evidence of usuary rights in judicial disputes.
The symbol of the tree as mediator is illustrated in Gorog-Karady's (1970) examination of the justice and mediating role of trees in African oral tradition. There are some common elements in these stories (22 are analysed): an evil deed is followed by atonement in which a tree has a part; the tree can be giver of life, death or it can insure the hero's survival; the tree intervenes in situations where man is not able to solve a conflict; the conflicts in which the tree acts as mediator are those where the rules regulating traditional society have been ignored.
In some cases the practical and symbolic roles of particular tree species are combined. For instance, in Western Cameroon, the tree Dracaena arborea is traditionally considered a symbol of peace and for this reason it is used to mark property boundaries (Depommier 1983) (See also Dongmo (1985)).
Among the Agni of Côte d'Ivoire, the Sereer of Senegal, and in the Boualé region of Côte d'Ivoire trees play a central role in the land tenure system. For the Agni, trees evidence land-use rights for an individual or lineage group. And, as in many cultures of the region, in the Agni culture, someone who plants a tree in a field has sole rights to its produce and sole rights to the use of the land it stands on. Thus land rights are established by collecting the harvest from planted trees rather than by bush clearing (Gastellu 1980). Boamah (1986) presents the results of two court cases which indicate that the planting or tending of naturally regenerating fruit trees on a piece of land for several years without interference effectively constitutes proof of possession in Ghana as well. These court rulings emphasize the fact that it is often the person who gathers the fruit of a planted tree who gains exclusive right to the land itself (see Section 6.2).
3.5 The use of forest products in social, cultural and healing ceremonies
Forests provide a range of products for traditional ceremonies from food and beverages to costumes and musical instruments. While some of these products are perhaps less often used on a day-to-day basis, they still form essential elements of a variety of cultural traditions. In a study of the uses of fallow tree species in Ho, Ghana, Asamoah (1985) found that half the identified species were valued in customary rites.
Forest products are used for healing throughout the region. The medicines and medicinal practices that were discussed in the first section, depend to a large extent on the mystical values associated with different forest species. Thus it is not possible to differentiate between the psychological and medical effects of a plant when investigating its effectiveness.
Forest foods also feature in many cultural ceremonies: marriages, funerals, initiations, installation of chiefs, and birth celebrations, to name a few. Palm wine and cola nuts are important symbolic foods throughout humid West Africa. In Nigeria, for example, palm wine is of paramount importance at most social functions (Okafor 1979). It is used in pouring libations, offering prayers, and heralding events. Cola nuts are regarded as important symbols of welcome and hospitality. For Muslims of the region, cola nuts are sacred: something given them by the prophet. They are a symbol of friendship and feature in all festive occasions. Among the Igbo of Southern Nigeria, all discussions, prayers, and ceremonies begin with the breaking of cola nuts. Without cola, these occasions are not regarded as serious (Okigbo 1980).
The seeds of Pentaclethra macrophylla are another example of symbolically important forest foods. In southwestern Nigeria, they feature in child-naming and girl's initiation ceremonies (heralding maturity). Bread fruit (Treculia africana) is served at women's burial ceremonies. It is also served during a festival staged to indicate a girl's impending departure to her husband's home (Okafor 1979).
Forests also provide the raw materials for many of the objects that are used in traditional ceremonies. Most musical instruments are made from forest products. For example, the Oubi (in Côte d'Ivoire) use Cordia platythyrsa for making tam-tams. The Boualé (also from Côte d'Ivoire) make a musical slide/rattle with the fruit of Oncoba spinosa and Glyphaea brevis and the seed of Entada pursaetha (Téhé 1980). Similarly, the seed shells of Chrysophyllum albidum and Mammea africana are worn by dancers as rattles and the wooden strips of Ricinodendron heudelottii are used to make xylophones in Igboland, Nigeria (Okigbo 1980).
Among the Mende and Dan (Côte d'Ivoire), masks play an important role in rituals and ceremonies; they often represent the spirits of the forests and ancestors (who reside in forests) and thus express and evoke cultural links to the past (Jedrej 1986). In Gabon, Perrois (1971) notes that wood sculptures and ceremonial objects serve as vehicles of communication with ancestors; the wood is used for different artifacts and is chosen according to the purposes and symbolic values of specific tree species.
Ceremonial clothing and costumes are also often made from specific forest products. Among the Ashante in Ghana, traditional cloth is still important at festive and ceremonial occasions. For example, the bark and stem of Lannea kerstingii are used for dyeing the funeral cloth kuntunkun. The bark of Bridelia ferruginea is used for dyeing Adinkra cloth, important at other ceremonial occasions (Annan 1980). Gara cloth is a traditionally valued indigo cloth. The indigo dye of Gara is derived from the leaves of the woody climber Lonchocarpus cyanescens. Finally, masks used in ceremonies throughout the region are often made with the wood of trees that are valued for their spiritual or mystical attributes (Jedrej 1986, Gollnhofer et al 1975).
Conclusion
Forests serve a variety of cultural and symbolic functions in West Africa. They are intimately linked with ancestry and cultural heritage. Forest symbols provide social structure and cultural identity in a rapidly changing environment.
There is little information on the ways in which these values are changing. No studies explore the implications of changing cultural values on forest resource use. And yet, there can be little doubt that values have changed and are continuing to change. With this evolution people's perceptions of the surrounding forest environment will undoubtedly be altered. Some researchers do however suggest that forests and their products are and will continue to be valued, in part because they symbolize cultural cohesion.
<section>7</section>
4. FOREST RESOURCES AS A SOURCE OF CASH INCOME: THE MARKETING OF GATHERED AND PROCESSED FOREST PRODUCTS
4.1 The production and marketing of bushmeat
4.2 Gathering and marketing of other forest foods
4.3 Production and marketing of palm wine
4.4 The market for medicinal products: The case of chewing sticks
4.5 Fuelwood production and marketing
4.6 Cola trade and production
4.7 The export of forest and tree resources from the humid zone region: Medicinal plants and animals
4.8 Processing enterprises: a source of household income from forest products
Forests (and uncultivated trees) provide important sources of income to many rural people in the West African forest zone. Forest products such as bushmeat and fuelwood are gathered and traded at local and regional markets and are generally destined for urban consumers. Forests also provide the raw materials for artisan and processing activities. Forest products are traded in both local and urban markets, and are sold to meet both rural and urban consumer needs. There are no studies which assess the socio-economic importance of the non-timber forest product trade to rural households and communities, and there are also no studies which evaluate the importance of this trade to regional economies. There are a few studies which focus on the income earned from gathering of forest products. Thus, the following discussion focuses largely on marketing.
A myriad of different forest products are collected for rural and urban markets. In general, studies which examine the harvesting of forest products do not distinguish between those products that are marketed and those products that are consumed by the household. For example, in the Boualé region of Côte d'Ivoire, Blanc-Pamard (1979) notes that several forest products are regularly collected for trade and home consumption. Among them: cola nuts (for trade), palm products (oil, wine, fruit, leaves for construction, basketry and other artisanal activities), wild fruits and other foods, fuelwood (in villages close to regional markets this provides an important source of income), poles for house construction, snails, insects, and mushrooms.
Trees and forests provide many different forms of food: a. fruit
Trees and forests provide many different forms of food: b. nuts
Trees and forests provide many different forms of food: c. pods
Trees and forests provide many different forms of food: d. Leaves
Trees and forests provide many different forms of food: e. bark/sap
Trees and forests provide many different forms of food: f. honey
Trees and forests provide many different forms of food: g. fungi
The degree to which these different forest products are marketed depends on the needs for cash, the accessibility of markets, the quantities of the product that are available as well as the time available for their collection and sale (Blanc-Pamard 1979). Forest products are sometimes marketed to meet specific cash needs. Sale is a predominantly seasonal activities, which is at its height during the agricultural slack periods, when less time is required for farming activity and the need for cash is high. Some researchers suggest that specific cash needs also helps determine the prices that are accepted or offered at different market levels (Kengne 1987, Nsangou no date). In a study in southern Cameroon, Weber (1974) asserted that the amount of cocoa being harvested reflected farmers' need for cash. In households where the surrounding resources provided for most of their daily needs, cocoa was harvested only to meet specific cash needs (such as taxes); by comparison, in
regions where households were more dependent on the market for their needs, a greater portion of the cocoa that was produced was harvested to meet daily cash needs.
The marketing of many forest products is specialised, involving producers (gatherers), wholesale traders in rural, regional and urban areas, and retail traders. While most people, and especially farmers, participate in these activities seasonally, or on a part-time basis, these activities provide employment for many rural and urban people. The sale of forest products in rural areas is an especially important source of cash income as there are often fewer alternative means. There are, however, no studies which evaluate the number of people involved in these trading activities.
There is a considerable amount of information available from market case studies as well as market commodity studies on the products sold and their marketing channels. From the information available it is evident that some forest products are sold almost universally in markets throughout the West African region. The following discussion focuses on these popular products as case examples. Included are bushmeat, and other forest foods such as Irvingia gabonensis, palm wine, fuelwood, plant medicines, and cola nuts.
Carica papaya - a popular fruit
4.1 The production and marketing of bushmeat
4.1.1 Bushmeat markets
4.1.2 Production of bushmeat for cash income
Bushmeat is valued throughout the West African region as a source of cash income and food. Wild animals are hunted for the consumer market by professional hunters (full-time), agriculturalists (part-time) and pygmies. In areas with access to urban markets, bushmeat is now often sold rather than being consumed. Hunting and gathering of bushmeat often complement seasonal requirements for agricultural labour. Hunting for bushmeat is a predominantly male activity. However, the collection of bushmeat such as snails and insects is carried out by both men and women. Women are generally responsible for processing bushmeat (i.e. smoking).
Many of the studies that are available examine the importance of bushmeat production at the national level, but no studies have been conducted on the socio-economic importance of bushmeat trade for rural communities. Few studies have examined quantities hunted by individuals, or the income earned from the sale of bushmeat. In addition, there is very little information on the income that is earned from the trade of bushmeat or the marketing costs involved. Therefore, while there is enough information from market studies to indicate that bushmeat is a popular and widely consumed forest product, there is little information available to assess its income-earning value and potential.
4.1.1 Bushmeat markets
The greatest amount of research on the markets for bushmeat has been carried out in Ghana and Nigeria. In Nigeria the demand for bushmeat is increasing (an increase of 159% since 1975 (Mba 1983)). It has been estimated that the value of bushmeat to the economy is 3.6 billion naira annually (Martin 1983) (see also Holsworth 1970, Section 6.7). This is reflected by the inflating prices: in urban markets bushmeat prices have risen by as much as 400% in recent years (Federal Department of Forestry 1987). Table 3 summarises available information on bushmeat market prices in different West African urban centers. In most cases the prices of bushmeat are higher than domestic meat prices. These prices are partly attributable to transportation and processing (when smoked) costs, which can add 25% to 50% to the original producer price (Ajayi 1979). However, high prices for bushmeat are primarily due to increasing consumer demands and dwindling supplies.
In 1965, Asibey analysed Ghana's market and market price trends for bushmeat from 1956 to 1963. He found that prices had increased 25% in seven years. Since that time the Department of Game and Wildlife has conducted bushmeat market studies. The volume of bushmeat trade at one Accra market (Kantamanto) has been recorded for the last 15 years (see Table 3). An average 14,400 animals are sold annually (71,000 kgs. of bushmeat worth 2,900,000 cedis). As trade is not recorded every day these figures are minimal estimates. However, they do give an indication of the magnitude of trade. Grasscutter and duiker are the types of bushmeat that are most commonly sold in this market; in 1985, 9,400 of the 11,900 animals sold were grasscutters (Asibey 1987, Ntiamoa-Baidu 1987).
In Nigeria, Martin (1983) found that the prices for bushmeat had increased by about 25% over two years in the late 1970's (the price of domestic meat increased by 20%), and grasscutter prices inflated by 75% during the same period. More recently, Asibey (1986, 1987) analysed the market price trends for bushmeat in Kumasi and Accra markets (see Table 4). He found that the bushmeat prices had increased at far greater rates than domestic meat prices; the price of grasscutter had increased from an average 84 cedis/kg. in 1980 to and average 685 cedis/kg. in 1986. In comparison, beef prices had risen from 41 cedis/kg. to 272 cedis/kg. over the same period.
Table 3: Market prices of meat in some West African countries
(US $/Kg)
Hare (Lepus ssp.)
African giant rat
(Crycetomys gambianus)
Grasscutter
(Thryonomus swinderianus)
Brushtailed porcupine
(Atherorus africanus)
Tree Hyrax
(Dendrohyrax arboreus)
Grey duiker
(Sylvicapra grimmia)
Maxwell's duiker
(Cephalophus maxwelli)
Bay duiker
(Cephalophus dorsalis)
Black duiker
(Cephalophus niger)
Bushbuck
(Tragelophus scriptus)
Bushpig
(Potamochoerus porcus)
Spot-nosed monkey
(Cercopithecus ascenius)
Red colobus
(Colobus badius)
Civets
(Mandinia spp.)
Beef
Mutton
(1) Cameroon, Sabouang, 1978
(5) Ghana, Accra, 1985
(2) Nigeria, Ibadan, 1975
(6) Côte d'Ivoire, Abidjan, 1978
(3) Nigeria, Bendel State, 1977
(7) Liberia, Monrovia, 1979
(4) Ghana, Accra, 1970
Source: Asibey 1986
Table 4: Bushmeat recorded for Kantamanto Market (Accra, Ghana)
July 1970 to December 1985 excluding July to December 1984
YEAR
NUMBER
WEIGHT (kg)
VALUE (cedis)
July 1970/71 June
July-Dec. 1983
1984 (Jan.-June)
Total
Average
Source: Asibey 1987 a
Table 5: Urban consumer prices for some meat in Ghana
Beef
Mutton
Bushmeat
Kumasi
Accra
Kumasi
Accra
Kumasi
Accra
NA
NA
In Cedis/Kg.
Source: Asibey 1987 a
In southwestern Cameroon, in the Mudemba market, the price of bushmeat has increased 117% in the last four years (Gartlan 1987). And in Mbandjok, Cameroon, Barbier and Tissandier (1980) studied the trade value of products sold in the market by day. They found that 3050 FCFA worth of termites were sold on one day in March 1971 (13% of the total (24,100) amount of meat, fish, and eggs sold).
Although the most important bushmeat markets are in urban centers, several authors note that there is also a rural market for bushmeat. Martin (1983) found that rural people spent an average 8.75 naira/month on bushmeat compared to an average 10.49 naira/month spent by urban consumers in Nigeria. Martin (1983) conducted an interesting market study in Bendel State in southeastern Nigeria. He found that duikers, grasscutters and brush-tailed porcupine were the most common species being sold at roadsides. The sale of snails was also widespread. He noted that snail, porcupine and grasscutter fetched the highest market prices (of all meats) per kilogramme while grasscutter was most preferred and most often sold. However, the extent to which people purchase bushmeat often varies considerably by household and community (Dietworst 1987).
4.1.2 Production of bushmeat for cash income
Bushmeat production and marketing provide employment and income to a large number of rural people. Meat is sold fresh and smoked. Bushmeat is often sold to village collectors (wholesale traders) who in turn, sell the produce to urban retail traders. Sometimes, however, bushmeat is sold directly by the producers at the roadside or to roadside sellers (Ajayi 1979).
For many women in Ghana the bushmeat trade is the main source of livelihood (Ntiamoa-Baidu 1987). The hunting also provides an important source of supplemental income for many farmers (see Asibey 1977, Ghana; Faure and Vivien 1980, Cameroon; Blanc-Pamard 1979, Côte d'Ivoire). In an interview with a farmer/hunter Asibey (1987b) relates that the farmer earned more income from bushmeat trade than from farming endeavors (maintaining the interests in farming because it was more secure and provided a greater variety of needed products). Similarity in Nigeria, Asibey (1987) asserts that hunting provides a good source of income. He estimates that sales of 4 grasscutters and 3 duikers a month would place a hunter in the lower middle income group ($130-660/year).
Adeola and Decker (1987) conducted an interesting study on the quantities of bushmeat produced by farmers and hunters in different ecological zones in Nigeria during the 1986 rainy season. The animals farmers most commonly harvested in the rainforest region were snails, squirrels, giant rats, guinea fowl, bats, cane rats, porcupine and duikers (in that order). In deciduous forest regions greater numbers of cane rats, bats, guinea fowl and snails were harvested. They estimated that the monthly harvest of bushmeat by farmers in the rainforest region was 61 million kilogrammes (61 kg./farmer), 318 million kilogrammes for big game. These figures are however misleading as small game were harvested in far greater numbers: 37 animals per farmer compared with 6 large animals per farmer (see Tables 5 and 6). They estimated harvest in the savannah region to be approximately 105 million kgs. It is interesting to note that farmers harvested substantial quantities of bushmeat when
compared with professional hunters.
African buffalo
Table 6: Monthly wildlife harvest by Nigerian hunters in the deciduous and rain forest regions
Deciduous Forest Region
Rain Forest Region
Number/Hunter
Kg per Hunter
Number/Hunter
Kg per Hunter
BIG GAME
Duikers
(Cephalophus monticola,
C. Grimmia)
Bush Buck
(Tragelaphus scriptus)
Buffalo
(Syncerus caffer)
Est. Mon. Harvest/Hunter ^1/
SMALL GAME
Squirrels
(Funisciurus anerythrus,
Xerus erythropus)
Cane rat
(Thryonomys swinderianus)
African giant rat
(Crycetomys gambianus)
Porcupine
(Hystrix cristata)
Bats
(Eidolon helvum)
Est. Mon. Harvest/Hunter ^1/
GAME BIRDS
Guinea fowl
(Numida meleagris)
Francolin
(Francolinus spp.)
Est. Mon. Harvest/Hunter
REPTILES/MOLLUSKS
Monitor lizard
(Varanus niloticus)
Tortoise
(Kinixys belliana)
Giant snail
(Archachatina marginata)
^1/ Estimated Monthly Harvest per Farmer surveyed
Survey from July to November rainy season 1986
Source: Adeola and Decker 1987
Table 7: Monthly wildlife harvest by Nigerian farmers in the deciduous and rain forest regions
Deciduous Forest Region
Rain Forest Region
Number/Farmer
Kg per Farmer
Number/Farmer
Kg per Farmer
BIG GAME
Duikers
(Cephalophus monticola,
C. Grimmia)
Bush Buck
(Tragelaphus scriptus)
Buffalo
(Syncerus caffer)
Est. Mon. Harvest/Farmer ^1/
Est. Mon. Harvest/Farmers (Region) ^1/
120,571,937 kg
318,351,758 kg
SMALL GAME
Squirrels
(Funisciurus anerythrus,
Xerus erythropus)
Cane rat
(Thryonomys swinderianus)
African giant rat
(Crycetomys gambianus)
Porcupine
(Hystrix cristata)
Bats
(Eidolon helvum)
Est. Mon. Harvest/Farmer ^1/
Est. Mon. Harvest/Farmers (Region) ^1/
55,407,500 kg
61,863,643 kg
GAME BIRDS
Guinea fowl
(Numida meleagris)
Francolin
(Francolinus spp.)
Est. Mon. Harvest/Farmer ^1/
Est. Mon. Harvest/Farmers (Region) ^1/
6,941,319 k g
4,312,106 kg
REPTILES/MOLLUSKS
Monitor Lizard
(Varanus niloticus)
Tortoise
(Kinixys belliana)
Giant snail
(Archachatina marginata)
^1/ Estimated Monthly Harvest per Farmer surveyed
Survey from July to November rainy season 1986
Source: Adeola and Decker 1987
4.2 Gathering and marketing of other forest foods
4.2.1 The markets for forest foods
4.2.2 The marketing of the fruit and seeds of Irvingia gabonensis
A great number of forest foods are gathered and sold in the local and regional markets of the region. Semi-wild produce from trees on farm and fallow lands (considered semi-wild as they are not planted but protected by farmers) are being harvested for the market. And cultivation of "wild" species seems to be increasing (see also Sections 5.3, 6.6). For example, a market survey in southern Nigeria revealed that 57 species of wild woody plant products were sold regularly (Okafor 1981). Forest foods are especially valued during the dry season and at times when cultivated foods are in short supply. In addition, in areas where few natural forests remain there is a regular market for these food products.
Information on gathering and marketing of forest foods can be found in specific market studies as well as commodity studies. Forestry studies which examine the local importance of forest food species also contain useful information. There have been a few market studies which examine the trends in market prices for some forest tree foods (Njoku 1983, Okafor various). It is clear from descriptive accounts that gathering of forest food products and their trade provide an important source of income, especially to women and the rural poor. However, no studies examine the socio-economic importance of this trade to local rural people or regional economies. The greatest amount of information on the markets for forest foods comes from Nigeria. While the popular species may differ from region to region, there is enough descriptive information from other West African countries to suggest that the Nigerian findings reflect similar patterns elsewhere in the region.
4.2.1 The markets for forest foods
Okafor (1981) conducted an extremely interesting and thorough study on Nigerian household use of indigenous farm and wild trees, including the trade and market potential of these tree food products. This extensive market study examined the seasonal availability and comparative market prices of 39 wild and 18 cultivated plant species (it was conducted weekly at five market sites over a three year period). The seasonal availability of forest fruits (including Dacryodes edulis and Dennettia tripetala), seeds (including Afzelia africana and Irvingia gabonensis) and vegetable species (including Ceiba pentandra and Gnetum africanum) were compared with those of cultivated species (see the charts depicting seasonal availability of foods in the local market in Appendix 16).
Irvingia gabonensis - Fruit
Irvingia gabonensis - branch with leaves
Table 8: Rural market price of some woody vegetables in markets in Anambra State, Nigeria
Commodity
1st quarter
2nd quarter
3rd quarter
4th quarter
Irvingia (price in Naira per 175 grams)
Range
Mean
Melon (price in Naira per 150 grams)
Range
Mean
Gnetum (price in Naira per kilogram)
Range
Mean
Vernonia (price in Naira per kilogram)
Range
Mean
Telfairia (price in Naira per kilogram)
Range
Mean
Irvingia:
Irvingia gabonensis, var. excelsa
Melon:
Colocynthis vulgaris (cultivated)
Gnetum:
Gnetum spp.
Vernonia:
Vernonia amygdalina
Telfairia:
Telfairia occidentalis (cultivated)
Source: Okafor 1979
Table 9: Prevailing market prices of fruits and vegetables in Enugu, Nigeria - September 1980
Commodity type
Scientific name
Price (Naira) per 500 g (1)
Price (Naira) per 500 g (2)
Fresh vegetables
Gnetum spp.
Gongronema latifolium
Myrianthus arboreus
Ocimum gratissimum
Piper guineense
Pterocarpus milbraedii
P. santalinoides
P. soyauxii
Talinum trangulare
Cultivated fresh vegetables
Amaranthus viridis
Celosea sp
Corchorus spp.
Cucurbita pepo
Solanum anomalum
Solanum spp.
Telfairia occidentalis
Vernonia amygdalina
Wild (and semi-wild) fresh fruits
Piper guineense
Dennettia tripetala
Canarium schweinfurthii
Dacryodes edulis
Irvingia gabonensis
var. Gabonensis
Treculia africana
Cultivated fresh fruits
Carica papaya
Citrus spp.
Cucurbita pepo
Abelmoschus esculentus
Mangifera indica
Musa sapientum
Solanum anomalum
Telfairia occidentalis
Wild (and semi- wild) fresh seeds
Garcinia kola
Tetracarpidum conophorum
Cultivated fresh seeds
Cola acuminata
Cola nitida
Aframomum melegueta
Mucuna sloanei
Telfairia occidentalis
Capsicum fructescens
Sources:
(1) Okafor 1981
(2) Njoku 1983
The prices for wild and cultivated varieties were also compared; some wild species were more expensive than their cultivated equivalent (see Table 8) (Okafor 1981, Njoku 1983). Okafor recorded the market prices for wild and cultivated species at the end of the 1980 rainy season (when prices are generally lower than at other times of the year) and found that the prices of the wild tree products were considerably higher than those of the cultivated species (see Table 7). For example, the price of the fruit of Dacryodes edulis was 1.17 naira/500 g. compared with 0.29 naira/500 g. for citrus. Okafor concluded that these high prices were a reflection of the popularity and the level of demand for wild food products as well as an indication of their relative scarcity and availability at strategic times in the year when conventional foods are unavailable (see also Johnson and Johnson 1976, Section 5.3).
4.2.2 The marketing of the fruit and seeds of Irvingia gabonensis
There is a considerable amount of information on the markets for Irvingia gabonensis in southern Nigeria. In some areas there is such high demand for this product that it has become a luxury item. Its major market is in rural southern Nigeria. Marketing of Irvingia sp. involves producers (principally men), processors (principally women), and wholesale and retail traders (generally women). The Department of Forest Resource Management (1986) notes that market prices are usually controlled by wholesale traders, but that for distant markets retail traders have greater control over prices. Households are reported to devote, on average, between 2% and 5% of their annual expenditure on Irvingia products. It is estimated that there is a demand for 78.8 million kilogrammes of Irvingia sp. per year; and that 80% of this demand is in the southern parts of Nigeria. The consumption of Irvingia gabonensis seeds is limited by supply, and in urban areas, by high prices (Department of Forest
Resource Management, Nigeria 1986).
Agbor (1986) conducted an extensive study of I. gabonensis marketing and production. There are two varieties of Irvingia sp., one produces a sweet fruit and is generally consumed raw, the other is a bitter variety exploited for its seed. Agbor found that there was a greater demand for the bitter variety. The prices for seeds and fruit were lower in the rainy season, and in all cases considerably more expensive in non-producing districts. He found that there was great variation in the density of trees in different southern districts ranging from an average 87 trees per farmer in Ogoja district to an average two trees per farmer in Ikono district. Tree density corresponded to variations in land availability: higher tree densities reflected less land pressure. I. gabonensis provided an important source of income for many farmers (see also Section 5.3).
In southwestern Cameroon, I. gabonensis fruit and seed are also commonly marketed. In the Korup region they are often gathered, dried and sold to Nigerian traders or taken to Nigerian markets (where one bucket fetches approximately FCFA 10,000) (Gartlan 1987, Department of Forest Resource Management 1986).
4.3 Production and marketing of palm wine
Palm wine and palm alcohol (processed from wine, Section 4.8.1) are commonly marketed throughout the West African region. While there is market demand for palm wine, there are considerable problems associated with its production and marketing: sap yields are extremely variable, and the wine does not keep longer than a day or two. For this reason, markets for palm wine are quite localised.
Most households in the region do however, produce palm oil, half of which is sold in local regional markets (Smith 1979, Longhurst 1985, Commonwealth Secretariat 1980, Sierra Leone; Nicol 1972 & Ancey 1967, Côte d'Ivoire). There are two principal methods of palm tapping. One method involves climbing the tree, cutting an inflorescence (flower spathe), and collecting the sap in calabash containers which are emptied once or twice daily. The second method entails felling the tree and collecting sap from the stem. In both cases fermentation is rapid and the wine must be consumed within a few days (thus long distance marketing is difficult). Palm wine can be produced from different palm species. However, in this region of West Africa it is generally made from the oil palm (Elaeis guineensis) or the Raphia palm.
In the Bas-Mungo and Bas-Wouri areas of southern Cameroon, palm wine production is big business: approximately three quarters of the men in villages produce palm wine; and wine production provides a living for an estimated 20,000 people; an estimated 6000 tonnes of palm wine enter commerce from this region each month. In his village-level study in the forest area near Douala, Moby-Etia (1982) analysed the economics of palm wine production and marketing. The peak season for production is the dry season. Moby-Etia has estimated that an average collector taps 8-10,000 litres of wine each season (the quantity tapped daily ranges from 5 to 100 litres a person). He calculated that a small producer earns about 20-35,000 FCFA a month. In a month-long road survey, Moby-Etia found that approximately 120,000 litres of palm wine entered Douala from the Olbambra region. In this area palm trees were generally felled for wine production. One tree alone produced between 45-60 litres of wine
over two weeks. The value of wine per tree ranges from 150-400 FCFA (wholesale price) to 200 to 600 FCFA (retail price); the equivalent urban price would be 700-2100 FCFA in retail trade.
Okafor (1979) conducted a similar study on palm wine production by farmers in Anambra state in southeastern Nigeria. He included an analysis of the quantities of wine produced per farmer as well as the returns from this activity (see Table 9). In almost all cases farmers earned more from palm wine tapping than the Nigerian minimum daily wage (2.3 Naira).
A few studies examine the consumption of palm wine at the regional and national level. In 1966 in Côte d'Ivoire, the estimated value of palm wine was 271 million FCFA, two thirds of which was purchased in local markets. In Senegal, the Forest Service estimates that almost 700,000 litres of palm wine were produced in 1982 (Direction des Eaux et Forêts 1982).
Table 10: Palm wine revenue earned by some farmers in Anambra State, Nigeria (June 1977- March 1978)
Area
Range of trees tapped #
Av.Rev./tree/day
(Naira)
Revenue/farmer/day
(Naira)
Price/gallon
(Naira)
Nijikoka
Anambra
Ogbaru
Aguata
Ezza
Isi-Uzo
Idemili
Uzo-Uwani
Nkanu
Oji River
Ishielu
Source: Okafor, 1979
4.4 The market for medicinal products: The case of chewing sticks
In several market studies, researchers have noted the fact that medicines are commonly sold, especially in markets destined for urban consumers (Kengne 1987, Johnson et al 1976). (See Section 4.7 for international medicine resource export information.) For example, in a study of three urban markets in Cameroon, Champaud (1983) found that there were medicine traders at each market (e.g. 10 in Foumbot market). No market studies, however, assess the extent of the plant medicine market, the traders involved, or the income earned.
Plant medicines are generally collected directly by the user or by a traditional doctor. There are a number of commonly used plant medicines that are marketed. In addition, urban migrants often seek the traditional cures to which they no longer have access, thus creating an urban market demand (Kenge 1987). In some cases, traditional borders also rely on the markets for certain medicine products (INADES 1984). One type of plant medicine which is widely used for dental care throughout the entire West African region is the chewing stick.
Adu-Tutu, Afful, Asante-Appiah, Lieberman, Hall, and Elvin-Lewis (1979) conducted a detailed study of the market for chewing sticks in southern Ghana. They found that there are four species whose products account for 85% of the total market. Chewing sticks are sold daily in most rural and urban markets. All 837 people that they interviewed used chewing sticks, and preferences for different species varied according to age and ethnic group. Isawumi (1978) notes that there are regional preferences for different species: Massularia acuminata chewsticks are most common in Ogun, Oyo, and Ondo States, whereas Garcinia kola is most popular in Cross River State, Nigeria. However, the main factor affecting people's choice of chewing stick is availability. Chewing sticks are frequently purchased by rural consumers as well as those living in urban areas: 80% of the rural people interviewed purchase chewing sticks, 95% of urban consumers purchase their chewing sticks (see Figure 1).
Amponsah (1978) conducted a study of the chewing stick trade at the Kejetia Lorry Station in southern Ghana. Chewing stick production involves collectors/fellers who are often paid by wholesale traders who control the transport, and retail traders. In this region two species are commonly traded: Garcinia kola and G. afzelii (the latter is more popular); men generally control the wholesale trade of Garcinia afzelii while both women and men are involved in G. kola trade. Women dominate the retail trade for all chewing stick types. The cash income earned by retail traders compares favourably with wages earned by unskilled wage labourers. And transportation is the main cost in the industry.
Table 11a: Chewing stick usage in Ghana - 1: Frequency of citation of reasons for choice of the usual species of chewing stick. (Total number of responses was 837).
Table 11b: Chewing stick usage in Ghana - 2: Acquisition of chewing sticks by buying (shaded columns) and collecting (open columns). Abbreviations for names are as follows: Ns, nsokodua; Gk, Garcinia kola; Sa, sawe; Tv, Teclea verdoorniana; Dg, Diahum guineense; Ms, Musa sapientum; Ai, Azadirachta indica; Cs, Citrus sinensis; Gs, Griffonia simplicifolia; Tg, Terminalia cf. glaucescens; Sd, sawedua.
Table 11c: Chewing stick usage in Ghana - 3: Acquisition of usual chewing stick by buying (shaded columns) and collecting (open columns) among people of various sizes of settlement. Vertical lines indicate 95% confidence limits.
Table 11d: Chewing stick usage in Ghana - 4: Acquisition of usual chewing stick by buying (shaded columns) and collecting (open columns) among people differing in educational background- Vertical lines indicate 95% confidence limits.
4.5 Fuelwood production and marketing
Throughout West Africa, fuelwood trade increasingly provides a source of cash income for those with access to urban markets. Generally, there is open market access, many buyers and sellers, few price interventions, and high transportation costs in relation to the fuelwood's value. However, studies have only recently begun to address issues such as the income earning potential for rural households from fuelwood trade.
Kamara (1986) conducted an interesting study on the production and marketing of fuelwood in the Bo and Makeni regions of Sierra Leone where fuelwood provides an important source of income for many rural farmers (especially women) and urban traders (see Section 6.4). He notes that, on average, more than half the fuelwood collected by households is sold. For example, in rural Bo, an average 4000 kilogrammes per household are sold, out of a total of 7600 kilogrammes collected annually (see Tables in Appendix 7). According to Kamara (1986) in the Bo and Makeni urban markets, traders sell as much as 4.9 tonnes of fuelwood a month, while in Freetown, some traders average as much as 19.8 tonnes a month.
In Enugu, Nigeria, Enunwaonye's (1983) study of the fuelwood market echoes many of Kamara's findings. Fuelwood producers generally do not sell fuelwood in the Enugu markets, rather they sell to retailers or middle-two men. The main fuelwood producers are farmers, the majority of whom participate in this activity seasonally, during the agricultural slack period. Women are more involved in the transport and marketing of fuelwood than its production for the market. Those involved in the seasonal sale of fuelwood generally find the fuelwood on their land, whereas the regular producers gather wood from communal forest areas. Profit margins for seasonal fuelwood producers average between 28% and 54%, for regular producers between 19% and 26%, and for retail traders between 47% and 71%. In Port Harcourt, Nigeria, Dagogo (1981) estimates that more than 700 people are employed in the fuelwood trade.
Zizyphus mauritiana - used as fuelwood
In Côte d'Ivoire, a study conducted by the Ministry of Social Affairs (1986) reports that charcoal is now the preferred fuel in Abidjan and that its popularity is spreading into the rural regions. Charcoal is preferred because it can be purchased in small quantities and is cheaper. Fuelwood marketing is dominated by women, but as the volume of trade expands, men are becoming increasingly involved. This shift may be occurring because men have both time to spend on these activities and access to transportation. The trend is similar for charcoal production and trade (Ministère des Affaires Sociales, Côte d'Ivoire 1986).
Exploitation of forest resources for fuelwood trade often threatens the viability of other forest activities, in recent years, market pressures and forest degradation have led to changes in usuary rights associated with fuelwood gathering. Fuelwood resources have become privatised and can now only be gathered from people's own land (even for domestic consumption). Households with no access to farmland are now forced to purchase their fuelwood.
Ocansey (1985) examined fuelwood exploitation in a village on the outskirts of Accra in Ghana. He found that the fuelwood trade to Accra and other urban centers was an extremely important economic activity for most villagers, especially during the fishing season (the demand for fuelwood increases because of fish-smoking activities). On average 50.94 m^3 wood left the community every day (this compares with an estimated average consumption of 1.37 m^3/year/capita). Farm and fallow lands were the main sources of fuelwood. Fuelwood production for trade was carried out largely by men, while the marketing of fuelwood (middlemen, retailers, wholesalers) was dominated by women. The collection of fuelwood for home consumption is still primarily a woman's activity.
Charcoal - a preferred fuel in some regions
4.6 Cola trade and production
Cola nuts have been an important trade item in the West African region for many centuries. The cola nut is valued in many cultures as a sign of friendship and peace and is consumed ("broken") at reunions, during meetings, ceremonies and festivals (see also Section 3.5). It is also the only stimulant allowed to Muslims. For this reason there is a heavy trade of cola from the humid southern regions to the northern arid parts of West Africa. There are several different species of cola which are traded. In southern regions, the most commonly consumed species is Cola acuminata. However, Cola nitida is preferred in Northern parts, thus C. nitida is more important in the long distance and export trade. Cola acuminata is the preferred species in western Cameroon, for example, and its trade is limited to this region. Cola nitida, however, is produced though generally not consumed in this region; what is collected is traded to the North.
Cola trees are common to humid regions throughout West Africa, although there are some regions which specialise in cola nut commerce. Information on cola nut production and marketing is scattered and not considered reliable. There are few statistics kept by government agencies as it is not as important a national crop as coffee, cocoa, or other export crops. In Cameroon, for example, Nkongmeneck (1985) reports that approximately 22,500 tonnes were produced in 1981 (of which, 20,400 tonnes entered commerce). An estimated 1,100 tonnes were exported in 1980 (worth approximately 182.6 million FCFA), primarily to Nigeria and Chad. Nkongmeneck (1985) adds that government data are replete with gaps, and thus are, at best, only indicative. He adds that the price of cola for the export market appears to be lower than those for internal markets. He postulates that this is because of poor internal market organisation and problems associated with cola nut conservation. In Ghana, the
Forestry Department estimated the value of cola exports to be 3.4 million cedis in 1975, the majority (83%) of which was sold to Nigeria (Forestry Department Annual Report 1983).
Throughout the region the marketing of cola nuts is highly specialised. For example, in Western Cameroon, the cola trade involves producers who sell at the farm or village site to traders who process the cola nuts. They then sell the nuts to wholesale traders who in turn sell to retail traders. The long distance trade of cola generally involves even more transactions.
Cola production and trade, though it is largely ignored by national statistics, appears to provide an important source of income for many rural people. As was noted above, the production and trade of cola is somewhat localised. In Cameroon, for example, the northwest region produces the greatest quantities for commerce. Soup Nguifo (1982) estimates, for example, that 3,000 tonnes of Cola nitida are traded from Kumba to the North each year. More than half the cola produced in this region is purchased on-farm. Detailed information on the prices received for cola at different stages show that on average the selling price by retail traders for cola is three and a half times that received by farmers.
In another study in Western Cameroon, Champaud (1983) estimated the importance of cola nut production for rural farm households. For some of the study households, cola nut provided greater returns than coffee production. Cola nuts sales contributed between 5% and 37% of the household's cash revenue. (These figures were not based on a large sample of households; as such, they serve only to illustrate the importance of cola production for some households.) One study estimates that 30% of cola that is produced is consumed by the household (Soup Nguifo 1982). Cashman (1987) notes that, for women in Southwestern Nigeria, cola trade brings the highest profits (when compared to all other economic activities), but it requires a high initial investment and thus is limited to those with capital resources.
Cola nuts are sold in most rural and urban markets. In cola producing regions there are markets which specialise in the bulk trade of cola and which are geared to long distance wholesale traders. For example, in northwestern Cameroon, there are several central regional markets at which cola trade is concentrated. These markets cater to bulk traders who are involved in the northern trade of cola. For example, in two central markets, 4,550 tonnes of cola nuts were sold on one market day. By comparison, in a secondary market, 0.60 tonnes were sold in one day. The long distance trade of cola earns the highest profits, but is controlled by traders from the north who have access to transport and capital resources. Most sellers are involved in small-scale trade. Soup Nguifo's (1982) study reveals that there is a greater demand for cola than there is supply, but despite this, old cola trees are not being replaced in the western region of Cameroon. He suggests that this is because
returns to the farmer are too low.
4.7 The export of forest and tree resources from the humid zone region: Medicinal plants and animals
In comparison with other regions of the world (e.g. Asia and the Pacific) the export of non-timber forest products from the West African humid forest zone is small. Though NTFPs are exported, information on these markets is scanty. Plant medicines and wild animal products are commonly exported within the region.
The Cameroonian Forest Service reports that medicinal plants were the most commonly recorded secondary forest products collected from Forestry Department lands. They are primarily collected for the export market, and the most common species are: Prunus africanum (729 tonnes exported in 1984), Pausinystalia johimbe (229 tonnes in 1982), Strophanthus sp. (25 tonnes in 1982) and Voacanga africana (30 tonnes in 1982) (Direction des Eaux et Forets 1988).
In his study on traditional plant medicines in the Guinea Republic, Gouterel (1979) discusses the export of medicinal plants. Plant materials are generally collected by paid collectors who sell the unprocessed plant material to foreign companies through an agent. For example, Combretum micranthum is exported to France where it is processed and used as a diuretic and in hepatitis treatments; and Rauwolfia vomitoria (the source of reserpine) is exported to Europe and Japan.
The impact of this trade on local and regional economies is quite large. In an assessment of resource use in the Oku Mountain region of Cameroon, Macleod (1987) includes a discussion of the importance of plant medicine collection to rural inhabitants of the region. She notes that Oku is a center for Prunus africanum bark collection. The bark is sought after by several large pharmaceutical companies who use it to produce drugs for prostate gland treatments. She estimates that over 2000 tonnes of bark are extracted annually by one company alone. This industry provides an important source of off-farm income for local residents: approximately half the bark is collected by paid workers and the rest is gathered by small enterprises. Macleod (1987) estimates that a third of the people from the region supplement their income with bark collection and other artisanal activities.
Wild animals (e.g. parrots) and wild animal products (e.g. ivory) are also important export products. Most governments collect statistics on the export of wild animals; however, they are considered quite unreliable because of the large quantity of trade which goes unrecorded. In Ghana, Ntiamoa-Baidu (1987) reported that US$ 344,000 worth of wild animals were exported in 1985 (the most important trade animal was the gray parrot; 9500 were traded in 1985). In Nigeria, Ajayi (1979) reported that 4.4 million dollars worth of wild animal products were exported in 1965 (of greatest value were hides and skins).
4.8 Processing enterprises: a source of household income from forest products
4.8.1 Palm oil processing activities
4.8.2 Rattan, cane and raphia processing activities
4.8.3 Cloth dyeing activities
For many farmers in the West African region, processing forest and farm tree products provides an essential source of off-farm income. In a farming systems study in Sierra Leone, Engel et al (1984) found that 19% of farmers considered off-farm enterprises their most important occupation in terms of labour input and benefits for the household. Their off-farm activities included palm oil processing, palm wine tapping, fuelwood collection, hunting, and fishing.
There are a large number of different processing activities (see especially Kenge 1987). The products are often of great local importance: providing food, household equipment, farming tools, transportation equipment, as well as cultural artifacts. Like gathering activities, non-timber forest product processing is often a part-time activity which is done in addition to agricultural and other tasks. Activities which are common throughout the West African region include palm oil processing and other forest food processing, alcohol distilling, fish smoking, raphia and rattan basketry, woodworking, charcoal production, cloth dyeing and soap production. There are no comprehensive regional studies which focus on forest-based processing enterprises, or even on processing activities at the country or regional level. However, there are case-specific studies which identify different types of processing activities and discuss the local-level importance of these enterprises products (see
sections on specific products).
4.8.1 Palm oil processing activities
Palm oil is one of the most important foods in West Africa. Its production provides income to a great number of West African women. Engel et al (1984) found that 93% of the households in the Bo region of Sierra Leone were involved in palm oil processing. Palm fruit is always collected from wild trees (generally on fallow lands). And while, in this region, men own palm trees and are responsible for the harvesting of palm fruit, women are responsible for processing and trading the oil (women often purchase the fruit for processing). The researchers found that 60% of the female producers sell the palm oil and palm kernel oil they produce. Palm oil is generally sold as soon as it is produced. However, palm kernels are often kept and processed in times of emergency cash need.
For most women, oil processing provides higher returns than other marketed products. The importance of palm oil production for rural households was emphasized in another study in Sierra Leone (Spencer et al 1979). Spencer and Byerlea estimated that palm oil processing for the market was the most common off-farm activity, involving 67% of the households. Cashman (1987) also found that palm oil processing was one of the most lucrative activities for women in southeastern Nigeria. She compared a range of income earning activities: cola nut, fruit, vegetable, meat and, fish sales, palm oil, maize, and locust bean processing, and soap making. She considered the labour and initial capital investment required for these varied activities and found that palm oil processing and the sale of cola nuts brought the highest profits, but that the initial investment required for cola trading was comparatively high, and the labour required in palm oil processing was great.
Palm oil processing provides an important source of cash income for many households in the Adioukrou region of Côte d'Ivoire as well (Boutillier and Dupire 1958). In this region the revenue is generally divided between the tree owner, fruit harvester and processor. For example, in one cited case 42% of the proceeds went to the climber (harvest), 38% went to his wife and her assistants (processors) and 20% went to the owner of the tree.
4.8.2 Rattan, cane and raphia processing activities
Cane and raphia products are widely used in rural households throughout West Africa. Baskets, mats, crop dryers, traps, and furniture are all typically made from palm products. In many rural regions people produce for their household needs and for the local market. Kaye (1987a) estimates the annual contribution of basketry production to the national economy to be 766 million FCFA. He notes that more than two thirds of the products are sold directly by artisans, not in markets. Kaye suggests that there has been an increase in production for the urban market and a decline in rural sales.
In some areas there are specialist artisans who produce on a larger scale for regional, urban and even export markets (primarily for sale to tourists). For example, in Côte d'Ivoire, Kaye (1987a) estimates that there are 1500 people involved in artisan basketry full-time, compared to an estimated 62,000 people who are involved in this activity on a part-time basis. He notes that those producing on a full-time basis focus on the urban and tourist markets.
In a case study of cane weaving enterprises in the Kumasi region of Ghana, Darko (1981) found that men dominated weaving activities while women dominated the trade of raw cane and fabricated cane products. Labourers were generally hired by female wholesalers who transported the materials to weavers. Darko (1981) noted that irregularity in the supply of rattan and raphia (the main inputs) was the greatest problem producers faced. Similarily, in southwestern Cameroon Shiembo (1986) argues that raphia and rattan production is limited and made more expensive by raw materials shortages. Shiembo (1986) estimates that some 3600 people are involved, at least part-time, in this small-scale industry.
4.8.3 Cloth dyeing activities
Dyed cloth has traditionally been, and still is, important in many rural communities in this region. These clothes are especially valued because they are used in traditional cultural events and festivities (see Section 3.5). In most cases, traditional dyes have vegetable bases whose components come from gathered plants and tree parts. Synthetic dyes have, in some cases, replaced natural dyes. The naturally dyed cloths are more expensive, but as they serve ceremonial functions, they are still popular.
In general the production of dyed cloth is done on a part-time basis. There are however, a few villages where production is specialised. One village on the outskirts of Kumasi accounts for about 50% of the cloth's production. There, the industry is highly specialised, involving bark collectors who transport the bark to dye centers, women who extract dye from bark, and others who sell the dye to the cloth craftsmen. Formerly, cloth dyeing was strictly a man's activity, but now women are involved in all but Adinkra cloth dyeing. The search for bark has become competitive and, in some cases, the bark is becoming difficult to find (Annan 1980).
In Sierra Leone, Chuta (1978) investigated the economics of Gara cloth production (see Section 3.5). She identified 360 small-scale Gara dyeing enterprises and found that 80% of these Gara enterprises were owned by women.
<section>8</section>
5. CHANGES IN FOREST RESOURCE USE
5.1 The impact of commercialisation and urban growth on resource use
5.2 The impact of forest degradation on forest resource use
5.3 Use of forest tree species on farm lands
5.4 Changes in usuary rights to forest products
Many different factors work together to limit or alter the way forest resources are used. Widespread forest degradation caused by expanding agricultural land clearing, conversion to plantations (cocoa and timber), and timber exploitation all diminish people's access to forest products. In addition, migration from rural areas to urban centers has created larger markets for some forest products. Increased commercialisation of rural economies in conjunction with increasing populations and degradation of the forest resource base have served to increase the pressure on dwindling resources.
Cocoa - an example of commercialisation
5.1 The impact of commercialisation and urban growth on resource use
There is little information which directly assesses the impact of increasing commercialisation on the way forest resources are used and valued. However, there are a few trends which can be discerned: urban growth has created new markets for formerly untraded goods, changes in the value of specific products (e.g. fuelwood) have changed traditional rules regarding their use: some traditional products are no longer sought after, locally-valued forest tree species are being incorporated into farming systems, and in some cases, degradation of the forest environment has led to a lower quality of life.
Bushmeat trade provides one of the clearest examples of the impact of commercialisation and resource degradation in the region. Commercialisation and increasing urbanisation have created an ever-expanding market for bushmeat. Consequently, wildlife resources are being over-exploited in most areas and their population sizes are thought to be dwindling (Asibey 1977, Jeffrey 1977, Ntiamoa-Baidu 1987). The result has translated into inflating bushmeat prices and a reduction in bushmeat consumption in rural areas (see Section 4.4.2). In some urban centres bushmeat has become a luxury item (den Hartog et al 1973, Asibey 1987b). Even in regional markets prices have increased over the last few years; Gartlan (1987) asserts that in southwestern Cameroon this inflation is due to a reduction in the availability of bushmeat.
In many regions, hunting for bushmeat has become an important income-earning activity (Asibey 1986, Dongmo 1985) (see Section 4.1). In some areas with good market access, bushmeat consumption is declining, as what can be caught is sold rather than consumed (Asibey 1987b). In these rural regions only what is not sold or what remains from the carcass dressing is consumed by the rural poor (Federal Department of Forestry, Nigeria 1987). Mankoto ma Mbaelele, Dudu, and Colyn (1987) note that in Zaire, the species which are consumed in rural regions differ from those species that are sold to urban consumers. People in rural regions eat what they cannot sell in urban markets.
There are several other traditional foods whose markets have expanded greatly with increasing urbanisation. One notable case from Nigeria is Irvingia gabonensis seeds whose market value is increasing as forest supplies dwindle (see Section 4.2.2). Although there are cultivated substitutes for Irvingia sp. seeds (e.g. Colocynthis sp. (melon) seeds), Irvingia sp. are preferred; people pay far higher prices for something of traditional value (see Tables 3 and 8, Okafor 1981).
Increasing urbanisation has also created a new market for a number of artisanal products such as cane and rattan furniture (see Section 4.8.2). Kaye (1987b) remarks that, in Côte d'Ivoire the rural market for traditional artisan products is declining at the same time that the urban markets are expanding.
In some cases, the increasing commercial value of forest products is altering the dynamics of the resource's exploitation. For example, the increasing value of fuelwood has drawn more men into the business of production and marketing. In Côte d'Ivoire, both production and marketing of fuelwood and charcoal are dominated by women on a small-scale, but as the fuelwood trade has expanded, men have become increasingly involved because of the time they can afford to spend and their access to transportation (Ministère des Affaires Sociales 1986). Similarly, in Bo, Sierra Leone, Kamara (1986) has found that rural men are increasingly involved with the production of fuelwood for the market. There, men collect 25% of the wood for the market compared to 7% of the total wood collected for home consumption. Thus 79% of the fuelwood men collect is for sale rather than home consumption (see Appendix 7). Similar trends exist in other parts of Sierra Leone. Kamara notes that this may have a
negative impact on women as it may reduce their income earning potential (though it may also reduce the time women have to spend collecting wood).
A change in the way lands are managed, through conversion to plantations for example, can also often limit access to, and therefore use of, a particular forest resource. In an assessment of a rice development project in northern Sierra Leone, Karimu (1981) found that non-project farmers had been negatively affected by the project; they no longer had access to Raphia palm groves which they valued as a source of raw materials for housing. Similarily, in an evaluation of the impacts of a forest plantation project in Ghana, local residents stated that local supplies of housing materials had declined due to forest conversion (Korang 1986).
5.2 The impact of forest degradation on forest resource use
In some regions formerly plentiful supplies of wildlife, medicines and supplementary foods have practically disappeared. This is not to suggest that substitutes are not adopted or that cleared forest lands reap no harvests. The degradation of the forest quite naturally leads to a decline in resource use. However, in the West African region there are some forest "products" which cannot be readily replaced; those that serve cultural or symbolic functions are especially important (e.g. bushmeat, medicines, and housing material). For example, in Korang's (1986) study of the impact of forest conversion on surrounding residents, a diminished supply of locally valued forest resources was noted. These losses had not been replaced with substitute products from the plantations. Thus people had lost a source of income (sale of canes and chewing sticks), food (bushmeat), and medicine.
In some cases, deforestation has reduced the extent to which forest resources are used. Visser (1975) notes that among the Ando in Côte d'Ivoire a decline in knowledge regarding medicinal plants and their uses has resulted from a decline in actual forest resources. In the case of plant medicines this loss of knowledge is particularly troubling, as traditional medicine is the only health care available to the majority of those living in rural areas of this West African region.
In Western Cameroon, Koagne (1986) notes that there are many forest foods which are decreasingly exploited. He adds that almost all of the region's natural vegetation has disappeared. Traditional supplemental foods are not available in exploitable quantities and new foods that are imported from other regions have taken their place. Forest foods with particular social value are still consumed on ceremonial occasions though these products are often specially protected or produced on farms for such occasions.
The greatest amount of information on the impact of forest degradation comes from studies of wildlife decline. Several studies have shown that bushmeat consumption is limited by the supply of wildlife (Ajayi 1974, Asibey 1987, Martin 1978, Ntiamoa-Baidu 1987, deVos 1977, Blanc-Pamard 1979) (See Table 1, Sections 1.1.5 and 4.1). In southern Cameroon Laburthe-Tolra (1981) asserts that the decline in bushmeat consumption, caused by reduced supply of wild animals, has resulted in a deterioration in the quality of people's diets. The risks associated with a continued decline in supply become particularity great when it is realised that, as discussed earlier, it is difficult to substitute for wild animals; livestock production is difficult in this region (see Section 1.1).
Fuelwood scarcity has led to a range of different problems. In the southern regions of Ghana, Ardayfio (1986) has found that fuelwood scarcity has forced households to purchase fuel at the expense of food (in one village household, fuelwood expenditures rose from 1% to 16% of total expenditures within a few months), cooking time is being reduced and, in some cases, different foods are being used. The additional time that must be spent collecting fuelwood has increased the negative health effects of fuelwood gathering, and women's income earning activities which require high fuelwood energy inputs, have, in some cases, been curtailed because the fuel costs have become prohibitive.
5.3 Use of forest tree species on farm lands
In some areas the combination of declining forest resources and increasing market demand for certain products has resulted in increased use of forest trees on farm lands. This is occurring, to different degrees, throughout humid West Africa. Its predominance depends upon the amount of land pressure that exists, the quality of nearby forest resources, traditional tenure regulations, the extent of commercialisation, and the markets for forest products. In Nigeria, on-farm trees are valued for cash income, shade, fruit, fuelwood, wood for building material and agricultural implements, soil conservation, and palm wine. As nearby forests disappear it is not only trees with marketable products which are increasingly left on farms, trees with food crops or particular household uses such as those use for medicine production, are also being preserved and supplemented (Umeh 1985).
Generally it is believed that many of the West Africans from the region do not plant trees. Trees on farm lands are most commonly those that have been left and protected during forest fallow and cultivation periods, or transplanted wildlings. But, tree planting on farm lands is increasing. In southern Nigeria, where land pressure is at perhaps its highest in the West African region, the number of trees being planted on farm and fallow lands is increasing (Okafor 1979). Currently approximately 37% of the farm and fallow land trees were planted (Obi 1985).
In southeastern Nigeria, there is a considerable amount of research evaluating trees on farm lands (see especially Okafor various). One hundred and seventy-one (171) common farm and fallow land forest tree species with edible products have been identified; the density of these species is often far greater on farm lands than in natural forests (Okafor et al 1987) (see Section 4.2.2). On-farm trees serve a multitude of household functions while providing support to agricultural production (e.g. yam stakes and mulch) and a source of cash income. Okafor (1987) found that the tree species with the greatest number of household uses were often incorporated into compound farms while less frequently used species were found in outlying fields. (See Appendix 17 for a description of the functions of trees on compound farms in southern Nigeria.)
Okafor also examined the relative predominance of tree planting and protection. His analysis showed that more Dacryodes edulis and Irvingia gabonensis were planted than were protected. On the other hand, Treculia africana and Pentaclethra macrophylla were generally protected rather than being planted. At the Anambra State Forestry Research Station I. gabonensis and D. edulis seedling demand far exceeds supply (Okafor 1986). Both of these species have valued traditional uses as well as an important market value (see Section 4.2).
In other parts of West Africa, tree planting also appears to be of growing importance. In Western Cameroon, Depommier (1983) notes that natural vegetation has almost disappeared. He finds that many useful forest species are protected and planted in hedgerows, especially those with market value. In Sierra Leone, Engel et al (1984) has also found that most farmers are interested in planting trees on their farms. The most valued species for planting are oil palm and other food trees.
Fruit trees are of growing importance. In an examination of agroforestry systems in southeastern Nigeria, Ijalana (1983) found that trees (especially fruit trees) were being incorporated into farms with increasing frequency. Trees were generally protected as wildlings though they were planted as boundary demarcations; generally those with long gestation periods were selected for this purpose, (e.g. Mansonia altissima and Nauclea diderrichii).
In the Ho district (Ghana), approximately 75% of the fallow field tree species have medicinal uses (Asamoah 1985). In Nigeria medicinally valued trees are also predominant on farm and fallow lands (Okafor and Fernandez 1987). For example, the leaves of Jatropha curcas are used for treating ringworm (the seeds are used as a soup ingredient).
Okafor found that at least half of the produce gathered from on-farm and fallow land trees was consumed by the household rather than being marketed, though strong markets for these tree products did exist (See Table 8 in section 4.2.1). Another study in southeastern Nigeria echoes Okafor's findings. It reveals that a great portion of the tree product harvest is consumed by the household rather than being sold: for example, 78% of the Irvingia gabonensis fruit and seeds harvested from compounds are consumed by the household (Nweke et al 1985).
5.4 Changes in usuary rights to forest products
In addition to planting trees, changes in the commercial value of forest products has, in some cases, led to changes in traditional regulations over tree products. For example, in a rural community near Accra, in Ghana, Ocansey (1985) found that the increasing market value of fuelwood led to severe exploitation of the woody vegetation, and changes in the rules associated with resource use. Fuelwood became a privatised commodity, and could now only be collected from people's own farm lands. Thus landless people in the community were forced to purchase their fuel.
In some instances changes in tree tenure systems may reflect increasing market demand for certain forest products and a rapid decline in resources themselves. This may be the case in Casamance, Senegal, where Pelissier (1966) writes that the traditional rights associated with forest products have changed with the decline of forest resources. Formerly, access to forests was "open", then rights to forest areas surrounding farm fields and especially the vast array of palm products from them, were restricted.
Increased tree planting can also be a sign of increased privatisation as it is traditionally a sign of ownership in some parts of humid West Africa (see Section 3.4). The introduction of a new technology for palm alcohol production in southern Benin catalyzed changes in the management and value of raphia swamp resources. In village areas with considerable raphia resources a system of communal management has developed. However, in villages with good access to the Cotonou urban market, excessive overexploitation has sometimes led to privatisation of raphia groves (Profizi 1986).
In many cases, raphia groves have been divided among villagers who have been given permanent rights to parcels of grove. By tradition, raphia is never planted, it is seen as a gift of God. However, since the privatisation of these areas people have begun to plant young seedlings. Good seed trees are now protected and their seeds are distributed among the villagers who raise and transport them into the groves. In some cases the privatisation has led to clearing of the raphia groves for vegetable cultivation which, because it can be undertaken in the dry season, leads to higher profits. In both cases the increased marketability of a forest product has led to changes in the management of a formerly "free" resource.
As forest resources decline, their utility and value to local people may diminish. Some authors suggest that loss of knowledge about traditional foods, medicines and uses of surrounding resources are indications of cultural disintegration and impoverishment (Okigbo). There is, however, little concrete information on either the changing uses of forest resources or the differential uses of different forest types. The examples presented in this section highlight some apparent trends. They suggest that it may be possible to manage both forest and fallow land in such a way that the production of increasingly valued (both commercially and domestically) forest products is supplemented.
Conclusion
There can be little doubt that the rapid changes to the environment which are occurring throughout the West African humid zone affect the ways these forest resources are used. In some cases new products introduced from urban areas (and foreign markets) are replacing traditional forest goods.
In other cases, however, commercialisation and resource decline have placed a high market value on forest products, especially those that cannot be replaced for cultural (e.g. Irvingia seeds), environmental (e.g. bushmeat), or economic (e.g. medicines) reasons. While the expansion of agriculture and human settlements into formerly uncleared forest areas has destroyed many forest resources, it has also created new habitats for other commonly used resources (e.g. grasscutter). Clearing and forest fallow cycles favour much-used species such as oil palms.
<section>9</section>
6. ASSESSING THE VALUE OF NON-TIMBER FOREST PRODUCTS TO LOCAL PEOPLE
6.1 People's responses to resource degradation
6.2 The value of forest resources as reflected in tenure and usuary rights
6.3 Indication values: the markets and market prices
6.4 Studies which examine the contribution of income from forest products to the household budget
6.5 Studies which estimate the quantity or frequency of forest product exploitation and consumption
6.6 Studies of the uses and distribution of farm and fallow land trees
6.7 Assessing the value of forest resources by their functions
6.8 Evaluating the importance of forest resources by examining those who rely on them most: Women and the rural poor
6.9 Evaluating the importance of non-timber forest products at the regional and national levels
The information that is needed to assess the importance of forests and forest resources at the rural household level differs from the information that is needed to assess their national or regional importance. At a national and regional level relevant information can include: the number of people employed in forest-related activities; the forest products with an export market; the uses of forest resources by regional and national enterprises; the availability of raw materials from the forest; the number of small forest based enterprises; and extrapolations of the quantities of forest resources exploited over a region. However, at the local level the importance of forests and forest resources can best be determined through more detailed examination of information about people's values and daily needs. As was noted at the outset, little information exists in the literature to directly assess the value people place on forests and forest products. There is however, a great deal
of indicative information which can be used to assess the local importance of forest resources. The following discussion draws on some of these examples in order to illuminate different ways in which the value of local resources can be assessed.
6.1 People's responses to resource degradation
The local value of forest resources is perhaps most insightfully assessed by reviewing studies which examine either people's responses to abrupt changes in their forest environment or the impact of development projects that change either the forest or people's access to the forest (See also Ume Okafor 1987, Nigeria; Faure et al 1980, Cameroon).
Korang (1986) conducted an interesting study on the local impact of the Subri development project in Ghana. The Subri project converted a large forest area to a Gmelina arborea pulp and fuelwood plantation. People from the surrounding area said that the project provided employment and improved roads. However, at the same time their supply of forest products diminished and housing and food prices increased. Ninety-four percent of `those interviewed complained that the project reduced the supply or their access to forest resources. In their view the most important losses were bushmeat, chewsticks, canes, poles and other housing materials, and condiments. Korang notes that for many local residents the formerly abundant supplies of chewing sticks and canes had provided a source of income (these products were gathered and sold to wholesale traders).
A study (Karimu 1981) of an agricultural development project in Northern Sierra Leone provides another example. The project, a rice production scheme, parcelled out areas of formerly common land. As a result of these allocations, the study asserts, non-project farmers no longer had access to raphia palm groves, their source of building materials, food, wine, and raw materials for basketry and furniture making. As was the case in the preceding Ghanaian example, the project had not considered the value of these forest resources for local consumption and income earning opportunity.
6.2 The value of forest resources as reflected in tenure and usuary rights
Many parts of West Africa have undergone great changes in land tenure regulations. It goes beyond the scope of this study to examine the causes and implications of these changes. Nonetheless, it should be noted that they can have a profound impact on the ways people use and value their surrounding resources. This discussion examines some of the different traditional user regulations governing the use of tree resources; such regulations sometimes indicate the value placed on different resources by different societies. Often these rules of custom change as the value of different tree products change. For example, sometimes, as a fruit becomes more valuable on the market, user rights become more restrictive.
Throughout the humid regions of West Africa trees have generally not been planted. In some cases this is the result of tree tenure regulations. In many regions culture and tradition have dictated that planters gain permanent rights to land on which they plant trees (Gastellu 1980). This does however change when resources become scarce and/or more valuable (see Sections 3.4 & 5.4).
Boamoah (1986) presents an interesting study of the traditional regulations associated with trees and their use in Ghana. In some parts of Ghana the rights over the use of trees and their products depends both on the type of land on which they are growing and the type of products being harvested. The traditional rules which this study examines suggest that trees vary in their importance and significance, those valued for cash and those with subsistence value. In addition, the rules suggest that trees, both generally and by specific species, are indicators of land right, inheritance and thus future wealth (see Section 3.4).
6.3 Indication values: the markets and market prices
Information on the markets, market prices and consumer demand for forest products all reveal the extent to which forests provide both widely desired products and income-earning potential. The increasing market for forest products such as bushmeat and Irvingia gabonensis seeds (both discussed Section 4) is due largely to urban expansion. The urban demand for these and other forest products reflects their cultural importance. There are studies that examine the frequency with which forest products are sold in markets, the comparative market prices of various forest products, and the number of people involved in their trade.
The market prices for bushmeat reflect its popularity. Data on bushmeat prices from several urban markets in the region are presented in Table 4 (see Section 4.1.2). In almost all cases bushmeat prices are higher than prices for meat from domesticated animals. This seems to indicate that there is widespread demand. In addition, the escalating bushmeat prices in Ghana and Nigeria suggest that demand is far from being satisfied. The data on Nigerian market prices for other forest foods compare favourably with the prices of substitute cultivated varieties suggesting cultural preference for these "wild" foods (Okafor 1979, 1981) (see Tables 8 and 9 in Section 4.2, Appendix 16). The comparatively high prices that are paid for forest foods result partly from the fact that they are available during periods when cultivated foods are in short supply. Information of this kind provides an indication of the importance of forest products to both consumers and market traders (see Section
Throughout the West African region, the trade of forest products involves many people at different levels: producers, village collectors, wholesale market traders, and retail traders (Ajayi 1979). In some cases these activities provide a vital source of income. At one market (Makola) in Ghana, Ansa (1986) found that there were 166 traders (the majority of whom were women) selling forest products or products made from forest raw materials. These included: chewing sticks, bushmeat, raw canes, fuelwood, charcoal, cane baskets, kitchen utensils, mortar and pestles, and stools.
The local markets for collection and trade of forest products indicate that there is widespread demand for forest produce and many potential income earning opportunities for local producers. These markets appear to be relatively stable (in comparison to export commodity markets) they can therefore provide a steady source of income for the many people involved in production, retail and wholesale trade of forest produce.
6.4 Studies which examine the contribution of income from forest products to the household budget
Few studies directly assess the contribution of forest-earned income to the household budget; however, some present data on the income earned from different forest based activities. While links are rarely made to the ways this income is spent, it can be assumed that income which supplements the household budget is important, especially in periods when other sources are not available. For example, Asibey (1977b) relates that animal hunting and gathering provide an important source of supplemental income to some farmers (see Section 4.1.2). And Okafor (1979) presents data on the income earned by farmers in Anambra State from palm wine production (see Table 10). He shows that the income earned per day from palm wine production exceeds the Nigerian daily minimum wage (2.3 naira/day).
Kamara (1986) presents data on income earned from fuelwood sales by both rural farmers and retailers in Sierra Leone. He estimates that the returns per roan day from rice cultivation and fuelwood sales are almost equivalent, and notes that the fuelwood income is critical as it provides the first returns from land clearing and income during the agricultural slack period when few other sources of cash income are available. For urban retailers (80% of whom are women), income earned from fuelwood contributes from an average of 42% of total household income in Freetown (where 80% of traders work full-time), to an average of 5% of the total household income in Makeni.
Cashman's (1987) study from southwestern Nigeria represents another example of the importance of trees as a source of household income. She notes that in this region, women earn the majority of the household's cash. Some of the regionally important income earning activities which employ women include: palm oil processing, cola nut trade, parkia bean processing, soap making, maize processing and food sales. Oil processing is especially valued for "bulk" expenses such as school fees.
In some cases, communities have come to rely and specialise in the trade and production of forest products. In Bas Mungo, Cameroon, for example, some 20,000 villagers are dependent on the sales of palm wine to nearby Douala (see Section 4.3) (Moby-Etia 1982). Similarly, in Anyama, Senegal, Vérnière (1969) relates that the cola nut trade provides the main source of income for the town's 6000 residents (see Section 4.6). Finally, in Ahwia (a Ghanaian village in the Kumasi area) all the village men depend on wood carving activities. Carvers earn a good living (about 1300 cedis/month on average) (Addey 1982).
6.5 Studies which estimate the quantity or frequency of forest product exploitation and consumption
Studies which examine and estimate the extent to and frequency with which different forest products are used also shed light on the value of these resources. Food consumption studies, and housing surveys evaluate the extent of forest product use. These case-specific studies which quantitatively assess the day-to-day use of forest resources provide analytical data which allows the utility of forest resources to be compared with the utility of other resources, and production systems.
Food consumption studies that examine the consumption of wild and forest foods or assess quantities of snack foods consumed can show the importance of forest products. Although not from the West African region, Ogle and Grivetti's (1985) study on the cultural, ecological, and nutritional aspects of wild plant use in Swaziland is an excellent example of how information from different subject disciplines can be integrated to help understand the role of wild plants in people's diets. They include a quantitative analysis of the frequency with which species are consumed. They find that over 220 wild plants are commonly (more than once a month) consumed; many agriculturalists who were interviewed claim they consume more wild plants than cultivated varieties.
Dietworst's (1987) meat consumption survey in three Nigerian village communities provides an informative analysis of the frequency of bushmeat consumption (see Section 1.1.5). A village study in Sine, Senegal also examines household consumption of bushmeat. Although the area is known to have poor wild animal resources, the researchers found that bushmeat was regularly consumed (on average, 12.9 g./day/per son). They added that the greatest quantities of bushmeat were consumed by children (Vincke et al, 1987).
Faure and Vivien's (1980) study of the local uses of forest resources in the Littoral region of southern Cameroon included an analysis of the extent to which they are used in house construction (see Section 1.5). They assert that approximately 300 poles are used for constructing one house. From this, they estimate that the nine study villages consume 4,200 cubic metres of wood to this end (see also Tanga 1974).
While few studies actually assess the extent to which plant medicines and traditional healing practices are used Abosede Akesode (1986) provide an unusual case study which examines the use of a traditional plant cure Nigeria (see Section 1.3.3).
Studies which examine the extent to which resources are exploited also indicate how valuable they are to local people. Moby-Etia's (1982) study of palm wine tapping in southern Cameroon estimates the amount of palm wine tapped per person per day and the amount produced per season (see Section 4.3). In Ghana, Dodah (1970) estimates that farmers in the Krobo region tap between 25 and 100 trees per season. In Nigeria, Okafor (1979) provides data on the numbers of trees tapped for palm wine by farmers in Anambra state (see Table 10).
6.6 Studies of the uses and distribution of farm and fallow land trees
Sometimes the types of trees on farm lands and on fallow lands differ, but often valued species are maintained regardless of their location. Regionally, trees such as oil palms are often protected and selectively left in clearings and on forest fallow lands. The multitude of functions associated with these farm trees demonstrates their value to local people. There are a number of studies from the region which inventory fallow and farm trees. The density of different species on farm and fallow lands can often indicate their importance (especially when compared with density of the same species in nearby forest areas).
Okafor and Fernandez (1987) conducted an inventory of farm and fallow land trees in southeastern Nigeria. They identified 171 edible tree species. The most commonly used and highly valued species were found in compound farms rather than in outlying farm and fallow land areas. These farm tree species provided food and beverages, stakes, fodder, fuelwood, medicines, fibres and housing materials. (See Appendix 17 for species.)
Other tree inventories of farm and fallow species reveal similar trends (Obi et al 1973, Herren-Gemmill 1988, ICRAF et al 1986). Herren-Gemmill compares the uses and management of fallow areas by farmers in the forest and derived savannah region of southern Nigeria. She finds that farmers in the forest zone leave a broader range of forest emergents standing when crop land is cleared. A great number and variety of trees are also allowed to germinate during cultivation. In comparison, savannah farmers preserve only economic species.
There are many regional farming system studies that focus on the functions trees serve. For example, in the Ho district of Ghana, Asamoah (1985) notes that 76% of the fallow species identified provide medicines, 92% are valued for their soil improving qualities, 92% have domestic uses, 88% are used for fuelwood, 67% have commercial value and 50% serve in customary rites. In another Ghanaian study, Elletey (1986) examines the reasons why farmers protect (or tolerate) farm versus fallow trees. Among the Banen of southern Cameroon, Dongmo (1985) finds that most farm trees are valued for their leaves, fruit or seeds. A few species are also left in fields for protection and demarcation (see also Depommier 1983).
6.7 Assessing the value of forest resources by their functions
6.7.1 Seasonal variation in the use and importance of forest products
6.7.2 The emergency or buffer role of forest resources
There are a multitude of household uses for forests. Some are region specific, while others are specific to a group of people, or even a household. In examining the uses of resources by individual households, and in assessing their importance at a regional level, it is more useful to focus on the functions they serve rather than the specific species exploited. People are not concerned with trees themselves; they value functions such as cooking, warmth, food, medicine and shelter. The first part of this study broadly defined important West African tree products and their functions: as foods and materials for household consumption, as support to other productive activities, as sources of cash income, and as cultural symbols.
Information on the functions of forest resources can be found in anthropological (Bahuchet 1978) and geographic household-level studies, as well as in studies evaluating the uses of farm fallow trees (Asamoah 1985, Boamah 1986, Dongmo 1985, Elletey 1986, Herren-Gemmill 1988, Okafor et al 1987) (see Sections 5.3 & 6.6). In regions where the natural forests have disappeared, useful trees are often incorporated into the farming systems (Okafor 1981, Ijalana 1983). For this reason studies of on-farm trees often reveal information on the functions that forest resources once served (See for example Poulsen (1981) who also suggests that forest products can be classified by function.)
This study has identified many of the common functions forest products serve in households throughout the West African forest region:
* food (both animals and plants) to supplement the diet and meet seasonal shortages;
* drinks: palm wine and alcohol, "water";
* food and cash buffers or insurance in emergency hardship periods;
* medicines and dental chewing sticks;
* fuel, for all household and enterprise needs;
* marketable products exploitable for cash income (e.g. cola nut);
* material for house construction: poles, bark, liana, palm roof tiles and other roof leaves, wattle slats, timber;
* material for household, agriculture, hunting and fishing equipment;
* yam and other crop stakes;
* materials for crop storage containers;
* fencing and boundary markings;
* fodder;
* shade;
* inputs for processing enterprises (e.g. fuelwood);
* locations for social, religious and healing ceremonies;
* symbols of cultural and religious identity and importance.
By focusing on the functions of forest products the role of these products can be examined and information from different areas of the region can be compared. In addition, this focus allows one to examine how uses change over time and by setting. For example, in examining the function of foods gathered from forest areas, similarities can be seen across the region: forest foods provide dietary staples and supplements; fill in seasonal and emergency food shortfalls; and provide specific nutrients and culturally symbolic foods. Forest leaves, nuts and wild animals are used in sauces which accompany main meal staples. Forest fruits and insects are consumed largely as snacks, especially by children and during periods when agricultural work is most time-consuming. Mushrooms are consumed as meat substitutes, and are generally available only during the rains. Forest foods may have particular cultural value (such as the cola nut, a sign of welcome in many parts of the region). Some
forest foods provide regular supplements to the diet, others are consumed seasonally, when staple food supplies dwindle or during peak labour periods when little time is left for cooking. Still other forest foods are used only in emergency periods when no other foods are available. These generally differ from regularly consumed products, they are more energy-rich but require lengthy processing. What is important about the focus on function is that discussions move beyond species descriptions.
The changing uses of forest resources (see Chapter 5) can also be viewed in terms of their evolving functions. For example, in some cases forest foods may no longer provide the diverse range of produce which they once did. But culturally important foods may still be widely consumed. In other instances, the growing market for some forest foods (e.g. Irvingia gabonensis seeds) may have changed their role in rural areas; trees may now be valued as a sources of cash income. Concomitant with these changing functions, changes in the ways in which these products are valued and managed may ensue. In southern Benin, for example, a new technology for palm alcohol distilling was introduced which changed the way the raphia palms were used and valued. Formerly they had served a great range of household functions and had been used by anyone in the community, but with the introduction of this new technology, they were rapidly overexploited because of the nearby urban market for palm
alcohol (Profizi 1986) (see Section 5.4).
There can be little doubt that the functions of forests will change for households in the rural regions of southern West Africa. The relative importance of different forest products may also change: this can already be seen as some products take on more of a commercial value. But, for most of the functions listed above, contemporary evidence suggests that forest products are still important for the majority of rural households. Although substitutes exist for many non-timber forest products, few people have the resources to buy them. Perhaps for this reason, of those noted above only "material for household, hunting, and fishing equipment", "foods as a buffer during emergencies", and "drinks" appear to be of declining importance throughout the region as a whole.
6.7.1 Seasonal variation in the use and importance of forest products
Perhaps one of the most crucial functions of forests is that they provide products for consumption and sale during seasons when other foods and sources of income are less prevalent. Although the seasonal variations may not be as pronounced in the humid zone when compared to more arid regions, forest product use still complements the seasonal agricultural cycle. Many smallscale enterprises are run seasonally, when labour is available.
In rural Sierra Leone fuelwood collection for market sale is concentrated in the off-peak agricultural season, thereby providing income in a period when food supplies are generally at their lowest (Kamara 1986) (see Appendix 16). Similarly, palm oil processing takes place when cash is needed for food purchases. The palm fruit and kernels are processed as soon as they are harvested, despite the fact that returns would be higher if they were saved and processed later in the season (a result of seasonal variations in selling prices) (Engel et al 1984).
The income earned in forest based processing and gathering activities often plays an essential part in the agricultural cycle. In rural Sierra Leone, income from fuelwood sales (the first returns from cleared lands) is often used to purchase agricultural inputs such as seeds or equipment (Kamara 1986). Similarly in Ghana, the income that is earned from bushmeat sales is often invested in agricultural production (Asibey 1987b).
Many forest products are gathered and consumed seasonally. In most cases this reflects a seasonal need for food supplements. However, in some instances forest foods are only available in specific seasons. Perhaps the most popular examples are snails and mushrooms which are both generally only available at the beginning of the rains in a review of bush foods consumed in southern Cameroon, Pélé and Berre (1967) found that plant foods gathered from wild areas (notably forests) were most valued when other food sources were unavailable - at the end of the dry season. Dongmo's more recent study (1985) in Banen, Cameroon reiterates these findings suggesting that forest foods are still roost important during the off-peak agricultural season. Okafor's study (1981) on forest foods in markets in southern Nigeria reveals that many are available in seasons when cultivated varieties are in short supply (see Appendix 15). He notes that these foods are only available in the dry season
because they are gathered from the forest. In some cases forest species are cultivated (e.g. Gnetum sp.), but these cultivars do not produce for as long a period into the dry season as those found in forest habitats.
Throughout West Africa consumption of bushmeat is generally higher during the rainy season. In some communities, hunting is an important off-season activity. In southern Cameroon, trapping is common during the rainy season (Amat et al 1972). And among the pygmies from southern Cameroon the species hunted as well as hunting techniques vary by season (Bahuchet 1978).
6.7.2 The emergency or buffer role of forest resources
Forests have traditionally provided food and marketable products during emergency periods of food shortages, illness or death. This function is well illustrated in stories from the region in which trees are portrayed as providers during famines (see Section 3). Early works, such as Irvine's (1952) study on the emergency uses of forest products, also illustrate the former importance of forests as a buffer source of food supplies. He relates that forest tubers, roots and rhizomes were the main source of energy during famine times. It is not however clear, from recent accounts, whether and how this function has changed in the last few decades. Forest resources have declined, so too has people's knowledge of their varied resources. In addition, the commercialised rural economies and food aid programmes may, in some cases, substitute for the food buffer forests once provided. It can be postulated that marketable and processed forest products provide a means for earning cash
income during emergencies, although no information has been found on this issue.
6.8 Evaluating the importance of forest resources by examining those who rely on them most: Women and the rural poor
This discussion has focused largely on common forest products and their use. Little has been said about who within the rural community relies most on forest resources. While forests are exploited for a variety of products and functions, they are especially important for those with access to fewer resources, most notably the rural poor, many of whom are women. This is of particular importance as many development projects are geared towards improving the lives of the rural poor. In most communities in the region, exploitation of forests has traditionally been open to all for subsistence needs. The poor often rely to a great extent on forests for foods, medicines, and building materials, as well as other needs discussed in earlier chapters.
Forest foods are particularly important for poor households as they provide an available, accessible source of a diverse range of foods. Especially important are fish and wild animals, leaves, nuts and mushrooms. For some forest foods such as bushmeat, consumption is limited by supply. In these cases, the poor's access to these products may decline as they become scarce luxuries. In other cases, forest foods may be considered poor man's food. In these instances people may attempt to purchase substitute foods whenever possible. In both situations forest food consumption may decline. However, there is little information from the region which specifically addresses the changing dietary patterns of the rural poor, or which focuses on their changing consumption of forest foods.
Forest-based activities, such as gathering and processing NTFPs often provide important employment opportunities in rural regions. Gathering of forest products for sale is often dominated by the rural poor. In Sierra Leone, for example, it is the poorer households within the rural community who rely on sale of fuelwood (Kamara 1986). Similarly, poorer women often dominate the gathering and trade of forest leaves (Okafor 1979). While forest based activities may provide numerous opportunities for the rural poor, the earning potential varies substantially (e.g. basket-making versus wood-carving). Generally, activities which are dominated by the poor reap the lowest returns. In some cases income earned from forest based activities can be invested in agricultural assets (such as implements, or livestock). In these cases forests offer the poor a means of investing in their future.
Working on the construction of a hut in North Senegal
Throughout the region women dominate the collection, trade and processing of the majority of non-timber forest products. In Ghana 84% of both retail and wholesale traders are women (Ardayfio 1985). This is due, in part, to the central role of women in West African (southern regions) trade. In general, wholesale traders control the market for products which are transported over long distances. The majority of wholesale traders derive their capital from personal savings as banks are not supportive of women. In southern Cameroon, Kenge's (1987) study of more than 1500 markets reveals that women (commonly known as "bayam sellems") dominate the wholesale and retail trade of almost all forest products with the exception of cola nuts, which men control.
Trading activities are often conducted seasonally, when demands for agricultural (or other) labour are low. For example, Riss (1984) finds that in the Kaolack region of southern Senegal, forest product gathering is an extremely important dry season activity for most women. All women collect forest products for the market. In addition, women generally use forest products to help meet their household's basic needs: foods, fuel, medicines and other products are frequently gathered. Women, therefore, can combine gathering forest products for subsistence needs and for the market. In addition, because of their experience in forest gathering they are knowledgeable about forest product exploitation. Visser (1975) found that among the Ando in Côte d'Ivoire, for example, women were more knowledgeable about gathering and using plant medicines than other members of the community. Forest product processing activities can also be adapted to women's other work. Often processing can be
performed near the home, allowing women to combine these income earning activities with some of their household work (e.g. childcare).
6.9 Evaluating the importance of non-timber forest products at the regional and national levels
More regional level information should broadly assess the impacts of resource use. General statistics on the consumption and trade of commodities are important but information on the dimensions of forest based activities is also needed: the numbers of people employed, and the numbers of small-scale enterprises. Estimates of the quantities of forest resources extracted and consumed on a regional scale are also needed. Often, regional assessments are based on extrapolations from case specific data. In other instances it is collected by government services at trade and collection sites. In general, reliable, accurate information is difficult to find. At best, macro-level data are collected regarding the commercial and export products extracted from Forest Department lands (Senegalese Forest Service being one notable exception).
Most Forest Services of the region collect some information on the non-timber forest products extracted from forest areas. Generally, these records are incomplete and focus on products with an export market (e.g. plant medicines). They do, however, provide an indication of the products that are gathered from Forest Reserves. The Senegalese Forest Service has collected the most thorough and useful information (Direction des Eaux et Forets 1982). It includes comparative data on regional production and product specialisation.
Information on the numbers of people involved in forest-based activities indicate their importance at a regional and national level. For example, in Côte d'Ivoire, Kaye (1987a) estimates the number of people who work in cane processing. Shiembo (1986) makes similar estimates for Cameroon. Ewusi (1986) provides an interesting analysis of statistical data from Ghana collected over the last twenty years. He includes information on a few forest products (e.g. palm kernel, shea nut, cola nut and copra production) and the fishing vessels used in Ghana (see Section 2.2).
Information on the production and consumption of forest products at a local level is often extrapolated to the region or country level. For example, Adeola and Decker's (1987) estimates of the quantity of bushmeat produced by farmers in different ecological zones and throughout Nigeria as a whole is based on studies of 480 farmers in the savannah, rainforest and deciduous forest zones (see Section 4.1.2). Similarily, Martin (1983) estimates the national value of bushmeat based on results from a market survey in southern Nigeria.
Faure and Vivien (1980) use information from a study of nine villages in Cameroon to calculate the quantities of forest resources used in the Littoral region as a whole. For example, based on household level estimates of fuelwood consumption, they conclude that rural inhabitants in the Littoral region (39,000 people) annually consume an estimated 250,000 to 300,000 m^3 of fuelwood. They also estimate the amount of forest area needed by rural dwellers to meet their needs by measuring the distances people travel into the forest to collect different products (e.g. bushmeat, fuelwood, housing poles). They found that a minimal area of 10 km^2 of surrounding forest is needed for each community.
While statistics of this kind can provide a general idea of the importance of forest products, they are usually based on little data, and may vary dramatically from one estimate to another (see also Ministère des Eaux et Forets, Côte d'Ivoire 1987). Regional-level extrapolations serve to illustrate the kinds of information available on the regional importance of non-timber forest products. Compared to other regions of the world such as Asia, Africa collects very little information at the national level. Nonetheless, these examples indicate that some forest products and forest based enterprises contribute significantly to national economies of the region.
Conclusion
Discussions on the use and importance of non-timber forest products generally focus either on those products which are traded at the national and international level, or on describing the myriad of species used by rural households. However, knowing the value of a country's medicinal plant product exports gives no indication of the impact of this trade on the lives of rural people. Additional questions need to be answered: does this trade provide a means of earning cash income, open up new forest areas for exploitation, result in the exclusion of people from formerly available resources, deprive them of an important medicine source, or simply have no impact at all? Studies which focus on the "major" (i.e. exported or industrial) non-timber forest products do not address these kinds of issues; they focus on foreign exchange earned, quantities exported, or government revenues collected (e.g. from taxes and permits).
Studies which focus on the myriad of resources that are exploited generally only produce lengthy lists of plant and animal species; they rarely distinguish between past and present uses, nor do they assess the relative importance of different products in people's lives. It is therefore not possible to assess the changing uses of forest resources, or the impact of forest decline on the lives of people in rural regions. In addition, long descriptive lists of useful forest species provide little information for planners and policy makers.
The importance of forest products needs to be assessed on several different levels: the region, country, ecological zone (i.e. humid zone) and household. At a regional or country level, information on the numbers of jobs created by forest-dependent activities can be important, as would material supply problems to large urban and export markets. At the local or household level the variety of uses of forest resources should be considered. But the great diversity of species used by people in different areas and at different times makes assessment difficult. Forest products' multiple uses can also be analysed in terms of their functions.
New ways of addressing the role and general importance of non-timber forest products are needed in order to move beyond the notion that these products have importance to local people but not to foresters. Foresters' management objectives have often been geared to products with large industrial markets, and the information they require for forest management is generally geared toward this end. More diversified management objectives will require different kinds of information. By judging the value of forest products in a variety of different ways it may be possible to more completely assess their importance on a range of different levels.
<section>a</section>
7. GEARING FORESTRY ACTIVITIES TO MEETING PEOPLE'S NEEDS AND SATISFYING THE DEMAND FOR NON-TIMBER FOREST PRODUCTS
7.1 Management of natural forest areas for wildlife and other products
7.2 Management of fallow lands and farm trees
7.3 Forest plantations and non-timber forest products
7.4 The marketing of non-timber forest products: Problems and potentials
This study has shown that forest products are still widely used in most of humid West Africa. There is not enough detailed and reliable data to estimate the importance of these products over the region as a whole using standard measures. The focus of future research, however, should not solely be aimed at filling these voids. There is enough evidence to show that many people rely on surrounding forests for both subsistence and economic needs (in the sense of the cash economy). It is also clear that the functions and value of forests are changing. Thus, research needs to be focused on what foresters can do to help restore and develop locally important forest products and to build on the knowledge and interests of rural people regarding management of their surrounding forest vegetation. The following discussion examines ways of diversifying forestry activities so as to include non-timber forest products. It is brief, and is not intended to be directive, rather it gives an
indication of the possibilities for management and development of a great range of products, forest functions, and management goals.
7.1 Management of natural forest areas for wildlife and other products
There is great potential for the management of natural forest areas for their NTFPs, as these resources are appreciated by resident populations. However, in light of growing population pressure and changing markets, forest managers are faced with a problem: how can they protect forests from over-exploitation while maintaining an interest in them through sustained use? The answer lies in flexible and positive management. In the past, management has often entailed collection of taxes and statistics. A clear understanding of how forest resources are currently used, can help in the development of a system to protect and develop (e.g. through selection) locally important forest resources. A system of usufruct rights which is geared to meeting local people's needs should also be developed. There is great scope for traditional as well as community forest management.
Many authors note that while forest products are commonly exploited, their density in natural areas are generally low. Research is needed on ways of increasing the density and productivity of locally exploited forest species. Some attempts are being made to this end. However, they generally focus on creating "new" resource sources through game ranches, domestication of animals, and increased tree planting on farms. The costs in terms of labor and capital may be too great for many rural people. One of the salient features of forests is that their products are readily available with little input (with the notable exception of gathering time). Thus, management plans that focus on improving existing resources, can draw on local people's knowledge and focus on products which are familiar and needed. Foods, medicines and products with cash value are perhaps those products that most need programmes of diversified management.
Delonix regia - a useful farm tree
For the West African region as a whole, the need for forest management for bushmeat is most pressing. Techniques are required to help restore and sustain wild animal populations. These need to be as simple and cheap as possible, the more expensive the method, the more expensive the final meat product. It appears that the most common approach to forest management for wild animal production entails creation of small patch clearings in the forests and selection for wild animals' food resources. Hunting regulations which account for seasonal patterns of labour demand (most notably for agricultural tasks), seasonal food needs and animal population cycles are also needed.
There is very little information on the ways to manage forests to yield a diversity of products. Some information can be gleaned from botanical and ecological studies. In addition, anthropological and ethnobotanical studies sometimes include information relevant for forest management. (For example, Profizi's (1983) study of raphia palms and their use in southern Benin includes a description of communal management techniques (see Section 6.7).)
More information is needed regarding ways to increase the productivity and density of locally valued plant species in natural forest stands. As forests have not been managed for NTFPs in the past (by foresters), little is known. The most promising information may come from farmers who have been managing useful trees on their farms or fallow lands. For example, in her study of fallow management in southwestern Nigeria, Herren-Gemmill (1988) relates that farmers often protect some forest species when they clear land for crop production, others (e.g. Triplochiton superba) are allowed to germinate and grow during the cultivation period, while some are deliberately planted. Some interesting work has also been carried out in southeastern Nigeria by Okafor (1977,1986). He has focused on improving popular forest food species and has found that protection and enrichment planting greatly increase density.
There are no examples of community forestry activities designed to enhance pre-existing forest resources in the region. There are a few examples of "indigenous" management by communities, but it is not clear how these systems are changing. One forest area called Yapo reserve, in southern Côte d'Ivoire, is currently being managed for its secondary as well as timber products. The managers note that the revenues from secondary products (mainly fuelwood, charcoal, chewing sticks, ornamental plant materials and wood sold for matchstick making) in 1987 was 6,750,000 FCFA (US$ 1 = FCFA 260) (Goussé 1987). They add that the revenues earned from these products are available on a continual basis and thus, have helped defray the management costs of the forest. There are only a few examples like this one. However, forest management for these products must rely on local knowledge, and management goals should be directed by local people's needs and interests. The potential for community
management of forest areas for NTFPs is therefore great.
7.2 Management of fallow lands and farm trees
Many authors note that intensification of management of fallow lands for forest products will relieve some of the pressure placed on forest areas (Ajayi 1979, Asibey 1987b, Poulsen 1981). In some regions that suffer from high population pressure, the use of fallow and farm areas has already intensified (see Sections 5.3 & 6.6). Trees have become more important on farms, and in some cases products formerly gathered from forests are now found on farms. There are many opportunities for development in this area. Intensive production of valued foods, medicines, building materials and marketable goods may be possible. Fallow areas can perhaps be managed for production of wild game, mushroom, medicine, or raw materials for rural enterprises.
There may be problems associated with introducing wild animals `into farming systems, even in fallow land areas. The introduction of new species can result in serious pest problems. However, as several authors have noted, if simple pest control technologies are developed, such as mist nets, gum, and other traps, the nutritional and monetary benefits gained from the captured animals may far outweigh any possible crop damage (as long as species are kept from reaching pest levels) (Asibey 1987b, Ntiamoa-Baidu 1987).
Ntiamoa-Baidu notes that the amount of damage actually caused by different species is unknown. She asserts that many damage claims by farmers are an attempt to justify killing animals for meat (reflecting the great demand). The possibility of incorporating bushmeat into farm management is evident. There are no animals which are not considered food by different West African groups, but the absence of affordable control techniques (or protection laws) prevent people from effectively exploiting this food resource. In one area of northern Ghana, mist nets were used to try to control bird pests on irrigated rice fields. Over a six week period, 80,000 birds were caught, providing a regular source of meat to farmers over that period.
While there appears to be great potential for managing forest fallow areas for wild animals (e.g. encouraging wild animal food plants), no examples from this region were found in the literature. One example from the Peruvian Amazon region illustrates the potential for this kind of management, especially where markets for bushmeat are strong. In this region fallow areas are selectively managed for fruit and other game food trees. Late in the fallow cycle hunting platforms are set up near aging fruit trees in order to watch for and capture game which comes in to feed as fruit ripens. Most of the meat is then consumed by the household, and income is also earned from bushmeat and skin sales (which contribute an average 9% of the average annual cash income) (Padoch et al 1985).
7.3 Forest plantations and non-timber forest products
Forest and tree crop plantations are generally believed to destroy non-timber forest product supplies, most notably wild animal habitats. While this is certainly the case for products which are cleared to make way for plantation crops, it may be possible to incorporate local product needs into plantation management plans. For example, at some stages of development, plantations may favour some wild animal populations. Asibey (1987b) notes for example, that grasscutter and antelope populations increase in the early stages of oil palm plantations. As plantations develop, the food supply dwindles and the animal populations decline. Simple management techniques, such as leaving patches of forest vegetation, may help sustain the wild animal populations. Other possibilities might include creating hedgerows of mixed vegetation to increase food and habitat diversity and encourage settlement of desired animal populations.
There is also the opportunity to draw on work of those focusing on "ecological engineering" and "restoration ecology". These two areas of research focus on planting and management of a broad range of products (Nwoboshi 1987). As was noted above, returns from management for "secondary" forest products often provide a steady source of revenue (as opposed to that gained from timber harvest) which can contribute to the costs of plantation management.
7.4 The marketing of non-timber forest products: Problems and potentials
It appears from the information that is available that the markets for non-timber forest products are growing especially in urban and peri-urban areas throughout the whole region. There is strong or growing local demand for such products as bushmeat, forest plant foods (especially species of cultural importance), building materials, palm oil, palm wine, chewing sticks, fuelwood, cola nuts, medicines, as well as manufactured goods such as furniture. However, when development activities focus on production for the market, more information on the market demand for different products is needed. For example, little information exists on the fluctuations in market demand for forest products.
Even information on the export market for non-timber forest products is scanty. There are undoubtedly many small businesses that trade non-timber forest products such as medicinal plants, live animals, and animal products. However, information on these enterprises is difficult to find. One example from Ghana demonstrates the potential or such activities. A former Ghanaian forester established an export business of non-timber forest products in 1974 and now exports medicinal plant products, natural sweeteners and provides herbarium samples for research. In 1987 alone his business exported approximately 110 tonnes of a natural sweetener product extracted from the fruit of the forest species Thaumatococcus daniellii (Enti 1987).
While few market studies have focused on the problems associated with marketing NTFPs, it is clear that poor transportation, irregularity of product supply, insufficient market information, as well as irregularity of labour supply loom large among them. In addition, the nature of some forest products makes marketing problematic. Palm wine, for example, can be preserved for two days (at most), and it is generally only traded when there is easy access to a nearby market. Plant medicines can also be difficult to market as they are often need to be fresh (one of the noted advantages of western drugs is that they can be stored).
Conclusion
The significance of NTFPs to rural people and for forest managers, is now being discussed in many circles throughout the West African region. Indeed, the ideas "tossed" out here are in no small part inspired by discussions with West African administrators, researchers and professionals. Thus, while these last chapters have drawn attention to great gaps in information, it should not be taken as a sign that knowledge or interest in these issues does not exist. Rather, the findings of this study should be viewed as an tool that indicates areas where more information is needed. More importantly, this analysis should serve as a springboard for new ideas regarding forest management to meet the needs of rural people.
<section>b</section>
Appendix 1 - Commonly Consumed Wildlife Species
Species
Common Name
Archachatina marginata
Giant snail
Arctolebus calabarensis
Golden potto
Atherorus africanus
Brush-tailed porcupine
Bdeogale nigripes
Black-legged mongoose
Cephalophus dorsalis
Bay duiker
Cephalophus jentinki
Jentink's duiker
Cephalophus monticola
Maxwell's duiker (Blue duiker)
Cephalophus niger
Black duiker
Cephalophus sylvicultor
Yellow-backed duiker
Cercocebus aterrimus
Blank mangabey
Cercocebus galeritus
Crested mangabey
Cercocebus torquatus
White collared mangabey
Cercopithecus ascanius
Sport nose monkey
Cercopithecus aethiops
Green monkey
Cercopithecus diana
Diana monkey
Cercopithecus mitis
Blue monkey
Cercopithecus mona
Mona monkey
Cercopithecus nictitans
Greater white-nosed monkey
Cercopithecus petaurista
Lesser white-nosed monkey
Choeropsis amphibius
Pigmy hippopotamus
Colobus badius
Red colobus
Colobus pennani
Red colobus monkey
Colobus polykomos
Black and white colobus monkey
Cricetomys gambianus
African giant rat
Crocuta crocuta
Spotted hyena
Dendrohyrax arboreus
Tree hyrax
Eidolon helrum
Fruit bat
Epixerus ebii
Tree squirrel
Epomops franwueti
Franquet bat
Epomorphorus anyous
Eastern apaulet bat
Felix aurata
Golden cat
Francolinus spp.
Francolin
Funisciurus spp.
Tree squirrel
Genetta pardina
Forest genet
Hippopotamus amphibius
Hippopotamus
Hyemoschus aquaticus
Water chevrotain
Hylochoerus meinertzhageni
Giant forest hog
Hypsignathus monstrosus
Hammerheaded bat
Hystrix spp.
Porcupine
Kinixyx belliana
Tortoise
Kobus ellipsiprymnus
Water buck
Lepus capensis
Togo hare
Manis gigantea
Pangolins or scaly anteaters
Mellivora capensis
Honey badger
Nandinia binotata
Two-spotted palm-civet
Neotragus pygmaeus
Royal antelope
Numida meleagris
Guinea fowl
Panthera pardus
Leopard
Papio anubis
Baboon
Perodicticus potto
Bosman's potto
Potamochoerus porcus
Bushpig
Protoxerus stangeri
Tree squirrel
Synceros cafer
Bushcow (Buffalo)
Sylvicapra grimmia
Grey duiker
Taurotragus euryceros
Bongo
Thryonomys swinderianus
Grasscutter
Tragelaphus scriptus
Bushbuck
Tragelaphus spekii
Sitatunga
Varanus spp.
Monitor lizards
Viverra civetta
African civet
Xerus erythropus
Striped ground squirrel
Xerus inauris
Ground squirrel
Xerus princeps
Ground squirrel
<section>c</section>
Appendix 2 - Nutrition Composition of Some Forest Animal Species
Name
Moisture
Protein
Fat
African giant rat
(Cricetomyx gambianus)
Grasscutter
(Thryonomys swinderianus)
Green monkey
(Cercopithecus aethiops)
Long-snouted mongoose
(Herpestes naso)
Forest Genet
(Genetta pardina)
Red river hog
(Potamochoerus aethiops)
(Artiodactyl)
Royal antelope
(Neotragus pymacus)
Crown duiker
(Sylvicapra grimmia)
Grey duiker
Bushbuck
(Tragelaphus scriptus)
DOMESTIC MEAT
Beef
Sheep (mutton)
Pig (pork)
Source: Asibey 1987; Ajayi 1979
Units: % proximate composition/100 g. edible portion
<section>d</section>
Appendix 3 - Commonly Consumed Forest and Farm Tree Foods in the West African Humid Zone
Afzelia bella
Seed spices and condiments, fermented leaf vegetables
Afzelia bipindensis
Seed spices and condiments
Aframomum melegueta
Fruit/seeds
Afzelia africana
Seed spices and condiments
Alchornea cordifolia
Leaves as vegetables
Alchornea floribunda
Fruit
Anacardium occidentale
Fruit
Anisophyllea laurina
Annona muricata
Fruit
Artocarpus communis
Fruit
Bailonella toxisperma
Fruit
Blighia unijugata
Leaves as vegetables
Borassus aethiopum
Fresh seed
Brachystegia eurycoma
Seed spices and condiments
Brachystegia kennedy
Seed spices and condiments
Brachystegia nigerica
Seed spices; condiments
Bucholzia coriacea
Fresh seeds
Canarium schweinfurthii
Fruit pulp and seed oil/fat
Carissa edulis
Fruit
Ceiba pentandra
Fresh leaf vegetables
Ceratotheca sesamoides
Leaves as vegetables
Chrysophyllum albidum
Fruit pulp; fruit jam and jellies
Cleistopholis patens
Fruit
Cocos nucifera
Fruit
Cola acuminata
Fresh seed
Cola gigantea
Seed spices and condiments
Cola hispida
Fruit pulp
Cola lepidota
Fruit pulp
Cola millenii
Fruit pulp
Cola pachycarpa
Fruit pulp
Dacryodes edulis
Fruit pulp; seed oil/fat; animal food
Daniellia oliveri
Vegetables
Dennettia tripetala
Whole fruit
Detarium microcarpum
Seed spices and condiments
Detarium senegalense
Seed spices and condiments
Dialium guineense
Fruit pulp; fresh seed; fermented leaf vegetables; seed oil/fat and animal food
Elaeis guineensis
Fruit pulp; fresh seed; fermented leaf vegetables; seed oil/fat and animal food
Fagara macrophylla
Leaves
Ficus spp.
Leaves
Garcinia cola
Fresh seed; chewing sticks
Garcinia polyantha
Fresh seed; chewing sticks
Gnetum spp.
Leaves as vegetables
Hibiscus esculentus
Leaves
Hildegardia barteri
Seed spices; condiments
Irvingia gabonensis var. gabonensis
Oil/fat; fruit jam and jellies; chewing sticks
Irvingia gabonensis var. excelsa
Seed spices and condiments; seed oil/fat; chewing sticks
Landolphia owariensis
Fruit
Lasianthera africana
Leaves
Maesobotrya barteri
Fruit pulp; fruit jam and jellies
Maesobotrya dusenii
Fruit pulp; fruit jam and jellies
Mammea africana
Fruit
Mimusops djave
Fruit
Momordica charantia
Leaves
Monodora myristica
Seed spices and condiments
Monodora tenuifolia
Seed spices and condiments
Mucuna sloanei
Myrianthus arboreus
Fresh leaf vegetables
Myrianthus muellerianthus
Fruit
Nauclea latifolia
Fruit
Pachylobus edulis
Fruit
Pachypodanthium confine
Fruit
Pachystela brevipes
Fruit pulp
Parinari excelsa
Parkia bicolor
Seed spices and condiments; fresh vegetables
Parkia clappertoniana
Fermented seed; seed spices and condiments
Pentaclethra macrophylla
Fermented seeds
Persea gratissima
Fruit
Phyllanthus muellerianus
Leaves
Plectranthus grandiflora
Flavouring from leaves
Poga oleosa
Seed oil/fat
Prosopis africana
Fermented seed; seed spices and condiments
Pterocarpus mildbraedii
Fresh leaf vegetables
Pterocarpus santalinoides
Fresh leaf vegetables
Pterocarpus soyauxii
Fresh leaf vegetables
Raphia hookerii
Fruit drink/wine
Raphia vinifera
Fruit drink/wine
Ricinodendron heudelottii
Oil seeds; fruit
Sacoglottis gabonensis
Bark
Spondias mombin
Fruit pulp; fruit jam and jellies
Struchium sparganophora
Leaves
Synsepalum stipulatum
Fruit pulp; fruit jam and jellies
Tamarindus indica
Fruit drink/wine; fruit pulp; fruit jam and jellies
Terminalia catappa
Seed
Tetrapleura tetraptera
Seed spices and condiments
Treculia africana
Fresh seed; bark; animal food
Triumfetta rhomboidea
Leaves as vegetables
Uapaca spp.
Fruit
Uvaria chamae
Vernonia amygdalina
Leaves
Vitex cerkowski
Fruit
Vitex doniana
Fruit pulp; fresh leaf vegetables; animal food
Xanthosoma mafaffa
Leaves
Xylopia aethiopica
Seed spice and condiments
Xylopia staudtii
Seed spice and condiments
<section>e</section>
Appendix 4 - Forest Species Commonly Consumed in a Ghanaian Village
Tree Species
Uses
Albizia zygia
Stem-powdered as soup base
Aningeria robusta
Fruit
Bombax buonopozense
Leaves in soups
Carica papaya
Fruits
Chrysophyllum albidum
Fruit
Chrysophyllum perpulchrum
Fruit
Cola nitida
Fruit/nut
Dacryodes klaineana
Fruit
Drypetes floribunda
Fruit
Elaeis guineensis
Fruit/nut/oil/wine
Ficus capensis
Fruit as soup base
Lecaniodiscus cupanioides
Fruit
Myrianthus arboreus
Fruit
Napoleona leonensis
Fruit
Psidium guajava
Fruit
Raphia hookerii
Wine/oil
Tetrapleura tetraptera
Fruit in soups
Vitex fosteri
Fruit in soups
Shrubs and Herbaceous Plants
Uses
Aspilia latifolia
Leaves as condiment
Barleria opaca
Leaves as soup base
Byttneria catalpifolia
Stem-water source
Euphorbia hirta
Leaves
Hoslundia opposita
Fruit
Piper guineense
Fruit as condiment
Solanum indicum
Fruit as soup base
Synsepalum dulcificum
Fruit (sweetener)
Telfairia occidentalis
Seeds as soup base
Source: Osei-Owusu 1981.
<section>f</section>
Appendix 5 - Medicinal Plants in Common Use in West Africa
Abrus precatorius
Acacia Senegal
Acokanthera longiflora
Adansonia digitata
Agave sisalana
Ageratum conyzoides
Albizia anthelmintica
Allium sativum
Aloe ferox
Alstonia boonei
Ammi visnaga
Anchomanes difformis
Arachis hypogea
Aristolochia bracteata
Astragalus gumifer
Azardirachta indica
Balanites aegyptiaca
Boerhavia diffusa
Borreria verticillata
Calotropis procera
Carapa procera
Capsicum minimum
Carica papaya
Carum carvi
Cassia occidentalis
Cassia senna
Catharanthus roseus
Chenopodium ambrosioides
Chrysanthemum cinerariae-folium
Cinchona succirubra
Cinnamomum zeylanicum
Centella coreacea
Crinum jagus
Cryptolepis sanguinolenta
Cymbopogon citratus
Datura stramonium
Euphorbia hirta
Euphorbia kamerunica
Funtumia elastica
Glinus lotoides
Harrisonia abyssinica
Heliotropium indicum
Hyoscyamus muticus
Jatropha curcus
Kalanchoe crenata
Lawsonia inermis
Mitragyna stipulosa
Momordica charantia
Morinda lucida
Moringa pterygosperina
Nauclea latifolia
Nicotiana tabacum
Nymphaea lotus
Ocimum gratissimum
Olea europea
Parquetina nigrescens
Peganum harmala
Pergularia daemia
Plumbago zeylanica
Physostigma venesosum
Phytolacca dodecandra
Piper guineense
Rapanea melanophloeos
Rauwolfia vomitoria
Ricinus communis
Securidaca longipedunculata
Securinega virosa
Solarium nigrum
Spondias mombin
Strophanthus kombe
Strychnos nux-vomica
Syzygium aromatium
Terminalia glaucescens
Thalictrum rhynchocarpum
Thea sinensis
Theobroma cacao
Trema orientalis
Triclesia gillettii
Voacanga africana
Warburgia ugandensis
Withania somnifera
Ximenia americana
Zanha golungensis
Zanthoxylum (Fagara) xanthoxyloides
Zingiber officinale
Source: Sofonara 1982.
<section>g</section>
Appendix 6 - "The Careless Hunter" - The Forest - A Vital Source of Plant Medicines
Source: INADES, Agripromo (original in French)
<section>h</section>
Appendix 7 - Quantities of Firewood Collected, Consumed and Sold by Rural Households in Sierra Leone
Percent Distribution of Annual Quantities of Firewood Collected, Consumed and Sold per Household According to Category of Labour
Labour Category
Annual Average ME-day per Household
Total Qty Collected per Household
Percent of Total Qty Consumed
Total Qty Consumed per Household
Percent of Total Qty Consumed
Total Qty Sold per Household
Percent of Total Qty Sold
(kg)
(kg)
(kg)
1. Rural Bo
Male Adult
Male Child
Female Adult
Female Child
All Groups
2. Rural Makeni
Male Adult
Male Child
Female Adult
Female Child
All Groups
Source: Kamara, 1986.
<section>i</section>
Appendix 8 - Species Commonly Used as Fuelwood in the West African Humid Forest Zone
Afzelia bipindensis
Albizia spp.
Anacardium occidentale
Anisophyllea laurina (fishsmoking)
Artocarpus communis
Avicennia nitida
Azadirachta indica
Blighia sapida
Bridelia micrantha
Cassia siamea
Celtis zenkeri
Chlorophora regia
Cola acuminata
Coula edulis
Dialium guineense
Dichostemma glaucescens
Dichrostachys cinerea
Elaeis guineensis
Erythrophleum guineense
Ficus asperifolia
Ficus exasperata
Funtumia elastica
Hannoa klaineana
Harungana madagascariensis
Hymenocardia sp.
Lophira alata
Mitragyna stipulosa
Nauclea latifolia
Ochthocosmus africanus
Parinari excelsa
Pentaclethra macrophylla
Phyllanthus discoideus
Psidium guajava
Ricinodendron heudelottii
Rhizophora spp.
Samanea dinklagei
Spondias mombin
Sterculia oblonga
Sterculia tragacantha
Talbotiella gentii
Tenninalia superba
Theobroma cacao
Treculia africana
Trichilia heudelottii
Triplochiton scleroxylon
Uapaca staudtii
Uvaria chamae
Vitex doniana (fish smoking)
Xylopia aethiopica
<section>j</section>
Appendix 9 - Species Commonly Used in House Construction in the West African Humid Forest Zone
Afzelia bipindensis
Alchornea cordifolia
Bamboos
Canarium schweinfurthii
Chlorophora excelsa
Coula edulis
Dacryodes edulis
Dialium guineense
Diospyros spp.
Elaeis guineensis
Enantia chlorantha
Entandrophragma utile
Harungana madagascariensis
Marantochloa cuspidata (leaves)
Newbouldia laevis
Pandanus spp.
Pentaclethra macrophylla
Pterocarpus soyauxii
Pycnanthus angolensis
Raphia spp.
Rhyzophora spp.
Scaphopetalum amoenum
Sterculia oblonga
Thaumatococcus daniellii (leaves)
Triplochiton scleroxylon
<section>k</section>
Appendix 10 - Commonly Exploited Forest Species used for Household Equipment and Furnishing
Acioa barteri
Afzelia spp.
Alchornea spp.
Alstonia boonei
Baillonella toxisperma
Brachystegia eurycoma
Ceiba pentandra
Chlorophora excelsa
Cleistopholis glauca
Cola spp.
Detarium microcarpum
Dialium guineense
Diospyros spp.
Elaeis guineensis
Ficus exasperata
Funtumia elastica
Guibourtia tessmannii
Harungana madagascariensis
Hildegardia barteri
Holarrhena floribunda
Irvingia gabonensis
Khaya anthotheca
Lagenaria siceraria
Landolphia sp.
Marantochloa flexuosa (leaves)
Mitragyna ciliata
Mitragyna stipulosa
Mondia whitei
Morinda lucida
Newbouldia laevis
Ochthocosmus africanus
Onchocalamus spp.
Pentaclethra macrophylla
Pterocarpus soyauxii
Randia acuminata
Raphia spp.
Samanea dinklagei
Terminalia ivorensis
Terminalia superba
Thaumatococcus daniellii (leaves)
Xylopia spp.
<section>l</section>
Appendix 11 - Some Forest Species Commonly Used for Making Canoes in West Africa
Afromosia elata
Afzelia bipindensis
Alstonia boonei
Anopyxis klaineana
Ceiba pentandra
Chlorophora excelsa
Enantia chlorantha
Erythroxylum mannii
Fagara spp.
Garcinia mannii
Gossweilerodendron balsamiferum
Heritiera utilis
Khaya spp.
Klainedoxa gabonensis
Lovoa trichilioides
Musanga cecropioides
Pterocarpus soyauxii
Tenninalia ivorensis
Triplochiton scleroxylon
<section>m</section>
Appendix 12 - Forest Species Commonly Used for Fodder
Acioa barteri
Andropogon gayanus
Alchornea cordifolia
Andropogon tectorum
Baphia nitida
Barteria nigritiana
Cola flaviflora
Dacryodes edulis
Dialium guineense
Elaeis guineensis
Ficus exasperata
Ficus thonningii
Gaertnera paniculata
Glyphaea brevis
Hymenodictyon pachyatha
Irvingia gabonensis
Lannea acida
Manniophyton sp.
Microdesmis puberula
Moringa oleifera
Nauclea latifolia
Nauclea pobeguinii
Newbouldia laevis
Ochna sp.
Parkia filicoidea
Pterocarpus santalinoides
Rauwolfia vomitora
Ricinodendron heudelottii
Spondias mombin
Veronia colorata
<section>n</section>
Appendix 13 - Cultural and Symbolic Uses for Forest Plants in Ghana
In his book Plants and Traditions of Africa Abbiw examines some of the cultural and symbolic uses and associations of forest plants.
The topic headings include:
Animals
(symbolic plant associations with animals)
Bees
(e.g. plants used to protect against stings)
Burglary
(plants used to prevent or bring about burglary)
Carvings
(symbolic species associations)
Cattle
(e.g. to increase milk output)
Ceremonial occasions
(plants used in)
Charms
Childbirth
Court cases
(e.g. plants used to sway results)
Death and dying
Devil
Disease
Dwarves and "fairies"
(e.g. plants which protect against)
Evil
Farming
(e.g. plants which enhance production)
Fertility
(of people and livestock)
Fetish
Fishing
Divination
Spirits
Graves
Hunting
(e.g. improving hunters abilities)
Infants
(e.g. make strong)
Intelligence
(e.g. improve memory)
Journeys
Juju magic
Kinship
Lactation
Lightning/Thunder Love
Luck
Manhood
Marketing
(e.g. improve marketing success)
Marriage
(e.g. protect)
Medicine
Occult
Ordeal, Trial by
Popularity
Protection
Religion
(plants associated with ceremonies)
Sacred plants
Secrets
(those plants associated with secrecy)
Shrines
Slavery
Snake bites
Taboos
Talismen
Twins
Walking
(plants used to encourage children to walk)
War
Wealth
Witchcraft
(e.g. plants for and against witchcraft)
<section>o</section>
Appendix 14 - Forest Species Common in West African Sacred Groves
Aframomum melegueta
Albizia ferruginea
Alstonia boonei
Anchomanes dubius
Antiaris africana
Baphia nitida
Bombax brevicuspe
Bombax buonopozense
Brachystegia spp.
Ceiba pentandra
Chlorophora excelsa
Chrysophyllum albidum
Cola acuminata
Desplatzia subericarpa
Detarium spp.
Didelotia africana
Diospyros mespiliformis
Distemonanthus benthamianus
Dracaena arborea
Elaeophorbia drupifera
Enantia chlorantha
Eriospermum pilosa
Euphorbia kamerunica
Erythrina senegalensis
Ficus exasperata
Garcinia kola
Glyphaea brevis
Harungana paniculata
Jatropha spp.
Kigelia africana
Newbouldia laevis
Piper umbellatum
Pterocarpus milbraedii
Pterocarpus osun
Pterocarpus santalinoides
Pterocarpus soyauxii
Sansevieria spp.
Strophanthus spp.
Tetrapleura tetraptera
Treculia africana
<section>p</section>
Appendix 15 - Comparative Seasonality of Firewood Collection and Agricultural Labour Requirements in Rural Sierra Leone
(Source: Kamara, 1986)
Rural Makeni
Comparative and seasonality of labour used to collect firewood and cultivate an acre of the traditional upland rice farm mixed with other crops in rural Makeni
Firewood Collection
Traditional Upland Rice Farm
Rural Bo
Comparative and seasonality of labour used to collect firewood and cultivate an acre of the traditional upland rice farm mixed with other crops in rural Bo
Firewood Collection
Traditional Upland Rice Farm
<section>q</section>
Appendix 16 - Seasonal Availability of Forest (and Wild) Foods in a Southeast Nigerian Market
(Source: Okafor, 1981)
AVAILABILITY OF DRIED PROCESSED WILD (AND SEMI-WILD) SEEDS AS OBSERVED DURING A MARKET SURVEY IN ENUGU. 1977-79
AVAILABILITY Of WILD (AND SEMI-WILD) EDIBLE FRESH VEGETABLES OBSERVED DURING A MARKET SURVEY IN ENUGU, 1977-79
AVAILABILITY OF DRIED WILD (AND SEMI-WILD) EDIBLE SEEDS AS OBSERVED DURING A MARKET SURVEY IN ENUGU, 1977-79
AVAILABILITY OF WILD (AND SEMI-WILD) EDIBLE FRESH FRUITS AS OBSERVED DURING A MARKET SURVEY IN ENUGU, 1977-79
<section>r</section>
Appendix 17 - Woody Species in Compound Farms in Southeastern Nigeria and Their Functions
Functions
Species
Foods:
Vegetables, leaves
Afzelia bella, Alchornea cordifolia, Blighia unijugata, Carica papaya, Ceiba pentandra, Chlorophora excelsa, Daniellia oliveri, Ficus spp., Gnetum spp., Gongronema latifolia, Lasianthera africana, Maesobotrya sp., Myrianthus arboreus, Ocimum gratissimum, Pterocarpus milbraedii, Pterocarpus santalinoides, Pterocarpus soyauxii, Theobroma cacao, Uvaria chamae, Vitex doniana.
Fruit
Anacardium occidentale, Annona muricata, Artocarpus communis, Canarium schweinfurthii, Carica papaya, Chrysophyllum albidum, Citrus sp., Cocos nucifera, Dacryodes edulis, Dialium guineense, Irvingia gabonensis var. gabonensis, Landolphia owariensis, Maesobotrya spp., Mangifera indica, Mondia whitei, Napoleona imperialis, Nauclea latifolia, Pterocarpus soyauxii, Psidium guajava, Spondias mombin, Uvaria chamae. Vitex doniana.
Nut/Seed
Anacardium occidentale, Cajanus cajan, Cola acuminata, Cola gigantea, Cola lepidota, Cola nitida, Cola pachycarpa, Garcinia kola, Irvingia gabonensis var. excelsa, Myrianthus arboreus, Pentaclethra macrophylla, Tetracarpidium conophorum, Theobroma cacao.
Condiment/Spice
Dennettia tripetala, Hildegardia barteri, Irvingia gabonensis var. excelsa, Jatropha curcas, Monodora myristica, Parkia biglobosa, Pentaclethra macrophylla, Prosopis africana, Ricinodendron heudelottii, Tetrapleura tetraptera, Xylopia aethiopica.
Oil
Elaeis guineensis, Irvingia gabonensis var. excelsa, Ricinodendron heudelottii, Tetracarpidium conophorum.
Beverages
Annona muricata, Dialium guineense, Elaeis guineensis, Irvingia gabonensis var. gabonensis.
Medicines
Cajanus cajan, Carica papaya, Garcinia kola, Irvingia gabonensis var. gabonensis, Jatropha curcas, Kigelia africana, Napoleona imperialis, Newbouldia laevis, Tetrapleura tetraptera.
Chewing sticks
Baphia nitida, Garcinia kola, Napoleona imperialis.
Purification of water
Moringa oleifera.
Building materials
Albizia spp., Alchornea cordifolia, Cocos nucifera, Daniellia oliveri, Elaeis guineensis, Sterculia tragacantha.
Stakes, agriculture
Acioa barteri, Afzelia bella, Albizia spp., Alchornea cordifolia, Anthonotha macrophylla, Dialium guineense, Hymenodictyon pachyantha, Moringa oleifera, Nauclea latifolia, Pentaclethra macrophylla, Ricinodendron heudelottii, Spondias mombin.
Fencing
Baphia nitida, Jatropha curcas, Moringa oleifera, Newbouldia laevis, Pterocarpus santalinoides, Spondias mombin.
Household equipment:
Wood utensils and implements
Crescentia cujete, Dialium guineense, Irvingia gabonensis var. gabonensis, Irvingia gabonensis var. excelsa, Pentaclethra macrophylla.
Wrappers
Anthonotha macrophylla, Hymenodictyon pachyantha.
Fibre
Ceiba pentandra, Hildegardia barteri, Mondia whitei.
Yam storage
Newbouldia laevis.
Gum
Hildegardia barteri.
Fodder
Acioa barteri, Albizia spp., Artocarpus communis, Baphia nitida, Cajanus cajan, Ceiba pentandra, Chlorophora excelsa, Dacryodes edulis, Daniellia oliveri Dialium guineense, Elaeis guineensis Ficus spp., Hymenodictyon pachyantha Irvingia gabonensis var. gabonensis Mangifera indica, Moringa oleifera Napoleona imperialis, Nauclea latifolia, Newbouldia laevis, Pentaclethra macrophylla, Persea americana, Prosopis africana, Psidium guajava, Pterocarpus santalinoides, Ricinodendron heudelottii, Spondias mombin, Uvaria chamae.
Mulch
Elaeis guineensis, Pentaclethra macrophylla.
Soil fertility restoration
Acioa barteri, Albizia spp., Anthonotha
macrophylla, Daniellia oliveri, Parkia biglobosa.
Fuelwood/Charcoal
Anacardium occidentale, Artocarpus communis, Crescentia cujete, Dialium guineense, Hannoa klaineana, Mangifera indica, Nauclea latifolia, Parkia biglobosa, Prosopis africana, Psidium guajava, Tetrapleura tetraptera, Uvaria chamae, Vitex doniana, Xylopia aethiopica.
Timber
Baphia nitida, Canarium schweinfurthii, Ceiba pentandra, Chlorophora excelsa, Cola gigantea, Daniellia oliveri, Hannoa klaineana, Parkia biglobosa, Pterocarpus milbraedii, Pterocarpus soyauxii, Vitex doniana, Xylopia aethiopica.
Dye
Pterocarpus milbraedii, Pterocarpus soyauxii.
Cultural/Symbolic functions
Chrysophyllum albidum, Cola acuminata, Cola lepidota, Cola nitida, Newbouldia laevis, Pterocarpus santalinoides, Pterocarpus soyauxii, Spondias mombin.
Source: Okafor, J.C. and Fernandez, 1987
<section>s</section>
1. OVERVIEW OF THE LITERATURE
1.1 Accessibility of information
1.2 A guide to the references
1.3 A view of the literature
As forest products feature in nearly all aspects of people's lives in the West African region, information about them can be found in anthropology (e.g. Motte 1982), nutrition (e.g. Hladik et al 1987), geography (e.g. Ardayfio 1986), botany (e.g. Ake Assi 1984), rural economics (e.g. Ewusi 1986), agriculture (e.g. Engel et al 1984), and forestry (e.g. Faure et al 1980). Although few studies attempt to assess the importance of NTFPs quantitatively, the collage of descriptive accounts, when supplemented by a few case-specific analytic studies (e.g. Okafor 1981) do indicate their importance to rural people.
This report only provides an indication of available information, and demonstrates the kind of search that is needed to find any information at all. For example, information on the use of plant medicines can be gleaned from different types of studies. Botanical surveys of medicinal plants often describe the species used by different groups of people to cure particular ailments. The surveys often also describes the habitats in which they are found. Evaluations of medical systems may include estimates of the number of traditional healers, or the number of people who do not have access to "modern" health care. Pharmacological studies provide some information on the effectiveness of traditional treatments that use medicinal plants, while anthropological studies provide insight into the beliefs associated with their use, and information on who uses them when. As was noted earlier, the most insightful information on the value of forest products on the household level comes from
studies which evaluate the impact of forest conversion or decreases in access to forest areas.
1.1 Accessibility of information
A great deal of the information that is reviewed here comes from unpublished studies from research centers throughout West Africa and in Paris. The most detailed information comes from student theses (Masters and PhDs). In some countries of the region, Government Ministries collect information on the use of non-timber forest products. When compared with other countries in West Africa., the Senegalese Forestry Department has the most thorough information on the production and trade of non-timber forest products.
Studies by NGOs (such as Save the Children), international governments and aid agencies provide another good source of information. It can be difficult for outsiders to gain access to unpublished research studies and Government reports. On the other hand, information gathered by international agencies and foreign researchers is often inaccessible to those in country. Finally, it should be noted that most West African research centers do not have large collections of information on work being done in neighboring countries (at least this is the case for those centers that were visited). (This problem is compounded by the fact that information is available in French or English with very little interchange.)
1.2 A guide to the references
The information which was reviewed is presented in the Annotated Bibliography. References are arranged alphabetically by author. Each entry provides a brief review of the document and highlights relevant information from that piece. Often these summaries provide more detailed information than is found in the text (i.e. species names, details of traditional forest management or NTFP production practices). Author and subject indices are included to facilitate research into a specific subtopic.
1.3 A view of the literature
- Forestry Literature
Information regarding the local importance of NTFPs can be found in the following general subject categories:
Non-timber forest products - otherwise classified as secondary forest products or non-wood forest products. Most commonly these discussions focus on NTFPs gathered for industrial or export purposes. Some information is available from Forest Services on products extracted from Reserve areas.
Tree guides - many include descriptions of tree product uses. There are many, especially older examples. They generally contain interesting information, but do not discuss the relative importance of different products.
Fuelwood - when compared to the arid regions of West Africa, there is very little information on household fuelwood consumption, fuelwood marketing or supply. The most interesting studies are Kamara's in Sierra Leone, Ardayfio's in Ghana and Moss and Morgans' long term study in southern Nigeria.
Agroforestry - some research has been conducted on the potential for agroforestry development in the area. This information is generally included in studies which evaluate farming systems in general. A great deal of information is available from southern Nigeria and Cameroon. There is a little information available on species trials.
-Wildlife Literature
The greatest amount of research on the utilization of wildlife comes from Asibey in Ghana and Ajayi in Nigeria. Though their research has been conducted in limited regions of Ghana and Nigeria, many of their findings are relevant to the West African region as a whole. These studies have focused on the contribution of these foods to the diet in very general terms. There have also been a number of market studies (especially in urban areas) in both Ghana and Nigeria.
- Botany Literature
There is a great deal of relevant historical and contemporary information in this discipline. Botanic surveys provide a great deal of information on the ecology and botany of commonly used species. There are many descriptive accounts of the ways in which different people from this region have and still do use the forest resources the early work of Dalziel et al (1937) for example, on the useful plants of tropical West Africa (a revision and updating of this work is being undertaken by Burkhill, it will contain information on more than 4000 species). Irvine's study on the woody plants of Ghana (1961), though dated, is extremely useful as it describes the economic and cultural uses of more than 350 species. Abbiw in Ghana and Ake Assi in Côte d'Ivoire provide a great deal of information on the current and historic use of forest plants. The National Herbarium in Cameroon (their data are presented in the National Flora) is accumulating a great deal of data as well. Finally,
Vivien is also preparing information on more than 200 species of edible forest species found in southern Cameroon.
The medicinal use of plants is actually well documented. There are a number of historic botanic works which have recorded the vast array of medicinal uses of forest plants in the West African region (e.g. Dalziel et al, Irvine, Walker et al, Portère). Some authors note that the diversity of medicinal plants being used is declining (e.g. Okigbo). Of particular note is the work being carried out by the ACCT (Agence de Coopération Culturelle et Technique, Paris, France) and Adjanohoun in Bordeaux. Ethnobotanical and anthropological studies also often contain detailed information on useful and medicinal plants.
-Plant Medicine and Ethno-medicine Literature
The literature on traditional plant medicines is vast. Information can be found in botanical (e.g. Ake Assi), pharmacological and chemical studies (e.g. Dwuma-Badu). Some studies focus on treatments used for specific ailments or diseases. Others focus on the multiple uses of a particular species (this is especially true for studies examining the phytochemical properties of a particular plant). There are also several country and regional botanic studies which include information on common plant medicines.
A Country Summary of Research on Plant Medicine
For Ghana and Nigeria see Abbiw (1989), Ayensu (1978), Puri et al (1964), Sofowora, Oliver and Gbile. These studies all discuss plants used for treating illnesses common throughout the region.
For Cameroon see Oliver-Bever, Thomas et al and Djoko et al. Oliver-Bever (1986) discusses the medicinal uses and chemical composition of traditionally valued species.
For Guinea see the work of Gouterel; he discusses both the common use of medicinal plants and exploitation of species for the export market.
For Senegal see Kerharo, ENDA, Tall and Engelhard et al. These studies address the common uses of plant medicines throughout Senegal, with the exception of Tall's study which focuses on the Senegal river region. Kerharo incorporates information on traditional Senegalese medical practices with an analysis of the therapeutic uses and chemical composition of more than 550 plant species. For each species he provides detailed information on the botany, habitat, uses (and methods used), chemical composition and pharmaceutical properties.
Comparatively little research has been conducted in Sierra Leone on the use of medicinal plants. MacFoy and his students provide the most up to date information.
In Côte d'Ivoire the most extensive work has been carried out by Ake Assi and Adjanohoun. Ake Assi's Flora of Côte d'Ivoire includes descriptive information on the medicinal uses of plants. He also includes a list of diseases and their associated plant remedies.
Adjanohoun and colleagues have conducted ethnobotanic surveys on the use of medicinal plants in many countries of the West African region. For example in Côte d'Ivoire (1979) they list more than 300 species and include a description of their geographic distribution, and their use by different ethnic groups. They also describe common use of these species. In Togo (1986), they identify more than 340 species of plants used to treat more than 200 illnesses. In Centre Afrique (Ake Assi 1985) they identify 90 plants used to treat 85 different illnesses.
-Anthropology and Ethnobotanical Literature
Anthropological studies (e.g. Motte, 1982) provide a great deal of detailed information about the day to day use of forest plants and animals. In addition, they often include information about the local values and beliefs associated with forests or particular forest species (e.g. Hladik et al 1987). This kind of information may be particularily important for those planning to build on traditional forms of forest area "management". There is also a great deal of information to be gleaned from ethno-linguistic studies which examine the role of forest myths in stories and language (e.g. Calame-Griaule 1970).
-Farming Systems Studies
The distinction between farm, fallow and forest areas is often not clear in the region. Thus, farming system studies can contain a great deal of information on the use of on-farm and forest trees (e.g. Okafor 1986, and Engel et al 1984). In some recent studies the role of fallow and shade trees has also been explored (e.g. Herren-Gemmill 1988, Okafor 1986, Ume-Okafor 1987). Farming system studies sometimes discuss the equipment that is used for farming, crop storage and processing. These give useful information on the inputs forest products provide.
-Nutrition and Food Consumption Studies
Generally these studies do not include a great deal of information on the commonly consumed forest foods. However, the entries in the bibliography on food consumption and wildlife both provide good indications of the kinds of information that are available (e.g. Akinyele et al 1983, Asedam 1982, Orraca-Tetteh no date, Smith 1979). Data on the nutrition composition of forest foods is presented in Okafor 1981, Okigbo 1975, Osei-Manu 1980, Pélé et al 1967, Duke et al 1986, and Asedam 1982. Information on the consumption of wild animals has been conducted primarily in Nigeria and Ghana.
-Building Materials and Housing Studies
Descriptive information on "traditional" housing materials can be found in botanical studies (e.g. Abbiw 1987, Irvine 1961, Ake Assi 1984, Walker et al 1961, Téhé 1980 and Profizi 1983). Information on the plants that are used and the methods of house construction can also be found in anthropological studies (e.g. Motte 1982, Pelissier 1966). Some interesting information can be gleaned from socio-economic studies and surveys which record housing types usually as indicators of wealth (e.g. Gartlan 1987). Some geographic studies describe the housing situation and the extent of "modernization" (e.g. Blanc-Pamard 1980). It is difficult, however, to find information on the quantities of materials used for house construction, the problems in finding desired materials, and estimates of the building materials used and needed at a regional level.
<section>t</section>
2. ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY
1. Abbiw, D. 1987. Personal communication. Director of the herbarium, Department of Botany, University of Ghana, Legon, Accra, Ghana.
Discussed the value and use of NTFPs in Ghana. Had extensive discussions about NTFPs of both cultural and economic importance. Discussed the production and trade of dugout canoes, medicinal plants, fruits and leaves, and building materials.
2. Abbiw, D. 1989. Useful plants of Ghana. University of Ghana, Legon, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew, London, England.
An extensive book recording the uses (both past and present) of plants. Examines the products derived from forests and other uncultivated areas. Draws on historic information as well as current field research (interviews and oral histories). The material is arranged by use and includes descriptions of the plants, who uses them and whether they are earmarked for use. Abbiw describes plants used as food, medicines, sources of drinking water, salt substitutes, famine foods, poles and construction materials, furniture, fuelwood, timber, tools (e.g. Celtis sp. for pestles), poisons; those exploited for latex, resin, copal, gum, tannin, dye, and essential oils. And those used in craft enterprises such as basketry, carving, matting, canoe building (primarily undertaken at the site of the felled tree), agricultural implement making (e.g. axes from Burkea africana, hoes of Baphia nitida), musical instrument construction, and soap production. It is not possible to distinguish
between current and historic uses, but the extent of descriptive accounts indicates the importance of the resources in peoples' daily lives.
Abbiw, for example, describes 62 wild fruit species (17 of which are marketed), 70 species used as chewing sticks and 20 species used as binding materials. He includes a chapter on plant-derived medicines (identifies 73 species) describing the plant, the parts of the plant that are used and the methods of use. Treatments of more than 85 ailments are discussed (e.g. hepatitis, earaches ...). The medicinal plants which are exploited for the export (or industrial) market (e.g. Griffonia sp.) are also discussed. In some cases trees valued for their medicinal products are protected by local customs or taboos. For example, Stereospermum kunthianum, a valued medicine tree, is not allowed to be cut, and if it is burned, it is believed to induce leprosy.
3. Abbiw, D. (in progress). Plants and tradition in West Africa. Department of Botany, University of Ghana, Legon, Ghana.
A study on the traditional use (cultural, mystical, symbolic and magical) of plants throughout West Africa. The study relays both historic information and updates from current field research (based on interviews and oral histories). The material is arranged by function rather than plant species. For example, the heading "Death and dying" includes plants which are associated with death, plants used to send or receive messages from the dead, plants associated with burial rites and ceremonies; "Marriage" includes plants believed to protect marriages, plants believed to improve marriages (e.g. a charm of Datura metel is believed to give the patience to tolerate one's spouse). There are over 50 subject areas described. The material contains a great deal of information on possible "conservation practices" such as the protection of sacred groves and protective taboos.
4. Abosede, A.O. and Akesode F. 1986. Self-medication with Agbo-Jedi in Lagos, Nigeria. Journal of Research on Ethnomedicine 1(1).
This study illustrates how traditional cures are still commonly used even by those attending modern health care clinics. The piece examines use of Agbo-Jedi, a herbal cure for infant dysentery. Abosede and Akesode surveyed 200 mothers attending a Lagos health clinic and found that 80% of them gave the concoction to their children. Seventy-four percent said they were ministering it to treat dysentery. Forty-seven percent fed it into their children daily as a preventive measure. Agbo-Jedi consists generally of water extracts of leaves, bark and roots (among the common ingredients are camphor, Khaya ivorensis, Pseudocedrela kotschyi, Detarium microcarpum, Lophira lanceolata).
5. Addey, J. 1982. Wood carving activities in Kumasi `and its suburbs. Thesis (BSc), Institute of Renewable Natural Resources, University of Science and Technology, Kumasi, Ghana (unpublished).
There is a considerable wood craft industry in the Kumasi region. This study examines the production, economic costs and income-earning potential of this industry. One surveyed village (Ahwia) specialises in wood craft production, all village men are involved in this activity to some extent. It is especially known for its stool carvings. Carvers earn a good living, but production is irregular (about 1300 cedis/month). Thirteen different tree species are carved (67 species are of minor importance). Cedrela odorata is now most commonly used because other preferred species have become difficult to find. Most wood comes from non-forest reserve land (includes an account of the costs for felling and transporting trees from these "stool" lands). The biggest problem is transportation of raw materials (wood), as desired trees are no longer close to the carving centers. Carvers produce religious/ceremonial artifacts as well as general domestic wares (pestles, bowls, utensils).
6. Addo Ashong, F.W. 1987. Personal communication. Director, Forest Products Research Institute, University of Science and Technology, Kumasi, Ghana.
Discusses research on the use of non-timber forest products in Ghana. Work is being carried out on tannins and adhesives extracted from mangrove species Rhizophora sp. The extracted essential oils of a few species (e.g. Pycnanthus sp.) are used to make soap. The Institute is also conducting research on the woods that were traditionally used to make grain storage containers and ways of treating wood for better pest protection.
7. Adekunle, A.O. 1971. The non-timber forest resources of the high forest areas of Nigeria. Nigerian Journal of Forestry 1(1): 12-16.
This general descriptive paper evaluates the potential for forest management in production of non-timber forest products. It provides illustrative examples of the myriad of products derived from forests and mangroves of the region. The importance of wildlife, particularily bushmeat, is also discussed. The article includes some quantitative information on the use and production of palm oil and palm wine.
8. Adeola, M.O. and Decker, E. 1987. Wildlife utilization in rural Nigeria. Paper presented at the international Symposium of Wildlife Management in Sub-Saharan Africa, Sponsored by FAD and the International Council for Game and Wildlife Conservation, 6-13 October 1987, Harare, Zimbabwe, pp. 512-521.
Nigerian farmers depend on bushmeat (including birds, reptiles and amphibians) for both food and cash income. This paper presents the results of a comparative study of bushmeat utilisation in three different ecological zones (rainforest, deciduous forest and savannah). The study distinguishes between hunters (full-time) and farmers (those who hunt as well as cultivate food or cash crops) and estimates the amounts of bushmeat (by species) they catch in different seasons. It does not distinguish between what is consumed and what is sold in the markets.
An estimated total of 1,320,000 metric tonnes of bushmeat are hunted in the three zones (the larger portion in the savannah region). Of the larger mammals, duiker and bushbuck are most common in the forest zone; a farmer averages 5 per month in the rainy season. Of the smaller game, squirrels, cane and giant rats, bats and porcupines are most common (averaging about 40 animals per month per farmer in the rainy season). Francolins, guinea fowl, lizards and snakes are also fairly common foods.
9. Adewumni, C.O. and Adesogam, E.K. 1983. Anthraquinones and oruwacin isolated from Morinda lucida as possible agents in tascioliasis and schystosomiasis control. In Essien, E. et al (eds.). Proceedings of VISOMP - Fifth International Symposium on Medicinal Plants. Drug Research and Production Unit, University of Ife and Organization of African Unity Ife-Ife, Nigeria, pp. 61-64.
10. Adeyokunnu, T.O. 1981. Women and agriculture in Nigeria. Research Series, U.N.E.C.A. Ibadan, Nigeria (unpublished).
Includes a discussion of the types of containers and packaging materials used for marketing agricultural products in different regions of Nigeria. In the West bags and baskets are most common (accounting for 80% of what is used), in the East baskets are most prevalent (43%), followed by bags and bowls. In the North calabashes are most prevalent. Most baskets and some bags are manufactured locally from palm products. Calabash containers are the fruit of the calabash tree. These data serve to illustrate the "service" function of forest derived products.
11. Adjanohoun, E. and Ake Assi, M.L. 1979. Contribution au recensement des plantes médicinales de Côte d'Ivoire. Centre National Floristique, Université d'Abidjan, Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire.
More than 300 plant species are identified with a description of their geographic distribution, and their use by different ethnic groups. Includes an index by disease/treatment of 135 ailments. For example, Rhaphiostylis beninensis is used as a mosquito repellant, Calpocalyx aubrevillei is used as a salt, Opilia celtidifolia is used as a fish toxin, Ricinodendron heudelotii is used as a condiment. Also includes descriptions of the mystical and magical uses for these plants (e.g. to bring stability, give strength, protect against fate and evil, ensure beauty in children).
12. Adjanohoun, E. et al. 1984. Contribution aux études ethnobotaniques et floristiques au Gabon. Agence de Coopération Culturelle et Technique, Paris, France.
An ethnobotanic work arranged by plant families. Includes a botanical description, information on ecological distribution, and the medicinal uses for forest plants in Gabon. For example, Plagiostyles africana leaves (a humid forest-tree species) are taken for hepatitis, its crushed bark is used in medico-magical treatments against evil spirits. The book includes a second section with the material arranged by illness. It lists treatments for biological systems (e.g. cardiovascular), symptoms (e.g. anaemia) and magical/mystical approaches. Includes an index on vegetative formations and ecological zones.
13. Adjanohoun, E. et al. 1986. Contribution aux études ethnobotaniques et floristiques au Togo. Agence de Coopération Culturelle et Technique, Paris, France.
Describes 348 medicinal plant species used to treat more than 200 illnesses. Material is arranged by plant species, illness, and symptom.
14. Adu-Tutu, M., Afful, Y., Asante-Appiah, K., Lieberman, D., Hall, J.B., and Elvin-Lewis, M. 1979. Chewing stick usage in southern Ghana. Economic Botany 33(3): 320-328.
Notes that 107 species of woody plants are used as chewing sticks. However, these researchers estimate that four species account for 85% of the total consumption in the southern region of Ghana. In this region, chewing sticks are used for dental hygiene by most people. The most common species are Garcinia afzelii and G. epunctata. Several pharmacological studies have shown that these preferred species have anti-bacterial properties which make them effective for fighting cavities.
Chewing sticks are sold regularly in local and urban markets. The study includes a quantitative assessment of the market and consumer preferences for different types of chewing sticks. Compares the extent of purchasing versus home production. This study asserts that chewing stick selection depends primarily on species availability. There are some differences in the preferences of rural and urban consumers, different ethnic groups and different age groups (older people tend to prefer softer products).
15. Agbelusi, E.A. and Afolayan, T.A. 1987. The role of wildlife in the Nigerian economy, in Proceedings of the 17th Annual Conference of the Forestry Association of Nigeria, Ikeja, Nigeria (unpublished).
Includes a discussion of the medicinal and mystical uses of wildlife. For example, the horn of a rhino is used to prepare a concoction for treating barrenness in women; the head and legs of the duiker are used in witchcraft to assure a safe childbirth; the head of the giant rat is used to win the love of a woman.
16. Agbor, L.O.N. 1986. Economic assessment of Irvingia gabonensis in Cross River State, Nigeria. MSc. Thesis, Department of Forest Resource Management, University of Ibadan, Ibadan, Nigeria (unpublished).
Examines the uses and markets for Irvingia gabonensis (agbo) whose wood is used to make mortars and pestles and whose fruit and seeds are widely consumed in southern Nigeria. Irvingia seeds are used in soups, adding a desired slimy consistency. The fruits of the sweet variety are consumed raw. This paper examines seasonal consumption (which is higher in the rainy season) and prices (which are lower in the rainy season). People often consume 15-20 fruit at one time. Provides information on the nutritional content of its edible parts.
Discusses the production and marketing of Irvingia sp. products and compares prices in different regions, in different seasons (the bitter variety is more expensive than the sweet). Irvingia may provide an important source of income for many farmers. Though Agbor finds great variation in the density of irvingia trees in different districts, ranging from an average 87 trees per farmer in Ogoja district to an average two trees per farmer in Ikono district, trees are almost always found on compound farms or on boundary land. Finally, this article discusses the productivity of these fruit trees over time (i.e. number of fruit/year at different tree ages).
17. Ahmed, A.I., Kolo, A.I., Okeke, R., Raid, P.R., and Kinako, P.K.S. 1971. Working Group on the development of other forest products. Report for the Federal Department of Forestry, Ibadan, Nigeria (unpublished).
A general discussion of the importance of non-timber forest products (especifically economically important ones, e.g. gums and tannins) and their potential for development. Notes that for many households, local production facilities provide the main source for products and a source of income. Includes a list of commonly used species and their uses.
18. Ajayi, S.S. 1971. Wildlife as a source of protein in Nigeria: some priorities for development. Nigerian Field 36(3): 115-120.
A general discussion of bushmeat's role in Nigerians' diets. Estimates that bushmeat supplies an average 20% of the animal protein consumed in rural Nigeria (extracted from the 1967 rural economic survey). Eighty percent of the population in the South consumes bushmeat. In 1969, the bushmeat trade in southern Nigeria was valued at 9 million pounds sterling (compared with 11 million for domestic meat). Snails are the most popular "meats" consumed. Their consumption is widespread throughout the southern region. Includes a brief discussion of the management for cane rat, guinea fowl and fish.
19. Ajayi, S.S. 1978. Pattern of bushmeat production, preservation and marketing in West Africa. Nigerian Journal of Forestry 8(1): 48-52.
Describes the traditional and modern hunting techniques employed in the West African region: trapping, snaring, individual hunting with guns, community hunting for commercial purposes, communal hunting for traditional festivals and hunting by urban dwellers.
Examines the structure of the bushmeat market. Most bushmeat hunters (producers) live in rural areas. They either sell the meat fresh, locally, or they give it to their wives to preserve (smoke dry) and sell to village collectors who in turn sell the produce to urban retail traders. In some cases rural producers sell their meat fresh to urban consumers or at the roadside. In light of the ever-increasing exploitation of wildlife the author suggests some possible conservation strategies geared towards meeting the demand for bushmeat; he suggests that the development of farmland wildlife management techniques could help supply farmers with adequate bushmeat and a source of income.
20. Ajayi, S.S. 1979. Utilization of forest wildlife in West Africa. Paper prepared for the FAO Forestry Department. FO:Misc./79/26 (unpublished).
An excellent review of the uses of wildlife throughout West Africa. Includes information on the animals used for food and other products (e.g. skins); the patterns of bushmeat production and marketing; the importance of bushmeat to regional and national economies; and the wild animal resources throughout the region. Includes data on the nutrient composition of different wild animal meats. Also discusses management techniques for bushmeat production.
21. Ajayi, S.S. and Olawoye, O.O. 1974. Some indications of the social acceptance of the African giant rat (Crycetomys gambianus) in southern Nigeria. Nigerian Journal of Forestry 4(1): 36-41.
Presents the results of a questionnaire survey conducted in the southern region of Nigeria. Finds that 72% of a wide cross section of the study communities (both urban and rural) consume giant rat. It is more commonly accepted among the poor. This may be a reflection of availability (of rat meat) rather than preference as those in the lower income brackets reside in rural areas. Statistically analyses results.
22. Ajayi, S.S. and Tewe, O. 1983. A quantitative assessment of wildlife and their nutritive value as a source of food in Nigeria. In Akinyele, L., and Atinmo, T., (eds.) Nutrition and Food Policy in Nigeria. National institute for Policy and Strategic Studies (NIPSS), Ibadan, Nigeria, pp. 138-148.
Reviews past research on the consumption of bushmeat in Nigeria. Presents quantitative data on bushmeat consumption: on average consumption has increased from 10.1 g per capita in 1968 (223,300 MT/year) to 13.2 g per capita in 1980 (421,000 MT/year), compared with 9.1 g/capita of beef in 1968 and 13.1 g/capita in 1980. Consumption of fish has remained considerably higher than that of meat (approximately four times more than bushmeat consumption).
Palm wine and palm oil are also major foods: in 1968 consumption of palm wine was 59.4 g/capita and in 1980 it was 66.5 g/capita (1,124,000 MT/year); in 1968 consumption of palm oil was 23.4 g/capita while in 1980 it was 26.1 g/capita (or 832,000 MT/year).
23. Ajayi, S.S., Tewe, O., Moriarty, C. and Awesu, M.O.A. 1978. Observations on the biology, and nutritive value of the African giant snail (Archachatina marginata). East African Wildlife Journal 16:85-95.
Discusses the giant snail's biology and its potential for domestication. Includes a discussion of its feeding and breeding habits. Snails are as nutritious as other meats; they are a good source of protein, low in fat, and exceptionally high in iron (12.2 mg/100 g) and calcium.
24. Akande, M. 1979. Bushfowl (Francolinus bical carratus) as a pest and a potential source of meat in Nigeria. Thesis, Department of Forest Resource Management, University of Ibadan, Ibadan, Nigeria (unpublished).
Study conducted in southwestern Nigeria where bushfowl is popular and often considered a delicacy (93% of those surveyed like it). It can be found in many rural markets. Cooked, it contains 13% protein and 65% fat. The study discusses the potential for bushfowl management.
25. Ake Assi, M.L. 1980. Les plantes et la thérapie de la stérilité des femmes en Côte d'Ivoire. Miscellaneous Paper No. 19, Landbouwhogeschool, Wageningen, The Netherlands.
Traditional treatments for women's sterility (it is always the women who are treated for this affliction) are still popular even in educated urban areas of Côte d'Ivoire. This paper provides botanical descriptions of some of the species used in traditional healers' treatments: Annona senegalensis, Ficus glumosa, Crosspteryx febrifuga, Clerodendrum umbellatum, and Microdesmis puberula.
26. Ake Assi, M.L. 1982. Médecine traditionnelle et pharmacopée: contribution aux études ethnobotaniques et floristiques en République Centrafricaine. Agence de Coopération Culturelle et Technique (ACCT), Paris, France.
Describes 90 plant species used for healing 85 different illnesses. Includes botanic description, geographic location, a list of the plants' uses, and an index arranged by illness. For example, Irvingia grandifolia is a large, moist forest tree species whose crushed bark is used in the treatment of gastroenteritis.
27. Ake Assi, M.L. 1983. Quelques vertus médicinale de Cassia occidentalis en basse Côte d'Ivoire. Bothalia 14 (3 and 4):617-620.
Describes 11 medicinal recipes using Cassia occidentalis in the forest zone of Côte d'Ivoire. Decoctions of leaves and roots are used as diuretics, laxatives, tonics and abortificants. They are also used in treatments for asthma, cataracts, jaundice and kwashiorkor. Describes other plant species used in conjunction with cassia. For example, an extract of the seeds of Xylopia aethiopica and Cassia leaves is used as an eye bath for treating cataracts.
28. Ake Assi, M.L. 1984. Flore de la Côte d'Ivoire: étude descriptive et biogéographique avec quelques notes ethnobotaniques. PhD. Thesis, Faculté des Sciences, Université d'Abidjan, Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire. (TO be published by Nouvelle Edition Africaine, Paris, France.)
A large work of six volumes organised by plant families. Each entry contains a botanic description, a biogeographic description and notes on plants' traditional and current uses. Describes plants used in medicinal treatments (e.g. asthma is treated with Pouzolzia guineensis and Anthonotha macrophylla), as foods, for ceremonial and religious practices, to make household items, and in agricultural, fishing and artisanal activities. Contains many useful annexes including a list of species arranged according to their medicinal uses, a list of diseases and their associated plant remedies, and a list of species (114 species) used as foods including a description of the plant parts consumed. Many of the entries include information on the cultural and social uses of plant resources. Information on traditional beliefs associated with specific plants is also included. Species used in religious practices and on social occasions are described. For example, a musical instrument of the
Boualé is made with the fruit of Oncoba spinosa and Glyphaea brevis as well as the seed of Entada pursaetha. Cordia platythyrsa is used for making tam-tams. The use of traditional plant dyes is also described. Provides an excellent bibliography. This study provides a wealth of information despite the fact that it is not possible to assess the extent to which the plants are used.
29. Ake Assi, M.L. 1985. Le bananier plantain: son utilisation dans la médecine traditionnelle en Côte d'Ivoire. Proceedings of the third meeting of the International Association for Research on Plantains and Bananas. Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire (unpublished).
Describes the use of plantains in traditional medical treatments. For example, its crushed roots, when mixed with water, are taken as a mouthwash against cavities; an extract of fresh roots mixed with salt is used in the treatment of cataracts; the juice of cooked green bananas are taken for incontinence. The fresh leaves of Bidens pilosa, when mixed with the charcoal of the plantain skin are administered to treat dysentery. The ash from the peel, mixed with water and filtered, is used in many medicinal recipes, as well as many traditional sauces.
30. Akinyele, L. and Atinmo, T. (eds.). 1983. Nutrition and food policy in Nigeria. National Institute for Policy and Strategic Studies (INPSS), Ibadan, Nigeria.
A collection of papers on the food and nutrition situation in Nigeria. Includes papers on the importance and nutritional contribution of bushmeat, as well as chapters on the role of forestry in food supply and national nutrition problems. Notes that bushmeat is an important food for many Nigerians, however, as the demand for bushmeat continues to increase, supplies are dwindling.
31. Amat, B. and Cortadellas, T. 1972. Ngovayaangui: un village du sud Caméroun. Contribution à une étude de la santé en Afrique. Thesis, Ecole Pratique des Hautes Etudes, Paris, France (unpublished).
A thorough village level study in a cocoa producing area, which includes information on traditional hunting and fishing practices, medicines, artisan activities and diet and common collected foods. The piece notes that the most commonly trapped and consumed species are small mammals. Includes a list of species. Commonly collected foods include snails, caterpillars and other insects, palm rats, pangolins, snakes, duikers, palm nuts, Irvingia gabonensis nuts, Dacryodes edulis, mushrooms, Pachylobus edulis fruit, honey and palm wine. Traditional food customs provide most of the meat to the elder men, leaving little animal protein for women and children.
Describes some of the equipment used in off-farm activities such as hunting, fishing and artisanry. Traps and snares are commonly used for hunting in the rainy season. Fishing, which is primarily a woman's activity, is done using rattan traps, nets, dams, and lines (which men employ). Artisanry which is also done on a part-time basis, informally, is also described as an important source of off-farm income. Production of many items is specialised by family and is passed through generations, with clearly gender-defined production practices.
Describes the traditional values ascribed to particular trees. These are generally associated with healing or magical qualities (see Sections 1.3.2,3). For example, the oven tree, Didelotia africana, is a powerful tree which can only be approached for help with difficult problems (e.g. unemployment, broken marriages); traditional sorcery healing sessions are held in the forest under the tree Disthamonanthus benthamianus. Describes 25 common plant remedies. The crushed bark of Enantia chlorantha is used to stop hemorrhaging, the bark is boiled and used against jaundice; the crushed leaves of Afromomum meleguetta mixed with yam leaves are used to treat toothaches.
32. Amponsah, S. 1978. Survey into the chewstick industry at Kejetia Lorry Station. Thesis (BSc), Institute of Renewable Natural Resources, university of Science and Technology, Kumasi, Ghana (unpublished).
A study of the chewing stick trade at one market near Kumasi which reveals that the most common chewing stick species are Garcinia cola and G. afzelii. Chewing stick production involves collectors/fellers (often paid by wholesalers), wholesalers (responsible for transport), and retailers. Generally, men control the wholesale trade of Garcinia afzelii while both women and men are involved in G. cola trade. Women dominate the retail trade for all varieties. Presents quantitative data on the average income earned by different actors (cash earned by retailers compares favourably with the wages earned by unskilled wage labourers). Transport is the main cost in the industry. Products gathered from Forest Reserve land are far cheaper (6 cedis to Forest Service for permit) than those gathered outside reserves (55 cedis paid to stools (communal chiefs) and alcohol to chiefs).
33. Amponsah Agyemang, G. 1980. The use of plants in traditional medical practice in an Ashante village. Thesis (BSc.) Institute of Renewable Natural Resources, University of Science and Technology, Kumasi, Ghana (unpublished).
This study identifies 105 species of plants that are used medicinally. It describes the plants, the methods and treatments in which they are used. The piece stresses that traditional medicines continue to be important. Half of this Ashante village is Christian, there is no fetish priest in the village, and yet all the villagers who were interviewed, regularly employ traditional plant medicines. In this village most species are used to treat more than one disease. There are generally several treatments for the same disease.
34. Ancey, G. 1967. La zone rurale de Brobo (Côte d'Ivoire) vue à travers son marché hebdomadaire. ORSTOM, Division Science Humaine and Ministère d'Agriculture, Côte d'Ivoire (mimeograph), Paris, France. (Published as L'économie de l'espace rurale de la région Bouaké: un exemple de fonctionnement de marché rurale approximité d'une agglomération urbaine: le cas Brobo 1974. ORSTOM, Travaux et Documents 38:183-201, Paris, France.)
This geographic study of a regional market in southern Côte d'Ivoire includes information on the returns garnered from some important marketed products including: palm wine, palm fruit, wood and fruits and leaves. Palm wine is only marketed by those villagers living within an 8 km radius of the market; 22% of the villages surrounding Brobo produce palm wine for this urban market.
Artisanal products such as baskets and carriers are also sold. The artisanal production tends to be concentrated in certain villages.
35. Andoh, A.K. 1986. The science and romance of selected herbs used in medicine and religious ceremonies. North Scale Institute, San Francisco, USA, 324 pp.
A collection of information on the medicinal and ceremonial use of wild plants by different groups of people around the world. Includes many examples from the Ashante region of Ghana. For example, Chlorophora excelsa is a sacred tree in many regions of southern Ghana and Nigeria. It is thought to house the souls of the newborn. The household gods of the Ibo (s. Nigeria) are always carved with its wood and its bark is used in some medicinal treatments.
36. Annan, J.L. 1980. The indigenous vegetable dyeing industries in Kumasi and its surrounding area. Thesis (BSc.) Institute of Renewable Natural Resources, University of Science and Technology, Kumasi, Ghana (unpublished).
Natural dyes are still commonly used for making traditional cloths in the Ashante region of Ghana. They are especially valued for festival and ceremonial occasions. Dyes extracted from the bark of forest and savannah trees provide particular ingredients for traditional cloths. For example, an extraction from the bark of Bridelia ferruginea is used to dye Adinkra cloth. The bark, roots and stems of Lannea kerstingii are used for dying the funeral cloth Kuntunkun. Other important dyes are derived from Entandrophragma angolense, Bombax buonopozense, and Terminalia ivorensis. Included in this paper is a list of other dye species, their habitat, dye colour and plant parts collected. Naturally dyed cloths are more expensive, but as they serve ceremonial functions they are still sought after. The production of cloth is widespread. One village on the outskirts of Kumasi accounts for 50% of the cloth production. There, the industry is highly specialised, involving bark collectors,
transporters, dye extractors or processors, dye traders, and cloth dyers. Traditionally only men could dye the ceremonial cloths. However, women are now involved in all but Adinkra cloth dying. The search for dye material has become more competitive (in some cases material is harder to find), collectors are now obliged to obtain the permission of town chiefs before gathering bark. Economic aspects of this small-scale industry are also discussed.
37. Annegers, J. F. 1973. Seasonal food shortages in West Africa. Ecology of Food and Nutrition 2:251-257.
In the southern regions of West Africa diets are generally based on tuberous crops which are typically low in protein. There is also a higher incidence of protein-calorie malnutrition in the southern areas. This consumption study, with its corresponding nutrient composition data, provides some interesting information. For instance, on average, insects provide 1-2 g of protein per capita per day in the region.
38. Ansa, E. 1986. A study of women in forestry in Ghana. (BSc.) Thesis, Institute of Renewable and Natural Resources. University of Science and Technology, Kumasi, Ghana (unpublished).
The retail trade of non-timber forest products in Ghana is dominated by women. Women are, `however, only minimally involved in timber trade. This paper presents the results of a study of the traders at Makola market. In this market women dominate the trade of: chewing sticks, wooden pestles and mortars, bushmeat, raw canes, cane baskets, charcoal, fuelwood, wooden ladles, kitchen stools and chop boxes. The trade of these products involves 166 retail traders, an indicator of the local importance of these products and forest-based rural industries.
39. Anyiwo, C.E. et al. 1986. The anti-bacterial effect of essential oil of Ocimum gratissimum. Journal of Research in Ethno-medicine 1(1):4-8.
Ocimum gratissimum is used in traditional treatments to stop bleeding wounds and nose infections. The chemical analysis of its oil reveals that it has antibacterial properties similar to other antibiotics, and is especially effective against salmonella and E. coli (causes sinusitus). The authors concluded that it could be an effective treatment against wound infections.
40. Ardayfio, E. 1983. Household energy utilization in selected settlements in Nigeria. Bulletin of the Ghana Geographic Association New Series Vol. 1.
A study of household fuelwood use and preferences in the forest and savanna areas of southwestern Nigeria which indicates that a wide variety of species and qualities of wood are used. Eleven species are commonly exploited in the forest zone. The desired wood qualities include high caloric value producing a long lasting steady burn. Fuelwood is gathered from the immediate surrounding area. While women have species preferences, proximity is the key factor determining what they actually use for fuelwood. The preferred species in the forest zone villages include: Ficus asperifolia, Celtis zenkeri, Cola acuminata, Funtumia elastica, and Ricinodendron heudelotii. Data on the quantity of fuelwood consumed per household and per individual is presented: people consume from 1.9 kg to 4 kg a day per capita (depending primarily on household size). Ardayfio finds no significant relationship between the ecological zones and fuelwood consumption.
41. Ardayfio, E. 1985. Women and urban marketing in Ghana. In Gallin, R.S. and Spring, A. (eds.). 1985. Women creating wealth: transforming economic development. Association for Women in Development Conference, 25-27 April, Washington D.C., USA.
Examines the position of women in the economy with respect to trade in particular: 84% of the people involved in Ghanaian trade are women. Fifty-one percent of wholesalers, who control the market for products transported over long distances from their production sites, derive their capital from personal savings, as banks do not support women. The paper also includes a discussion of the major markets for certain products.
42. Ardayfio, E. 1986. The rural energy crisis in Ghana: its implications for women's work and household survival. World Employment Program, Working paper 39, International Labour Organization (ILO), Geneva, Switzerland.
This study examines the impact of the energy crisis on women and household well-being. It compares information in three villages from different regions in Ghana. It explores the energy situation in Ghana; the impact of modernisation on rural households; rural energy use and requirements; the relationship between the rural energy crisis and women's work; and the relationship between rural energy, household nutrition and health.
In some cases fuelwood scarcity may force households to purchase fuelwood at the expense of food purchases (in one village household fuelwood expenditures rose from 1% to 16.3% of total expenditures within a few months). It may reduce cooking time, which in some cases results in changes in the types of foods consumed. The added time spent fuelwood collecting may increase the negative health effects of gathering (e.g. headaches and backaches). In addition, income earning activities which require a large input of fuelwood may have to be curtailed as the "operating" expenses become prohibitive. A description of common food dishes, their ingredients and the time required to cook them is included.
43. Asamoah, R.K.F. 1985. Uses of fallow trees and farm practices in Bo forest district (Ghana). Thesis, Institute of Renewable Natural Resources, University of Science and Technology, Kumasi, Ghana (unpublished).
Includes a survey of the trees found in fallow and fanned fields. Describes the reasons certain species are left in farm fields, and explores the different uses for the more common fallow tree species (which include Terminalia glaucescens, Faidherbia albida (syn. Acacia albida), Phyllanthus sp., Anogeissus leiocarpus, Chlorophora excelsa, Alstonia boonei, Ceiba pentandra). Approximately 75% of the fallow species serve as medicines, 92% have soil improvement qualities, 92% have domestic uses. The paper includes detailed information on the various uses of these different species. For example, the wood of Anogaissus leiocarpus is used for farm implements, especially hoe handles. The wood of Garienia ternifolia is used for knife handles. The leaves of Chlorophora excelsa are used as sandpaper; its gum is used as a bird trap; its wood is used for mortars. The wood of Funtumia elastica is used for household utensils and agricultural tools. The wood of Cola gigantea is used for
fencing and farm implements, its bark is used for treating sores.
Ceiba pentandra's fruits are used in medicines, domestically for pillow making and commercially sold to help plug holes in canoes; the seeds' oil is taken against rheumatism, sold commercially for soap-making, and used to ignite fires; the leaves are consumed in soups and also provide fodder to goats, their ash provides a good mulch; the bark and stem are used in a medicine and a mouthwash; the roots are used in a treatment for leprosy. A favoured mushroom grows at the base of their stems. They are also a good honey fodder tree. Finally, they are a sacred tree, the leaves and bark are believed to expel evil spirits.
Asamoah also finds that half of these fallow and farm land trees have cultural or customary importance. Ceiba pentandra and Chlorophora excelsa for example, are both considered sacred trees.
44. Asedam, J.J. 1982. Nutritive value of some Ghanaian mushrooms. Thesis, Department of Nutrition and Food Science, University of Ghana, Legon, Ghana (unpublished).
Examines the nutrition composition of some commonly consumed mushrooms (e.g. Termitomyces sp. and Volvoreillea sp.). Includes a general discussion on their consumption; they are highly valued foods, but are only available in the early rainy season. They are good sources of minerals and, in some cases, protein.
45. Asibey, E.O.A. 1965. Utilization of wildlife in Ghana. Ghana Farmer 9:91-93.
This article discusses the role of bushmeat in the diets of rural people. It presents data on the increasing price of bushmeat in regional markets (increase of 25% in the seven years from 1956 to 1963) and it notes that bushmeat prices are higher than domestic meat prices. The piece includes a discussion of the most frequently traded species and the profits earned by bushmeat traders. High exploitation has led to a reduction in large game species; nonetheless, the range of species that are sold appears to be far greater than current accounts of the bushmeat market in Ghana (see Asibey's later work).
46. Asibey, E.O.A. 1974. Wildlife as a source of protein in Africa south of the Sahara. Biological Conservation 6(1): 32-39.
Reviews studies conducted on the consumption of wild meat in Africa. Results are presented from the bushmeat market survey in Ghana. A broader range of animals are now consumed compared to what was eaten in the past. Wildlife resources have been so degraded that the choice of bushmeat species has become less selective. Asibey notes that small game and insects are the most important food species. He emphasises that conservation efforts must help maintain the supply of subsistence foods such as wild animals.
47. Asibey, E.O.A. 1977. Expected effects of land-use patterns on future supplies of bushmeat in Africa south of the Sahara. Environmental Conservation 4(1): 43-49.
Reviews information on the food uses of wildlife in African countries. Notes that where it is available, West Africans consume bushmeat. In fact, there is a growing demand for bushmeat which has been driven by the continued growth of urban and industrial centers. Asibey argues that current land-use planning does not reflect the demand for bushmeat production. He presents data from bushmeat markets and "chop" bars. At one chop bar in Sunyani, (Ghana) approximately 400 people consume bushmeat daily. Asibey notes that wild animals provide a supplementary source of income for many farmers: in one area of Ghana 80 farmers earned approximately 3850 cedis from a month's hunting (or 48 cedis each). And in other study, Asibey reveals that one farmer earned an average 1,700 cedis a year from bushmeat sales.
48. Asibey, E.O.A. 1986. Wildlife and food security. Paper prepared for the Forestry Department, FAO, Rome, Italy (unpublished).
A good paper reviewing the contribution of wildlife meat to the diets and economies of both rural and urban communities. Includes information on the price of bushmeat in rural and urban markets in several countries. Generally bushmeat sells for more than domestic meat. Asibey notes that the nutritional quality of bushmeat is comparable, and in some cases superior to that of domestic meat.
Detailed information on the economics of bushmeat trade are also provided. For many, it can be a major source of income: a hare hunter in Argentina can earn the equivalent of US$ 1,350 a month, compared with a farm labourer's US$ 100. An interview with a Ghanaian reveals that hunting provides him with more income than farming; farming is valued for the variety of foods and insurance it provides (crops, unlike wild game, may be pledged for loans).
Asibey reviews what is known about habitat management and game ranching and explores the possibility of managing agricultural areas and pest control activities to foster wild meat production. The appendices provide a summary of research by country, as well as data from selected countries on bushmeat markets. Excellent bibliography.
49. Asibey, E.O.A. 1987a. The grasscutter. Forestry Commission, Accra, Ghana. Prepared for FAO Regional Office, Accra, Ghana.
Description of the ecology of the grasscutter (Thryonomys swinderianus). Presents information on the consumption and trade of grasscutter in Ghana. Data from one market survey in Accra shows that over 61,900 grasscutters were sold over 6 years. The price of grasscutter has increased from an average 84 cedis/kg in 1980 to 685 cedis/kg in 1986 (compared to 272 cedis/kg for beef). This paper also presents information on the domestication of this species.
50. Asibey, E.O.A. 1987b. Wildlife issues in sub-saharan Africa. Paper presented at the International Symposium and Conference: Wildlife Management in Sub-Saharan Africa, 6-12 October. Sponsored by FAO and the International Council for Game and Wildlife Conservation, Harare, Zimbabwe, pp. 32-50.
A general discussion of the importance of wildlife as a source of food and income for many people in both urban and rural Africa. In some areas bushmeat has become so valuable that rural dwellers sell what they catch to urbanites rather than consuming it themselves. Discusses different strategies for restoration of wildlife, including: domestication, game ranching, forest habitat management, conservation, and agricultural pest control geared to consumption or sale of pests as bushmeat.
51. Atsu, S.Y. and Owusu, P. 1982. Food production and resource use in the traditional food farms in the eastern region of Ghana. Technical Publication Series No. 41. Institute of Statistical, Social, and Economic Research, University of Ghana, Legon, Ghana.
A detailed farm level study examining the socioeconomic situation and farming practices of two households. Includes interesting information on farming assets, marketing and "investment" practices.
Describes farming equipment; one of the studied households owned 13 cane baskets, 3 cutlasses, and 2 hoes, investing (the following season) in 2 new baskets, 2 cutlasses, and 2 hoes. The second household (with far fewer resources) owned 2 cutlasses, 2 cane baskets, 5 jute sacks and 1 mattock.
52. Awesu, M.O. 1980. The biology and management of the African giant snail Archachatina marginata. Thesis, Department of Forest Resource Management, University of Ibadan, Ibadan, Nigeria (unpublished).
Giant snails are an important food in the southern regions of Nigeria. They are a good source of protein and vitamin B1. This article focuses on the potential for domestication of the giant snail.
53. Ayeni, J.S.O. 1980. The biology and utilization of the helmet guinea fowl (Numida meleagris galeata) in Nigeria. Thesis, Department of Forest Resource Management, University of Ibadan, Ibadan, Nigeria (unpublished).
Reviews available information on the importance of bushmeat consumption in Nigeria. Reports that guinea fowl is an accepted food in all Nigerian States. Seventy-nine percent of those interviewed had consumed guinea fowl. It is generally found in the wild, but is domesticated. Guinea fowl eggs are considered a delicacy and are preferred to chicken eggs.
54. Ayeni, J.S.O., Aire, T.A., Olomu, J.M. (eds.). 1983. The helmet guinea fowl in Nigeria. Papers from a workshop on the grey breasted guinea fowl (Numida Maleagris Galeata), Lagos, Nigeria. Sponsored by FAO.
Estimates that there are 44 million semi-domesticated guinea fowl in Nigeria (25% of all poultry). The population of the southern species - the crested guinea fowl - is decreasing because of habitat (forest) destruction. This paper presents information on their nutritional value as well as people's preferences for bushfowl over chicken (45%).
55. Ayensu, E.S. 1978. The medicinal plants of West Africa. Reference Publications Inc., Algonac, Michigan, USA.
Describes 187 plant species used (with references for each use described) in medical treatments in different regions of West Africa. Includes an index by ailment and species.
56. Ayo Odunfa, S. 1981. Micro-organisms associated with fermentation of African locust bean (Parkia filicoidea) during Iru preparation. Journal of Plant Foods 3:245-250.
Iru is the most important food condiment in Nigeria and other countries of West Africa. It is a fermented vegetable protein prepared from the seeds of the African locust bean (Parkia filicoidea). Locust beans are not extensively used for food in their natural state, since they contain protease inhibitors such as trypsin which reduce the digestibility of protein. Fermentation counteracts these inhibitors, increases their digestibility and thus permits the use of the beans as food. The vitamin content of the parkia seeds is also found to increase during fermentation.
57. Bahuchet, S. 1972. Etude écologique d'un campement de pygmées Babinga (Région Lobaye, Centre Afrique). Journal d'Agriculture Tropicale et Botanique Appliquée 19(12): 510-599.
An ethnographic study of the Babinga pygmies. Discusses the foods most frequently gathered by the pygmies. Among the most frequent are the fruit of Irvingia gabonensis, leaves of Gnetum spp., roots, and mushrooms. Discusses the seasonal variations in gathering and consumption of forest foods. Babinga pygmies consume large numbers and a great variety of insects. Discusses hunting techniques and the forest products used for making traps, nets and other hunting equipment. Traps are designed to catch small animals (e.g. rats, porcupines, mice, duikers, and civets). Notes that hunting is a seasonal activity. Finally, discusses food consumption practices. Examines food consumed during meals at one camp of 20 days. Notes that snack food are commonly eaten throughout the day. Discusses the difference in food consumption between seasons and in forest versus village camps.
58. Bahuchet, S. 1978. Les contraintes écologiques en forêt tropicale humide: l'exemple des pygmées Aka de la Lobaye (Centre Afrique). Journal d'Agriculture Tropicale et Botanique Appliquée 25 (4): 257-285.
An anthropological study which examines the relationship between the hunter-gatherer pygmies and their forest environment. Includes a great deal of detailed information on the food plants and animals that are exploited. Although this is an equatorial climate, most foods have distinct seasonalities. The, forest areas are extremely heterogeneous in their resources, both spatially and in time. For example, most tubers are available only in the dry season. Similarly, honey is also a dry season product. The main trade product is bushmeat though honey, wild fruits and leaves, ivory, skins, and mushrooms are also traded. Hunting techniques vary by season, as do the species being hunted. Includes a map illustrating different forest types, and a list of commonly and occasionally consumed forest plants and animals.
59. Balinga, V.S. 1977. Competitive uses of wildlife: a Cameroon wildlife officer tells how policy turned to practical management. Unasylva 29(116): 22-25.
A general discussion of the role of wildlife at the national and local levels. Wildlife is an important source of meat for many Cameroonians, especially in the southern regions. This article estimates that 2,000 tonnes of bushmeat are consumed annually in the country. It discusses the incentives for hunting in respect to national laws. And notes that wild game is often killed for medicinal and ritual purposes. A list of commonly consumed game in different ecological regions is provided.
60. Baptist, R. and Mensah, G. 1986. Bénin et L'Afrique de l'Ouest: l'aucolade-animal l'élevage promotteur. World Animal Review 60:2-6.
This article reviews the research that has been conducted on bushmeat consumption throughout West Africa. It notes that bushmeat is preferred over domestic meat in Benin and is commonly sold in markets. It also discusses the potential for domestication of grasscutters.
61. Barbier, J.C. and Tissandier, J. 1980. "Nbandjok" ou les promesses d'une ville liée a un complexe agro-industriels sucrier au Caméroun. In Complexes Agroindustriels au Caméroun. Travaux Documents, ORSTOM No. 118 Paris. France.
This study includes data on the market products from Mbandjok, Cameroon. The value of marketed goods on four market days is recorded. Information on termites, bushmeat, oil palm kernels and fruit is included.
62. Béguin, J-P. 1952. L'habitat au Caméroun. ORSTOM, Paris, France.
A descriptive and pictoral account of different housing styles and construction techniques (including information on raw materials) that are used in different regions of Cameroon. Also describes structures built for storage and drying of different agricultural and cash crops.
63. Belisle, M. 1987. Le territoire forestier Camérounais: les ressources, les intervenants, les politiques d'utilisation. Paper prepared for the Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry Division, and International Institute for Environment and Development, Washington D.C., USA (unpublished).
This paper reviews the forest resource and policy situation in Cameroon. It notes that forest areas support an important wildlife population that provides food to many Cameroonians, especially in the southern region. On average, people consume an estimated 2.5/kg/capita/year (and fish consumption of an average 9/kg/year/capita). In the southern region wild game provides the main source of animal protein.
64. Benneh, G. 1973. Small-scale farming systems in Ghana. Africa (Journal of the international African Institute) 43(2): 134-146 (April).
This article includes a discussion of the judicial role of trees in the Huza bush fallow system. The tree Pycnocoma cornuta is planted to mark the boundaries of farm strips. Land is purchased in groups which are sub-divided into individual strips. The piece also discusses the tree species left in cocoa farms. The most common species are: Ceiba pentandra, Chlorophora excelsa, and Ficus asperifolia.
65. Bergeret, A. 1986. Fonctionne alimentaire des arbres et arbustes et quelques plantes herbacées de Sali, Sénégal. Communication au VII Séminaire d'Economie et Sociologie Rurale, Université de Montpellier, Montpellier, France. 15-19 September. Sponsored by Centre Internationale Rurale Agriculture et Développement (CIRAD). (Findings published in Botanique Appliquée 33:91-130.)
This study is included despite the fact that it is not in the Humid Zone because it provides a good example of how information on forests, agriculture and nutrition can be integrated in order to examine the role forest products play in the day to day lives of rural populations. It examines the nutritional contribution of trees and other wild plant foods to the diets of three ethnic groups living in the Sine-Saloum region. These groups consume (collectively) more than 110 species of wild plants (the parts consumed and species are listed). Provides information on the seasons in which foods are collected and consumed. An analysis of the nutritional value (linked to physiological function) of different foods is also included. The study reviews the conditions of the forest resource base and discusses the current shortage of forest foods. The study integrates information on seasonal patterns in the agricultural cycle, forest food use, the nutritional value of different foods
and inventory data on different food resources.
66. Bergeret, B. 1957. Note préliminaire a l'étude du vin de palme au Caméroun. Médecine Tropicale 17(6): 901-904.
Discusses the nutritional value of palm wine which is consumed in large quantities in southern Cameroon. He notes that it is an especially good source of vitamins B1, B2 and C.
67. Berron, H. 1980. Tradition et modernisme en pays lagunaires de Basse Côte d'Ivoire. Editions Ophrys, Paris. France.
Discusses the economic production activities, processing and trade of the region neighbouring Abidjan. Includes details of the different forest products that support these small industries. Discusses fish-smoking activities including estimates of the costs of production (fish, labour, and cost of fuelwood). Notes that most of the fish produced for the local market are caught and processed by small-scale enterprises (artisans) as opposed to large fishing companies. The short smoke technique is used by women who are near markets. The long smoke method is necessary when fish are to be transported over long distances.
Fish processing can be a lucrative enterprise increasing the value of the fish two or threefold. Attieke (manioc flour) production is another food processing enterprise which depends on fuelwood as well as the leaves of Thaumatococcus daniellii which are needed to wrap, cook and sell attieke. These leaves are gathered in forest areas and sold in local markets for 10 F a packet of 60. Discusses the prices of fuelwood and charcoal in Abidjan and surrounding markets.
68. Bicchierri, M. 1972. Hunters and gatherers today: socioeconomic study of eleven such cultures in the twentieth century. Holt, Rhinehart and Winston, N.Y., USA.
This book is a collection of anthropological studies on contemporary hunter-gatherer societies. Several studies focus on the wild plants and animals that are used for daily subsistence. The book provides information on seasonality in the use of various plants. The symbolic and cultural value of the natural surroundings is also discussed.
69. Biffot, L. 1977. Contribution a la connaissance et compréhension de la population rurale de Nord-Est Gabon. Collection Science Humaine Gabonaise, Centre National de la Recherche Science et Technologie. Ministère de la Recherche Scientifique Charge de l'Environnement et de la Protection de la Nature, Gabon.
This study of the rural environment in northeast Gabon looks at the lives and cultivation practices of two village communities examining the historical and current farming systems. The study classifies plants by their uses: food, industrial, medicinal, and euphoristic. The sections on medicinal and euphoristic plants contain some information on the social traditions associated with each plant's use. The report also examines rural housing (and construction material), explores commercialisation patterns, road infrastructure, and rural villagers attitudes towards urbanites.
Finally, the use of village and farm tree products is discussed. It notes, for example, that the fruits of Pachylobus edulis and Persea gratissima are used as meat substitutes while the seeds of Ceiba pentandra are mainly exploited for their "cotton".
70. Binet, J. 1974. Drogue et mystique: le Bwiti de Fangs (Cameroon). Diogéne 86:34-57.
Explores the symbolic and mystical uses of certain forest species valued by the Fangs of southern Cameroon. The Nzimba (temple - location of initiation ceremonies and other rites) is always located at the base of a large forest tree, where certain medicinal plants are cultivated and maintained. The tree symbolises the forest which houses the body of God. It is the source of people's food. The root bark of the species Tabernantha iboga (a hallucinogen) must be consumed by all initiates, so that they can see God. Iboga is the vehicle which allows man to see God. The species is always planted near the Nzimba. The article also discusses the ritual use of other drug species.
71. Biyiti, L. et al. 1983. A preliminary study of the in vitro anti-bacterial activity of a Cameroonian medicinal plant, Tabernaemontana crassa. Review of Science and Technology. Health Science Series, Cameroon, Volume 11:3-4.
Presents the results of a chemical analysis of this species' bark, which is traditionally used against common infections. The results show that this species is extremely effective against some bacterial strains.
72. Blanc-Pamard, C. 1979. Un jeu écologique différentiel: Les communautés rurales du contact forêts-savanes au fond du "V Baoulé" (Côte d'Ivoire). Travaux Documents, ORSTOM No. 107, Paris, France.
This study provides an in-depth examination of natural resource use in three village communities in the forest-savannah region. This analysis describes each village's agricultural and other economic and subsistence activities. It examines the time required to produce and process a variety of products (analysis of labour) in different seasons, and the budget and expenditures of several case study households. It evaluates markets, housing and food supply and consumption.
The study villages differ in their agricultural practices and economic activities. (In one village production was primarily cocoa and coffee cash crops, while in other villages staple crops (especially yams) dominated cultivation activities.) The degree to which different products are marketed in this region depends upon the need for cash, the accessibility of markets, product availability and the time available for collection and sale. The resources that are available are more diverse than in other regions, as they span two major ecological zones.
Gathering from the forest areas is reported to be an important activity in all villages, especially the one least dependent on cocoa/coffee. Some of the important products that are gathered from the forest include: cola nuts (for trade), palm products (oil, wine, fruit, leaves for construction, and raw materials for basketry and other artisanal activities), wild fruits and other foods (especially during the hunger season and during field work), fuelwood (especially in the villages close to regional markets), poles for house construction, snails, insects and mushrooms.
The study also includes a table of 68 medicinal plants gathered from the different environments, describing their habitat and uses. Information comes from interviews with traditional healers in the three study villages. For example, the leaves and fruit of Trema guineensis are crushed and used to treat toothaches. The leaves are eaten by women who are trying to have children. A decoction of the roots of Ricinodendron africanum are taken for stomachaches. The leaves of Euphorbia hirta are taken as a purgative. Young leaves are also used to treat conjunctivitis. The latex sap is used on wounds.
Hunting is still an important activity in one region (where production is not focused on cash crops). The forest/savannah is a good region for hunting, as animals from both environments can be caught. Dry season hunting is carried out in groups in the savannah areas where bush fires are set to flush out the game. Grasscutters, rats and other rodents are the main species that are hunted. Hunting is conducted throughout the year in the forest areas, usually by individuals who set traps around plantations or along paths. Some hunt with guns. Larger game is found in the forest region, mainly duikers and other antelopes, porcupines and squirrels. Children often catch (and consume) small animals (birds and small rodents).
Bushmeat provides an important source of animal protein and in some cases cash income. In predominantly cocoa/coffee areas, hunting is less common. In all regions insects and snails are much sought after. The prevalence of hunting appears to be a function of the supply of game (rather than time or accessibility of markets).
73. Blanc-Pamard, C. 1980. De l'utilisation de trois espèces de palmiers dans le sud du "V Boualé" (Côte d'Ivoire). Série Sciences Humaine, Cahiers d'ORSTOM 17(3-4): 247-257, Paris, France.
This article provides a discussion of the Baoulé population's current and historic use of palm products. Three species are common in the region (a transition zone between the humid forest and savanna). The palms and spines are used for basket-making, mats, cage-carriers (for chickens), and fences. Borassus aethiopium (palmyra) is most extensively exploited for its sap; it is used to make palm wine. The fruits are consumed in season, while the head (terminal bud) is eaten in famine periods. Elaeis guineensis is exploited for its fruit/kernel oil as well as its wine. The mushrooms growing on the felled stems of the oil palm are collected during the rainy season. Raphia palm (Phoenix reclinata) is less common in the region. It is most prized for house construction, providing the material for the walls and roofs. The leaves are also used for finer mats (for sleeping), coffee dryers, and sacks. Its wine is considered better than that of the other two palms, but is only tapped
for special ceremonies. Some data on the marketing of palm wine is included in the study. The author concludes that the region's palms are important in the people's material and spiritual worlds.
74. Boamah, A.A. 1986. A study of indigenous tenures relating to trees and forests in some parts of Ghana. Thesis (BSc), Institute of Renewable Natural Resources, University of Science and Technology, Kumasi, Ghana (unpublished).
A study of different land and tree tenure regulations and practices in Ghana. The study differentiates between the user rights for trees of different species, trees on different types of land (e.g. lineage fallow land versus temporarily granted land), and trees that are valued for different uses. The rules govern rights to medicinal products, fruit from the tree, fruit from under the tree, fuelwood and timber. They also distinguish between trees that are planted and those that are naturally occurring. Usuary rights vary by tree species; rights regarding species with a cash value are more restrictive (e.g. Cola sp.). Some tree products such as medicines may be used by all people, no matter what the land and tree ownership, while the use of other products, especially marketable goods (fruits), is controlled by established user regulations. The study suggests that medicines, fallen fruit and, in some cases, fuelwood, are considered "basic" products which cannot be denied to
those in need. In addition, the use of commercially valuable trees for subsistence consumption is generally allowed.
75. Boni, D. 1982. L'économie de plantation en Côte d'Ivoire forestière. Thesis Doctorat de l'Etat, Institute of Tropical Geography, University of Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire (unpublished).
This detailed analysis of oil palm plantations in the forest zone of Côte d'Ivoire includes a discussion of the "other" uses of palms. Generally these trees are not planted, but selectively protected and encouraged. Palm hearts are occasionally eaten, and wine tapping is very common. Palm fronds are used for house construction as roofs, in basketry and other artisanal activities. Newborns are bathed in palm kernel oil. And oil palm roots are used in several different medicinal treatments.
76. Bouet, C. 1980. La Saga de l'Okoumé au Gabon. Cahiers d'ORSTOM, Série Sciences Humaines, 17(3-4): 269-273.
This paper discusses the traditional and economic importance of several forest trees from Gabon: Aucoumea klaineana, Pachylobus edulis, P. buttreri and Pycnanthus angolensis. Their mystical value (e.g. medicines, sacred groves) and practical uses (e.g. canoes, implements and utensils) are both reviewed. Their commercial timber value is also assessed.
77. Bouquet, A. 1969. Féticheurs et médecines traditionnelles du Congo. Mémoire d'ORSTOM No. 36, Paris, France.
A descriptive account of over 1,000 plant species having symbolic, medicinal, or ritual importance. For each species the common name, botanical description, uses and methods of use are provided. Bouquet notes that wild plants and their uses are very familiar to those living in rural areas. He adds that collected forest plants are essential supplements (especially what is consumed between meals) to the region's protein and vitamin poor diet. The piece also provides information on sacred trees (among the more common sacred species are Ficus thonningii and Anonidium mannii).
78. Boutillier, J.H. and Dupire, M. 1958. Le pays Adioukrou et sa palmeraie (Côte d'Ivoire): etude socio-économique. ORSTOM, Paris, France.
This socioeconomic analysis examines palm oil processing enterprises in rural household. The division of revenue from palm tapping, fruit harvesting, and oil processing is also examined. For example, in one case 42% of the revenue went to the palm climber (harvest), 38% went to the wife of the climber and her assistants (oil processing), and 20% went to the owner of the palm tree.
79. Boye G. (no date). Traditional medicine - the Ghanaian approach. Centre for Scientific Research into Plant Medicine, Mampong-Akwapim, Ghana (unpublished).
A general paper on traditional medical practices in Ghana. Describes the role of institutions (the Ghana psychic and traditional healers association) in organising traditional medicine practitioners. Notes that traditional practitioners treat the majority of rural Ghanaians. In 1978, there were 3,363 registered, practising traditional healers in Ghana. Discusses the role of the Centre for Scientific Research into Plant Medicines in developing means of synthesising traditional and modern medical care.
80. Burkhill, H.M. 1985 (2nd edition). Useful plants of tropical West Africa. Royal Botanical Garden, Kew, London, Great Britain.
A revised and updated version of Dalziel's work, this book includes information published since 1937. Arranged by plant family, each species' entry includes a botanical description giving the plant's ecological distribution, and a listing of local uses and local names. There is a subject index arranged by usage. Volume I is completed (A-D). Though the information is descriptive, the immense number of plant uses that are listed serve to illustrate their value to the local population.
81. Busson, F. 1961. Plantes alimentaires de l'Ouest Afrique: étude biologique, botanique et chimique. Leconte, Ed. Marseille, France.
This book analyses regional foods gathered from the wild. It provides a description of the botany, chemistry and food uses of the region's indigenous plants.
82. Calame-Griaule, G. (ed.). 1969. Le thème de l'arbre dans les contes Africains I (The tree in African stories). Société d'Etude Linguistiques et Anthropologiques de France No. 16, Paris, France.
This collection of essays examines the symbolic importance of the tree in African oral tradition. In Africa, the tree features in many myths and tales, reflecting the permanence of a few important symbolic images; the tree stands between heaven and earth (cosmic tree); it is a protector and nurse (maternal), a phallic symbol (paternal and ancestral), and the ambiguous image of death and rebirth. Also, the tree often features in beliefs and rites. It can be a provider of goods (food, medicines etc.), or symbolise human fecundity. Deciduousness (death and rebirth) is seen as an indication of the trees power to give life, rebirth, and also death.
83. Calame-Griaule, G. (ed.). 1970. Le thème de l'arbre dans les contes Africains II. Société d'Etude Linguistiques et Anthropologiques de France No. 20, Paris, France.
This collection of three essays surveys the symbolic role of trees in African stories: the tree as a justice, the tree and marriage, and the tree and ancestors. In folk stories the tree plays either an active (e.g. tree marries a person, gives life or death) or instrumental role (e.g. as intermediary in the marriage of a couple, as a link between ancestors and the living).
84. Calame-Griaule, G. (ed.). 1974. Le thème de l'arbre dans les contes III. Société d'Etude Linguistiques et Anthropologiques de France No. 42-43, Paris. France.
This collection of essays further assesses the role of trees in African (and other) stories. It gathers together plant themes from Tenda, Samo and Dogon stories. The references to different plants are analysed in light of ethnobotanical information on the specific uses and value of particular plants.
85. Calame-Griaule, G. 1980. L'arbre et l'imaginaire. Cahiers d'ORSTOM, Série Sciences Humaines 17(3-4): 315-321.
This article is, essentially, an essay on the symbolic and mythical role of trees in African folklore. Trees are portrayed as `cosmic' linking the underworld with the sky; protectors; providers of essential goods, foods, knowledge and fecundity; paternal; and as symbols of the dialectic between life and death.
86. Campbell, B.M. 1986. The importance of wild fruits for peasant households in Zimbabwe. Food and Nutrition 12(1): 38-44.
An interesting study on the use of wild fruits in rural Zimbabwe which finds that three species are especially favoured: Diospyros mespiliformis, Strychnos cocaloides and Azanza garckeana. The study notes that preference for and use of these three favoured fruit species seems not to have been affected by deforestation. Fruits are consumed most frequently as snacks; in the survey only 23% of those collecting fruit reported saying they would use them for their meals.
87. Campbell-Platt, G. 1980. African locust bean (Parkia sp.) and its fermented food product Dawadawa. Ecology of Food and Nutrition 9(2): 123-132.
This is an excellent study containing a great deal of detailed information on the role, frequency and consumption of Parkia sp. (african locust bean). This important tree food is a legume whose seed pods are a commonly food in West Africa. The pods are fermented to make Dawadawa (a common soup and sauce ingredient). The pericarp is also eaten fresh. The seeds are rich in protein, lysine, fat and riboflavin. They provide a valuable food during the hungry season, especially for the poor. Parkia sp. is consumed in 50% of all meals in Ghana's Upper Region, and 10% of all meals in the northern region. It was eaten on 90 out of the 100 days of study by the Calbrais of northern Togo. And in northern Nigeria it is the second cheapest protein source after groundnuts.
88. Cashman, K. 1987. Women's activities and the potential of alley farming in southwestern Nigeria. Report prepared for The Ford Foundation. International Livestock Center for Africa, Humid Zone Programme, Ibadan, Nigeria (unpublished).
An interesting socioeconomic study on women's activities in the region. Explores women's income-earning activities, the most important of which is palm oil processing. Cashman compares the profits earned in different activities (e.g. oil processing, food sale, fish sale, maize processing, cola nut sales, locust bean processing, soap-making), and the labour and initial capital investment required for these varied activities. Oil processing and sales of cola nuts bring the highest profits, but the initial investment required for cola trading is comparatively high, while the labour required in palm oil processing is great. Nonetheless, oil processing is the greatest source of income for most of the women who were interviewed. In this area women earn the majority of household's cash income. Farm produce is valued for its regular returns, while the income that is earned from oil-processing is used for "bulk" expenses such as school fees. Women often "fix" their earnings in
livestock to avoid giving the income to their husbands. Most trees and their products are owned by men (e.g. cola, oil palms and parkias); women pay tree owners and harvesters (climbers) a percentage of produce or profits from the sale of processed products.
89. Chambers, R. and Leach, M. 1986. Trees to meet contingencies: a strategy for the rural poor? Institute of Development Studies (IDS), University of Sussex, Sussex, Great Britain.
An interesting analysis which explores the role trees may play as insurance against unexpected death, illness, or drought. Trees provide growing economic banks whose products may be sold or used in emergencies.
90. Chambers, R. and Longhurst, R. 1986. Trees, seasons and the poor. IDS Bulletin 17(3): 44-50, Institute of Development Studies (IDS), University of Sussex, Sussex, Great Britain.
In this essay, the authors illustrate the seasonal importance of trees to the poor; trees dampen the impacts of seasonal fluctuations in climate, food supply, labour and other hardships. Four distinct roles are identified: ameliorating microclimate effects, providing slack and lean season food and fodder, providing employment thus smoothing fluctuations in income generating activities, and meeting seasonal contingencies. Trees may provide food during the lean period, or during peak agricultural periods when there is little time for food preparation. The income that is generated from processing, gathering, and trade of forest products can be an important part of many poor peoples' survival strategy (e.g. charcoal production and sale may increase in poor harvest years). Finally trees may provide insurance (i.e. standing timber) against unforeseen hardships (e.g. deaths, sickness, marriages).
91. Champaud, J. 1983. Ville et campagnes du Caméroun de l'ouest. Mémoires ORSTOM 98, ORSTOM, Paris, France.
This geographic study on the relationship between urban and rural areas in Cameroon includes information on 3 urban markets: Narjo, Bangargté and Foumbot. It includes data on the numbers of retail traders of palm wine, cola nuts, palm oil, traditional medicines and artisan products. The study focuses on the dynamics of the cola trade in western Cameroon.
92. Charter, J.R. 1973. The economic value of wildlife in Nigeria. Research Paper No. 19. Federal Forestry Department, Nigeria.
This report estimates the economic value of wild animal meat in three areas of southern Nigeria. Bushmeat contributes approximately 19% of the overall meat consumed in the study areas (while fish contributes 60% and livestock 21%). In areas with high population density and no forest reserves such as Onitsha, bushmeat contributes 7% of the total animal meat consumed, whereas in areas near large forests, bushmeat provides the majority of meat consumed: 82% in Benin and 84% in Oyo.
93. Chong, P. 1987. Alleviation of fuelwood supply shortages in the western area, Sierra Leone. FAO Consultant Report, Forestry Department (unpublished).
This report provides an analysis of people's use of mangrove forest resources. Mangroves provide fuel (firewood and charcoal), food (oil, condiments, sweetmeats, vegetables, and alcohol), fodder, tannins and dyes, honey, fish, bushmeat and material for construction (for boats, docks, houses, and furniture).
Wood from mangrove areas is used for making fish traps, smoking ovens, shelters designed to attract fish, for fishing poles and boats. Tannins are extracted from the mangrove species and are used to preserve nets and lines. Firewood is used for fish smoking, cooking, and salt production. The fish smoking industry in Sierra Leone is entirely dependent on mangroves as their source of fuel; salt preservation provides the only alternative to smoking. Includes information on income earned per day by firewood cutters.
94. Chuta, E. 1978. The economy of the Gara cloth industry in Sierra Leone. Working paper No. 25, African Rural Economy Program, Michigan State and Njala College, Sierra Leone.
Three hundred and sixty small-scale private Gara dyeing establishments are economically analysed in this study. Traditionally, the indigo dye of Gara cloth is derived from the leaves of woody climber Lonchocarpus cyanescens. The leaves are collected, pounded, dried, and then sold to Gara cloth dyers (in 1974, a forty pound sack of dried leaves sold for 12 Leones). The Gara processing enterprises are predominantly owned (80%) and operated by women. Most of the labour in these enterprises is carried out by the proprietor and her family. Synthetic dyes have replaced the natural indigo dyes in some cases, however the traditional cloth fetches a much higher market price. This paper also describes other natural dye products.
95. Cline, E. 1985. Anti-bacterial properties of plants used medicinally in Gloucester village, Sierra Leone. Thesis, Department of Botany, University of Sierra Leone, Fourah Bay College, Freetown, Sierra Leone (unpublished).
Presents the results of chemical analyses of commonly used medicinal plants to determine their anti-bacterial properties.
96. Clottey, J.A. 1969. Wildlife as a source of protein in Ghana. Paper presented at the Working Party on Wildlife Management, African Forestry Commission, Lome, Togo. Reprinted in Food and Nutrition in Africa 9:7-11(1971).
Clottey discusses the factors influencing the prominence of bushmeat in the diets of many Ghanaians. He notes that there is an increasing demand for bushmeat in urban areas and estimates that Ghanaians consume an average 1.8 g of bushmeat daily (similar to meat consumption). The commercial trading of bushmeat developed in the crisis years of 1964-66, with specialised processing centers scattered throughout the country to service urban demand. Included in this analysis are tables on the annual availability of animal protein, and a consumer price index for the meat market in Accra.
97. Coleman, A. 1983. La production artisanale dans le développement de la Côte d'Ivoire: le cas des travailleurs de Rotin sur la route de Bassam. Thesis Institut d'ethno-sociologie, Université de Côte d'Ivoire, Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire (unpublished).
A sociological study of the rattan enterprises in the Bassam area. Provides detailed information on the sources of raw materials, the costs of production, the economic situation of rattan workers, the production methods employed, as well as a description of final products (most of this information is based on interviews with workers at 24 different workshops). Discusses the costs (of material and labour) of specific rattan objects and their selling prices. Notes that the supply of rattan can be a problem, depending on the time of year. Certain regions (e.g. Anyama) have become specialised centres for the sale of unprocessed rattan. In this region most rattan workers are foreign men.
Also describes other plants used in basketry: e.g. Borassus sp. palm, forest lianas and the leaves of Thaumatococcus sp. Discusses the potential for development the rattan industry geared to the Abidjan and tourist markets.
98. Coles, M. 1981. Study of medicinal plants in Gloucester village (Sierra Leone). Thesis, Department of Botany, university of Sierra Leone, Fourah Bay College, Freetown, Sierra Leone (unpublished).
This study examines common medicinal plant treatments, and describes their preparation. The discussion is organised according to illness. For example, the paper discusses plant species used to treat malaria (e.g. infusions of the leaves of Sterculia tragacantha). The paper also presents the results of screening of 65 plant species for anti-fungal properties; four show anti-fungal activity (Ficus exasperata, Lantana camara, Colocassia esculentum, and Ageratum conyzoides). Also includes a description of plants that have mystical or symbolic functions.
99. Collart, A. 1986. Development planning for small-scale fisheries in West Africa: practical, technological, and socio-economic aspects of fish production and processing. FAO Publication IDAF/W/71.
This general overview of small-scale fishing activities throughout West Africa includes estimates of the numbers and types of fishing crafts that are used. It estimates the number of canoes (and other fishing craft) in each West African country. Dugout canoes are the most commonly used boats throughout the region. In Cameroon, for example, there are an estimated 4,450 canoes. Ghana produces most of the dugout canoes that are used throughout the region. They are made primarily from the trunks of Triplochiton scleroxylon. The cost of an eleven meter traditional dugout canoe was the equivalent of approximately $ 2,000 at the time of this study. A new type of canoe has been developed in Senegal using board planks. These boats, however, cost about three times more than traditional dugout canoes.
100. Collins, W. et al. 1962. On the ecology of child health and nutrition in Nigerian villages. Elsevier Publishing Co., Amsterdam, The Netherlands. (Reprinted from Tropical Geography and Medicine 14:201-229.)
A combined ecological and dietary survey was conducted over a year to examine the relationship between farming systems and nutrition. While the information and approach are dated, some interesting facts on diet and food consumption practices is included. Data on seasonal variations in nutrient consumption are also provided.
101. Commonwealth Secretariat. 1980. Turner's Peninsula coconut project (Sierra Leone), feasibility study. Prepared for the Ministry of Trade and Industries, Freetown, Sierra Leone.
This study discusses common processing activities including piassava production (processed from wild raphia plants), palm oil production, palm wine tapping, coconut oil and salt production. It includes information on the resources exploited (e.g. number of trees tapped), the quantities produced and estimates the income that is earned. It notes that most palm products are gathered from wild trees.
102. Conseil Africain et Malgache pour l'Enseignement Supérieur. 1977. Troisième Colloque de CAMES médecine traditionnelle et pharmacopées africaines, Kigali, Zaïre.
A voluminous collection of papers on the use of plants in traditional medicine systems. Theme 1.: Botanical and ethnobotanical research. Theme 2.: Clinical and pharmacological research (papers explore different uses and preparations of traditional plant medicines). Theme 3.: Chemical research (explores chemical composition of different plant species). Theme 4.: Organizational research (focuses on how to further develop traditional medicine practices and how to integrate traditional and other types of medical services nationally).
103. Coulibaly, A. 1977. Artisanat de production et de service enquête régionale: Bandoukou, Bongouanou, Kaniola, Mankaro, Touba (Côte d'Ivoire). Office National de Formation Professionnelle, Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire (unpublished).
Presents an analysis of 750 interviews on artisan activities conducted in five rural zones of Côte d'Ivoire. The report describes the qualities and characteristics of rural small-scale enterprises. It notes that artisan activities can provide a supplementary source of income to agriculturalists. In areas with intensive agricultural production, less time is spent on artisanal production. Artisan activities are especially important in the off-peak agricultural season and during seasons of poor harvest. Approximately 30% of these activities involve woodworking. The survey identified 747 artisans whose activities supported an estimated 4,800 people.
104. Cousteix, P.J. 1961. L'art et la pharmacopée des guérisseurs Ewondo (Yaoundé Région, Cameroun). Recherches et Etudes Camérounaises. Yaoundé, Institut de Recherches Scientifiques du Caméroun, pp. 1-86.
This paper explores the Ewondo's medicinal and mystical beliefs, discussing the practices of their traditional healers and fetishists. Arranged by type of ailment (e.g. illnesses of the intestines, problems specific to women, and health of newly born) each chapter includes descriptions of treatments. Approximately 200 medicinal plants are described.
105. Cremoux, P. 1963. The importance of game meat consumption in diet of sedentary and nomadic peoples of the Senegal River Valley. In Conservation of nature and natural resources in modern African states, International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN) Publication, New Series 1, Morges, Switzerland.
This data is discussed in Asibey (1986) and Sale (1981). The paper discusses the importance of game in the diet of several Senegalese peoples. Includes estimates of annual bushmeat consumption for Senegal as a whole.
106. Dagogo. 1981. Ecology of the mangrove forest with special reference to the Delta. HND Project, School of Forestry, Forest Research Institute of Nigeria, Ibadan, Nigeria (unpublished).
Estimates that more than 700 people are employed in the fuelwood trade in Port Harcourt. The majority of the fuelwood is gathered from the mangrove areas. Mangrove species provide an excellent fuel which is especially valued for fish smoking.
107. Dalziel, J.M. 1937. The useful plants of West Tropical Africa. London Crown Agents, London, Great Britain. An Appendix to Dalziel, J.M. and Hutchinson, J. 1927-1936. The flora of tropical West Africa. London Crown Agents, London, Great Britain.
A classic botanical text describing the plant resources of tropical West Africa. The appendix on useful plants provides information on more than 100 edible species and thousands of non-food plants with economic import. A significant number of the plants that described are forest-tree species. Many medicinal uses are also listed. (See also Burkhill 1985)
108. Darko, E. 1981. A survey of cane weaving in Ghana. Thesis (BSc), Institute of Renewable Natural Resources, University of Science and Technology, Kumasi, Ghana (unpublished).
This study of cane (rattan and raphia primarily) basketry in the Kumasi region notes that in one study village (Enyiresi), basketry is the main rural industry. Men dominate weaving activities, while women dominate the trade of cane and fabricated cane products. Labourers are generally hired by (women) wholesalers who transport the material to weavers. The costs and benefits for different segments of the small-scale industry (includes estimate production figures) are examined.
As this region's supply of cane has begun to exhaust, the costs of production have begun to rise sharply. The industry's main problems are an irregular supply of both raw materials, and labour for collection.
109. Davidson, O. 1985. Energy use patterns in Sierra Leone. Manuscript Report No. MR103e. International Development Research Center, Ottawa, Canada.
This general study of the energy situation in Sierra Leone includes good statistics on both private and commercial fuelwood and charcoal purchasing and use. The report also provides information on small-scale processing enterprises (e.g. the quantity of fuel used in baking) and the caloric values for the different species of fuelwood that are used in different enterprises. It notes that an increasing percentage of urban people's income is being spent on wood fuel. For the majority of people in rural areas, fuelwood is the only source of energy. Fuelwood provides 72% of the total energy consumed by all sectors in Sierra Leone, charcoal provides a further 10%.
110. Department of Forest Resource Management, University of Ibadan. 1986. Feasibility study of indigenous forest fruit trees in Nigeria - Irvingia gabonensis, Parkia clappertoniana. Final Report. Prepared for the Federal Department of Forestry, Lagos, Nigeria (unpublished).
This paper examines the uses of these two indigenous economic species, their markets, marketability, availability and distribution. It includes a quantitative analysis of market prices and household consumption.
The kernels of Irvingia gabonensis are an important ingredient in the soups made to accompany a carbohydrate staple; in some areas there is such great demand that it has become a luxury item. It is estimated that, on average, households spend between 2 and 5% of their annual expenditure on irvingia products. The estimated annual household consumption ranges from 3.2 to 14.13 kg/year depending on the region. The major market for these kernels is rural southern Nigeria. Consumption is greater in rural areas, but there is a growing demand for it in urban centers. Indeed, irvingia seeds are even imported from Cameroon. The marketing of Irvingia sp. involves producers (principally men), processors (principally women), wholesalers and retailers. Generally the price is controlled by wholesalers, but for distant markets retailers have greater control over prices.
Although Parkia clappertoniana is a savannah tree, it is widely distributed throughout the southern region (it was found in 50% of the southern forest reserves studied). Its fermented seeds provide an extremely popular condiment which is often used as a meat substitute. Its leaves and pods provide fodder, and almost all this plant's parts provide medicines. In the Lagos area 98% of those interviewed consume fermented parkia bean; 95% of the southern Nigerian population consumes fermented parkia regularly (an estimated 3.2 to 28 kg/household/year).
111. Depommier, D. 1983. Aspects de la foresterie villageoise dans l'Ouest et le Nord (Cameroun). Report of an internship. Institut de Recherche Agronomique and Centre Tropicale Forestier Technique, `Nkolbisson' Cameroun.
The role of trees and forest areas in the west and north of Cameroon is examined in this report. In the West, trees are incorporated into the "farm" areas in live hedges and managed bush areas. Trees are planted and selectively managed. Eucalyptus is a favoured exotic species because of the nearby market for poles (electric company). This report discusses the economics of the eucalyptus trade. There are many other tree species (e.g. Cola nitida, Albizia glaberrima, Vernonia amygdalina) found in these hedge rows which are valued as reserve sources of food, fuel, timber, shade, medicines and other products. Raphia palms are especially valued. They grow in dense stands in valley bottoms, and are used for house construction (60% of a house's building material is derived from the raphia palm), and palm wine (an important source of income). This study examines the prevalence of different species in planted hedge areas and in other farm areas. It includes a description of the
uses of different common species, as well as the species different artisans prefer. For example, the leaves of Dracaena arborea are used in basket-making and weaving. The tree is also traditionally considered the tree of peace, it is used to mark property boundaries.
112. Dietworst, D. 1987. Household meat consumption survey in communities in southern Nigeria. International Livestock Center for Africa (ILCA), Humid Zone Programme, Ibadan, Nigeria. (unpublished).
An extremely interesting study on meat consumption in three different communities in southwest and southeast Nigeria. A total of 61 households were interviewed. Consumption of fish, bushmeat and snails is reviewed. Information on the frequency of consumption (per household), the quantity and prices of meat, and the source of supply (e.g. market, bush, home-production) are all recorded. Information on general economic indicators (e.g. house construction material), taboos and practices is also presented.
The data from this study has not yet been analysed, however, a few conclusions can be drawn. In general, domestic livestock (goats and chickens) is consumed a few times a year on special occasions. In a few households beef is regularly consumed. Generally, dried fish is the most commonly consumed meat. In the Imo community snails are regularly consumed (several times a week in season) by more than a third of the community, and are consumed by more than two thirds of the community on at least a monthly basis. In the same community bushmeat is consumed less frequently (only about 20% of the households consume bushmeat on a monthly basis), although it is consumed occasionally by all households. In contrast, the households in Oyo State (Owu-Ile), consume bushmeat more regularly (80% of the households consume bushmeat at least several times a month), 20% consume it daily. In the third community, also in Oyo state, bushmeat and snail consumption is less regular. However, in all
communities all households consume both snails and bushmeat occasionally.
113. Diouf, N.S. 1987. Les techniques artisanales de traitement et conservation du poisson au Senegal, Ghana, Bénin et Caméroun. Paper prepared for the FAO Fisheries Department, Dakar, Senegal.
Fish smoking is a common practice in each of the countries that is examined in this report. In Ghana, 60% of marketed fish is smoked. In Benin two thirds of the fish catch is smoked. In Cameroon, all fish from coastal fisheries (with exception of one species) is smoked. This report discusses different fish smoking techniques and the quantities of fuelwood required for each approach. Fuelwood requirements vary according to the length of processing and the desired intensity of heat. For example, one Cameroonian technique requires 3.015 kg/wood to smoke 1 kg of fish.
114. Direction de promotion de bois (Cameroon). 1987. "Note sur l'économie forestière nationale." Nkolbisson, Yaoundé, Cameroon.
An analysis of the Cameroonian forest industry. Includes information on local wood processors and local markets.
115. Direction des Eaux et Forets (Senegal). 1982. Annual Report 1982-1983. Dakar, Senegal.
The Senegalese Forest Service gathers a considerable amount of information on the exploitation of secondary forest resources. The Forest Service collects a tax on poles, palm spines and leaves, as well as wood used for artisan woodworking (e.g. for coffins, tam-tams, chairs, beds, and canoes). Therefore, this report provides statistical estimates of forest-based artisan production by district (the numbers of beds, mats, baskets, chairs, etc. produced). The Casamance region (Guinea forest zone) produces the greatest quantity of processed and gathered forest products. For example, in 1982, an estimated 1.96 million kg of wild fruits were collected, 714,000 litres of palm oil were produced', 47,500 litres of palm wine were produced, 23,000 kg of leaves and bark were collected, 582,000 brushes were produced, and 12,000 baskets were produced.
The records include statistics on products that entered Dakar each month of 1982; 502,000 kg of wild fruit, 26,000 kg of wild leaves, and 19,000 litres of palm oil. The report comments on the market prices for processed wood products, animal products (e.g. skin), wild fruits and leaves, palm oil, palm wine, and plant medicines. Also includes statistical estimates of the consumption of charcoal and fuelwood over the last ten years.
116. Direction des Eaux et Forets (Cameroon). 1985. Annual Report 1984-1985. Ministère d'Agriculture, Yaoundé, Cameroon.
This report provides some statistics on the export of medicinal plants (the most common secondary forest products collected from Forest Department land): the bark of Pygeum (Prunus africana) (729 tonnes), Voacanga sp. (30 tonnes), Yohimbe (Pausinystalia johimbe) (229 tonnes), Strophanthus sp. (25 tonnes) and ebony. These statistics only provide an indication of the quantities of secondary products "officially" extracted from forest reserves by large scale producers.
117. Direction du commerce intérieur (Cameroon). No date. Enquête des commerçants-artisans: resumé. Ministère du Commerce et de l'industrie, Yaoundé, Cameroon (unpublished).
This survey of small-scale commercial and artisan enterprises in urban areas of Cameroon reveals that 35% of these enterprises are in Douala and 26% are in Yaoundé. A total of 13,700 enterprises were surveyed and classified into 80 professional groups. Of these, 14% were found to be woodworking enterprises and 1% were sculptors. Seventeen percent of the total male employment was in woodworking. Most products were produced on order (9% were sold on street corners and a further 6% were sold in markets). Forty percent of those interviewed complained that they had difficulty purchasing raw materials.
118. Djoko, E., Eboutou, M.L., Rafidison, P. 1983. Plantes médicinales du Caméroun. Série No. 1. Cahiers de l'I.M.P.M. (Institut de Recherches Médicales et d'Etudes des Plantes Médicinales). Centre d'Etudes des Plantes Médicinales (MESRES), Yaoundé, Cameroon.
Providing the results of interdisciplinary research on the useful medicinal plants of Cameroon, this report outlines 30 species describing them botanically, listing their habitat and ecology, traditional uses, and chemical composition. For example, Pterocarpus soyauxii's bark is used in treatments of anaemia, bronchial problems, and with palm oil against many skin aliments. It contains tannins, sterrols and flavanoids. The effectiveness of the different medical treatments is not evaluated.
119. Dodah Ayernor, G.K. 1970. The sap of the palm, Elaeis guineensis for alcoholic fermentation. Student paper. Department of Nutrition and Food Science, University of Ghana, Legon, Ghana (unpublished).
In the Krobo district of Ghana farmers tap between 25 and 100 trees a season (which in this region involves felling the tree). This paper discusses the fermentation process of palm wine and spirits.
120. Dongmo, J. 1985. L'évolution du système agraire en pays Banen: étude géographique. Thesis, Department of Geography, Université de Yaoundé, Yaoundé, Cameroon (unpublished).
This detailed geographic study explores the role farm and field trees and forest resources play in the lives of the Banen of southern Cameroon (between Douala and Bafoussam). It describes their agricultural and non-farm activities. And discusses the socio-cultural functions of forest products. Most "farm" trees are valued for their fruits, leaves, or seeds. Especially important are Canarium schweinfurthii, Vitex cierkowskii, Myrianthus muellerianthus, Pachylobus edulis, and Irvingia gabonensis. Some tree species are left in fields for protection and demarcation. For example, the tree Kigelia africana is thought to protect fields from trespassers. Most forest and tree products are gathered for home consumption rather than for sale in the markets. During the off-peak agricultural season, gathering is at its height.
Oil palms play a central role in the economic and social lives of the Banen. The study finds that the density of palms is a function of their distance from people's houses (the highest densities are found nearest the houses). Palm oil is now used primarily for home consumption because of the low prices at the market level. Palm kernel oil is an important ingredient in many medical treatments, palm wine is commonly tapped. Often the bark of certain forest species is added to wine to speed fermentation or to give a desired flavoring. The greatest quantities of wine are tapped during the rainy season. Palms also provide the basic raw materials for household utensils and farm equipment, including transportation baskets, storage bins, drying racks, harvest baskets. The main species used for basketry is Hybophrynium braunianum. Fish traps are made from the bark of raphia palms. Mushrooms are even collected from the decomposing felled palm stems.
A description of the Banen hunting and fishing practices is also included. It notes that hunting has become more lucrative with the increased commercialisation of the area. Wild game is still in plentiful supply. And the flowers of Tephrosia vogelii are crushed, placed in a basket and put in the water as a fish poison. Snails, tortoises, caterpillars, larvae, and other insects are also commonly gathered during the rainy season. This study contains considerable descriptive information on the collection of wild game, but gives little indication of the extent to which they are exploited.
121. Duke, J.A. and Atchley, A.A. 1986. CRC handbook of proximate analysis tables of higher plants. CRC Press, Boca Raton, USA, pp. 389.
Presents nutrient composition data for hundreds of plant species. It includes information on calories, protein, fat, fibre, ash, calcium, phosphorus, iron, sodium, potassium, carotene, thiamine, riboflavin, niacin and vitamin C.
122. Dwuma-Badu, D. 1983. Anti-infective agents from traditional useful medicinal plants in West Africa. In Essien et al. 1983. Anti-infective agents of higher plants origin: proceedings of VISOMP - Fifth International Symposium on Medicinal Plants. Drug Research and Production Unit, University of Ife, Nigeria and Organization of African Unity, pp. 32-40.
Discusses the results of pharmacological analyses of Piper guineense, Cryptolepis sanguinolenta, Xylopia aethiopica, Tiliacora funifera, Azadirachta indica, Enantia chlorantha, Combretum mucronatum and Mitragyna stipulosa. All are used by traditional healers for treating infections. Discusses the traditional use as well as the chemical composition of each species. For example, Enantia chlorantha is traditionally used for treating jaundice and skin ulcers and leprosy. The plant has been shown to have strong microbial action. It also contains constituents (analgestic and alkaloids) which have been found to reverse and repair liver damage. Its uses for treating skin diseases can also be explained by its chemical composition.
123. Dwuma-Badu, D. 1986. Some studies of the constituents of West African medicinal plants: problems, progress and potentials. The Ghana pharmaceutical Journal: 21-38.
Describes research undertaken by the Faculty of Pharmacy at the University of Science and Technology at Kumasi in Ghana. They have focused their research on analysis of the chemical constituents of Cryptolepis sanguinolenta, Rhigiocarya racemifera, Triclisia sp., and Griffonia simplicifolia. C. sanguinolenta is traditionally used in treating malaria, urinary tract infections and wounds. Its chemical composition and biological activities indicate that it has great potential for treatment of bacterial and other diseases. It contains the compounds cryptolepine and quindoline. Detailed information on the chemical composition and biological activities of many commonly used plant medicines is provided. The author focuses on plants that contain anti-tumor constituents and muscle relaxants, anti-inflammatory and anti-bacterial, and anti-sickling agents.
124. Ekong, D.D.E. 1979. African medicinal plants under the microscope. UNESCO Courrier 7:17-19,42.
A general discussion of the drug potential of African plants used in traditional medicinal treatments. Draws examples from Nigerian research. For example, the roots of Fagara zanthoxyloides, traditionally used as chewing sticks for dental care, have been found to have anti-microbial and anti-sickling activity. Examination of the dried fruit of Xylopia aethiopica, used in many traditional treatments, revealed that it contains an acid which is very active against certain bacteria.
125. Elletey, J.S. 1986. An architectural analysis of some traditional farms in some villages near Kumasi. Thesis (BSc), Institute of Renewable and Natural Resources, University of Science and Technology, Kumasi, Ghana (unpublished).
This study examines the role trees play on four farms in four different Ghanaian villages. It explores the farmers' reasons for protecting or leaving trees on agricultural lands: to use as yam stakes, to improve crop yields, as food crops, for shade, for wood for carving, as timber, as live fences, for firewood and fodder. The largest trees are found on farm land not in fallow areas, although the diversity of species is greater in bush fallows. Some species are believed to positively (e.g. Rauwolfia vomitoria and cocoyams) or negatively (Ficus asperifolia and cocoyams) effect certain crops.
126. ENDA. 1987. Environnement africain: série plantes médicinales. Fiche technique. ENDA. (Environnement et Développement du Tiers Monde), Dakar, Senegal.
This series of leaflets on medicinal plants that are commonly used in West Africa includes plant descriptions, details of plants ecological distribution, ecological requirements, and means of propagation. It outlines the chemical composition of their active ingredients, and describes their traditional use in medicine. For example, Xylopia aethiopica, a tall, humid forest tree, is traditionally used for treating liver ailments and mouth infections (a decoction of the roots mixed with water is used as a mouthwash). The tree requires rich, humid soil, thrives in swampy conditions, and can be propagated from seed in good soil after six months gestation. The plant contains the essential cuminol, organic acids, alcohol, turpines, and anonacenes. Other species covered in include Cassia alata, Holarrhena floribunda, Borreria verticillata, Piliostygma reticulatum, Moringa oleifera, Calotropis procera and Euphorbia hirta.
127. Energy Initiatives for Africa. 1986. Etude de marché régionale sur le charbon de bois en Europe, Royaume Uni, et Afrique de l'Ouest. Energy/Development International (EDI), Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire.
This report discusses charcoal production and marketing in Liberia and Côte d'Ivoire. It examines the potential for development of the export market to Europe and northern Africa. The economics of this trade including the selling prices at roadsides, in rural markets, and in Monrovia markets, as well as the costs of production and transportation are all discussed. The paper notes that charcoal production provides the second most important source of income in Liberian rural areas after agriculture. Fifty percent of the annual production is geared to the Monrovia market. It also states that, alternatively, in Côte d'Ivoire, charcoal is primarily used in urban areas. An estimated 190,000 tonnes are produced a year (600 tonnes are exported to France). The article concludes that the production costs for the African export market are prohibitive, but there is some potential for development of the European market.
128. Engel, A. et al. 1984. Promoting smallholder cropping systems in Sierra Leone: an assessment of traditional cropping systems and recommendations for the Bo-Pejehun rural development project. Institute of Socio-economics of Agricultural Development, Technical University of Berlin, Berlin, West Germany.
The published results of this interdisciplinary 3 month field survey provide a great deal of detailed information on Sierra Leonian farming practices, off-farm activities (especially palm oil processing), markets for agricultural and processed products, and women's role in the household (including their income earning activities). It describes the seasonality of different activities as well as the seasonal periods of hardship. The study finds that off-farm activities (oil processing, coffee and cocoa processing, hunting, fuelwood collection, palm wine tapping and artisanal activities) are very important. Nineteen percent of the farmers regard these activities as the most important in terms of labour and household benefit, another 14% mention them as the second most important activities. The analysis discusses the conflicting demands on farmer's time and the extent to which palm fruit and kernels are processed. Often palm kernels and other products are put aside to process
later in times of emergency cash needs.
129. Engelhard, P. and Robineau, L. 1981. La pharmacopée: composante de l'économique de la Santé au Senegal. ENDA (Environnement et Développement du Tiers Monde) Study No. 59, Dakar, Senegal.
In reviewing the health situation and health care systems in Senegal, this study examines Senegalese use of traditional medicine. It also provides an assessment of traditional medicine by "modern" practitioners. The study notes that 62% of "modern" Dakar doctors send patients to traditional practitioners. A list of common plant medicines is included.
130. Enti, A.A. 1987. Personal communication. Director, Forest Enterprises Inc. Accra, Ghana.
Enti owns Forest Enterprises Inc. which exports non-timber forest products, including a number of drug and food (sweeteners) gathered from forests throughout Ghana. In 1984 he exported £180,000 worth of forest medicines. Discussed the exploitation of NTFPs and the international markets and marketing of medicinal/food forest products. Currently his main business is with Tate and Lyle (a large food processing company in Great Britain) exporting the aryl's of Thaumatococcus daniellii from which a sweetener is extracted. In 1987, he expected to export 110 tonnes of the semi-processed fruit of Thaumatococcus daniellii. Also supplies companies and research centers in the United States and Europe.
131. Enunwaonye, R.U. 1983. Economic analysis of fuelwood consumption in Enugu, Anambra State. MSc. Thesis, Department of Forest Resource Management, University of Ibadan, Ibadan, Nigeria (unpublished).
Examines the fuelwood market in Enugu analysing the people involved In the trade, and the seasonal differences in prices and profits. Notes that fuelwood producers generally do not sell fuelwood in the Enugu markets, rather they sell to retailers or middle-(wo)men. The main fuelwood producers are farmers, the majority of whom participate in this activity seasonally, during the agricultural slack period. Women are more involved in the transport of fuelwood than production for the market. There are nonetheless some regular fuelwood producers who often employ labourers. Those involved in the seasonal sale of fuelwood generally find the fuelwood on their land, whereas the regular producers gather wood from communal forest areas. Examines on-farm (producer) and market (retailer) fuelwood prices and costs and finds that the profit margin averages 28-54% for seasonal fuelwood producers, 19-26% for regular producers, and 47-71% for the retailers. Also includes information on
fuelwood species preferences.
132. Essien, E., Adebanjo, A.O., Adewunmi. C.O. and Odebiyi, O.O. (eds.). 1983. Anti-infective agents of higher plants origin: proceedings of VISOMP - Fifth International Symposium on Medicinal Plants. Drug Research and Production Unit, University of Ife and Organization of African Unity, Ife-Ife, Nigeria.
A collection of papers investigating the plants that are used in traditional treatments against infections. Includes several interesting reports on molluscicidal plants. These plants contain substances which kill molluscs (e.g. snails), often the intermediary hosts of infectious diseases such as bilharzia. Reviews current pharmacological and chemical research on traditional plant medicines. Contains some useful information assessing the effectiveness of specific traditional cures. However, the information is geared to the potential drug market and not to assessing traditional medical practices per se.
133. Etienne, J. 1974. Artisanat traditionnelle en Côte d'Ivoire. Association Universitaire pour le Développement de l'Enseignement et de la Couture en Afrique et a Madagascar. Ministère de L'Enseignement et de la Formation Professionnelle, Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire.
This detailed study of traditional artisan production throughout Ivory Coast provides descriptive information on wood, cane, raphia, cloth, dyeing and printing, pottery and metal artisanry. It describes the region, ethnic groups, objects fabricated, raw materials used, marketing and techniques of production for more than 200 activities. Describes the most commonly used objects including mortars and pestles, plates, household utensils, furniture, and musical instruments. Notes that basketry and other weaving activities are not specialised enterprises, that they are engaged in by most rural men. The most common raw materials for this sector are raphia palm, leaves, fibres and leaf spines, forest lianas, and the leaves of Thaumatococcus spp. Describes the different methods used by various ethnic groups to fabricate a multitude of household and agricultural products (e.g. harvest and transport baskets for coffee, cocoa, and cola nuts, crop dryers and crop storage containers,
household utensils, and furniture).
Traditional clothes (cloth) are made from the bark of several forest trees. These are still important for traditional ceremonies and festive occasions. Discusses the natural dyes used in cloth printing enterprises (which are dominated by women). Certain traditional colours (indigo) are still commonly produced from forest plants. Traditional wood-based artisan activities have been most affected by modernisation.
The commercialisation of wood-based artisanry has led to a dichotomy between products fashioned for tourists and urban markets and those produced for everyday use. Most rural men still produce the wooden objects needed within the household.
134. Ewusi, K. 1986. Statistical tables of the economy of Ghana 1950-1985. Adwensa Publications, Institute of Statistical, Social and Economic Research, University of Ghana, Legon, Ghana.
These statistics give some indication of the importance of forest resources in the fishing sector. They include information on the Ghanaian fishing fleet.
In 1962 an estimated 78% of the total fish catch was caught from dugout canoes, in 1982 83% of the total catch was caught from dugout canoes. The number of dugout canoes has remained approximately the same over the last twenty years (8,700) while the number of motorized canoes has increased (from 1,700 in 1961 to 7,600 in 1970). The number of motorized fishing vessels has also increased, although dugout wood canoes still remain the most common boats. The tables also include some production statistics for palm kernel, shea nut, copra and cola nut.
135. FAO. 1986. Some medicinal forest plants of Africa and Latin America. FAO Forestry Paper No. 67, FAO, Rome, Italy.
Presents monographs of 40 species of trees and shrubs used as medicines. Includes information on the botany, silviculture, ecological distribution, chemical properties, pharmaceutical and traditional uses for each species. A bibliography for each species is included.
136. Faure, J. and Vivien, J. 1980. Intérêt de toutes les ressources ligneuses et non-ligneuses tirées de la foret par les populations locales. Etude 3. Etude préparée pour le Société SEDA (Yaoundé) sur l'aménagement des forets littorales de Campo et Edea, Cameroun (unpublished). (Study prepared for SEDA, a consulting firm as part of a larger study on the development potential of the Littoral region and its forest management.)
An excellent study on the local use of forest resources in eight rural villages and a pygmy settlement. The study examines the uses of a gamut of resources including fuelwood, house construction supplies, foods, medicines (particularly those commonly used by villagers without healer assistance) and other vegetative products, aquatic and terrestrial animals. It also assesses the zones of harvest or gathering for various forest products. The paper notes that the distances traveled in search of medicines and wild game were considerable (more than 20 km). The paper includes an estimate of the quantities of wood used for fuel and house construction.
In all surveyed villages people hunted and fished for home consumption. In some villages wild game was found on the market. The authors note that bushmeat and fish provided the only regular source of meat to households in the region.
In a village where access to forest resources had recently been taken away, the numbers of species identified by villagers as essential far outnumbered those identified in other villages. The authors argue that as village access to forest resources has declined, awareness of what is(was) used and depended upon has heightened (see Section 1.2, conclusion).
137. Federal Department of Forestry (Nigeria). 1987. Wildlife utilization and wildlife values in Nigeria. Paper presented at the International Symposium and Conference: Wildlife Management in Sub-Saharan Africa, Harare, Zimbabwe, 6-13 October. Sponsored by FAO and the International Council for Game and Wildlife Conservation.
In Nigeria, wildlife is most used and valued as food in some communities it also features in traditional religious and customary ceremonies. This paper reviews the importance of bushmeat (listing the important food species) and discusses current trends in price and consumption patterns. The ever growing demand for bushmeat in urban areas and the dwindling supply throughout the country (caused by changes in land use and over-exploitation) have caused great increases in bushmeat prices in the last few years (especially in urban markets). In some regions the price has increased as much as 400%. In many areas it has become a luxury item. Farmers generally sell what they catch to wholesale traders or on the roadside. Only what is not sold, or what is left from dressing the carcass is consumed by the rural poor. The bushmeat trade is highly specialised in most areas. This report presents data on bushmeat consumption from the 1960's.
138. Ferry, G. 1974. L'univers végétal dans les contes Tenda (Senegal). In Calame-Griaule, G. (ed.). Le thème de l'arbre dans les contes III, SELAF (Société d'Etude Linguistiques et Anthropologiques de France) 42-43:21-37, SELAF, Paris, France.
This paper examines the plants which feature in myths and stories in Tenda (southern Senegal) tradition. It includes a description of over 300 species. It compares the common day to day use of plants with their symbolic role in myths and stories. For example, the tree Saba senegalensis is often associated with circumcision: the crusted seeds are used for treating circumcision wounds. The fruits are eaten and the wood is used as fuelwood on festive occasions. In stories the tree is portrayed as a provider. Its fruit is consumed in famine or to help care for the needy (such as an orphan).
139. Forestry Department (Ghana). 1975. Annual report of the Forestry Department, Ministry of Lands and Mineral Resources, Accra, Ghana.
Includes statistical information on non-timber forest products collected from forest reserves. In 1975, 64,700 cedis worth of produce were recorded (includes fuelwood, fruits, leaves, poles and chewing sticks). These figure are not thought to be reliable. Also includes data on the export of some products including cork, cola nuts, gums and resins.
140. Franqueville, A. 1972. Les relations villes-campagnes sur la route au Nord de Yaoundé (Cameroon). Cahiers ORSTOM, Série Sciences Humaine 9(3):337-387.
This article includes interesting information on rural-urban marketing in southern Cameroon. Yaoundé provides a market for wild fruits, plant medicines, caterpillars, fuelwood, charcoal and cultivated and cash-crop products. Though there is a demand for wild game, supply has dwindled and it, therefore rarely appears in the markets.
The evolution of housing is also discussed; poto-poto houses are still most common (mud, poles and palm leaf stems). They are increasingly "ameliorated" with cement wall plastering, and in cases of wealthier residents, replaced by cement houses.
141. Franqueville, A. and Tissandier, J. 1975. Note sur révolution de l'habitat rural dans le sud du Cameroun. Communication au séminaire sur l'environnement rural et l'habitat en Afrique intertropicale. ORSTOM, Paris, France.
Rural houses in southern Cameroon were "traditionally" made from leaves, bark, palm leaves and leaf spines ("bamboo") and wood. During the colonial administration, residents were forced to change their house construction to "poto-poto" (now often considered "traditional"). The poto-poto house is the most common type of rural housing in this region. The poles are young tree stems; Coula edulis is the preferred species for housing poles because it is termite resistant. The wattle cross slats are generally made of the leaf spines of raphia palm. Rooves are also built using palm fronds. The main change in the style of construction since independence has been the introduction of metal sheet rooves, and cement in the case of wealthy villagers. Generally, the men and women have separate houses men's houses are larger and more "modern", as the focus of home improvements is on the man's house.
142. Fyle, M. 1981. Commerce and entrepreneurship: the Sierra Leone hinterland in the 19th century. Institute of African Studies, Occasional Paper 2, Fourah Bay College, University of Sierra Leone, Freetown, Sierra Leone.
Discusses the trade between southern (e.g. palm oil) and northern (e.g. parkia locust bean, calabash, shea butter nut) regions of the country. Discusses how Colonial takeover has changed internal trade traditions.
143. Gartlan, S. 1987. Korup regional management plan: conservation and development in the Ndian division of Cameroon. World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF) and Earth Life, Godalming, England (mimeograph).
This background study for the Korup conservation project includes information on agricultural and other economic activities of the region. It includes a description of the ecology of the region, the forest animal and plant resources as well as local uses of these resources. The area is sparsely populated and markets are generally poorly developed. Most of the trade of forest resources has been with Nigeria.
Included in this report is an assessment of the resources of villages situated within the park's proposed boundaries. It provides a detailed view of the on-farm and village trees (included are coffee, cocoa, oil palm, coconut, raphia palm, citrus, mango. Persea sp., Dacryodes sp., cola, calabash, and breadfruit). For example, there are more than 40,000 oil palms in the ten villages surveyed; there are 4,000 Dacryodes sp. (valued for their fruit). The forest and tree resources that are most exploited at the household level include the fruit of Ricinodendron heudelotii, raphia palm wine and oil, and Irvingia gabonensis. In one village the seeds of Irvingia gabonensis are collected from the forest, dried, and carried to Nigeria for sale (where one bucket fetched FCFA 10,000 in 1986).
Regional trade is also examined. The most important trade items include the seeds of Irvingia gabonensis, building poles, chewing sticks, bushmeat, and distilled palm alcohol. Since the "closing" of the border in 1984, Nigerian trade has diminished. Chewing sticks (from Garcinia sp.), raphia canes, and building poles are all used in local villages and traded in the regional market. The alcoholic drink made by distilling the sap of palm species is also a major item of trade in the regional market.
Nine percent of the meat consumed in Cameroon is bushmeat. Hunting and trapping are common during the rainy season and bushmeat, especially porcupine and duiker, are also sold in the regional market. Hunting is carried out in all villages. The regional market price for bushmeat has increased 117% in the last four years, reflecting its decrease in availability.
Finally, the paper describes housing styles, and notes that the majority of houses are still of the traditional variety (e.g. thatched roofs, mud and wattle, or bark).
144. Gastellu, J.W. 1980. L'arbre ne cache pas la foret, ou: usus, fructus et abusus. Cahiers d'ORSTOM. Série Sciences Humaines 17(3-4):279-283.
This piece provides an interesting discussion of the function of trees in African life: economics, climate, religion, and law (land). It focuses on the role of trees in traditional land rights issues and compares traditional tree rights in Senegal (Serer) and Côte d'Ivoire (Agni). In general, the use of forest/tree products over several years gives the user the rights to the land occupied by the tree. Someone who plants a tree has the sole rights to the products of the tree.
145. Gbile, Z.O. 1979. Exploitation of Nigeria's economic non-timber plant species in the wild: progress and prospects. Proceedings of the 9th Annual Conference of the Forestry Association of Nigeria (unpublished).
Reviews the available research and information on some commonly used plant medicines. Discusses species with hypotensive, anti-diabetic, anti-microbial, anti-sickling and anti-malarial action, as well as those used in the treatment of asthma, hepatitis, and worms. Also discusses plants valued as sweeteners and dyes.
146. Gbile, Z.O. 1983. Indigenous and adapted African vegetables. In Proceedings of the Sixth African Symposium on Horticultural Crops, Ibadan, Nigeria, 19-25 July 1981. Sponsored by the Horticultural Society of Nigeria (HORSTON) and the Federal Ministry of Science and Technology. (Printed in Acta horticulturae 123:71-80 (December).)
Discusses indigenous vegetables species consumed in Nigeria. Presents information on the nutrient value and medicinal properties of each species. Includes a description of some farm and forest species as well as some herbaceous forest plants. For example, the seeds of Ceiba pentandra, a rain forest tree, are used in soups, its young leaves are cooked as vegetables. The leaves of Struchium sparganophora are gathered in bush areas especially during the dry season and cooked as a vegetable. The fruit and leaves of Momordica charantia are used as a laxative. The fruit of Solanum aethiopium are used in remedies for colic; its young leaves are used as alight sedative. Some forest and bush species discussed include Vernonia amygdalina, Gnetum sp., Irvingia gabonensis and Ceratotheca sesamoides.
147. Gbile, Z.O. 1986. Ethnobotany, taxonomy and conservation of medicinal plants. Paper presented at the workshop on medicinal plants. University of Ife, Ife-Ife, Nigeria (unpublished).
Reviews current work being conducted at different research centers throughout Nigeria on the uses, taxonomy, chemical composition and pharmacological potential of some plants used in traditional medicine. Provides information on some of the species that are under investigation including: Morinda lucida, Hunteria umbellata, Annona senegalensis, Xylopia aethiopica, Alstonia boonei, Picralima nitida, Kigelia africana, Newbouldia laevis, Telfairia occidentalis, Carica papaya, Dioscorea spp., Alchornea cordifolia, Ocimum gratissimum, Azadirachta indica, and Fagara sp. For example, Xylopia aethiopica's fruit is used in many medicinal treatments because of its preservative properties and their broad anti-bacterial action. The powdered dried seeds of Picralima nitida are marketed as anti-malarials. The bark of Alstonia boonei contains many alkaloids and echitamine which is believed to explain its use in the treatment of fevers, dizziness, and high blood pressure. It is also
traditionally used to treat asthma, snake bites, worms and impotence.
148. Gbile, Z.O. 1988. Personal communication. Research Scientist, Forest Ecology and Conservation Division, Forest Research Institute, Ibadan, Nigeria.
Discussed commonly exploited medicinal plants from the Ibadan region. Also discussed the food resources commonly garnered from forests in the southwestern regions of Nigeria.
149. Gbile, Z.O. and Adensina, S.K. 1987. Nigerian flora and its pharmaceutical potentials. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 19(I):1-17.
Herbal medicines are still commonly employed in most regions of Nigeria. Herbalists may use both psychological and chemical remedies (plant products). Preparations from leaves, roots, bark, flowers, fruit and seeds are employed in a variety of ways. Plants that are traditionally used as sweeteners, anti-infectives, molluscicides, anti-malarials, laxatives, cardiovascular and nervous disease treatments, proteolytic ferments, steroidal alkaloids, anti-tumour and anti-sickling drugs are all discussed with a view towards their pharmaceutical potential. The authors combine information on their traditional uses, chemical constituents and potential efficacy. For example, the stem bark of several species of Khaya (the genus of African mahogany) are used in many fever and malaria remedies. The chemical composition includes scopoletin and scoparone making these species potentially valuable ingredients for anti-malarial drugs. Includes a good bibliography.
150. Genelly, R. 1968. Interim Report to the Government of Ghana on wildlife conditions. Prepared for the FAD Forestry Department, FO:TA/GHA (unpublished).
Discusses the condition of wildlife resources in Ghana. Includes a review of conservation areas and issues. Also includes a discussion of wild animals as a food source for rural populations. Up to 80% of the protein consumed by Ghanaians is derived from wild mammals, birds, reptiles and snails. This study provides statistical estimates of bushmeat consumption. One bushmeat dealer traded 6 tonnes of game over a 15 month period in 1966 (a value of £1,300).
151. Getahun, A. 1980. IITR/IDRC agroforestry project: annual report, International Institute for Tropical Agriculture (IITA), Ibadan, Nigeria.
Discusses the different farming systems found in the southern Nigerian project area. Tree crops cover 64% of farm land area. The trees commonly found on farms are discussed (e.g. Elaeis guineense, Cola sp., Vernonia amygdalina, Ficus sp., Tectona grandis, Irvingia gabonensis, and Dacryodes edulis).
152. Gill, L.S. and Akinwumi, C. 1986. Nigerian folk medicine: practices and beliefs of the Ondo people. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 18:257-266.
The use of plant medicines is both common and widespread among the Ondo. This article describes 48 plant species used in traditional Ondo treatments. It includes a description of their uses, the plant parts used, as well as biodynamic notes. The authors found that 14 species contained alkaloids, and that 34 species had local actions.
153. Gollnhofer, O., Salée, P. and Sillans, R.J. 1975. Art et artisanat Tsogho, Gabon. Travaux et Documents de l'ORSTOM 42, ORSTOM, Paris, France.
A study of the art and artisanry of the Tsogho from Gabon which includes a great deal of detailed information on the material used to create and construct different objects. Describes a multitude of products made from forest resources: objects that are used in transport and agriculture, religious and social ceremonies, objects used to make household utensils, build temples and make musical instruments. Rattan is the most widely used material for all household items including crop dryers, baskets, mats, furniture, food containers and kitchen utensils. Notes that most fish traps are still made from local materials.
In Gabon specific objects are often made from a particular species. The baskets that are used for fish drying are made "from the stems of Marantochloa ramosissima, baskets for drying peppers are made with the leaf petioles of Megaphrynium macrostachyum, while larger transport baskets are made with the bark of Cleistopholis glauca. Knives are made from Diospyros sanzaminika; ropes that are used for climbing aim trees (for wine tapping) are made from the forest liana Entada mannii; mallets used for bark extraction (for traditional medicines) are made from Sindora klaineana; Marantochloa ramosissima leaves are used to make the filters for palm oil processing. Finally, mortars are made from Mitragyna ciliata and pestles are made from Randia acuminata. Also notes that sculptures and figures and masks are made from specific species of wood. Includes a description of the plants used for special dyes and paints.
154. Gorog-Karady, V. 1970. L'arbre justicier. In Calame-Griaule, G. (ed.). 1980. Le thème de l'arbre dans les contes africains, SELAF No. 20:23-62.
The tree is often a symbol of justice and judge in African stories. This study explores the tree's image in 22 stories from different African cultures. In each case, an evil deed is followed by atonement in which the tree plays a role. The tree can give life or death, or insure a hero's survival. In the stories it generally intervenes to serve as mediator and judge in situations where man is not able to solve a conflict which involves a breach of traditional societal rules.
155. Goussé, A. 1987. Personal communication. Forester at SODEFOR (Société de Développement Forestière), Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire.
SODEFOR is in charge of forest management in Côte d'Ivoire. Goussé discusses the management of Yapo National Forest (near Abidjan), which has both plantations and natural forest. Currently the only returns from the forest have come from the harvest of secondary products, most notably fuelwood, poles, chewing sticks, matchsticks, and ornamental plants. The returns from secondary forest products in 1987 were approximately FCFA 6,750,000 (US$ = FCFA 260). This income has helped defray the costs of management.
156. Gouterel, R. 1979. Actualisation de la pharmacopie traditionnelle et prospection des plantes médicinales en République Populaire de Guinée. Directeur de Recherche au Centre Nationale de Recherche Scientifique, Guinea.
This paper discusses commonly used traditional plant medicines. It includes information on methods of medicine preparation, the plant species for which export markets exist and the quantities of plant materials that are exported to foreign multinationals. Among the important exported species are Combretum micranthum (exported to France, where it is processed and used as a diuretic and in treatments for hepatitis), Cola nitida, C. acuminata (exported to France - 20 tonnes/year, where it is processed into a tonic) Harpagophytum procumbens (exported to Germany, where it is processed into medicine against rheumatism). Primus africanum (exported to France), Rauwolfia vomitoria (the source of reserpine, exported to Europe and Japan), and Datura metel (a source of tropane and scopomaine, exported to Germany).
157. Grivetti, L., Frentzel, C.J., Ginsberg, K., Howell. K., and Ogle, B.M. 1980. Agricultural development: present and potential role of edible wild plants. Part 2: Sub-saharan Africa. USAID, Washington D.C., USA.
This study reviews the literature that examines wild plant consumption by different African populations. It contains an excellent bibliography and is particularily comprehensive in the fields of historical botany, nutrition, and medicine. The authors conclude that wild plants have historically been an important component of many Africans' diets and agricultural development planners should explore the potential for conservation and development of wild plant resources.
158. Grivetti, L., Frentzel, C.J., Ginsberg, K.E., Howell. K.L., and Ogle, B.M. 1987. Bush foods and edible weeds of agriculture: perspectives on dietary uses of wild plants in Africa, their role in maintaining human nutritional status and implications for agricultural development. In Akhtar (ed.). Health and disease in tropical Africa. Harwood, London, Great Britain, pp. 51-81.
Provides an extensive review of peoples' consumption of wild plants in different regions of Africa. It draws on information from ethno-botanical, archaeological, anthropological and nutrition studies. It demonstrates that wild plants are essential components of many Africans' diets, especially in periods of seasonal shortage. The authors suggest that by maintaining and increasing current use of locally available wild foods the economic and nutritional situation of rural Africans might improve.
159. Hall, D. 1988. Biotechnology for rural Africa: high value natural product development as an integral program for tropical forest conservation in Africa. Report prepared for the FAO Agricultural Industries Division, Rome, Italy (unpublished).
This report review the feasibility of plans to develop high value natural products (e.g. essential oils) using the Korup (Cameroon) conservation as a case example. It reviews a range of plants that are used to produce medicines, dyes and foods and describes the use of some forest fruits and nuts such as Sechium edule and Dacryodes edulis, and leaf vegetables such as Gnetum sp.. Species that are used as spices and stimulants are also identified. For example, the seeds of Afrostyrax lepidophyllus are used to give a garlic taste while Tetrapleura tetraptera leaves are used as soup flavouring. Some forest plant parts are used to make dyes: the bark of Pterocarpus osun for a red dye, the bark of Enantia chlorantha for a yellow dye.
The study describes a range of plants that contain ingredients that are anti-malarial, anti-diarrhea, anti-heminthic, molluscicidal, anti-amoebic, anti-bacterial, anti-fungal, anti-viral, anti-inflammatory, anti-tumor, and cardiac glycosides. And it notes that there is an export market for some medicinal plant products. In 1984, 728 tonnes of Prunus africana, 229 tonnes of Pausinystalia johimbe, and 30.5 tonnes of Voacanga africana were exported, according to the Cameroon Forestry Department.
160. den Hartog, V. and deVos, A. 1973. The use of rodents as food in tropical Africa. Nutrition Newsletter 11(2):1-14.
Discusses the use of rodents as food throughout the world, focusing on the potential for development in Africa. Presents nutrition and consumption information on the most commonly consumed rodents including grasscutters, giant rats, squirrels and porcupines. The authors note that reliable information on consumption of different rodent species is not available, and that most studies of bushmeat do not include small animals (especially rodents) which are often consumed by children. The article does, however, present a summary of the available information on bushmeat consumption in West Africa. A study conducted in rural Togo estimates that the per capita consumption of bushmeat ranges from 0.5 to 12 g daily. Some of the cultural taboos associated with rodent consumption in different communities are also mentioned.
161. Herren-Gemmill, B. 1988. Personal communication. Currently completing PhD research at the University of California, Davis, USA. Studying the utilization, yields, and importance of bush fallow products in the rural economy of southwestern Nigeria.
Herren-Gemmill compares the fallow management practices of farmers in the derived savanna/forest border and the forest zone. She finds that farmers in the forest zone leave a broad range of forest tree emergents standing when land is cleared for crops. Similarly, she notes that a great number and variety of trees are allowed to germinate and grow during the cultivation period. Alternatively, farmers from the savanna/forest border preserve primarily commercial tree crops. Oil palm is protected equally in both regions. And standing trees serve several different purposes: fruit and leaves are harvested for home consumption and market sale, yam stakes (common species include Alchornea laxiflora, Funtumia sp., and Combretum sp.), timber, firewood, chewing sticks, browse, and medicines are also all derived for use. Common forest fallow species include Chlorophora excelsa, Chrysophyllum sp., Newbouldia laevis, Triplochiton sp., Cola sp., Irvingia gabonensis, Ficus exasperata,
Alstonia boonei, Elaeis guineensis and Alchornea laxiflora. Herren-Gemmill is also conducting research on the income earned from forest fallow products, the relative density of trees in fallows and on farm fields, fallow successional dynamics in two land clearings, and cultivation practices (mechanical and manual) and selective versus non-selective weeding.
162. Hladik, C. et al. 1987. Se nourrir en foret équatoriale: anthropologie alimentaire différentielle des populations des régions forestières humides d'Afrique. Research Team Report 263, Centre Nationale de Recherches Scientifiques, Paris, France.
A comparative interdisciplinary study of the food uses of forest resources by different ethnic groups in the equatorial forests of West and Central Africa (includes information from Cameroon, Central African Republic, Gabon, and Zaire). Agriculturalists, fishing people, and hunter-gatherers are all studied. Describes the forest resources, gathering, hunting, fishing, agricultural systems, food preparation, food consumption, food values (cultural), physical and biomedical data, as well as information on rituals and food taboos.
The seasonal variations in both the prevalence and consumption of different forest foods and agricultural products are examined. Compares this resource data with biomedical data on the seasonal variation of nutritional status in the different ethnic groups. Provides detailed estimates of daily consumption of forest and cultivated foods. For example, in the village, during the rainy season, the Ntomba consume an average 37 g/day of bushmeat, while in the dry season they consume an average of only 6 g/day of bushmeat (this compares to 11 g/day of domestic meat consumed in the rainy season and 0.4 g/day consumed in the dry season). Notes that bushmeat's dietary importance stems from the calories it provides (e.g. some highly-prized bushmeat species are preferred for their fatty consistencies). Domestic meat is only consumed on festive occasions, whereas bushmeat supplies a regular source of food. Caterpillars are generally consumed in the villages rather than forest camps.
Gives details of both food preservation and some techniques of traditional food preparation. Also provides information on the hunting techniques that the different ethnic groups employ. The availability of different game species is highly seasonal, hunting techniques also vary according to season.
Also discusses some of the forest foods which feature in cultural festivities and social rituals (e.g. palm wine, giant pangolin Manis gigantia), and some of the food taboos for different people within the community (e.g. pregnant Yasa women are encouraged to eat Prodicticus potto and prohibited from eating Varanus niloticus).
163. Hodasi, J. 1984. Some observations on the edible giant land snails of West Africa. World Animal Review 52:24-28.
A synopsis of the biology of different species of land snails. They are such highly prized foods that they are being over-exploited and in some areas are fast becoming endangered species. They are good sources of protein, iron and other minerals. Attempts are being made to cultivate them.
164. Holsworth, W.H. 1970. Wildlife management. Department of Forestry, University of Ibadan, Ibadan, Nigeria (unpublished).
This paper reviews the status of wildlife, wildlife consumption, and wildlife legislation in Nigeria. It assesses the potential for tourism development, export of wild animals and animal products, as well as the current status of bushmeat consumption. Bushmeat is especially valued in the western and mid-western States. The report estimates that the total value of bushmeat in southern Nigeria is 9,000,000 naira annually. Fish and shell fish contribute the greatest amount of animal protein to the Nigerian diet. The paper asserts that naturally occurring animal protein (fish and bushmeat) contributes 4% of the gross domestic product of Nigeria. Includes both tables on the annual consumption of local and imported meats in different regions in the south and statistics on the export of wild animals and derived products.
165. ICRAF and the Cameroonian Agroforestry Task Force. 1986. Proposal for agroforestry research in the humid tropical lowlands of Cameroon, `Nkolbisson, Yaoundé, Cameroon.
This analysis of farming systems in humid regions of Cameroon presents the results of the first stage of a Diagnosis and Design evaluation. It includes an analysis of the functions of farm trees: food, fodder, oil, medicine, building material, shade for cocoa, and soil fertility restoration.
166. Ijalana, S.A. 1983. Economic analysis of agroforestry in the lowland rainforest zone of Ondo state, Nigeria. Thesis, Department of Forest Resource Management, University of Ibadan, Ibadan, Nigeria (unpublished).
This analysis of farming systems in Ondo state estimates the costs and returns of agroforestry in the region. Analysis focuses on the incorporation of Gmelina sp. and Leucaena sp. However, the study also identifies indigenous on farm trees and describes their uses and values. Oil palms (Elaeis guineensis) are the most popular and widely distributed trees, because of their income earning potential. Fruit trees are of growing importance. Generally trees are not planted, but seedlings are selectively managed. Nonetheless some species were found to be planted including: Nauclea diderrichii, Tectona grandis, Terminalia superba, Mansonia altissima, and Irvingia gabonensis. These trees are valued for land demarcation (trees with long gestation periods are favoured), poles, fuelwood, fruits and seeds. Most on-farm trees are wildlings having been left to grow. They are especially valued for their fruit, fuelwood, shade and as yam stakes (especially Rauwolfia vomitoria). Trees are
used for constructing yam storage structures. The leaves of Mitragyna ciliata are especially valued for storing cola nuts. Some information on agricultural tools is included as is some data on the market returns for some tree crops (e.g. cola nuts sell for 975 naira a tonne compared with 378 naira a tonne for yams). The paper finds that on average, a farming household owns two hoes, three cutlasses and five baskets.
167. INADES, 1984. La medicine traditionnelle. Agripromo No. 44. Yaoundé, Cameroon.
This issue of Agripromo reviews traditional medicinal practices. It includes a description of the medicinal uses of papaya (the roots, fruit, and leaves are used against worms, coughs, headaches, constipation, malaria, jaundice, cuts, abcesses, and to stop bleeding). It also describes other plant treatments which use on-farm plants. The article discusses the attributes and problems of traditional medicine and includes interviews with traditional healers. One of whom is a traditional practitioner from Burundi who integrates his activities with the modern medical system. He's a specialist in liver problems, diabetes and bronchial disorders. He treats, an average 40-50 people a day, who come from all over the country. He employs 120 different medicinal plants and notes that most of them are rare during the dry season. In his interview he discusses the problems associated with his profession. The piece also reports on the work of the union of traditional healers in Cameroon,
which has approximately 3,000 members and the journal recounts some readers' experiences with traditional medicine.
168. Ingles, A. 1988. Rural women and urban men: fuelwood conflicts and forest sustainability in Sussex village. Sierra Leone. GDI Social Forestry Network Paper 6C, Overseas Development Institute, London, Great Britain.
An interesting discussion of the conflict between local and urban demand for forest products. The author notes that fuelwood is used for the local fish processing industry. There are 15 fish-smoking enterprises in the area, which consume approximately 70 tonnes of fuelwood a year (an average 27.3 kg of fuelwood are used per fish drying session). The preferred fuelwood species are Ochthocosmus africanus, Humerocardia sp., Vitex doniana, Anisophyllea laurina coconut husks and palm fronds. However, woody species are most often used. Fuelwood provides the sole source of energy for cooking in the community. An average 7.75 kg per household per day are used (thus, approximately 142 tonnes annually for the community as a whole).
Fuelwood used in the household is collected by women, who travel about 1 km to collect and cut wood. They collect only dry dead wood during the dry season and cut small coppicing species leaving several coppice shoots. By comparison, the urban woodcutters cut any species throughout the year leaving no regeneration. Generally it is absentee landowners who give urban woodcutters rights to felling, otherwise it is carried on illegally. The author concludes that the urban woodcutters are overexploiting the community's forest resource, depriving them of future energy resources.
169. Irvine, F. 1952. Supplementary and emergency food plants of West Africa. Economic Botany 6(1):23-40.
Irvine explores the ways in which forest food resources are exploited by West African populations. He distinguishes between plants eaten only in times of emergency and famine, those regularly collected but not marketed, those gathered and marketed, those that are "tended" in the "bush", and those that are cultivated food plants. The article focuses on the emergency and subsistence uses of wild species. He notes that the wild plants that are consumed in famine periods are different from those eaten regularly. Famine foods are more energy rich and often require lengthy processing. For example, baobab leaves are regularly consumed in sauces, so too are its fruits in season. However, its roots are consumed in emergency periods. Irvine also notes that the consumption of wild animals may increase in famine periods. A great deal of detailed descriptive information on wild plant species' food use is presented. However, it only provides a general indication of the extent to which
the plants are used (e.g. emergency or regularly). The majority of species that are discussed are found in the forest zone.
170. Irvine, F. 1956. The edible cultivated and semi-cultivated leaves of West Africa. Qualitas Plantarum et Materiaea Vegetabilis 2:35-42.
Identifies more than 150 species whose leaves are regularly consumed in stews, sauces and as condiments. A significant number are wild species (some are from forest areas).
171. Irvine, F. 1961. Woody plants of Ghana with reference to their uses. London Crown Agents, London, Great Britain.
Describes more than 700 commonly exploited wild and cultivated species from Ghana. Also included are nutrition composition tables for food products derived from 80 species of plants. Botanical descriptions are accompanied by detailed information on cultural, economic and dietary uses and values.
172. Isawumi, M.A. 1978. Nigerian chewing sticks. Nigerian Field 43(2,3,4):50-58, 111-121, 161-170, 44(1):21-28.
Chewing sticks are used by the majority of Nigerians throughout the country. They are produced from the root, bark or stem of 24 different tree species. They are marketed daily throughout the country, although certain species are specific to certain ecological regions. For example, Massularia acuminata chewing sticks are most common in Ogun, Oyo, and Ondo States, whereas Garcinia cola is most popular in Cross Rivers State. The species used for chewing sticks have been found to have anti"-microbial effects, thereby providing an effective product for dental care. A list and description of species is included in this article.
173. Jahn, S.A.A., Musnad, H.A., and Burgstaller, H. 1986. The tree that purifies water: cultivating multipurpose Moringaceae in the Sudan. Unasylva 38(152):23-29.
This article describes the many uses of Moringa sp. trees both in Africa and Asia. Moringa produce vegetables, spice, oil, medicine, fodder, bee fodder, and firewood. They are also used as windshields, nemoticides and water coagulants or clarifiers. The crushed seeds of Moringa olifera have traditionally been used by Sudanese women to clarify water. And the author confirms that doses of 30 to 200 mg./litre (depending on the quality of the water) of powdered seed can clarify turbid water to tap water quality within a few hours. The elimination of turbidity eliminates 98-99% of indicator bacteria, thus providing an excellent low-cost water treatment system. These trees are often planted around house compounds or in agricultural fields. The article describes propagation techniques for different Moringa species.
174. Jedrej, M.C. 1986. Dan and Mende masks: a structural comparison. Africa 56(1):71-81. Journal of the International Africa Institute, London, Great Britain.
Discusses the roles that masks play in different ceremonies. They may act as peacemakers. They represent the spirits of the forest, and in some cases may reflect different people in society. Masks may be passed on through generations. And more important, spirit masks are never traded. In some cases specific trees or wood qualities are sought for mask-making.
175. Jeffrey, S. 1977. How Liberia uses its wildlife. Oryx 14(2):168-173.
In Liberia wildlife is valued most because it provides food. Trade in animal products (e.g. skins and ivory) is common but bushmeat provides the main source of meat (excluding fish) for most Liberians. It is sold at most markets and along roads. However, wildlife populations are increasingly being over-exploited as access to wild habitats improves (through new roads), firearms become more common, and markets for bushmeat expand. This article presents data on the predominance of the different species sold by roadside vendors; duikers (especially Cephalophus maxwelli, C. dorsilis and C. zebra) and monkey (Colobus badius) are the most commonly marketed. The article includes data on the average prices of bushmeat; generally bushmeat is cheaper than domesticated meat. The piece also presents data on the returns from the skin and ivory trade.
176. Johnson, D. 1987. A study of some useful species of plants with particular reference to local dye plants in Sierra Leone. Thesis, Department of Botany, University of Sierra Leone, Fourah Bay College, Freetown, Sierra Leone (unpublished).
The first part of this thesis describes 52 plant species that are used throughout the household. It describes plants that are used for making household equipment and utensils, fishing and hunting equipment, local crafts and ornaments. It also describes those used only on social occasions.
The second part describes plant species that are used as dyes. Each entry includes the dye colour, the plant part used, the methods used for dye extraction, as well as the traditional uses for specific colours. For example, the bark of Rhyzophora racemosa produces a red dye, the seeds of Garcinia kola produce an orange dye, the bark of Leucaena sp. is used to produce a pink dye. The leaves of Lonchocarpus cyanescens produce the indigo dye used in traditional Gara cloth production (still an important small industry).
177. Johnson, E. and Johnson, T.J. 1976. Economic plants in a rural Nigerian market. Economic Botany 30:375-381.
Presents the results of a year-long market survey examining the fresh plants sold in a rural Nigerian market. The authors assess species' availability, and the frequency and seasonalities in the sale of 58 wild and cultivated foods. Among the most commonly sold products were the nut of Irvingia gabonensis, the fruit of Dacryodes edulis; other popular species included Cola acuminata, Cola nitida, Pentaclethra macrophylla, Tetracarpidium conophorum and Thaumatococcus daniellii. The fact that farm and forest foods were sold with relative frequency gives an indication of their local value.
178. Kamara, J.N. 1986. Firewood energy in Sierra Leone: production, marketing and household use patterns. Studies No. 9, Verlag Weltarchiv, Hamburg, West Germany.
An excellent study on the use and trade of fuelwood in both urban and rural Sierra Leone. Includes detailed quantitative information on the production of fuelwood for household consumption and sale in two rural regions. Examines the returns to fuelwood production and trading at the retail and wholesale levels. Includes information on the cost and returns of urban fuelwood marketing in three urban centers.
Firewood is the primary source of energy in both the rural and urban areas of Sierra Leone. It provides an important source of income for many rural farmers (especially women) and urban traders (also predominantly women). Most traders are involved only part time (except in Freetown where the majority are full time fuelwood traders). The fuelwood market is located in villages near roads. More than half of the fuelwood that is collected by households is sold. Information on fuelwood's contribution to household income and farm processing is also included (13% of the household firewood energy is expended in this manner).
179. Kamara, M. 1978. L'artisanat traditionnel: son importance économique et socio-culturelle en Côte d'Ivoire. Département des Sciences Sociales Appliquées. Mémoire de Maîtrise, Université National de Côte d'Ivoire, Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire (unpublished).
A general discussion of the economic contributions of small-scale artisanal enterprises to the national economy. Argues that artisans constitute 23% of the manufacturing production of the country. Reports that in 1965 there were an estimated 59,000 artisans, of which 12,000 were involved in basketry and other raphia-based enterprises. In the forest regions raphia, rattan, oil palms, and lianas provide the raw materials for basketry activities. Presents interesting information on the development of artisan activities at the national level. Argues that the consumption of artisan products has implicit social value. Kamara distinguishes between domestic, educational, cultural, and luxury consumption. Domestic consumption includes cooking utensils, furniture, transportation and storage equipment. Educational products include articles used in games, dances, and instruction, e.g. the talking drums used to recount ancient histories. Cultural products include objects such as those
used for divination, funeral sculptures, coffins, and other objects associated with ritual ceremonies. Argues that the greatest contribution of artisans to the national economy is employment. Contains good bibliography.
180. Kamara-Ajaron, S. 1980. L'huile de palme et son utilisation au Sénégal. Notes Africaines No. 165, January.
Discusses the traditional medicinal uses of palm oil (Elaeis guineensis). Concoctions of boiled millet and oil are given to mothers at childbirth to encourage milk production. Palm oil is used to prevent blood infections at childbirth, as an antiseptic in soap; it is taken as a laxative and tonic and finally, it is used in cosmetics and skin care.
Cassia occidentalis is also examined in this article. Its leaves, when mixed with an extract of Xylopia aethiopica are used as an eye bath for treating cataracts.
181. Kamden, L. et al. 1987. Plantes médicinales de la région Moloundou et Zoetélé et leur utilisation en médecine traditionnelle. Centre d'Etudes des Plantes Médicinales, Ministry for Higher Education and Scientifique Research, Yaoundé, Cameroon.
Identifies and examines 60 plant species that are used to treat common ailments. Classifies different diseases by the frequency with which they are treated using plant medicines. Plant medicines most commonly treat stomach problems, malaria, fever, bronchial ailments, and toothaches.
182. Karimu, J. 1981. Strategies for peasant farmer development: an evaluation of a rural development project in northern Sierra Leone. PhD Dissertation, University of London, Great Britain (unpublished).
The rice production scheme that this particular project introduced had an unforeseen negative impact on non-project farmers: access to raphia palm groves (located in swampy areas) became difficult (because of the parcelling out of formerly common land). Wild raphia is especially valued as house building material. It also provides food, wine, and the raw materials for artisanal activities (basketry and furniture production).
183. Karimu, J. and Richards, P. 1980. The northern area integrated agricultural development project. Consultancy Report, Ministry of Agriculture, Freetown, Sierra Leone.
This detailed analysis of agricultural systems and off-farm economic activities in the project region notes that 55% of the region's farmers are involved in non-farm trading and craft production. Important activities include wood carving, carpentry, and palm wine tapping.
184. Kaye, V. 1987a. Le marche de l'artisanat d'art de Côte d'Ivoire. Sous Direction de la Promotion de l'Artisanat d'Art, Centre National de Promotion Touristique, Ministère du Tourisme, Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire (unpublished).
A general discussion of the markets of different artisan products (e.g. basketry, pottery, textile, sculpture). Addresses commercial operation but not domestic artisan production. Notes that there are three principal markets for most artisan products: the household (e.g. kitchen utensils, ceremonial cloths), hotels, and the external market (export and tourists). Presents estimates on the volume of artisan trade in Côte d'Ivoire: estimates that there are 2,400 wood sculptors whose gross production is FCFA 518,400,000 annually. Estimates that there are 1,000 basketry workers whose production is valued at FCFA 144,000 million annually.
185. Kaye, V. 1987b. Etude sur les potentialités de l'artisanat d'art en Côte d'Ivoire: plan triennal de développement de l'artisanat d'art, 1988-1991. Sous Direction de l'Artisanat d'Art, Direction de la Promotion de l'Artisanat d'Art, Ministère du Tourisme, Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire.
This in-depth study of artisan production and markets distinguishes between artistic artisanry (production of art objects), domestic artisanry (traditional production to meet immediate domestic needs), and utilitarian artisanry (commercialised production of utilitarian products such as furniture). It provides statistical estimates on the number of artisans (102,270), distinguishing between those for whom it is their principal occupation, those involved occasionally (seasonally), and those involved very occasionally (at least once a month). The statistics also differentiate between rural and urban-based workers. For example, estimates that there are 1,500 people whose main occupation is working cane, 3,000 who are involved occasionally, and 62,000 very occasionally. The majority of cane workers live in the rural areas. The cane enterprises produce an estimated FCFA 766 million annually.
Presents similar statistics for wood sculptors, ivory sculptors, potters, cloth dyers and printers, cloth weavers, metal workers, and leather workers. Estimates total artisan production to be FCFA 11,785 million. Examines the market for artisan products, noting that 90% of the people surveyed in the urban areas had purchased artisan products. Adds that 64% of artisans' clientele are rural people. Cane products are generally sold directly on order (60% of sales). Notes both that cane work and basketry is a vital enterprise link to agriculture (e.g. for the production of transport and storage equipment, and crop dryers) and that most rural workers in this enterprise produce for their own needs as well as those of fellow villagers. Discusses the recent changes in artisan production and markets and assesses the potential for development of the artisan industry for the tourist trade.
186. Kengne, F. 1987. Les marches du sud Cameroun leur rôle dans l'organisation commerciale régionale: étude géographique. Thesis, Doctorat de Lettre de l'Etat, Université de Bordeaux III, France (unpublished).
This extensive study of more than 1500 markets in southern Cameroon includes an analysis of the types of markets, types of products sold, the structure of different product markets (e.g. the presence or absence of middle women locally known as "bayam sellams"), and the physical market organisation. It includes information on the marketing of palm wine, and notes that palm wine is sold in more than half the markets studied. It describes some of the forest and farm tree products marketed including nuts, fruit, leaves (both for consumption and as packaging material), termites, bushmeat, and medicinal products. And it notes that there are certain areas of markets which specialise in fuelwood and charcoal. Material for house construction is also often marketed including: poles, lianas, raphia leaves and spines, as well as raffia roofing material. These products are generally seen in markets catering to urban consumers.
187. Kerharo, J. 1970. Pharmacognosie du Rauwolfia vomitoria grand médicament africain. Journal d'Agriculture Tropicale et Botanique Appliquée 17(10):353-367.
Rauwolfia is a medicine common to many West African medical treatments. It is valued for its purgative quality and is used in many fetish treatments. This article describes its chemical composition and pharmaceutical uses.
188. Kerharo, J. and Adam, J. 1974. La pharmacopée Sénégalaise traditionnelle. Plantes médicinales et toxiques. Vigot Frères, Paris, France.
This book provides a general overview of different traditional medical practices in Senegal. It integrates information about the traditional use of more than 550 plant species with data on their chemical and therapeutic effectiveness. For each species it provides detailed information on the botany, habitat, uses (and methods used), chemical composition and pharmaceutical properties. It describes treatments that are used by healers to treat ten common diseases (e.g. bilharzia, snake and anti-venom, yellow fever, malaria, intestinal disorders, pulmonary problems, rheumatism, syphilis, leprosy and mental disorders). The publication includes an extensive bibliography.
189. Kio, P.R.O. 1987. Problems of raw materials in pharmaceutical production in Nigeria. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Nigerian Society of Pharmacognosy, University of Ibadan, Nigeria (unpublished).
The pharmaceutical industry is largely dependent on inputs from imports (80%). This paper evaluates the potential profit that could be derived through export of Nigerian local plant resources. There are many different species of plants that could be developed as substitutes, additives (e.g. manioc), flavourings and sweeteners (e.g. Thaumatococcus daniellii), suspending agents (e.g. gum of Zanthoxylum sp.), or essential oils (e.g. Ocimum gratissimum). This article discusses the potential for development drugs that use some species that are commonly used in traditional medical treatments (eg. Azadirachta indica, Enantia chlorantha, Rauwolfia sp. Alstonia boonei).
190. Koagne, H. 1986. La dynamique des plantes et dérivés alimentaires dans la Chefferie Bafoussam. Mémoire de Maîtrise, Département of Géographie, University of Yaoundé, Cameroon (unpublished).
This detailed study compares the historic and current use of wild and cultivated food plants in the western region of Cameroon. It includes nutritional and medical information and the results of a food consumption survey. The food consumption survey includes information on forest and farm tree food preparation and consumption. It analyses the frequency with which these different foods are eaten.
The piece also discusses the marketing and economic returns of several forest and farm tree products including raphia palm wine, the fruit of Pachylobus edulis, Dacryodes edulis, Canarium schweinfurthii and palm oil. In some cases Pachylobus edulis fruit provide an important source of income. The author compares the revenue earned from different crops in four case study households. The highest income is earned in a household which sells raphia palm wine. Provides data on the consumption of raphia palm wine, noting that while it is no longer consumed daily, it is still used at all ritual and cultural ceremonies.
Gathered edible plants are less important in the diet today than they were in the past, however a few species are still consumed in about 80% of the meals (e.g. Vernonia amygdalina, Pteridium aquilinum, and Triumfetta rhomboidea). Palm oil is used almost daily. The "fruit of Pachylobus edulis is also common and is often used in sauces to accompany the main meals. Generally each household has five or six Pachylobus edulis trees.
Fruit is generally not considered "food", it is eaten at any time of the day, especially by children, but there are many tree fruits which are sought after. The fruit of Cola acuminata are consumed daily and most households have at least one or two trees. The piece also includes data on nutrition composition of wild and domesticated indigenous food species.
The piece notes that the natural vegetation of the region has all but disappeared, except in sacred groves. It discusses the frequency with which certain forest foods are still served at some ceremonies (e.g. weddings, funerals, initiations and births). Prominent among these ceremonially important plant foods are raphia palm wine, and sauces made with Vernonia amygdalina, Pachylobus edulis and Triumfetta rhomboidea.
The raphia palm is the most "all-purpose" tree: it provides fruits that are eaten raw or cooked; leaves that are used for making fish nets and ropes, petioles and spines that are used in house construction. The wood is used for household furniture, musical instruments, and for the walls of houses. Its leaf spines are used in most basketry, for making harvest baskets and crop dryers.
191. Korang, T. 1986. Impact of forest management on the rural population: a case study of the Subri Project. Thesis, Institute of Renewable Natural Resources, University of Science and Technology, Kumasi, Ghana (unpublished).
This study examines the impact of forest conversion (plantations for pulp and fuel) on local people. Korang assesses the impact in terms of the costs and benefits of the project as viewed by residents of the region. The creation of employment and improved road maintenance were the two most important positive changes, while the majority of local people felt that in the future the project was likely to cause a depletion of non-timber forest products, a shortage of wood products, food and accommodation.
Ten tree products are discussed in the article but the loss of bushmeat, canes, and chewing stick materials are deemed most important. These products, especially cane and chewing sticks were especially valued by local people because of their commercial value. Many households supplemented their incomes by gathering these products and selling them to wholesale traders.
192. Laburthe-Tolra, P. 1981. Les seigneurs de la foret: essai sur le passe historique, l'organisation sociale et les normes ethniques des anciens Betis du Caméroun. La Sorbonne, Paris, France.
This paper examines the changes in living, cultural and agricultural practices of the Beti in southern Cameroon. Men traditionally did all the wood work (carving and carpentry) and have responsibility for all tree clearing and planting activities. Hunting, which was the man's domain, has become much less common as all the big game has disappeared, while fishing is still normally undertaken by women who used traps or poisons. These poisons can be derived from Tetrapleura tetraptera, Pachyelasma tessmannii and Tephrosia toxica.
The diet is less diverse, includes far less animal protein, and manioc and macabo have become more common staple replacing the more nutritious yarns. Formerly women built yam storage houses, but this is no longer done as food supplies are now less stable. Insects are however still very popular. Prior to "modern" education children ate throughout the day, and initiation ceremonies provided periods of great food consumption. The article discusses some of these traditional religious ceremonies and protected tree species. For example, the large red barked tree Distemonanthus benthamianus plays a central role in many Beti rituals.Itli never burned or felled and its bark is carried as a talisman.
The paper also describes former house construction methods: houses were made of poles (usually Coula edulis as its wood is termite resistant), bark walls (generally the smoked bark of Triplochiton scleroxylon and Enantia chlorantha) and raphia palm thatch rooves. The creosote from cooking fires fixed the roof leaves so that they were watertight. The houses were appreciated because they could be moved, the bark walls lasted many years.
193. Lacrouts, M. and Tyc, J. 1961. Les ressources animales de la République de la Côte d'Ivoire. Ministère d'Agriculture, Côte d'Ivoire.
Though the data from this study are old, they do illustrate the central importance bushmeat had in the recent past. This report estimates that people consume 9.7 kg of wild meat (from gathering and hunting) a year; this quantity is more than all domestic meats, chicken and milk combined; it is equivalent to the amount of fish consumed annually. A specific study in Bongouanou found that people consumed greater quantities of bushmeat in their field camps (87 g/day/person of a total 97 g of meat consumed) than in the villages (32 g/person/day of a total 66 g of meat consumed daily). The study found that gathered or hunted meat was eaten daily in most households. In one region alone an estimated 2,000 tonnes of snails were eaten annually. There was a great deal bushmeat trade between the forest and savanna regions. But the report indicates that the supply of bushmeat is declining. As hunting is now illegal in Côte d'Ivoire, it is difficult to find current estimates on
bushmeat consumption.
194. Leleup, N. and Daems, B. 1969. Les chenilles alimentaires du Kwango: causes de leurs rarification et mesure préconisées pour y remédier (Centre Afrique). Journal d'Agriculture Tropicale et Botaniques Appliquées 16(I):1-22.
Although this study is not from the West African area, it serves as an example of the potential (and actual) importance of "small" bushmeat - the caterpillar. The article describes the ecology, distribution, use and seasonality of different species. It reveals that caterpillars are one of the main sources of protein and income to local communities. They are an excellent protein source (70% when dried). From 1954 to 1958, in Kwanga district, the trade of 925 tonnes of dried caterpillars was recorded. The authors estimate that a minimal 300 tonnes are traded yearly in the region. Thirty species are consumed.
195. Levingston, R. and Zamora, R. 1983. Medicine trees of the tropics. Unasylva 35(149):7-11.
For the majority of people in the rural tropics, the 200,000 to 700,000 plant species with medicinal value provide the primary source of treatment. In this article, medicinally valuable plants are described according to their function: abortificant, anti-helmintic, emetic, cardiotonic, etc. The species that are native to the humid tropics that are discussed in this piece include the kamala tree (Mallotus philippensis) common in Asian rain forests; Myroxylon balsamum from South America, Rauwolfia sp. common in Africa and Asia. In arid regions, Jatropha curcas has many medicinal uses as do many Acacia sp., A. nilotica (syn. A. arabica). The article successfully integrates ecological and medicinal information. However, it provides only a few examples and thus gives no indication of the extent to which these plants are used, nor an indication of the efficiency of their cures.
196. Longhurst, R. 1985. Cropping systems and household food security: evidence from three West African countries. Food and Nutrition 11(2):10-16.
Using case studies from Sierra Leone, Gambia and Nigeria this article describes the seasonal variations in food supply in different farming systems. Longhurst examines different factors including the differences in women's role, the effects of climate, disease, income, and work loads. In Sierra Leone, palm oil provides a significant portion of the overall energy intake (14%). In Nigeria, fermented Parkia sp. is a common food.
197. Lootvoet, B. 1984. Artisanat et commerce autour d'un complexe industriel: données économiques sur Agboville et Dimbokro, République de Côte d'Ivoire. Document de Travail, Centre ORSTOM, Petit-Bassam, Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire.
This survey of small-scale enterprises and commercial activities in Agboville and Dimbokro, Côte d'Ivoire provides detailed information on production (food processing, soap production, cloth and leather working, rattan and wood-working, metal and jewelry work) and commercial activities (including food and specialised goods sold in and out of central market areas). It explores the economic returns of these varied activities. And it notes that there are large economic differences between different woodworkers. The paper looks at the number of people that are involved in wood and rattan production activities, the number of retail traders of fruit, condiments, smoked fish, and snails, as well as the number of traders of charcoal, wood and basketry products. Most charcoal and wood is sold outside of market areas. Of these trading activities, the greatest number of people are involved in the sale of condiments, smoked fish, fuelwood and charcoal. In the production sector, the
greatest number of people are involved in woodworking (cabinet-making).
198. MacFoy, C. 1983. Medicinal plant survey of Sierra Leone. Department of Botany, University of Sierra Leone, Fourah Bay College, Freetown College, Sierra Leone.
Describes over 100 species used in traditional medical treatments. Each entry includes botanical and ecological descriptions as well as a listing of the species' local uses.
199. MacFoy, C. 1986. Medical ethnobotany of Gloucester village. Sierra Leone. University of Sierra Leone, Africana Research Bulletin (14-(1 & 2)).
This study, which is based on interviews with villagers, herbalists, and traditional healers discusses, in a general way, the continued use of traditional medicine. The study describes 70 plant species collected for treatment against snake bites, jaundice, scabies, malaria, measles, headaches, impotence, hypertension, diabetes, toothaches, earaches, dysentery, asthma, yellow fever, boils, hernias, worms, coughs, rheumatism, and diarrhea. Many herbalists are finding it more and more difficult to find their medicines. They are being forced to travel longer distances. The traditions surrounding plant medicine collection are all discussed (e.g. season of collection, time of day, location, plants found). The article also includes listings of some species that are valued for their magical properties (e.g. protection against witches). Many of the listed treatments involve combinations of several different species. For example, a decoction of the leaves of Morinda morindoides, M.
geminata, Ocimum gratissimum, Citrus aurantifolia and Pachylobus edulis are boiled and taken in tea against malaria.
200. MacFoy, C. and Cline, E. 1986. Some medicinal plants used against bacterial infections of man in Gloucester village (Sierra Leone). Journal of the Pharmaceutical Society of Sierra Leone Vol. 1.
A village level study on the uses of plants in treating bacterial infections. Twenty five species are identified as being commonly used to treat cholera, dental infections, dysentery, leprosy, measles, sores, tetanus, tuberculosis, and veneral diseases. Information on the methods of use is also included. The authors note that plant medicines are the most commonly used treatments despite village proximity to "modern" facilities. The majority of the people prefer herbal medicine because it is familiar (traditional and past experience) and because of the escalating cost of antibiotics in pharmacies and markets.
201. MacFoy, C. and Sama, A. 1983. Medicinal plants in Pujehun District, Sierra Leone. Journal of Ethnopharmacology 8:215-223.
This article describes 59 plant species used in traditional treatments. It notes that some species are cultivated, but the majority are collected from the wild. The practices associated with plant medicine collection (e.g. restrictions on the time at which specific plants can be collected) are reviewed. MacFoy and Sama observe that most villagers turn to traditional plant medicines first. Interesting, detailed information on the values of these medicinal plants is provided. The authors note that some species are common food plants.
202. Macleod, H. 1987. Conservation of Oku mountain forest, Cameroon. Study report No. 15, Oku Project, International Council for Bird Preservation (ICBP), Cambridge, Great Britain (unpublished).
This report is a background study of the Oku mountain forest area and its resident population. It includes a description of the peoples' agricultural practices, other economic activities, and their use of surrounding forest resources. The paper asserts that 35% of the area's villagers supplement their income with non-farm activities such as honey production, woodworking, basket weaving, and medicinal bark collection. For some families, these "other" activities represent their sole source of income. Because the region is a centre for Prunus africanum (syn. Pygaeum africanum), whose bark is used for treatments of prostate glands, the bark extraction industry provides an important source of off-farm income for local residents. Over 4,000 tonnes of bark are extracted annually by one pharmaceutical company alone.
The report describes the activities and gives production figures for a local honey cooperative. It outlines local wood-carving and weaving activities and includes information on the types of forest species that are exploited. Traditional products include carved stools, drums, masks, bowls, palm oil containers, carved portals, and decorative pillars. Wood carving is traditionally a male activity, while women dominate basket weaving enterprises.
The region is also renowned as a centre of traditional healing. People travel to the region from over 400 kilometres away for medical treatments. Macleod notes some of the medicinal plants that are found in this forest region.
203. Madon, G. and Matly, M. 1987. Sénégal: énergie domestique. Eléments de stratégie: Tome I Rapport. Prepared for the Département des Eaux et Forets, Dakar, Senegal.
Discusses domestic consumption of charcoal and fuelwood. Notes that charcoal is the preferred fuel in Dakar and other urban centres. Provides information on the market prices for fuelwood and charcoal. Also discusses revenues earned by charcoal makers and traders.
204. Madouga, M. and Ebale, M. 1988. Personal Communication. Officers in the Département de l'Habitat et Urbanisation, Yaoundé, Cameroon (January).
Madouga and Ebale discussed traditional housing: building techniques, the types and quantities of materials that are used. Poto-poto (mud and wattle houses) can last for as long as 50 years, and on average take 2 months to build. The forest species used for poles vary from region to region. Termite-resistant species are in especially high demand and can fetch high prices in urban and peri-urban markets. A one-room house might require approximately 350 poles and 1,000 cross-slats.
205. Mallart Guimera, L. 1969. L'arbre oven. In Calame-Griaule, G. (ed.) 1969. Le thème de l'arbre dans les contes africains. Société d'Etudes Linguistiques et Anthropologique de France (SELAF), Paris, France, 16:59-69.
An ethnographic study of the symbolic importance of the "oven" tree (Copaifera religiosa) for the Evuzok people in southern Cameroon. The study draws on oral histories and stories as well as information from traditional healers. Natural vegetation plays a significant symbolic role in the lives of the Evuzok, featuring in their rites, magic and healing practices. The oven tree is the' most important. It is considered the most powerful: the chief of all trees, controlling fecundity, wealth, power and fame. It is also a "sorcerer tree", its power is not always munificent. Thus, the tree is an ambiguous symbol of both good and evil. It is both revered and feared. The tree's bark is used in many traditional medical treatments, particularity for illnesses "caused" by sorcery such as venereal diseases and sterility.
206. Mankoto ma Mbaelele, M., Dudu, A. and Colyn, M. 1987. Data on small and medium scale game utilization in the rain forest of Zaire. Paper presented at the International Symposium on Wildlife Management in Sub-Saharan Africa, Harare, Zimbabwe, 6-13 October. Sponsored by FAO and the International Council for Game and Wildlife Conservation, pp. 109-141.
This paper examines the mammal species that are marketed in Kisangani and those that are hunted and consumed in northern Zaire. The main village products sold for the Kisangani market are game meat, fuelwood and agricultural food crops. Game meat is sold either fresh or dried (there are differences between different game species). The most commonly consumed game species in the rural areas differ from those consumed in urban Kisangani. Hunting is seasonal, it is at its peak in July and August (the slack period for agriculture) and at its lowest level during the planting season. Some species are sought in particular seasons (e.g. bats, molluscs, caterpillars). Fish and bushmeat comprise an estimated 95% of the meat that is consumed by both rural and urban dwellers. Bushmeat is generally cheaper than domestic meat and can be purchased in smaller portions, suiting the needs of the urban poor.
207. Martin, G.H. 1978. Bushmeat: a neglected national resource. Paper presented at a seminar of the Centre for Social, Cultural and Environmental Studies, University of Benin, Benin, Nigeria (unpublished).
Presents a general view of the bushmeat market in southern Nigeria, estimating market size and the quantities and monetary value of bushmeat sales. The paper discusses the results of a market and roadside survey conducted by students at the University of Benin, Department of Biology. Grasscutter and small antelopes (mostly duikers) were the most commonly sold species. Monkeys, porcupine and giant rat were also common. The average price of bushmeat per kg. was 4.50 naira compared with 1.75/kg for beef, and 2.00/kg for goat. Ninety-two percent of those surveyed (5,000 people) eat bushmeat; 53% of those living in rural areas consumed it regularly (more than once a month), in urban areas 40% were regular consumers. Sixty-two percent (in both rural and urban areas) stated that bushmeat availability limited their consumption. Bushmeat was purchased regularly by both rural and urban consumers. The study estimates that the annual value of the bushmeat market is 3,600 million
naira.
208. Martin, G.H. 1983. Bushmeat in Nigeria as a natural resource with environmental implications. Environmental Conservation 10(2):125-132.
This article reports the results of a recent bushmeat consumption study from southern Nigeria. It includes a roadside survey (of bushmeat sales), a market survey of meat prices, and the results of 5,000 interviews designed to examine peoples' consumption and appreciation of bushmeat. The most common species sold at roadsides were duikers (Cephalophus sp.), grasscutters (Thryonomys sp.), and porcupines (Atherurus africanus). Bushmeat commanded high prices in the market (equivalent to that of imported beef). Ninety-five percent of those surveyed ate bushmeat. It was eaten more frequently by those living in rural areas. The percentage of regular bushmeat consumers ranged from 46-62% of total meat consumption in all income groups, however, those people in the higher income groups spent more on bushmeat than those with smaller incomes. This suggests that poorer people purchased smaller quantities of bushmeat, but with similar frequency to those with higher incomes. Grasscutter
was the species eaten most regularly, followed by duikers. Presents estimates of the national value of bushmeat trade; figures range from 150,000,000 naira to 3,600 million naira. Proposes that the potential for domestication and game-cropping be explored.
209. Martin, G.H. 1985. Carcass composition and palatability of some wild animals commonly used as food in West Africa. World Animal Review 53:40-45.
This article discusses the meat quality, carcass weight and prices of the most commonly marketed bushmeat species in Bendel, Nigeria. The most commonly sold animals (mostly roadside) are duiker (Cephalophus maxwelli), cane rat (Thryonomys swinderianus), porcupine (Atherurus africanus), and the giant snail (Archachatina marginata). Animals are sold fresh the day of killing; if they are not sold, they are smoked for future sale. Cane rat is the most important bushmeat species; it is consumed in the greatest quantities and is preferred. Snails, cane rat and porcupine fetch the highest prices per kilo. The prices for cane rat have increased faster than those for other bushmeats. In Ghana and Nigeria bushmeat prices are higher than local domestic meat prices.
210. Mba, 1983. Meat production in Nigeria: prospects and problems. In Akinyele, L. and Atinmo T. (eds.). Nutrition and food policy in Nigeria. National Institute for Policy and Strategic Studies (INPSS), Ibadan, Nigeria.
This study indicates that there is an ever-increasing demand for bushmeat (a 94% increase in 1980 compared with 1975). The supply of bushmeat is, however declining.
211. Mbi, C.N. 1985. The sterols and oils of the bark and seed of a medicinal plant in Cameroon. Revue Sciences et Techniques (Série Science de la Santé). Yaoundé, Cameroon. Tome 11(1-2):93-99.
This article reports the results of pharmacological research on the stem bark of Bacholzia sp.. The powdered bark of Bacholzia is traditionally used for decongestion of sinuses, headaches, and eye problems. It is also used in treating chest pains, kidney disease, and smallpox. The study finds that it contained the sterols galcosinolates and proanthyocyanide which help explain its effectiveness.
212. Mbi, C.N. and Njikam, A.P. 1986. The use of Cameroon's forests as medicinal plant reserves. Earth Life News 5:14-19.
In this article, some common medicinal plant species that are found in the forest zone are discussed. The importance of preserving forest areas as reserves for genetic material for future medicines is emphasised. The article explains the chemical basis for the use of some medicinal plants (e.g. tannin of Pterocarpus sp. is a glycoside which is not readily absorbed into the system and thus is of great value in treating diarrhea and dysentery). It also outlines the properties of gums, fixed oils, toxalbumins (e.g. latex of Caricar sp.), glycosides, alkaloids, essential oils, resins, and other properties. Finally, the piece reviews some of the botanical and pharmacological research that has been conducted on commonly used plant species at the Centre for Medicinal Plant Research (MESRES) In Yaoundé.
213. Mbila, M. et al. 1984. Etude de la germination de la croissance et de l'absorption d'eau chez Cassia alata. Revue Sciences et Techniques (Série Science de la Santé) Yaoundé, Cameroun. Tome I(3-4):69-77.
This article describes the traditional medicinal uses of Cassia alata. In Senegal, a skin lotion is made from the leaves, flowers, and bark. Throughout West Africa, the leaves are used both as a purgative and to treat abcesses. Infusions of the leaves are used in treating jaundice; they are also commonly used to treat skin problems.
214. Mensah, A. 1982. Traditional food packaging: a survey of materials, methods and cultural practices. Thesis, Department of Nutrition and Food Science, University of Ghana, Logon (unpublished).
This is an interesting study of the materials that are used for food packaging. Many traditional foods (e.g. kenkey and dokon) are cooked and stored in the large leaves of Marantochloa cuspidata, M. purpurea, Megaphrynium macrostachyum, Sterculia tragacantha, Baphia nitida and plantain. These leaves are usually either gathered from forest areas or purchased and they are often smoke dried and saved for later use. They are especially valued for the flavour they give to the wrapped food, their preserving qualities, or their ability to withstand boiling. The shelf life of wrapped products varies from a couple of days to a week depending on the leaves that are used. Many traditional foods are wrapped in specific leaves. For example, kenkey is wrapped in the leaves of Sterculia sp., while agidi (corn dumplings) are wrapped in Marantochloa sp. leaves, or when it is unavailable in the leaves of Megaphrynium sp.
215. Michotte, J. 1969. Groupe de production et niveau de revenu dans la zone dense a l'ouest de Bouaké, Côte d'Ivoire. ORSTOM, Série Sciences Humaine Vol. 2(2). Centre Petit-Bassam, Côte d'Ivoire.
This study examines the relationship between the income farmers earn producing coffee and the income they earn from gathering forest products. The article indicates that the most common forest products farmers sell are oil palm products and fruits. The study concludes that farmers with greater coffee production and more disposable income earn more cash income from other gathering activities.
216. Ministère de la Santé Publique (Senegal). 1984. Enquête alimentaire nutritionnelle dans le Département de Bignona, Région de Casamance. Division de l'alimentation et de la nutrition appliquée, Dakar, Senegal.
This report discusses food resources and nutritional situation in this forest region of Casamance. It compares the frequency with which people exploit fish, wild animal, and wild fruit resources. In one village 20% of the population hunts, in another area, more dependent on fishing, only 8% of the population hunts. Fruit production (and collection) varies greatly from area to area (e.g. in Djiamande, 15% of the villagers are involved in this activity, compared with 77% of those from Karongue). Palm oil, leaves, fish, and ground nuts are the main complementary foods of the region. Provides information on food taboos.
217. Ministère des Affaires Sociales (Côte d'Ivoire). 1986. Femmes et environnement: des foyers améliorées pour l'économies de bois de feu en Côte d'Ivoire. Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire.
An interesting study of the fuelwood situation in Côte d'Ivoire. Compares the costs of using fuelwood, charcoal and gas in different settings. The study estimates that households spend between 8 and 17% of their annual income on fuel. Charcoal is now the preferred fuel in Abidjan because it can be purchased in small quantities, is smokeless, produces a good heat, and may be cheaper. Its popularity is spreading into the rural regions.
Notes that fuelwood is an important item of social exchange in rural areas. Its marketing is dominated by women when on a small scale, as the fuelwood trade expands men become increasingly involved (because of the time they can afford to spend on these activities and their access to transportation). The same is true for charcoal production. Small scale charcoal production provides an important source of income for young women. Discusses the dependence of many processing and other small scale enterprises on fuelwood and charcoal. Notes that these are primarily women's activities, and it is these women who bear the brunt of increasing fuel costs. Links the fuelwood situation to cooking practices and food consumption. Women perceive that the fuelwood situation is getting worse and that there has been a general degradation of the rural environment caused by increasing population pressure, changes in agricultural practices, and increasing pressure from cattle grazing.
Discusses the traditions which protect specific trees (because they are valued sources of food, medicine, wood for religious articles, or house spirits), or areas (e.g. sacred groves).
218. Ministère des Eaux et Forets, Côte d'Ivoire. 1987. Note d'intention: les projets de gestion de la faune en République de Côte d'Ivoire. Paper presented at the International Symposium and Conference: Wildlife Management in Sub-Saharan Africa, Harare, Zimbabwe, 6-13 October. Sponsored by FAD and the International Council for Game and Wildlife Conservation, pp. 466-471.
Reviews the role of wildlife in the national economy, assesses the subsistence and tourist/trophy values. Estimates the value of bushmeat consumption to be 50 billion francs a year (a conservative estimate based on an estimate of 5 kg/year/capita consumption). Reports on one recent study which finds that in rural areas average bushmeat consumption is 11.3 kg/year/capita, and 4.3 kg/year/capita among urban consumers. Production of bushmeat is still greater than total domestic meat production. These figures are particularly interesting as hunting is illegal in Côte d'Ivoire.
219. Ministère du Plan (Côte d'Ivoire). 1967. Région du sud-est: étude socio-économique. Les comptes économiques de 1967. Société d'études pour le développement économique et social, Paris, France (February).
An analysis of socioeconomic data on agricultural and small and large scale industries. Includes information on the costs and revenues of various small scale enterprises. Includes detailed statistics on the value (in FCFA) of marketed and home produced fresh and smoked bushmeat, snails, medicinal plants, palm wine, palm oil, and palm alcohol. Although these statistics can only be taken as crude indicators, they are interesting because more recent consumption estimates are not available as hunting is now officially illegal throughout the country.
Estimates the total value of bushmeat in the rural region of the south east at 630.4 million FCFA; the value of smoked game meat is estimated to be 385.2 million, while the value of fresh bushmeat is estimated to be 172 million FCFA. The consumption of small game far exceeds that of large game. Snails are also of considerable value: 73.1 million FCFA. The statistics indicate that the major portion of bushmeat is produced for home consumption rather than for the market.
Describes the methods of production (e.g. chairs, tables, beds) for several wood products. Also discusses the value added in these enterprises. Reports fuelwood consumption of various small scale enterprises. For example, notes that over the region fuelwood costs represent 4% of overall receipts (or approximately 6% of their costs) for small scale enterprises.
220. Moby-Etia, P. 1982. Les pays Bas-Mungo Bas-Wouri (Cameroon). Etude géographique de la vie rurale et des relations avec les Douala (Cameroon). Thesis 3rd Cycle, Université de Paris I, Paris, France (unpublished).
A thorough village level study comparing local uses of forest resources and regional timber company exploitation (as the area is close to Douala port, most of the good timber areas are heavily exploited). The local people exploit the secondary forest, especially for oil palms, Irvingia gabonensis and other food trees. The plateau forests are valued by residents for timber (for artisanal activities) and medicine resources. The mangrove forests are valued for the fuelwood used in fish smoking and the timber used in house construction. Because timber extractors generate no local benefits they put added pressure on the remaining resources.
Analyses the economics of palm wine (and alcohol) production and marketing. Estimates that wine production provides a living for more than 20,000 people in the region. More than three quarters of the men in the villages produce palm wine, especially in the dry season (an average collector taps 8-10,000 litres a season). More than 6000 tonnes of palm wine enter commerce from this region. Small producers average about 20-35,000 FCFA a month from this production (larger producers can realize a profit of more than 50,000 FCFA a month). Examines the trade of palm wine (quantitatively) with Douala (only includes what enters Douala by road but substantial quantities are brought by boat and over land). The oil presses used for oil processing (another important enterprise in the region) are made from the wood of Pterocarpus soyauxii. Notes that this species is now difficult to find as it has been heavily exploited by industrial forest enterprises.
Finally, includes a discussion of the resources employed to make equipment used in other sectors such as fishing. Canoes are important assets in the region both for fishing and transportation. Pterocarpus soyauxii is the most sought after species by the local canoe builders. There are both "light wood" (from swampy areas) and "heavy wood" (from dryer areas) varieties which are used for different sized crafts. Canoe paddles are made from Staudtia gabonensis.
221. Hope Simo, J. 1984. Ambivalence and development: the role of women in cash-earning activities in the Ndop plains (Cameroon). Thèse de Maîtrise, Yaoundé, Cameroun (unpublished).
A sociological study of women's processing and marketing enterprises in the Ndop region of Cameroon. Fish smoking is one of the most common activities available to women. These women purchase fresh fish and sell the processed product for 2-3 times the purchase price. Fuelwood supply for smoking often limits the extent of these operations.
222. Moris, J.R. 1985. Indigenous versus introduced solutions to food stress. Paper presented at the workshop on seasonal `causes of household food insecurity: policy, implementation and research needs. International Food Policy Research Institute, Washington, DC, USA.
An analysis of the ways people cope with seasonal and emergency food supply problems. Case material is drawn from several African countries. One section is devoted to seasonal and emergency food gathering (including hunting) strategies. Moris develops the notion of introduced and institutional seasonalities: school fees, for example must be paid on an administrative calendar which does not necessarily correspond to crop production cycles. The crop payments may not coincide with periods of cash needs - thus institutionally induced hardships may ensue.
223. Moss, R. and Morgan, W. 1981. Fuelwood and rural energy production and supply in the humid tropics. UN University, Tycooly International Publishing Ltd., Dublin, Ireland.
A general discussion of the use, production, and supply of fuelwood in regions of the humid tropics. Presents considerable data from on-going fuelwood studies in southern Nigeria. Discusses fuelwood production for both market sale and home consumption.
224. Motte, E. 1982. Les plantes chez les pygmées Aka et les Monzombo de Lobaye (Centre Afrique): étude éthnobotanique comparative chez les chasseurs-cuielleurs et les pêcheurs-cultivateurs dans un même milieu végétal. Société d'Etudes Linguistiques et Anthropologiques de France (SELAF), Paris, France.
This extensive anthropological and ethnobotanical study compares the use of forest resources by hunter gatherer pygmies and agricultural fishing people. It includes information on gathered and cultivated plants and their uses, hunting and fishing equipment and practices (e.g. species used for trap construction, canoe building and fish poisons), cooking, cooking utensils, house and furniture construction materials, and equipment used in transport and storage. The piece also describes the raw materials used for making musical instruments and traditional medicines while also illustrating the role forest resources play in myths, stories, and magical rituals. Includes a great deal of information and an excellent bibliography.
225. Ndon, B.A. and Essien. 1987. The establishment of local browse species in comparison with Leucaena sp. and Gliricidia sp. In Reynolds, L. and Atta-Krah, A.N. 1987. Browse and small ruminant production in southeastern Nigeria. Proceedings of a symposium. International Livestock Centre for Africa, Ibadan, Nigeria (unpublished).
This study examines the productivity of local browse species and exotics. These exotic species do not perform well on acid soils (common in Cross river state). The study finds that Alchornea cordifolia and Harungana madagascariensis each produced more biomass than Gliricidia sp.. The most commonly used browse species are identified.
226. Nerquaye-Tetteh, G.A. 1982. Assessment of women's participation in activities related to small-scaled fisheries. Food Research Institute, Ministry of Agriculture, Accra, Ghana.
This paper describes the different methods used for fish smoking, including the fuelwood species required. The preferred species are: Terminalia ivorensis, Nesogordonia papaverifera, Baphia nitida, Azadirachta indica, Combretum sp., and Ricinodendron macrocarpum; they burn slowly and produce the desired smoker heat, and taste. Some women purchase fuelwood. The study finds that fish smoking is the main source of income for women, often the primary source for the household as a whole. The piece describes the types of wood used to build smoking ovens; the desired species are difficult to find, and inferior wood is now being used.
227. Niangoran-Bouah, G. 1983. Le silence dans les traditions de culture Africaine. Revue Ivoirienne d'Anthropologie et de Sociologie No. 3:6-11.
An anthropological essay on traditional initiation ceremonies and their role in West African culture. Sacred forest groves provide the location for initiation rites and other culturally defining activities. During these ceremonies, young people learn about their cultural heritage: the history and laws of their particular society. These groves provide the symbolic link to ancestors and myths of particular culture.
228. Nicol, B.M. 1972. Food from forests. Report on FAO Conference on the Establishment of Cooperative Agricultural Research Project between countries with similar ecological conditions in Africa, Document 16, Rome, Italy.
Includes information on the consumption of palm products. Estimates that they provide approximately one third of the energy in the diet of people in the humid tropics. In addition, palm oil (from processed fruit of Elaeis guineensis) provides an essential source of vitamin A. Nicol adds that Irvingia gabonensis seeds are an important source of protein.
229. Nihan, G., Demol, E. and Abodotabi, A. 1982. Le secteur non-structure "moderne" de Yaoundé (Cameroon). ILO, Genève, Switzerland.
This detailed study of the "informal" sector in Yaoundé examines the activities and importance of small scale production and service enterprises, including woodworking enterprises. The study estimates that in manufacturing, the informal sector employs as many, if not more people than large scale industry in manufacturing. A large fraction (49%) of the labour force work as apprentices. Provides detailed estimates of the revenues that are earned, the raw materials that are used, the value-added, and the investment capacities.
It is estimated that small scale woodworking industries earn an estimated gross income of FCFA 1.6 billion and use an estimated FCFA 0.9 billion worth of raw material (wood). An estimated 1,500 people are involved in small woodworking enterprises in Yaoundé. More than 50% of these people originate from the rural areas (the majority coming from Bamilike).
230. Njoku, K.U. 1983. Economic assessment of indigenous food producing forest tree species in Imo state, Nigeria. MSc Thesis, Department of Forest Resource Management, University of Ibadan, Ibadan, Nigeria (unpublished).
A thorough examination of the role and importance of forest food products in Imo State households. Examines the density of forest food trees on farms and notes that their density is much lower in natural forest areas. Presents information from a market study which compares the prices and availabilities of marketed forest foods. In general, wild fruits and vegetables sell for comparable or greater prices than cultivated varieties. For example, Gnetum sp. leaves sell for 1.60 naira/500 g while cultivated Amaranthus sp. sells for 0.50 naira/500 g; Dennettia tripetala fruit sell for 1.80 naira/500 g while papaya sells for 0.40 naira/500 g. Vegetables are available daily in markets, especially in the dry season, when cultivated varieties are not available. Seeds are more seasonal than fresh fruits which are available in most periods. Describes 12 vegetable tree species.
Also includes descriptive information of the ways forest foods are consumed (e.g. Dennettia tripetala fruit are consumed fresh with cola nuts to add a peppery taste) and the myriad of "other" uses for these locally valued species. For example, the leaves of Dacryodes edulis are used in marriage ceremonies to signify acceptance of a suitor. The paper also describes common dishes that are based on wild forest products (e.g. soups, salads and vegetable sauces for yams) and how they are processed.
231. Njomgang, C. 1987. Evaluation des énérgies traditionnelles au Cameroun, Institut de Sciences Humaines, Centre de Recherches Economiques et Démographiques, Yaoundé, Cameroon.
This review of fuelwood studies conducted in Cameroon estimates that fuelwood consumption is the equivalent of 1.6-1.7 steres per person per year (1.6 kg/day). It notes that 60% of the households in Yaoundé use fuelwood and charcoal for cooking. In rural areas, fuelwood is the main source of cooking fuel.
232. Nkodo. 1988. Personal Communication. Doctor working for Save the Children (an international NGO) in Yaoundé, Cameroon (January).
Discussed both the extent to which traditional medicines are still used and current Cameroonian initiatives to build on traditional healing practices. Also discussed possible ways of incorporating health issues into community forestry activities (e.g. species bearing fruit with high vitamin contents for introduction in southern regions).
233. Nkongmeneck, B. 1985. Le genre cola au Cameroun. Revues Sciences et Techniques, Série de la Science Agronomique 1(3):57-70, Yaoundé, Cameroon.
A study of the cola genus in Cameroon, this article describes 40 species, including their regional distribution and traditional pharmacological uses. Three species. Cola acuminata, Cola anomala, and Cola pachycarpa are the most commonly used. Cola acuminata is used by the Beti to treat coughs, colds, and catarrhs. It is also used for treatment of herpes, colic and eye problems. Cola anomala is used for treating sprains. The bark of Cola pachycarpa is used for treating dysentery, stomachaches, and conjunctivitis. The descriptions include recipes for each treatment (most treatments are a combination of several different products).
Discusses the economic importance of cola in internal and external trade. Provides statistics on production, export, and pricing in the northwest. For example, in 1980 at least 20,000 tonnes were produced in the northwest, the biggest production areas. The price of cola varies greatly, depending on the season (a nut might cost between 10 and 30 FCFA during the peak season, but its price can reach as much as 75 FCFA in the off-season). Most of the exported cola nut is traded with Nigeria and Chad. Provides statistics on the export prices for cola nut.
Finally, the article also describes the social importance of cola in different regions of the country. For Muslims, this nut is one of the only stimulants allowed by their faith. In many southern regions of Cameroon, the cola nut is seen as a symbol of love and friendship, it features in many social ceremonies: funerals, weddings, and initiations. It is an important symbol of reconciliation and friendship.
234. Nsangou, A. No date. La contribution des "buyem sellems" au developpement. Institut Sciences Humaines, Ministry for Higher Education and Scientific Research, Yaoundé, Cameroon (unpublished).
A general discussion of trade and traders in the Douala market area. Discusses the trade between Cameroon's southern (e.g. palm oil) and northern regions (e.g. parkia locust bean, calabash, shea butter nut). Examines how colonial takeover has changed internal trade traditions. Also discusses the people who are involved in wholesale and retail trading. Notes that 57% of the market salespeople are women; of these, only one-third are married although more than three-quarters of them are responsible for supporting families. Notes that most sellers are involved in these activities in order to meet specific income needs. Their prices often reflect cash needs rather than the comparative value of the product. The study emphasises the central role women play in meeting cash income needs.
235. Ntiamoa-Baidu, Y. 1987. West African wildlife: a resource in jeopardy. Unasylva 156, 39(2):27-35.
This article focuses on how the over-exploitation of West African (and particularly Ghanaian) wildlife is threatening the existence of many species. Wild animal meat is commonly consumed and preferred in this region. Over-exploitation of wildlife populations is the result of changes in traditional hunting and management practices, increased human population, lack of suitable and adequate substitutes for bushmeat, and a reduction in wildlife habitat. All mammals, with the exception of rodents, are over-exploited. Data on the bushmeat trade is presented. Cultural (some information on sacred groves is included), medicinal, and income-earning uses of wildlife are also discussed.
236. Nweke, F., Walker, J., Okoro, E., Hahn, N.D. 1985. Compound farming in southeastern Nigeria. Draft Document, International Institute for Tropical Agriculture (IITA), Ibadan, Nigeria (unpublished).
A village level study of farming practices in Imo and Anambra states. Contains descriptive analyses of compound and far field cultivation systems including: land holding patterns, land tenure practices, methods of soil fertility "regeneration", analyses of crop plant species and their uses, livestock production, household nutrition and demographics. The study illustrates the central importance of tree species in these systems.
Common tree species fulfill a number of requirements providing food, medicine, fuelwood, fodder, soil fertility regeneration, boundary markers and live fences. Tree components are especially used to counter seasonal variations in staple food supply. Among the most common on-farm trees are Dacryodes edulis, Pterocarpus sp., Newbouldia laevis, Spondias mombin, Ficus sp., Irvingia sp.. Cola acuminata, Elaeis guineensis, Chrysophyllum albidum and Anacardium occidentalis. Provides an interesting analysis of the proportion of different foods from compound and far fields used for home consumption, sale or as a seed source. Finds that the highest proportion of tree crops are retained for home consumption. A larger proportion of the food comes from compounds. For example 78% of Irvingia gabonensis produce in compound farms is consumed by households, the remaining 22% is sold in local markets. Provides information on preferred and common species for fodder, fuelwood, medicines (a
few), and those used for boundary delineation.
237. Nwoboshi, L.C. 1986. Meeting the challenges of deforestation in Nigeria through effective reforestation. In Oguntala, A.B. (ed.), 1986 Annual Conference of the Forestry Association of Nigeria, Minna, Nigeria (December).
Notes that deforestation has increased interest in and awareness of the importance of non-timber forest products, especially food products. Summarises the information on edible forest species that is available in Nigeria. Argues that effective reforestation must include a programme of management for non-timber forest products.
238. Nwoboshi, L.C. 1987. Regeneration success of natural management, enrichment planting and plantations in West Africa. In Vincent, J. and Mergen, F. (eds.). Natural management of tropical" moist forests: silviculture and management prospects of sustained utilization, Yale University, New Haven, USA.
This paper argues that production of "minor forest products" is becoming increasingly difficult as deforestation continues. Nwoboshi explores ways of incorporating MFPs into forest management through "ecological engineering" - enrichment plantings or management of natural forest areas for MFPs.
239. Nyanteng, V.K. 1979. Supplementary occupations and incomes of cocoa farmers in the Suhun Agricultural District of Ghana.' Discussion Paper 8. Institute of Statistical, Social and Economic Research, University of Ghana, Logon, Ghana.
This study examines the off-farm income-earning activities of male and female farmers. The decline in the cocoa market has led to an increased reliance on off-farm activities. Thirty percent of the "small" farmers spend the vast majority of their time on off-farm activities. Data on average income earned in different activities is presented.
Women are primarily involved in trading and food processing. A few are artisans (e.g. weavers, cloth dyers and basket makers), and herbalists. Drink processing (especially palm wine tapping) and artisanry are the main off-farm activities for men. (This study does not consider those activities for which people migrate.) Other men's activities include hunting, charcoal production, trading and herb production.
240. Obi, N.S. 1985. Economic survey of traditional agroforestry systems in Anambra State of Nigeria. MSc Thesis, Department of Forest Resource Management, University of Ibadan, Ibadan, Nigeria (unpublished).
Examines the importance of trees within farming systems in this region. Obi found that preservation and planting of trees on farm lands was widespread both in compound farms and in near fields; 37% of the trees in these fields were planted, not wildlings.
241. Obi, J.K. and Tuley, J. 1973. The bush fallow and ley farming in the oil palm belt of southeastern Nigeria. Miscellaneous Report, Land Resources Division, Nigeria.
Describes the bush fallow system in southeastern Nigeria, including the crops and livestock involved. Includes an inventory of the trees found in the bush fallows as well as information on the uses of forest products garnered from these areas. The dominant species are Alchornea cordifolia, Acioa barteri and Anthonotha macrophylla; common species include Dialium guineense, Cnestis ferruginea and Harungana madagascarensis. Acioa barteri is sometimes planted, it coppices well and Is especially valued for fuelwood.
242. Ocansey, J.M. 1985. A survey of wood energy utilization within a rural community. Thesis, Institute of Renewable Natural Resources, University of Science and Technology, Kumasi, Ghana (unpublished).
A household fuelwood study in a rural community close to Accra, Ghana. Households in this community depend on fuelwood for all their domestic and processing needs. Fuelwood trade to Accra and other urban centres is an extremely important economic activity for these villagers, especially during the fishing season. On average 50.94 m^3 wood leaves the community every day. Fuelwood is collected from natural woodlands (extremely degraded), farm lands, fallow lands and public plantations and private woodlots, though the main fuelwood source is farm and fallow land. Wood resources are being extensively over-exploited, changing household usage and user-rights practices.
Wood is the main fuel for small enterprises such as baking, fish frying and smoking, alcohol distilling and other food processing activities which provide essential sources of income to many local residents. Presents data on fuelwood consumption by different small enterprises. Fuelwood production for trade is carried out largely by men, while the trade of fuelwood (middlemen, retailers, wholesalers) is dominated by women. On average 1.37 m^3 of fuelwood is consumed per person annually.
Fuelwood can now only be gathered on farmer's own land. A person who does not own land is often forced to purchase fuelwood. Individuals must obtain permits (issued by the Forestry Department) to collect from public plantations, however traders generally obtain these outside the community.
243. Ogle, B.M. and Grivetti, S. 1985. Legacy of the chameleon: edible wild plants in the kingdom of Swaziland: a cultural, ecological and nutritional study. Ecology of Food and Nutrition 16(3):193-208, 17(1):1-64.
This study provides an excellent example of how information from different "disciplines" must be synthesised in order to understand the role of wild plants in peoples' day to day lives. Ogle and Grivetti examine the cultural, ecological and nutritional aspects of wild plant use. They include a quantitative analysis of the frequency with which different species are consumed. Wild plant resources have long been neglected by development planners, but are extensively used by rural people to supplement their diet. More than forty percent of the agriculturalists interviewed claimed they consumed more wild plants than cultivated varieties. Indeed, Ogle and Grivetti found that over 220 wild plant species were commonly consumed. There was considerable variation between different ecological zones. The reasons given for the continued use of wild plants were superior taste, cultural value, greater health benefits and low cost. Nonetheless, many species were no longer available and
many felt the use of wild plants would decline.
244. Ogubu, J. 1973. Seasonal hunger in tropical Africa as a cultural phenomenon. The Onich Ibo of Nigeria and Chakaka Poka of Malawi. Africa 43:317-332,
Discusses seasonal food shortages and agricultural cycles in two African societies. Indigenous wild food resources are of great importance in the periods just prior to agricultural harvests.
245. Oguntala, A.B. (ed.). 1986. The challenge of deforestation in Nigeria: proceedings of the 1986 Annual Conference of the Forestry Association of Nigeria, Minna, Nigeria (December).
A series of papers which analyse the impact of deforestation on the Nigerian environment, people and economy. Fuelwood and other wood products are now in short supply in many areas of Nigeria. An estimated 2 million people are employed in forest industries, the majority of whom work part time in fuelwood and pole supply (only 50,000 people are employed in the production of processing of logs). There has been a great decline in forest area, including reserved forest area. The ecological impacts of this deforestation include flooding, water supply shortages, soil erosion and increased storm damage. (See entries for Okafor and Nwoboshi.)
246. Okafor, J.C. 1977. Development of forest tree crops for food supplies in Nigeria. Forest Ecology and Management 1(3):235-244.
Reviews findings and research on the distribution of indigenous forest and farm trees with edible products. The most favoured species are incorporated into farm and village areas. Among the more common species are: Treculia africana, Pentaclethra macrophylla, Dacryodes edulis, Chrysophyllum albidum and Irvingia gabonensis. A general discussion of the socioeconomic importance of edible trees provides some interesting information: one market survey revealed that foods from 44 forest tree species were being sold at competitive prices.
247. Okafor, J.C. 1979. Edible indigenous woody plants in the rural economy of the Nigerian forest zone. In Okali, D.U.U. (ed.). Proceedings of a MAB state of knowledge workshop on the Nigerian rainforest ecosystem, Nigeria, 24-26 January. Sponsored by Man and the Biosphere Programme and the Federal Ministry of Science and Technology, pp. 262-301.
This chapter explores the role of indigenous tree and liana species in the lives of rural people in southern Nigeria. It reviews the different dietary roles of these species: Treculia africana fruit are consumed as a staple, while the fruit of Pentaclethra macrophylla and Dacryodes edulis are used as food supplements, the processed fruits of Irvingia gabonensis, Mucuna sloanei and Parkia clappertoniana are used as condiments, and the leaves of Pterocarpus sp., Myrianthus arboreus, Vernonia amygdalina, Gnetum sp. And Ceiba pentandra are consumed as vegetables. Discusses different farming practices and tenure arrangements. Also discusses the households' non-food use of trees: as structural material, stakes, mulch, animal fodder, firewood, for medicines, dyes, fibres, and essential oils. Provides a few illustrative examples of the symbolic role specific trees play, e.g. the breaking of cola nut is a gesture of welcome and hospitality; bread fruit (Treculia africana) is
served in ceremonies to celebrate a girl's departure from her family to join her husband. It is also served at women's burial ceremonies. Chrysophyllum albidum is used by fetish "healers" and is frequently protected in sacred groves.
248. Okafor, J.C. 1981. Woody plants of nutritional importance in traditional farming systems of the Nigerian humid tropics. PhD Thesis, Department of Forest Resource Management, University of Ibadan, Ibadan, Nigeria (unpublished).
An extremely interesting and thorough report on the household use of indigenous farm and wild trees. Presents the results of an extensive market study of indigenous edible woody plant foods (weekly at five markets over a three year period) examining the seasonal availability of products and their comparative prices over a three year period. Describes the prevailing farming practices and the roles of and benefits from these trees in these different systems. Discusses farmers' species preferences (approximately 400 interviews). Examines the botanic, ecologic (including trade and market potential), economic, and nutrition aspects of five extremely common forest and farm trees: Irvingia gabonensis, Dacryodes edulis, Treculia africana, Pentaclethra macrophylla, Chrysophyllum albidum. Examines the density and distribution of edible woody plants (117 species identified) on farms.
Okafor found that in the midwestern and southeastern zones these five major species were present on more than 72% of the farms. In the mid-western zone, Dacryodes edulis was found on all surveyed farms and Irvingia gabonensis was found on 95% of the farms. Analyses the frequency with which trees are planted, transplanted and protected. Presents data on fruiting periods of the study species, and the seasonal variations in sale and home consumption of their products (over 50% of the produce from the five study species is sold). Presents information on how these tree foods are used and processed. Includes information on the nutritional composition of these different foods. Irvingia gabonensis is an especially good source of fat, while Pentaclethra macrophylla is high in protein. The study species are becoming increasingly popular on farms and fetch comparable or higher prices than traditional cultivated crops.
249. Okafor, J.C. 1983. Horticulturally promising indigenous wild plant species of the Nigerian forest zone. Paper presented at Sixth African Symposium on Horticultural Crops, Ibadan, Nigeria. (Published in Acta Horticulturae 123:165-176 (December)).
Reviews the results of research conducted on edible indigenous woody plants in southern Nigeria. Notes that an inventory of edible wild trees revealed a total of 112 exploited species. Market studies have revealed that 57 species of wild and semi-wild edible woody plants are available seasonally in markets in the southeastern region of Nigeria. Notes that most of the wild fruit and vegetable species are expensive, though available during strategic periods (e.g. during the hungry season for fruits and the dry season for vegetables). Okafor adds that high prices are probably due to scarcity and consumer preferences. Commonly marketed species include Chrysophyllum albidum, Dacryodes edulis, Irvingia gabonensis, Pentaclethra macrophylla, Treculia africana, Parkia clappertoniana, Dennettia tripetala, Garcinia cola, Pterocarpus sp. and. Afzelia bella.
250. Okafor, J.C. 1986. Towards diversification and improvement of alley-farming systems in the Nigerian humid tropics. Paper presented at the 1986 Annual Conference of the Forestry Association of Nigeria. In Oguntala, A.B. (ed.). The challenge of deforestation in Nigerian proceedings of the 1986 Annual Conference of the Forestry Association of Nigeria, Minna, Nigeria (December).
A critical analysis of alley cropping as proposed by IITA. Okafor notes that this system is not being fully exploited because it emphasises only arable crops in the alleys, and Leucaena sp. and Gliricida sp. in hedgerows. Drawing on recent findings on the ecology and propagation of indigenous food tree species, as well as information on the multitude of tree uses, he proposes ways of improving both farming practices and the current alley-cropping model. He suggests ways of diversifying the system using indigenous species mixes, pruning regimes and diversified alley management (eg. variations in width) He notes that the timing of alley cropping is limited in scope compared with traditional farming systems of the SE region. The paper includes information on the uses for different tree species.
251. Okafor, J.C. and Fernandas, E.C.M. 1987. Compound farms of southeastern Nigeria: a predominant agroforestry home garden system with crops and small livestock. Agroforestry Systems 5(2):153-168.
In southeastern Nigeria farms are often smaller than a hectare (55%); the vast majority (90%) are less than 4 hectares. There are three different types of farming systems: compound, near fields, and distant fields. This article identifies 171 species of food-bearing woody plants. Most livestock fodder is from trees and shrubs. The common species that are used for fodder are Ficus sp., Hymenodictyon pachyantha, Irvingia gabonensis, Nauclea latifolia, Newbouldia laevis and Pterocarpus santalinoides. On-farm trees that provide a regular food supply are generally found in compound farms (e.g. Dacryodes edulis and Vernonia amygdalina), while species that are less frequently used or difficult to harvest are more common in the distant fields. There is a greater diversity of tree species in the forest zone farms compared with those in the savannah region. The compound farm system features diversified planting and harvesting in order to circumvent difficulties with crop storage.
The market for, and income earned from the products of certain tree species (e.g. Irvingia gabonensis) is examined. A list of common species along with their uses is included.
252. Oke, O.H. 1979. Some aspects of traditional African foods. In Inglett (ed.). Tropical foods: chemistry and nutrition. Academic Press, New York, USA.
Provides information on the food preparation and consumption practices of different societies. Forest foods are important components of many sauces and condiments. Provides nutritional analyses of several common dishes, which include some forest food products.
253. Okigbo, B.N. 1975. Neglected plants of horticultural and nutritional importance in traditional farming systems of tropical Africa. 9th International Symposium Horticulture Society. Kumasi, Ghana 12-17 August. Acta horticulturae 53:131-150.
Distinguishes between plants found only in cultivation (e.g. Treculia africana), those that are protected on farmland, selectively planted or harvested from wild groves (e.g. Elaeis guineensis), those that are both protected on farmlands and found in the wild (e.g. Monodora myristica), and those that are found only in the wild (e.g. Gnetum africanum). Examines the wild species that are common dietary supplements especially during lean period. Discusses the tree species whose leaves (e.g. Pterocarpus soyauxii) or fruit (e.g. Canarium schweinfurthii) flourish during the hunger period.
254. Okigbo, B.N. 1980. Plants and food in Igbo culture. Presented as the Ahiajoku Lecture, 28 November. Owerri, Imo State, Nigeria (unpublished).
A general discussion on the nutritional and household uses of plants (especially "indigenous" species) in Igbo culture (in southeastern Nigeria). Provides extensive descriptive information on the traditional uses of wild plants including species used in building and constructing homes. Pentaclethra macrophylla, Dialium guineense, Newbouldia laevis, and Chlorophora excelsa are commonly used for poles. Oil and raphia palm petioles are used for the cross-slats and Marantochloa cuspidata leaves and Thaumatococcus daniellii are used for roofing. Wild plants are also used to make furniture, agricultural and household equipment (e.g. Pterocarpus soyauxii, Dialium guineense and Irvingia gabonensis for mortars and N. Laevis, P. Soyauxii and D. Guineense for pestle) and canoes (Afromosia elata and Gossweilerodendron balsamiferum). The paper also reviews those plant species that are used to produce medicines, beverages, condiments, wrappers and packages, musical instruments,
ceremonial objects, mystical and magical objects. The symbolic value of certain sacred, protected species is listed. Okigbo notes that many of the uses are disappearing.
255. Okigbo, B.N. 1983. Fruits and vegetable production and extension services in. Africa. Acta horticulturae 123:23-27.
Discusses the contribution of wild plants to the diet. Notes that more than 1,500 species of wild plants are (or have been) consumed by different African peoples. Distinguishes between those wild species consumed regularly (e.g. Gnetum sp.) and those used only in times of scarcity (e.g. Vitex doniana).
256. Okigbo, B.N. 1985. The African food crisis: potentials for broadening the food base with traditional food crops. Paper presented at an FAO meeting on broadening the food base with traditional food plants, Harare, Zimbabwe.
A general discussion of food security issues and the decline in the use of traditional food plants. Presents a synopsis on the evolution of African (principally Nigerian) farming systems (e.g. shortening fallow, expansion of cassava production, increased specialisation). Provides examples of commonly consumed wild and semi-wild fruits, roots and pulse plants. Appendices include: listings of commonly consumed species, tables on nutrient composition of forest fruits, leaves, seeds and mushrooms.
257. Okigbo, B.N. 1986. Broadening the food base in Africa: the potential of traditional food plants. Ecology of Food and Nutrition 12(19):4-17.
Describes some traditional food plants of different African farming systems, including some tree and forest foods. Notes that cash cropping has had a negative impact on nutrition in two ways; exotic crop species are more ecologically vulnerable thus the risk of loss is greater and cash earnings cannot always buy equivalent needed foods; diets have become less diverse.
258. Okigbo, B.N. no date. Cropping systems in the humid tropics of West Africa and their improvement. International Institute for Tropical Agriculture (IITA), Ibadan, Nigeria (unpublished).
Includes a discussion of the wild plants and forest trees found on farms, and compound farms where there is a rich diversity of species. Dominant species in fallows include: Alchornea cordifolia, Cnestis ferruginea, Harungana madagascariensis, Dialium guineensis, Monodora tenuifolia and Napoleona vogelii. Some species are planted in fallow, Acioa barteri and Antonatha macrophylla for example.
259. Okiy, G. 1960. Indigenous Nigerian food plants. Journal of the West African Science Association 6:117-121.
A summary of the research that has been conducted on the dietary role of wild plants in Nigeria. Provides information on the most important species consumed (including many farm and forest tree species).
260. Okoli, B.E. 1984. Wild and cultivated cucurbits in Nigeria. Economic Botany 38(3):350-357.
Many wild and cultivated species in the Cucurbitaceae sp. are common in the Nigerian diet. This article discusses some common food varieties, Nigerian cooking and processing practices. It presents nutrient composition data for a few species. Notes that the fruits, leaves and seeds of some wild species are used as medicines. For example, Momordica balsamina fruit are used externally as a balsam; a decoction is taken as an emitic, purgative, and stomatic. The roots may be used in aphrodisiac prescriptions, and the leaves are used to treat breast cancer.
261. Olatunbosum, D.; Olayide, S.O.; Idusogie, E.G.; Abiagom, J.D. 1972. Role of fish and animal products in Nigerian agricultural development and nutrition. Ecology of Food and Nutrition 1(3):235-243.
A dietary study highlighting the importance of fish and bushmeat in the diet of rural Nigerians. Fish supply an average 29 g protein per capita daily in Nigeria. Bushmeat supplies 9.7 g and beef 9.1 g (only wild herbivores were considered "bushmeat" in this survey, thus bushmeat probably supplies a far greater portion of animal protein).
262. Olawoye, O.O. and Ajayi, S.S. 1975. Highlights of bushmeat production and marketing in Nigeria. Bulletin 3. Federal Department of Forestry, Ibadan, Nigeria.
Results of bushmeat marketing surveys reveal that the volume of bushmeat traded is declining. The most commonly traded species are those that are highly productive, especially the rodents - grasscutter and giant rat. Large antelopes and monkeys are rarely traded as their populations have dwindled drastically.
263. Oliver, B. 1959. Nigeria's useful plants. Part II: medicinal plants. Nigerian Field 24(4):160-182.
Describes 50 plant species that are commonly used in traditional medicine. For example, the oil from Carapa procera seeds is used to dress wounds and treat smallpox; the bark is used as a quinine substitute and bitter tonic.
264. Oliver-Bever, B. 1986. Medicinal plants in tropical West Africa, Cambridge University Press, Great Britain, 375 pp.
Provides an extensive review of the important medicinal plants of the West African humid zone. Groups plant species by their medicinal actions including: plants which affect the cardiovascular, nervous, and hormonal systems, and those with antibiotic, insecticidal and molluscicidal properties. Throughout, the plant descriptions include information on local medicinal uses, chemical constituents, pharmacological and clinical actions. There is no discussion of the efficacy or prevalence of use of these plant medicines.
265. Oomen, H.A.P.C. and Grubben, G. 1977. Tropical leaf vegetables in human nutrition. Communication No. 69, Department of Agriculture, Research Institute, Voor de Trojaen, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
A study on the use, production and nutritional value of tropical leaf vegetables. The emphasis is on home-produced leaf vegetables. However, some wild plant and tree leaves are included, among them Adansonia digitata, Moringa oleifera, Athyrium esculentum, Morinda citrifolia, Gnetum gnemon, Carica papaya, Sesbania grandiflora. Many tropical and leaf vegetables are both cultivated and found in the wild, thus it can be difficult to determine the source of a leaf product.
266. Orimoyegun, S.O. and Kadeba, O. 1983. Potential of obeche (Triplochiton scleroxylon) as a leaf vegetable. Presented at the Sixth African Symposium on Horticultural Crops, Ibadan, Nigeria, 19-25 July 1981. (Printed in Acta horticulturae 123:99-103 (December)).
Presents the results of nutrient analysis of the young leaves of obeche. Obeche is a good source of protein and phorphorous. Its leaves are widely used as a vegetable in rural areas, but are not consumed by urbanites. Suggests that this is because of low availability rather than changes in taste.
267. Orraca-Tetteh, R. 1987. Personal communication. Director, Department of Nutrition and Food Sciences. University of Ghana, Legon, Ghana.
The department (students) has conducted many village level food consumption studies. Though forest food consumption data has been inadequately analysed there is a considerable amount of information on forest foods consumption. Giant rat, grasscutters, and snails (and other small game) are all frequently consumed. Bushmeat consumption appears to vary greatly from village to village, and household to household. It is however, generally more frequently consumed than domestic meat. Fish is the most common source of animal protein. In a few cases bushmeat was consumed as much as 4 or 5 times a week. Dawadawa (fermented parkia beans), palm oil and palm kernel, shea butter (Vitellaria sp., syn. Butyrospermum sp.), and leaf "vegetables" are regularly consumed in many households. When in season, mushrooms and fruit are also common foods.
268. Osei-Manu, P. 1980. The nutritive value and the influence of maturity on some leafy vegetables. Thesis, Department of Nutrition and Food Science, University of Ghana, Legon, Ghana (unpublished).
Discusses the importance of leaf vegetables in the Ghanaian diet. Includes information on the nutrient composition, the quality and quantity of leaves consumed (includes an analysis of leaves of some wild species). Notes that gathered wild leaves are especially valuable during the dry season, adding variety to the diet; they can be good sources of vitamins and minerals.
269. Osei-Owusu, A. 1981. Survey of wild food plants in a Ghanaian village. Project Paper, Institute of Renewable Natural Resources, University of Science and Technology, Kumasi, Ghana (unpublished).
A village survey conducted in the Ashante-Akim District of Ghana, the researcher's village. The study identifies 28 commonly consumed wild food plant species (including 18 tree species, 4 shrub, 4 liana, and 2 herb species). It lists the edible parts, the ways they are used, and the habitats in which they are found. The majority of plants have parts which are eaten "in the bush" as snacks (e.g. fruit of Lecaniodiscus cupanioides, Myrianthus arboreus, Napoleonaea leonensis and Dacryodes klaineana), or are added to soups and sauces for flavouring (the ground stem of Albizia zygia, the leaves of Bombax buonopozense, and the fruits of Ficus capensis and Tetrapleura tetraptera). Others have plant parts that are used in unique ways. The stems of the liana, Byttneria catalpifolia provide a source of drinking water.
270. Oyakhilome, A.S.O. 1985. Some neglected Nigerian ancient useful tree crops. Need for revival and incorporation into present farming systems. Bendel Agricultural and Rural Development Authority, Benin City, Nigeria.
A general discussion of the role of traditional food products in the rural Nigerian diet. Gives a list of species and detailed descriptions of their ecology, botany, and chemical composition. The paper provides a great deal of detailed information on the food tree species: Pentaclethra sp., Parkia clappertoniana, Artocarpus sp., Treculia africana, Ricinus communis Lecaniodiscus cupanioides, Spondias mombin, Irvingia gabonensis and Dacryodes edulis. The seeds of Irvingia gabonensis are used in one third of all soup preparations.
271. Oyenuga, V.A. 1968. Nigeria's food and feeding stuffs: their chemistry and nutritive value. Ibadan University Press, Ibadan, Nigeria.
Presents information on the chemical composition and nutritive value of important foods. Some forest (e.g. Elaeis guineensis) and farm (e.g. Treculia africana) tree products are included.
272. Padoch, C., Chota Inuma, J., DeJong, W., and Unruh, J. 1985. Amazonian agroforestry: a market-oriented system in Perú. Agroforestry Systems 3:47-58.
Describes a market-oriented agroforestry system where tree products provide important food and cash-earning resources. Trees are encouraged and incorporated into the farm and fallow systems. Important cultivated fruits include: Poraqueiba sericea, Bactris gasipaes, Chrysophyllum cainito, Pourouma cecropiaefolia, Inga edulis, Anacardium occidentale, and Bertholletia excelsa, whose products provide an average 63% of the household annual income. Also important are the forest trees for fruit, fibres for handicrafts and medicinal plants. The fallow fields are managed as a habitat for wild game which is either consumed or sold.
273. Pagezy, E. 1982. Seasonal hunger as experienced by the Oto and the Twa of a Ntomba village in the equatorial forest. Ecology of Food and Nutrition 12(3):139-153.
A study of seasonal variations in the nutritional status of Ntombe village women. The rainy season is the hunger period, principally because animal foods are less common (especially fish and caterpillars); there is a corresponding decrease in work. This anthropometric survey illustrates seasonal variation in weight and fat stores among the women.
274. Pélé, J. and Berre, S. 1967. Les aliments d'origine végétale au Cameroun. Le Cameroun Agricole, Pastoral et Forestier No. 108, 109, 110, 111. ORSTOM, Paris, France.
Discussion of the common fruit, leaves, mushrooms, and bark consumed as snacks, as supplements, or as staples in the Cameroonian diet. Includes information on the nutrient composition of some tree and forest foods including the fruit of Artocarpus communis, Pachylobus edulis, Baillonella toxisperma (syn. Mimusops djave), Ricinodendron africanum, Irvingia gabonensis, Coula edulis. Cola acuminata, Garcinia cola, and Terminalia catappa. Lists the species whose leaves are added to soups and sauces, and those whose parts are gathered and used as flavourings and condiments (e.g. the bark of the forest tree Scorodophloeus zenkeri, added to sauces to give a garlic-like flavour). Distinguishes between those that are cultivated, those that are gathered from the immediate surrounding area, and those that are gathered in the "bush". Notes that products from the bush are especially valued at times of scarcity (e.g. dry season). Provides nutrition composition information for all the
commonly used leaves. Generally, leaves are high in iron, calcium and phosphorus; some species are also good sources of protein and vitamin C. Mushrooms are regularly consumed in the rainy season, and are available in most markets; they are especially valued as meat substitutes. Distinguishes between those products which are marketed locally (e.g. Pachylobus edulis fruit) and those that are gathered only for home consumption (e.g. seeds of Terminalia catappa). The discussion is fairly general, thus it is difficult to assess the frequency with which foods are used and the value people place on them. Nonetheless, it does include a great deal of descriptive information on forest foods.
275. Pélissier, P. 1966. Les paysans du Sénégal. Les civilisations agraires du Cayor à la Casamance, Sénégal. Centre Nationale de Recherches Scientifiques, Paris, France.
A detailed study of the Cayor from Casamance. Discusses their living and agricultural practices as well as their use of the surrounding natural resources. Describes the changes in use rights of tree and forest resources: formerly rights to forest resources were "open" now, rights to forest areas neighboring farmland are clearly defined, especially for palm products. Palm wine and palm oil are the most important products garnered from forest areas. Palm oil is marketed and provides a source of non-farm income. The use of palm wine has decreased with the spread of Islam. Forest resources are used in house construction, for making agricultural equipment and household items, and for fuel. Hunting is also still an important activity in the off-peak agricultural season.
276. Pelissier, P. 1980. L'arbre dans les paysages agraires de l'Afrique Noire. Cahiers d'ORSTOM, Série Sciences Humaines 17(3r4):127-137. ORSTOM, Paris, France.
This general paper on the role of trees in African farming systems focuses primarily on arid and semi-arid regions. It discusses the importance of particular trees such as the oil palm, raphia palm, baobab, and various acacias.
277. Perrois, L. 1971. Problèmes d'analyse de l'art traditionnel du Gabon. Travaux Techniques 32, ORSTOM, Paris, France.
Discusses the role and meaning of wood sculptures and ceremonial objects, which often serve as a vehicle of communication with ancestors. The type of wood that is used can often vary based on the object being made, its purpose and the ethnic group that is involved in its construction. Discusses the qualities and symbolic value of some commonly used species.
278. Phillis, D. et al. 1982. Village food systems in West Africa. International African Institute, Washington D.C., USA.
A comprehensive diet and socioeconomic survey of five villages in Gambia. Fruit is widely consumed when in season, but fruiting seasons are short. Fresh leaf consumption is also seasonal. Baobab leaf flour is used in about 10% of the meals during the dry season. Wild food plants are frequently consumed when available. Snack foods contribute 3-10% of the total daily energy and protein consumption. They are consumed year round, but their prevalence varies by season and their frequency increases during the harvest season.
279. Pokam Wadja, K. 1979. Artisanats et commerce de détail a New Bell (Douala, Cameroon). Memoire DES. Department of Geography, University of Yaoundé, Cameroon (unpublished).
This study of more than 5,000 artisans from the New Bell quarter of Douala finds that most artisans there are men between the ages of 20 and 30. The research presents information on the numbers of different enterprises in the region; woodworking enterprises are among the most common (about 200 workshops, representing 17% of the total number of enterprises). Other forest resource dependent enterprises are sculpture in wood and ivory, rattan working, and medicinal plant production and healing. Those working in rattan enterprises note that as the industry expanded, it has become increasingly difficult to obtain raw materials.
280. Portère, R. 1974. Un curieux élément culturel Arabico-Islamique et Neoafricain: les baguettes végétales mâchés servant de frottes-dents. Journal d'Agriculture Tropicale et Botanique Appliquées 21.
Provides a catalogue of chewing sticks used throughout the world. Throughout West Africa the bark, roots and stems of 123 species are used for cleaning teeth and treating dental problems. This article describes the plants' uses and the species' distributions. A description of masticatory plants is also included.
281. Poulsen, G. 1981. Important forest products in Africa other than wood and wood extractives: a preliminary study. Consultancy report prepared for FAO Forestry Department. RAF/78/025, FAO, Rome, Italy.
An extremely interesting report which pulls together information on the myriad products gleaned from African forest areas. The information is arranged by product type, e.g. dyes, cork, resin, silk, wild animals, etc. The author stresses that there is little systematically gathered information. He notes that foods and beverages,, medicines and other pharmaceuticals are extremely important. Poulsen provides detailed suggestions for further research on specific forest products.
282. Poulsen, G. 1982. The non-wood products of African forests. Unasylva 34(137):15-21.
A descriptive account of the multitude of products derived from African forests (principally West African). Includes many illustrative examples. Poulsen provides examples of many forest gathered foods. He distinguishes between those fruits that are eaten fresh, those that are processed, and those that are used to extract oil. Examples of other forest products are also included, especially fodder, medicines and raw materials for small scale enterprises.
283. Prescott-Allen, R. and Prescott-Allen, C. 1982. What's wildlife worth? Economic contributions of wild plants and animals to developing countries. Earthscan, IIED, London, Great Britain.
A short book illustrating the economic, cultural, food and future (genetic resources) value of wildlife. Provides good syntheses and estimates of the role wild foods play in the diets of people in developing countries. For example, in Cameroon's moist forest zone, bushmeat supplies 70-80% of the annual animal protein consumed, compared with 2.8% for the country as a whole. They present information indicating that the price for bushmeat far exceeds domestic meat prices.
284. Profizi, J-P. 1983. Les palmiers raphia du sud Benin: utilisations actuelles et potentielles. Notes Africaines 178.
A review and evaluation of the uses of raphia palm in southern Benin. There are four species found in different regions of Benin: Raphia hookerii, R. vinifera, R. sudanica, and R. humilis. The leaves are still used domestically for roof-making, and In some areas sold in markets for this purpose. Leaf spines (canes) are used in house construction. Profizi reports some data on the quantities of "spines" used in house building. They are also used for making fishing equipment, poles, traps and boats.
The most commonly used raphia species in the southern region of Benin is R. hookerii. It is often the only tree left in degraded swamplands. In the Porto-Novo region there are many artisans who specialise in raphia product production (furniture and household equipment). In the south, raphia is most commonly used in wine production. Profizi provides information on the methods of extraction, nutritional value and markets for palm wine.
Profizi also includes a description of communal management techniques in Benin. In one community, the groves are exploited for their sap (to make palm wine) on a three year rotation (in addition, the region being tapped is allowed to "rest" for about six months during the rains, when it is too difficult to tap the palms). In another community, people have learned to raise the palms from seed. They protect seed trees from tapping, and distribute seeds among the community. Saplings are then planted into people's private parcels of palm grove.
285. Profizi, J-P. 1986. Biologie et modes de gestion des mare cages à Raphia hookeri au sud-est du Benin. Journal d'Agriculture et de Botanique Appliquée 33:49-58.
An excellent article describing the use and management of raphia palm swamps in southern Benin. The most important products are palm wine and alcohol. The introduction of new alcohol distilling technologies has had a profound effect on the management and exploitation of the palm swamps. In some villages, increased exploitation of raphia palms has led to changes in ownership and management of swamps. The swamps have sometimes been parcelled out into private inheritable plots where the operating villagers have further developed the arboricuture of Raphia hookeri. In other instances, the swamp parcels have been converted to food crops.
286. Puri, G. and Talalaj, D. 1964. A survey of some plants used in native medicine in West Africa of interest to India. Department Botany, University of Science and Technology, Kumasi, Ghana (unpublished).
Lists 170 plant species commonly used in traditional medical treatments in Ghana and Nigeria. Describes the illnesses that are treated, the plant parts that are used in treatments, and the chemical constituents of the relevant plant part.
287. Reynolds, L. and Atta-Krah, A.N. (eds.) 1987. Browse and small ruminant production in southeastern Nigeria. Proceedings of a symposium. International Livestock Centre for Africa (ILCA), Humid Zone Programme, Ibadan, Nigeria (unpublished).
A collection of papers on small livestock production and management in southeastern Nigeria. Includes several studies on the use of browse. Goats are the most important small stock. There are different types of management, although free ranging appears to be the most common. In some regions cut and carry systems are common. Most browse appears to come from bush fallows: this study provides lists of the forest trees that provide fodder. Forest and fallow species also provide the only livestock medicines available to most farmers.
288. Riss, M.D. 1984. La place de la femme dans les mutations internes de l'économie rurale a partir d'un exemple Sénégalais (Kaolock région au sud Sénégal) (unpublished).
Gathering forest (and tree) products is an extremely important dry season activity for most women in the Kaolock region of Senegal. All women collect forest products to sell (as opposed to commonly held notion that gathering is primarily a subsistence activity). Tree product availability varies regionally; important species include Detarium senegalense, D. microcarpa, Anacardium occidentale and Parkia sp..
289. Robinson, P.T. and Peal, A. 1981. Liberia's wildlife - time for decision. Zoonooz (San Diego, USA) 54(10) 7-21.
This paper reviews the historic roots of Liberian wildlife exploitation. Bushmeat is the most common meat (excluding fish) consumed in Liberia. It is even "imported" from neighbouring Sierra Leone and Guinea. There is no control of hunting, and the resources are rapidly being depleted. Live animals and trophies are also traded to the export market. Robinson and Peal discuss the need for conservation and expansion of current efforts to establish national parks.
290. deRosny, E. 1977. Les yeux de ma chèvre. Collection Terre Humaine, Plon, Paris, France.
A novel written by a Catholic priest from Cameroon about traditional healing practices. Describes his life and experiences living among traditional healers. Reviews the socio-cultural importance of different forest medicines and the importance of particular city and village trees in healing ceremonies. Assesses the efficacy of their cures, focusing on aspects of faith and psychological treatments. Notes that for many healers it is becoming increasingly difficult to find medicinal plants. Discusses the cultural beliefs associated with forests. And notes that frequently the plant's location and the time of collection are crucial to the treatment's effectiveness.
291. Sackey, F.V. 1977. A survey of traditional methods of food storage and preservation in some villages and Accra city districts. Student paper. Department of Nutrition and Food Science, University of Ghana, Legon, Ghana (unpublished).
This paper discusses traditional food preservation methods including storage bins and barns, processing smoking and drying and storage underground. Wood ash is commonly used as an insecticide in storage areas. It is also used as a ripening agent for some fruit. Describes maize storage structures which are built with poles and lianas.
292. Sale, J.B. 1978. Report on the importance and value of wild plants and animals in Africa. International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN), Gland, Switzerland.
Lists (and illustrates) the multitude of products derived from wild natural resources: including food and beverages, medicines, tannins, gums, dyes and stains, construction materials, firewood, soil conservation, sacred plants, lighting, boats, musical instruments, fibre products (basketry) etc.
293. Sale, J.B. 1981. The importance and values of wild plants and animals in Africa. Prepared for the International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN), Gland, Switzerland.
Summarises the available information on the economic and cultural importance of wildlife (both plants and animals) in Africa. Includes useful case specific data on the frequency with which certain products are used (e.g. wild relish plants). And reports on the economic importance of hunting, the bushmeat market, the nutritional composition of common wild foods, and the medicinal use of those resources. Using case study material from the anthropological literature, discusses the social and cultural significance of wildlife resources.
294. Sama, A. 1981. Herbal medicine and insecticidal plants in Pujehun district. Sierra Leone. Thesis, Department of Botany, University of Sierra Leone, Fourah Bay College, Freetown, Sierra Leone (unpublished).
This paper presents the results of a survey that was carried out in Pujehun district. Sierra Leone. Seventy-three plant species were collected and analysed for their chemical components. The potential for use of some local plants in insecticides is discussed (e.g. Mammea africana has an insecticidal effect on drosophila larvae). Reports the way these plants are used in traditional Mende medicine. Descriptions of the plant's, medical use and the medicine's methods of preparation are included. For example, the leaves of Spondias mombin are used to ease labour pains in pregnant women and control the stomach pains after childbirth.
295. Sanogo, D. 1983. Bois sacré: temple ou école? Revue Ivoirienne d'Anthropologie et de Sociologie 3:59-62.
A somewhat theoretical discussion of the role of sacred groves in traditional Senoufo (Côte d'Ivoire) society. Discusses the types of experiences - religious and educative - that take place in the sacred groves. Notes that each family has its own sacred grove and that young men must be initiated in their family's sacred grove. Concludes that these initiations focus on morality issues and provide important symbolic links to family and cultural history.
296. Sarpong, K. 1986. Orthodox and traditional medicine: marriage for the future. The Ghana Pharmaceutical Journal: 40-44.
A general discussion of the positive and negative aspects of traditional medical practices and their potential for integration into the modern health care systems. Includes some interesting details about use of traditional treatments. Discusses some plants used in -traditional obstetrics. Many species are given to pregnant women to help promote the healthy growth of the fetus (e.g. Fleurya destuans and Piper umbellatum are given weekly in preparations of palm soup; these plants have exceptionally high vitamin contents). The powdered bark of Cola gigantea is taken daily for the last week prior to birth to ensure an easy delivery. At the Centre for Research into Plant Medicine at Mampong-Akwapim in Ghana, they have found that a decoction of leaves of Canthium glabriflorum is an effective cure for hypertension. The leaves and steins of Desmodium adscendens and Thonningia sanguinea are effective for treating asthma attacks, and the leaves of Bridelia ferrunginea are effective
anti-diabetics (it lowers the blood sugar of patients within twelve weeks of treatment). Discusses other traditional treatments in light of scientific research which has been carried out on these treatment's biological and chemical properties.
297. Schnell, R. 1946. Sur quelques plantes a usages religieux de la région forestière d'Afrique Occidentale. Journal de la. Société Africaniste 16:29-37.
A descriptive account comparing the religious significance of various forest species to different peoples of the West African forest zone. Chlorophora excelsa (iroko) is a sacred tree throughout the region. It is often considered the "chief" of all trees. Iroko is often protected and sacrifices and gifts are given to it. Villages are often situated near a large iroko. In some cases they are planted in villages. They are especially associated with fertility and birth. For example the Ibo (Nigeria) believe that it furnishes the souls for the newborn. The tree's wood is used to make sacred masks, and other sacred objects. In some cultures felling the iroko is forbidden. Also discusses other species such as Ceiba pentandra (associated primarily with burials and ancestral ties), Baphia nitida, Harungana paniculata, Elaeophorbia drupifera, Dracaena arborea, Anchomanes dubius, Piper umbellatum, and Eriospora pilosa.
298. Schwartz, A. 1980. La palmeraie subspontanée d'Elaeis guineensis en pays Guéré-Nidrou (ouest de la Côte d'Ivoire). Une explication sociologique. Cahiers d'ORSTOM, Série Sciences Humaines 17(3-4):283-285.
This paper discusses the socio-cultural importance of oil palms. It includes information on household consumption. And notes that oil palms are the most commonly used food, comprising 28% of the diet.
299. SEMA METRA Conseil, 1987. Etude d'approvisionnement d'Abidjan en énergie domestique. Consultancy report prepared for Ministère des Eaux et Forets, Abidjan, Côte d'Ivoire.
A study of the domestic uses of energy in Abidjan. Includes market information on fuelwood and charcoal prices, consumption, and trade.
300. Shiembo, P. 1986. Development and utilization of minor forest products in Cameroon with particular reference to raphia and cane (rattan) palms. MPhil Thesis, Department of Forest Resource Management, Ibadan University, Ibadan, Nigeria (unpublished).
This article discusses 5 species of raphia and 3 species of rattan. It argues that raphia and rattan products contribute substantially to the economic, cultural and social welfare of rural communities. Shiembo notes that most rural people use raphia and rattan. However, the study focuses on those who are organised into craft centres. Shiembo estimates that there are 3,600 people working in rattan/raphia production. Most raphia workers are also involved in other economic activities. The author provides some information on the market and trade of fabricated products and raw materials (e.g. market price for gathered cane, farm price for thatch bundles, prices of finished products). In some areas raphia and rattan are severely over-exploited and in short supply. Shiembo describes raphia products including house frames, thatch, fencing, storage and drying racks and buildings (agricultural products), furniture, mats, bags, looms, ropes, market stalls, baskets for food storage
and transport, fish traps, canoes, and household equipment. The article examines the methods of production for these items. Some data on the marketing of forest fruits and palm wine is also included. In this region, commonly marketed fruit include Irvingia gabonensis, Ricinodendron heudelotii, Garcinia cola and Tetrapleura tetraptera.
301. Singleton, M. and Vincke, P. 1985. Chasse coutumière et législation cynégénétique: le cas des Séreers du Sénégal. Journal d'Agriculture Traditionnelle et Botanique Appliquée 32:215-234.
An analysis of bushmeat consumption and the traditional hunting practices of the Sereer from Senegal. The current state hunting laws have not affected people's practices. People hunt for pleasure, food, and to symbolically proclaim their manhood. A good hunt is believed to bring good luck, e.g. guarantee a good harvest, assure a woman's fertility. This article provides a list of species that are commonly hunted and consumed. Wildlife populations are rapidly dwindling, especially in areas where agricultural cooperatives have been established. The authors suggest that wildlife resources need to be managed by interested groups (e.g. hunting guilds) through "privatisation" of wildlife resources.
302. Smith, V.E. 1979. Household food consumption in rural Sierra Leone. Nutrition Planning, Information Service, Michigan State, Ann Arbor, USA.
A country-wide diet survey. Although the information is aggregated, there is some useful data on the role of tree and forest foods in the average diets of those surveyed. Palm oil, palm kernels (Elaeus guineensis), and bushmeat are all consumed by more than 50% of the population. Relevant data include:
of
the
households
consume
palm oil
palm kernels
dried salt water fish
fresh salt water fish
bushmeat
palm wine
Bushmeat and fish are the roost commonly consumed meats. Certain foods are produced primarily for home consumption among them: palm kernels, cocoa butter, honey, wild greens, palm wine. Great quantities of palm kernels are consumed (only rice is consumed in greater quantities).
303. Snedler, D. 1987. A case study on compound farms in three villages in southeastern Nigeria. Project Report. International Institute for Tropical Agriculture (IITA), Ibadan, Nigeria (unpublished).
This examination of compound farm species (in the study villages) identifies 104 perennials, including 74 tree species, 3 lianas, and 22 shrubs. On average farms were raising between 27 and 36 different plant species.
304. Sofowora, A. 1982. Medicinal plants and traditional medicine in Africa. John Wiley and Sons, N.Y. USA.
An extremely interesting book which integrates information from ethnobotanical and anthropological studies of traditional medicinal practices, with scientific and pharmacological information. Describes different traditional healing systems and practices; includes an analysis of the strengths and weaknesses of these practices. Discusses some common traditional plant treatments (includes many illustrations from West Africa) and reviews both the scientific evidence available to support the uses of traditional plant cures and the current African research on promising plant remedies.
305. SONED, 1982. Etude agro-socioéconomique de la vallée de Guidel. Rapport préliminaires des activités agricoles. Société Nationale d'Energie et Développement, Dakar, Senegal.
Describes the uses of forest resources in the Guidel region of Casamance. Includes information on the marketing of charcoal, fuelwood, and other wood products. Discusses, in a general way, marketing of wild fruits, palm wine and palm oil. Also examines the markets and exploitation of medicinal plants both for local and export markets (e.g. Voacanga africana, collected for the French market).
Includes an analysis of the small-scale forest-based enterprises of the region, charcoal producers, woodworkers, and other wood-based artisans (describing the numbers of people involved, the resources used, and the revenue earned). And estimates the average income earned from the sale of forest resources.
306. Soup Nguifo. 1982. La commercialisation de kola dans la Province de l'Ouest Cameroun. Thesis, Department of Geography, University of Yaoundé, Yaoundé, Cameroon (unpublished).
An in-depth study of the production, consumption, and marketing of cola nuts in western Cameroon. The two predominant market species are Cola nitida and Cola acuminata. Cola acuminata is the preferred species in western Cameroon and its trade is limited to this region. Cola nitida is generally not consumed in the west and what is collected is traded to the North. Cola nuts are still important symbols of friendship and peace in the region. They are consumed (broken) at all traditional ceremonies, marriages, funerals, and in the settlement of disputes. Includes production estimates for the region. Generally, producers sell at the farm site to merchants who then process the cola. Describes cola nut processing which in many cases is highly specialised. Discusses the economics of this trade, including details on the costs and profits earned by different intermediaries (producers, merchants, retail traders). In general, it is a buyer's market. There are several central regional
markets at which the cola trade is concentrated. These markets cater especially to the bulk traders who are involved in the northern trade of cola (where the big profits are made). In most area markets, cola is sold in bulk, in semi-bulk, and in small quantities (not more than one basket). Most sellers are involved in the small-scale trade. The study reveals that there is a greater demand for cola than there is supply, nonetheless old cola trees are not being replaced. The study also describes other forest resources that are used in the house (e.g. palms and lianas).
307. Spencer, D. and Byerlea, D. 1979. Annual costs, returns, and seasonal labour required for selected farm and non-farm enterprises in rural Sierra Leone. Working Paper No. 27, African Rural Economy Programme, Michigan State, USA.
Off-farm activities provide an important source of income during the off-peak agricultural season. This study presents information on the number of households involved in small scale enterprises and other off-farm artisan activities. It describes the seasonal fluctuations in small scale enterprise activities and finds that the important activities include: palm oil and palm kernel oil processing, palm wine production, hunting, carpentry, and other artisan activities. It finds that 22% of households hunt and 40% consider fishing an important off-farm activity.
The paper examines time spent and revenue gained from each activity. Palm oil processing is the most common enterprise (67% of the households). It provides the highest economic returns to labour.
308. Steckle, J. 1972. Effects of industrialization on food consumption patterns: a study of two Ewe villages (Ghana). Technical Publication Series No. 20. Institute of Statistical, Social and Economic Research, University of Ghana, Legon, Ghana.
This study compares the well-being (especially their nutritional status) of villagers in an agricultural and a newly industrial community. It includes information on village demographics, nutritional status, education, health care, food consumption (meal frequency, diet, distribution of food within the household, weaning practices), food purchasing power, energy use, access to markets, economic status (e.g. types of houses), and economic activities (e.g. farming). Palm oil, palm nuts, fish and bushmeat are the main forest foods recorded in the food consumption survey. Notes that the food situation is more stable in the agricultural community.
In the agricultural community everyone uses fuelwood as a source of energy; some (13%) supplement fuelwood with charcoal. In the industrial village a greater mix of fuels are employed. As few families have access to agricultural lands they are forced to purchase the bulk of their fuel.
309. Studstill, J. 1970. L'arbre ancéstral. In Calame-Griaule, G. (ed.) 1969. Le thème de l'arbre dans les contes africains. SELAF (Société d'Etudes Linguistiques et Anthropologique de France) 20:119-137, Paris, France.
A linguistic study of the ancestral symbol of the tree in African stories and myths. The tree symbolises ancestral wisdom, authority and custom, and, at the same time, the feared arbitrator. The tree symbolises the bond between the living and the dead and expresses evolutionary and geneological relationships. In some cases it provides the link to the dead, while in others it provides the "home" (seat) of an ancestor.
310. Sylla, L. 1983. Démocratie de l'arbre a palabre et bois sacre: essai sur le pouvoir parallèle des sociétés initiatiques africaines. Revue Ivoirienne d'Anthropologie et de Sociologie 3:12-42.
An essay exploring the symbolic importance of sacred groves and "arbre a palabre" (village trees) in cultural and political life. The sacred groves and "arbre palabre" provide the forum for traditional politics and legislation. The "arbre a palabre" (big village tree) is the venue for traditional government (government style where conflicts are discussed and negotiated), customary justice (the tree provides a symbolic link to ancestors) and social regulation. The second sacred symbol of political power is the sacred grove, the site of initiation ceremonies. Sacred groves contain the most sacred relics of society and symbolically link the group with their ancestors.
311. Szolnoki, T.W. 1985. Food and fruit trees of the Gambia. Stiftung Wälderhaltung in Afrika, Hamburg, Federal Republic of Germany.
This book describes 40 common food trees from the Gambia. It includes a botanic description, information on their cultivation and propagation and their use in foods. Where information is available, this book provides data on the nutritional quality of different tree foods, the plant parts eaten and methods by which they are consumed. The book also discusses the seasonal dimensions of consumption of different tree foods. It is a useful field-oriented publication.
312. Tall, E.K. 1984. Guérir à Cubatel: interprétation de la maladie et pratiques thérapeutiques chez les Haalpulaaren dans la vallée du fleuve al de Sénégal. PhD Thesis, Paris University, France (unpublished).
This paper describes the traditional Senegalese medical system and its practices. It analyses how the system is evolving. One chapter is devoted to the medicinal plants used for different treatments. There are 20 principal species which are used. The study also includes information on the magi co-mystical uses of these species.
313. Tanga, S. 1974. La région de Foumbot (Cameroon): étude géographique. Memoire DES, Department of Geography, University of Yaoundé, Cameroon (unpublished).
A geographic study of the Foumbot region north of Bafoussam. Includes a discussion on the comparative costs of rural housing. Provides data on the quantities of material needed for traditional houses. For example, a one-room traditional "poto-poto" (mud and wattle) would use 35 poles, 600 palm spines, and 500 palm leaves as thatch roofing.
314. Téhé, H. 1980. Utilisations des plantes chez les Guérés et les Oubis (Côte d'Ivoire). Centre ORSTOM, Adiopodoume, Côte d'Ivoire.
This descriptive account of the household use of forest resources includes information on culturally important species, plants used in medical treatments, those gathered and consumed regularly and those used only during emergency periods. Forest food plants are categorised by their food use (e.g. seeds for oil production (Tieghemella heckelii)).
315. Tehe, H. 1986. Utilisations des ressources forestiers chez les Guérés et les Oubis (Côte d'Ivoire). Banco (Côte d'Ivoire) 4:26-30.
A descriptive account of the day to day use of forest resources by two Ivoirien forest communities. Many foods are garnered from the forest including snacks foods such as Coula edulis, Tarrietia utilis, and Mammea africana, those added to sauces such as Irvingia gabonensis, Ricinodendron heudelotii, Tieghemella heckelii, Hibiscus asper and Calamus deërratus, and those used for salt such as Ficus exasperata and Bussea occidentalis.
Forest plants are also used to construct houses (e.g. the leaves of Megaphrynium distans provide roofing material, poles are often Coula edulis and Strombosia glaucescens), agricultural tools (e.g. the handles of machetes and hoes are often made with Diospyros sp. and Balanites wilsoniana), household equipment (e.g. the mortar and pestle are made from Coula edulis and Terminalia ivorensis) and musical instruments.
Forest resources figure prominently in many Guéré and Oubi traditions. For example, ritual sacrifices are always held under Chlorophora excelsa and Ceiba pentandra, Dracaena humilis and Kantou guerensis are used to ward off evil spirits during ceremonies.
316. Teleki, G. and Baldwin, L. 1981. Sierra Leone's wildlife legacy: options for survival. Zoonooz (San Diego, USA) 54(10):21-28.
Bushmeat was once a staple food in many Sierra Leoneans' diets. But wildlife has become scarce throughout all regions of Sierra Leone and as a result, bushmeat is less commonly consumed (at the time the authors note that bushmeat can be found in most rural villages and markets). There is still intensive hunting for bushmeat which is sold in the Liberian markets (for dollars). This article reviews the history of the resource's over-exploitation (colonial timber extraction, anti-pest campaigns (monkey bounty-hunting) causing the destruction of one food resource for the protection of another). It presents information on the remaining wildlife resources, and discusses the needs for conservation.
317. Terribile, J.N. 1975. Contribution a l'inventaire des plantes médicinales du Togo du Sud. Mémoire, Université de Benin, Togo (unpublished).
This paper describes 131 plant species that are used in traditional medical treatments in southern Togo. The background information comes from interviews with traditional healers and fetishists. The study includes descriptions of mystical and magical plant properties while it also reviews the social values these plants represent. For example, Funtumia africana is a respected tree; its wood is used for the ancestral throne, and to make ceremonial objects (royal sceptre).
318. Thomas, D.W. and Tobias, M.F. 1987. Medicinal and food plants from Cameroon's forests: development and conservation. Paper prepared for the UNDP/FAD Forestry Sector Review of Cameroon (unpublished).
The paper draws on both historical information and the authors' personal experiences presenting data on medicinal, insecticidal and molluscicidal plants in Cameroon. The authors provide a brief explanation of the plant properties as they relate to their traditional medicinal uses (e.g. molluscicidal phytochemicals kill the host snails of schistosomiasis) and list the species valued for those properties. The material is descriptive. The potential for development some of these medicinal plant products is assessed. The paper also describes some of the forest food trees of different regions of Cameroon.
319. Thomi, W.H. and Yankson, P.W. 1985. Small scale industries and decentralization in Ghana: a preliminary report on small scale industries in small and medium size towns in Ghana. University of Ghana, Department of Geography, Legon, Ghana.
In exploring the general characteristics of small industries, this article includes information on the types of enterprises that exist and the numbers of people they employ. The majority of the industries are new. Food processing is the most common activity: fish smoking, baking, brewing, and palm oil processing. Wood based industries (small saw mill enterprises and carpentry) appear to be the most lucrative. Information on handicraft (especially basketry) and soap production, cloth dying and drum making is also provided.
320. Trincaz, J. 1980. L'arbre garant de la pérennité culturelle d'une société d'émigrés menacée. Cahiers d'ORSTOM, Série Sciences Humaines 17(3-4):285-289.
This essay describes the symbolic and cultural importance of a tree in the lives of Senegalese immigrants from Guinea Bissau. These immigrants have brought their sacred tree to their new home. There, it acts as a socially unifying symbol, providing some cultural continuity. It is protected and revered. The tree houses the spirits of the forest who are revered for the protection they afford. At the same time, trees native to their new home are destroyed without hesitation as they have little meaning for the group.
321. Trincaz, P. 1980. L'importance de l'arbre dans l'imaginaire de Cheikh Mamadeu Sane. Du rêve religieux a la réalité du village thérapeutique dans la forêt Casamançaise. Cahiers d'ORSTOM, Série Sciences Humaines 17(3-4):309-311.
This article describes a healing village in Casamance, Senegal, which is located at the foot of a large forest tree (Ceiba pentandra). It discusses the therapeutic value of the forest environment for treating psychological problems, and the mythical, religious and social importance of the tree itself.
322. Tripp, R. No date. Farmers and traders: economic strategies and nutritional status in northern Ghana (unpublished).
A descriptive account of food consumption of people from a settlement area in northern Ghana. The staple, porridge, is accompanied by vegetable or wild meat sauces. Shea butter (Vitellaria paradoxa, syn. Butyrospermum parkii) is the only oil source. The study attempts to distinguish between the causes and "indicators" of malnutrition, however the data is not conclusive.
323. Turay, J. 1987. Personal communication. Forestry Officer in Sierra Leone's Northern District (currently working for the FAO Fuelwood Project).
An excellent discussion regarding local use of forest products including the resources used for commonly consumed foods and medicines, and the materials used for making household items such as baskets, mats, food storage containers, and food wraps. Turay also identifies the forest materials that are used in house building. Diospyros sp. is used for house poles. Psychotria rufipilis and Craterispermum laurinum are used for the cross wattle slats. Rooves are commonly made with leaf fronds of raphia palms. Finally, a forest liana is used for tying the wattle to the poles.
324. Ucha, N. 1988. Use of indigenous browse species in southeastern Nigeria. Research project in progress. International Livestock Centre for Africa (ILCA), Humid Zone Programme, Ibadan, Nigeria (unpublished).
An interesting study on common browse species and their uses in this region. Includes a list of species along with calculations on the frequency with which different species are used. The most frequently used species were Acioa barterii, Baphia nitida, Dialium guineense and Alchornea cordifolia. Tethering livestock and collecting fodder, especially during the rainy season, are increasingly common. Information on the medicinal and feed value of some species is also discussed. Some fodder species are valued for their medicinal qualities as much as their feed value.
325. Ume Okafor, E.A.U. 1987. Deforestation and rural development: a case study of Isuofia rural electrification project. In Proceedings of the 17th Annual Forestry Association, Ikeja, Nigeria, 6-10 December, pp. 21-24 (unpublished).
An interesting assessment of the costs of deforestation to local farmers. Examining what was felled on a transect (pole line) provides a useful illustration of the trees found on and near farms. 17.5 km (6 m wide) were cleared for pole erection. A total of 507 trees were felled; 28% were Ricinodendron heudelotii (used as yam stakes, for fodder, food, fences, and boundary markers); 24% were Elaeis guineensis (for palm oil, palm wine and many household items), other common species were Acioa barterii, Dacryodes edulis, Pentaclethra macrophylla, Treculia africana, Mangifera sp., Cola sp., Citrus sp. and Bosqueia angolensis. In all 23 different species were felled.
The author, based on 150 farmer interviews in one village, estimates the income farmers had earned from these resources. He calculates that annual revenue from the cleared trees had been 10,290 naira. This estimate is conservative as it does not include the myriad of products that were used for home consumption.
326. Umeh, L. 1985. Management of agroforestry systems in the lowland humid tropics: a study of some village communities in southern Nigeria. PhD Thesis, Department of Forest Resource Management, University of Ibadan, Ibadan, Nigeria (unpublished).
This interesting study of agroforestry practices in southern Nigeria includes a great deal of information on indigenous farming practices. It also includes an economic analysis of an on-farm agroforestry trial of four different tree species mixed with local agricultural crops. In all cases the introduction of trees (e.g. Irvingia gabonensis, Leucaena sp., Gmelina sp.) increased farmers' income. The highest yielding combination was Irvingia gabonensis and cocoyam. When asked, farmers said they left trees on farm land to increase cash-income, improve soil conservation, and provide shade, firewood, fruits, building poles, wood for farm implements, timber, and drink (palm wine). Many farmers in the region already plant trees, 83.5% of those interviewed were interested in planting trees; 74.2% earned some income from planted trees.
327. Uwalaka, R.E. 1985. Seed characteristics, germination and early growth of some edible forest species. Thesis, Department of Forest Resource Management, University of Ibadan, Ibadan, Nigeria (unpublished).
Discusses the food uses of some forest tree fruits, leaves and seeds. Notes that many traditional forest foods also have medicinal values, for example, the fruit of Xylopia aethiopica are cooked in soups for expectant mothers. An extract of the bark and fruit is used to treat dysentery and bronchitis. The root extract is used for treating boils. It and also acts as a pain reliever. Also discusses the uses of Pentaclethra macrophylla, Chrysophyllum albidum, Dialium guineense. Piper guineense, and Afromomum melegueta.
328. Vergiat, A.M. 1969. Plantes magiques et médicinales des féticheurs de l'Ougangui (Centre Afrique). Journal d'Agriculture Tropicale et Botaniques Appliquées 16(2-10, 17(1-9):3 parts).
This series presents detailed information on the medicinal and mystical use of plants. It is divided into three sections: an account of fetish medicinal practices, descriptions of traditional treatments arranged according to illness, and a descriptive list of medicinal plants. Traditionally a tree is planted in the brush for a newborn child. A fast-growing, profuse fruiter is planted for female children. The child's development is linked to the growth of the tree. If the tree's growth declines, people fear for the child's health and a healer is called. When the child is sick it is brought to the tree for treatment. When the tree begins to fruit, the time has come for the child to marry. Occasionally gifts are left for the tree throughout a person's life. When someone dies it is believed that their spirit goes to reside in their personal ("birthright") tree.
329. Vérnière, M. 1969. Anyama, étude de la population et du commerce kolatier. Cahiers d'ORSTOM, Série Sciences Humaines 6(I):83-112.
A case study of the importance of the cola nut trade in Anyama (Senegal). The gathering and sale of cola provides the main source of income for the town's 6,000 residents. The principal market is Dakar. A second forest product, Thaumatococcus daniellii leaf, plays an important role in this enterprise as it is the only product used for packaging cola nuts.
330. Verschuren, J. 1983. Conservation of tropical rainforest in Liberia: recommendations for wildlife conservation and national parks. Prepared for the International Union for the Conservation of Nature (IUCN) and the Government of Liberia.
The background information for this project includes a summary of the use and status of Liberia's wildlife. In Liberia hunting (with rifles) is widespread. There are no hunting regulations and few "indigenous" regulatory practices still exist. Antelopes (e.g. duikers) and monkeys are most heavily hunted, however the antelope population appears to be well adapted to heavy exploitation and forest clearing.
331. Vial, Fayolle and Levante. 1966. Aspect économique du sector de l'artisanat. République de Côte d'Ivoire. Société d'étude pour le developpement économique et sociale, Paris, France.
This general study of artisan activities in Côte d'Ivoire distinguishes between service (e.g. cleaners and repair shops), production (e.g. bakers and cabinet makers), and traditional enterprises (sculptors, basket weaving, and cloth dying). It provides detailed data on the number of enterprises, the people employed, the costs and returns of production, and the value-added in these varied activities. And it notes that these enterprises are labour intensive, employing many apprentices. Many of these enterprises use forest resources as raw materials (e.g. wood used in sculpture) and in processing (e.g. fuelwood and charcoal used in baking, smithing, and preparing food). For each activity, this study estimates the cost of the fuelwood and/or charcoal that is used. Statistics on the costs and revenues earned in the production of different wood and cabinet craft items are also provided.
332. Vincke, P.P., Singleton, M. and Diouf, P.S.D. 1987. Chasse alimentaire chez les Séreers du Siné (Senegal). Paper presented at the International Symposium and Conference: Wildlife Management in Sub-Saharan Africa, Harare, Zimbabwe, 6-13 October. Sponsored by FAO and the International Council for Game and Wildlife Conservation, pp. 653-656.
This paper presents the results of a study of the subsistence bushmeat hunting in Sine, Senegal(a region of poor wildlife resources). It finds that birds are the most commonly consumed animals; most hunting is done by children, who consume the greatest quantities of bushmeat; average bushmeat consumption in the village is 12.9 g/day/person (.consumption of domestic animals - total - is an average 24 g/day/person). There is one bushmeat species that is protected (and often captured) because it is a totem animal of the Sereer.
333. Visser, L. 1975 Plantes médicinales de la Côte d'Ivoire. Mededelingen Landbouwhogeschool (No. 75-15), Wageningen, The Netherlands.
An ethnobotanical study of the medicinal uses of plants by the Ando people of Côte d'Ivoire. Notes that the mystical and healing qualities of Ando medicinal plants cannot be separated. Describes Ando medicine practices and beliefs. Distinguishes between plants used commonly by the population and those known only to traditional specialist healers. Women are generally most knowledgeable about forest plant medicines as they regularly collect fuelwood and food from forests. Plant medicines are generally collected when they are needed. The most regularly used species are often planted near home compounds for convenience (e.g. Jatropha curcas whose seeds are used for soap-making and whose leaves and latex, when grilled, are applied to cuts and abcesses).
Describes the treatments and methods in which 84 different plant species are employed. Finds that some treatments are given preventively. The most common "daily" treatments are prepared as enemas. For example, a decoction of the leaves of Cnestis ferrunginea is used for treating diarrohoea and dysentery, the leaves of Ageratum conyzoides and Capsicum sp. are used against intestinal worms, while the crushed leaves of Ficus asperifolia and pepper (Capsicum annuum) are used for abortions. Notes that as forest resources are becoming degraded, knowledge about plant medicines has declined.
Includes a great deal of detailed information on forest plant species of particular cultural significance. For example, the Bombax sp. tree is planted when villages are established - until that moment a settlement is considered a camp. Blighia sapida is planted (or left) as a village tree. It is a heavy fruiter and a symbol of fecundity. Other village tree species, "l'arbre a palabre", are valued for shade (e.g. Cordia millenii, Bombax buonopozense).
334. Vivien, J. 1988 (in press). Fruitiers sauvages. Institut de Recherche de Fruits et Agrumes, Montpellier, France.
A series of articles to be published in this review on the wild fruit species of Cameroon. Covers 200 edible wild fruit species of the forest zone, describing the fruit, its economic importance, how it is prepared, and the parts that are consumed. Includes a table listing the wild fruits which are marketed in urban areas.
335. Vivien, J. and Faure, J. 1985. Arbres des forets denses d'Afrique Centrale. Agence de Coopération Culturelle et Technique, Paris, France.
A botanical study of the trees of the west and central African high forests. Describes 333 species. Focuses on species distribution in Cameroon. Includes some information on the local uses of these species. For example, the roots and bark of Picralima nitida are used as medicine. The seeds provide a local anaesthetic. The fruits of Dacryodes macrophylla are eaten.
336. deVos, A. 1977. Game as food: a report on its significance in Africa and Latin America. Unasylva 29(11):2-12.
This article examines rural African use of wildlife as food. It provides a good review of the research that has been conducted. Small animals such as rodents are the most commonly consumed species. Hunting them is unrestricted, because they have high reproduction rates and are often more numerous than larger species. In West Africa the giant rat and the grasscutter are the most important types of bushmeat. deVos provides comparative tables that indicates the nutritional contribution wild meat makes to peoples' diets. He notes that the consumption of bushmeat is closely linked to supply thus, there are great regional variations in consumption. deVos' studies indicates that the condition of the forest resource directly affects wild meat consumption.
337. Wahua, T. and Oji. 1987. Survey of browse plants in upland areas of River State, Nigeria. In Reynolds, L. and Atta-Krah, A.N (eds.). Browse and small ruminant production in southeastern Nigeria: proceedings of a symposium. International Livestock Center for Africa (ILCA), Humid Zone Programme, Ibadan, Nigeria (unpublished).
This study examines small livestock management practices and includes a survey of 35 browse species. Some of the species it mentions are found only in the regions that are discussed. There are descriptions of species that are used for livestock ailments or have other special uses (e.g. Manniophytom fulvum is used to defatten goats for pregnancy).
338. Walker, A. and Sillans, R. 1961. Les plantes utiles du Gabon. Encyclopédie Biologique No. 56. Ed. Lechevalier.
339. Weber, J. 1974. Structure agraire et évolution des milieux ruraux: le cas de la région cacaoyère de centre-sud Cameroun. ORSTOM, Paris, France.
Compares the historic agricultural practices and lifestyle of cocoa producers with that of contemporary producers in the southern central region of Cameroon. The study examines farming practices of three households in different regions of southern Cameroon. It finds that cocoa production varies greatly between farmers, based primarily upon their need for cash. In the more remote regions, where wild game and land are still plentiful, farmers need cash primarily to pay taxes, thus only a fraction of their cocoa is actually harvested. In this case cocoa serves as a reserve or insurance system. In areas where game and land are scarce, farmers rely on the market for food and thus have a greater need for cash.
Formerly men were responsible for forest clearing, hunting and collection of wild fruit and other foods. Women were responsible for agricultural production. In all areas hunting and fishing are still considered important activities.
340. Weigel, J. 1982. Aspects économiques de la transformation artisanale du poisson en Côte d'Ivoire. Document ORSTOM, Paris, France.
Discusses operation and economics of small-scale fish smoking enterprises. Notes that fuel (wood or charcoal) for smoking can account for as much as 20% of production costs.
341. Wiredu, M.A. 1982. The educational, recreational and cultural values of the Kumasi Zoo. BSc Thesis, Institute of Renewable Natural Resources, University of Science and Technology, Kumasi, Ghana (unpublished).
Reviews the subsistence importance of wildlife as a source of food. Describes cultural values of different totem animals and describes the symbolic roles animals have played in traditional beliefs and festivals. Includes a compilation of proverbs associated with wildlife species.
342. Wood, A. 1987. Personal communication. National Council for Women and Development, Accra, Ghana.
Discussed fuelwood requirements for different enterprises that are dominated by women, especially food processing and fish smoking. Also reviewed some of the traditional food that are still ceremonially prepared.
343. Wundo, T.T. 1977. Mbengwi: urbanisation in a rural environment. Maîtrise DES, Department of Geography, University of Yaoundé, Cameroon (unpublished).
This paper compares construction costs for traditional, semi-permanent and permanent houses. Traditional houses are built with locally available (usually gathered) materials including poles, lianas, bamboo, raphia spines, and, in some cases, raphia roofing. The study estimates that a semi-permanent house costs more than three times as much as a traditional house, while a permanent structure would cost more than fifteen times more than a traditional dwelling.
344. van der Zon, A.P. and Grubben, G. 1976. Les légumes-feuilles spontanés et cultives du Sud-Dahomey. Communication 65, Département des Recherches Agronomiques, Koninklijk Institut voor de Tropen, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
This study of wild and cultivated leaf vegetables in southern Dahomey (Benin), estimates that 10% of the leaf vegetables that are sold are collected from the wild. In some seasons and regions, the most commonly marketed leaves have been gathered, not cultivated. Common species include: Justica anselliana, Polygonum pulchrum and Talinum triangulare.
D/T9450E/2/9.93/1500
