<title>Guidelines for integrating nutrition concerns into forestry projects</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
Since 1984 the Community Forestry Unit of FAO has been working on materials to illustrate the extremely important links between forestry and nutrition. During the past five years the Unit has published a range of different materials on the subject. Additionally, it has supported Asian and African Nutrition Division workshops for forest policy makers, forestry project managers and nutritionists. FAO has found that the integration of nutritional or food security objectives is perceived to be more tangible than other poverty indicators and greatly interests forestry policy makers and programme implementors. This field manual is an attempt to make the link between nutrition and forestry projects more explicit and to give ideas about how forestry projects should proceed.
This approach is new both to forestry and nutrition. Convential measures of nutritional well-being are often neither feasible nor desirable when focusing on nutrition as it relates to forestry. Most forestry activities cannot independently eliminate the basic and complex causes of malnutrition in such a way as to show a measurable difference in the growth of babies at the end of a project. However, there are things that can be done if nutritional problems and their causes are to be identified and nutritionally vulnerable groups are to benefit. Often it is a matter of expanding, in a nutritionally informed way, the selection of species in the nurseries and focusing distribution so that vulnerable groups gain access. Other times it is establishing a forest management plan that takes into consideration the foods and other nutritionally valuable products communities use. This field manual identifies some less direct activities as well and describes the necessary steps for
planning, implementing monitoring and evaluating a forestry project that includes measurable nutritional objectives.
Cynthia Ogden, a nutrition planner, has been helping develop and focus the Community Forestry Unit's study of the links between forestry and nutrition almost since the Unit began its investigations. She has helped analyse the relevant literature and design workshops, and has given presentations on the subject. She developed these guidelines and incorporated many of the concerns of forestry policy makers, project implementers and national nutritionists who have reviewed them. Britta Ogle, Jacqueline Landman, Julia Falconer, Elizabeth Campbell and William Sunderlan provided significant input. Several people from the Food Policy and Nutrition Division of FAO also provided ideas. The effort was directed by the Community Forestry Unit and partially funded by the Forests, Trees and People Programme a multi-donor trust fund dedicated to increasing the sustainability of the livelihoods of men and women throughout the developing world, especially the rural poor, through self-help
management of tree and forest resources.
This is the first field manual of its type. It is being produced and circulated with the hope that it will be read, tested and then revised based upon comments from the field. People are encouraged to send their comments to the Community Forestry Unit, Forestry Department, Food and Agriculture Organization, Via delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
Marilyn W. Hoskins
Senior Community Forestry Officer
Planning and Institutions Service
Forestry Department
Food and Agriculture Organization
<section>2</section>
Introduction
All development projects attempt to improve the well-being of people living in project areas. Development goals often involve narrowing the disparity between the rich and the poor by focusing especially on improving the situation of those in the poorer strata. Increasingly, criteria other than economic improvement are being used to further these goals.
Nutritional well-being is one of the non-economic criteria that is being used to assess quality of life. Isolated development projects cannot by themselves eliminate the underlying causes of malnutrition that are deeply rooted in political, social and economic inequalities. Yet development projects, and specifically forestry projects can use nutritional well-being as a measure of project success and can use nutritional vulnerability to identify potential project beneficiary groups. Incorporating nutrition concerns into forestry activities is possible once the relationship between forestry and nutrition is understood. With the help of the community, nutritionists, social scientists and foresters can determine the nutrition situation in the project area in order to focus activities on enhancing the nutritional well-being of individuals. With surprisingly little effort most forestry projects can incorporate measures aimed at improving nutritional well-being.
<section>3</section>
About the field manual
This manual has three purposes. First, it describes some of the linkages between forestry and nutrition to help foresters, together with nutritionists, orient their activities toward improving the nutrition situation in their project area. Second, it suggests an approach by which forestry activities can incorporate local peoples' nutrition and food security concerns. Third, it identifies some possible indicators for use in monitoring and evaluating the effects of forestry activities on nutritionally vulnerable groups and individuals.
The manual is written for planners and managers. It suggests ways of addressing nutrition issues. It makes reference to practical examples, emphasizing the process of community participation in identifying problems and activities. Although different types of forestry projects might be classified with respect to their potential in relation to nutrition, this guide presupposes that all types of forestry projects can incorporate nutrition concerns by choosing the relevant steps and examples.
The guide has two sections. The first introduces the linkages between forestry and nutrition, including a short discussion of the causes of malnutrition. The next contains a methodology for incorporating nutrition concerns into forestry projects. It includes examples of how forestry can positively and adversely affect nutrition. The section offers worksheets that correspond to the methodology.
The worksheets summarize the methodology discussed in the manual. They are each comprised of an objective, suggested responsible parties, and a series of questions that may make it easier to reach the objective(s). The appendices identify some of the possible indicators that can be used to plan, monitor and evaluate the impact of forestry activities on nutrition.
<section>4</section>
I. Forestry and nutrition
Linkages between forestry and nutrition
Contributions to nutritional well-being
Assessing nutritional well-being
Linkages between forestry and nutrition
The relationship between forestry and nutrition may go unnoticed by development professionals. Yet the connection is important. Forests and trees contribute to the nutritional well-being of many people and are especially important for the poor, who may depend on natural resources for many purposes.
Some nutritional implications of forests and trees
Coconuts produce a good, almost sterile oral rehydration fluid; a high energy food; oil for cooking or soap-making; foliage for roofing; husks and wood for fuel; shade under which other foods grow and animals live.
Plantains, bananas and ensete (false bananas in Ethiopia) may be the staple high carbohydrate food of 30-50 million people in the world; an important supplementary food for millions of others.
Mulberries may form the basis for a silkworm industry, providing income and food for many people.
Fruit orchards may produce most of the carotene (vitamin A) and vitamin C in diets.
Trees may provide a place away from the field and footpath as a designated place for defecating and urinating, as in India. In this way they may lessen transmission of diseases linked to malnutrition (Latham 1988).
Not surprisingly, forests and trees provide many edible products. Although these foods usually are not dietary staples, they play a supplementary role in the diet. Wild leaves and fruits contain necessary vitamins. Seeds, nuts, roots and tubers supply fats and carbohydrates. Mushrooms, gums and saps provide protein and minerals. Wild animals often supply the majority of meat consumed by people living near forest areas. Forest foods also contribute to diet diversity and consequently may improve the quantity and quality of food intake. Forest foods are often seasonally important. Those foods available for longer periods or during the "hungry season" ensure that rural people eat when agricultural products are not yet available and/or when storage facilities have emptied. Finally, tree products such as roots, nuts, honey and stems furnish needed energy during famines or natural disasters.
Forestry also contributes to food production through environmental protection. Various trees with deep rooting systems extract nutrients from deep in the soil and deposit them in the form of leaf litter. This leaf cover enriches the soil and helps retain moisture. Nitrogen fixing trees also contribute to soil fertility as does the shade which lowers surface temperatures. Trees and shrubs planted and managed as wind breaks can help control erosion, thereby stabilizing soil quality and helping agricultural production. Moreover, fodder for animals collected from forests and trees enhances meat and dairy production.
Another linkage between forestry and nutrition is fuelwood. Fuelwood scarcity can influence household nutrition in a number of ways: cooking foods, boiling water and allocation of women's time. If fuelwood is scarce, women may be forced to ration cooking times. This can lead to decreases in food consumption or meal frequency. In turn, the nutritional well-being of household members may suffer. Additionally, fuelwood scarcity may increase the incidence of illness resulting from contaminated water or improperly prepared food. Finally, the amount of fuelwood available for household use influences the time women spend collecting fuelwood and thus the time they have for food production and preparation, income generation, child care and leisure.
Income and medicines also link forestry and nutrition together. Selling fuelwood, wild foods, medicines and forest raw materials or employment in forestry bring essential monetary income to many households. In addition, medicines, which originate from tree products, help keep humans and livestock healthy.
Forestry products and benefits, overall household welfare and household nutritional well-being all affect one another. Their relationship is characterized by a complex web. The diagram in Figure 1 outlines some of the factors that influence one another. The graphic is not all-inclusive and is complicated. It only attempts to indicate the range of factors that interact to form links between forestry and nutrition. It identifies forest products and benefits that can influence nutritional well-being and can often be targeted by forestry projects.
Figure 1 Forestry products and benefits related to nutrition
Contributions to nutritional well-being
In much of the world, individuals and households suffer from problems of undernutrition. The causes of these problems are complex and the consequences often lead to a "vicious circle of malnutrition." On the individual level, food consumption and infection determine nutritional status. However, food consumption and infection are, in turn, affected by many other social, political and economic factors. The most pressing of these is poverty.
Crop variation
While commercialization in small-scale farming households is a necessary development, changes in crop variation policies such as monocropping can lead to a decrease in diet diversity and to malnutrition. Hassan et al. carried out research on the extent of malnutrition in two villages in Bangladesh between 1981 and 1982. The first village employs traditional farming practices, is double-cropped and flooded. The second village, on the other hand, is triple-cropped and non-flooded but has irrigation facilities, high yielding variety seeds, and chemical fertilizers and pesticides. Researchers found that in this second, agriculturally modern village which specializes in cereal crops, there is a greater incidence of vitamin A and vitamin C deficiency. The researchers concluded that one of the factors affecting the higher incidence of nutrient deficiencies in this village was decreased food diversity caused by less crop variation (Hassan et al. 1985).
The quality and quantity of an individual's food consumption is predominantly determined by the level and variety of the household's food supply. The food supply consists of foods produced, foods stored, foods gathered, foods given as aid and foods purchased. Many different factors affect the amount and quality of food produced and purchased including agricultural and marketing policies,^1 land holding patterns and laws,^2 labour availability, women's time^3 and cash income. The importance of stored foods should not be underestimated given the seasonal nature of food production and gathering. Food storage facilities and food preservation techniques have a large impact on the household food supply.
^1 For example, cash cropping and crop variation.
^2 For example, landlessness, land poor families and access to commons.
^3 For example, for food production, food preparation and child care.
Infectious diseases also contribute to malnutrition through the synergistic relationship between malnutrition and infection. Malnutrition lowers resistance to infection, and infection increases the likelihood of nutritional deficiencies. Infections often result from poor environmental conditions due to lack of sanitation or clean water. These infections may persist unchecked due to an absence of health facilities. Moreover, activities that modify environments may influence the spread of infection. Water, for such purposes as irrigation, hydro-power or transportation and natural environments of forests or bushlands may constitute habitats for disease-spawning animals and insects. Mosquitos, which thrive in bushland environments, and snails and flies, which thrive in water environments, carry parasites responsible for malaria, schistosomiasis, and onchocerciasis. These infections in turn contribute to malnutrition by affecting the body's ability to consume and absorb foods.
Figure 2 diagrams the factors that, alone or in combination, contribute to malnutrition. The figure indicates that forestry can influence the factors that contribute to household welfare and affect nutritional well-being. Once again the diagram is only illustrative and not all-inclusive.
Vulnerability
The concept of vulnerability is often used interchangeably with poverty. However, as Chambers (1989) points out, the concepts are not identical. Poor people lack, but vulnerable people are defenseless, insecure and exposed to risks and shocks. Community members often define security as a priority and projects must begin to consider vulnerability and not just economic poverty.
Nutritional vulnerability is a particular instance of vulnerability. Certain individuals tend to be nutritionally "at risk" especially if their household is at risk. For example, due to rapid growth, children require frequent feedings of foods with high energy and nutrient content. In addition, because children explore and play in many areas and in large groups, they are more prone to infection than adults. Pregnant and lactating women are also vulnerable to nutritional problems as they require additional food for the growth of the fetus and for milk production. Moreover, households that consume monotonous diets of maize or highly milled rice or that are living in particular areas such as those with insufficient iodine in the soil, may be vulnerable to nutritional disorders. Further, communities may be nutritionally at risk because of seasonal variations in the food supply.
Nutritional deficiencies
Vitamin deficiencies are not the major nutritional problems. The overall major nutritional problem is inadequate caloric intake. The four most serious nutritional deficiencies in the world today are those involving a lack of calories (protein-energy), vitamin A, iron and iodine. Protein-energy malnutrition (PEM) may result from inadequate consumption of food or from disease and usually manifests itself in children through inadequate growth, severe loss of weight, and lack of energy. In extreme cases, swelling or changes in skin, hair, face and mental capacity indicate the presence of PEM. Severe cases of PEM can be fatal. Vitamin A deficiency seriously affects the eyes (causing blindness in extreme cases), is often related to PEM, and is frequently precipitated by infectious diseases. Iron deficiency can lead to nutritional anemia, causing tiredness, shortness of breath, heart palpitations and, in extreme cases, death. Finally, iodine deficiency can lead to goitre (swelling
of the thyroid gland) and cretinism in children born to mothers with iodine deficiency. Niacin, thiamine, vitamin C, vitamin D and riboflavin deficiencies may be problems in certain communities. A deficiency of a single nutrient alone is rare. For example, although riboflavin deficiency alone is not serious, it usually indicates a deficiency in all the B vitamins.
Figure 2 Contributions to individual nutritional well-being
Assessing nutritional well-being
Nutritionists use many types of information to evaluate nutritional well-being. For example, health statistics, vital statistics, anthropometric data, food science information, diet surveys, agricultural data, economic data, socio-cultural data, clinical examinations and laboratory tests can be helpful.^4 In most forestry projects, examination of these types of existing data will improve the project planning process. Ministries, nutrition institutes, local universities, health centres or dispensaries are possible sources of information. Another essential information source is the community itself. Local officials, members of women's groups, traditional midwives and others know what is happening in their community and can offer their own perceptions and state their needs.
^4 Often, nutritionists compare anthropometric measurements (such as height and weight) to reference standards to determine nutritional status. In a forestry project with a nutritionist this is an important method for obtaining background nutrition information and for monitoring and evaluating the project. However, it may not be a feasible or adviseable to measure project success by having foresters weigh and measure babies. Thus, because the term nutritional status often reflects anthropometric measurements, the term nutritional well-being is used throughout this guide.
Table 1 describes the different types of information listed above. The table contains possible sources of information and explanations about how forestry project planners might be able to use the information.
Women's role in nutrition
Women are crucial in maintaining the nutritional well-being of family members for several reasons. Most notably, women play a central role in household food security. Their role in food production is well known but often minimized. In Africa it is estimated that women make up 60-80% of the labour force involved in food production. Additionally, some studies indicate that income received by women is more often used for food purchases than is men's income.
Within the household, women have responsibility for food storage, processing, preservation, and preparation in addition to their duties as child rearer, water and fuel carrier, etc. The labour demands on rural women are tremendous. The many demands placed on a woman's time mean that she cannot devote much time to any one activity, thus even her food production function has had to be altered in order for her to meet other demands. For example, in Zimbabwe, rural women have changed their crop production from the nutritious crops of sorghum, millet, and groundnuts to maize because the processing of the former crops is so demanding (Tagwireyi 1987).
Table 1 Assessing nutritional well-being
TYPE OF INFORMATION
POSSIBLE SOURCES
VALUE OF INFORMATION PROVIDED
UTILITY TO FORESTRY ACTIVITIES
Health and nutrition information
Health centres, nutritionists and health professionals
Existing information to determine the nutrition and health situation in the area.
Vital statistics
Ministries
Existing information to determine the nutrition and health situation in the area.
To set project objectives
Food science information nutrient content, biological availability, toxicity, food processing
Universities
Existing information to select species based on the community's nutritional needs
Anthropometric data
Nutrition institutions, nutritionists
Existing information to determine the nutritional situation in the area.
To determine the nutritionally vulnerable
Clinical examinations
Health professionals
Requires highly trained medical personnel and thus may be difficult for some forestry projects.
Laboratory tests
Health professionals
Requires highly trained personnel and large hospital facilities and thus may be difficult for forestry use.
To create a pool of baseline data for use in monitoring and evaluation
Dietary surveys
Nutrition institutions, nutritionists
Determines overall food consumption patterns including forest and tree foods eaten.
Agricultural data food production, food balance sheets
Nutritionists, agronomists, ministries, community members
Determines scarcity periods and food storage capacity. Determine food uses of trees and forests including snack foods. Determines the vulnerable.
To develop an idea of the level and types of existent indigenous knowledge
Economic data purchasing power, food prices and distribution
Economists, ministries, community members
Determines income distribution and the nutritionally vulnerable.
Sociocultural data food consumption patterns, food practices and beliefs
Community members, sociologists, universities, anthropologists
Determines child feeding practices, key food consumption, fuelwood use, women's workload.
To select indicators^5
^5 Only the last four types of information can reliably be used in the selection of indicators
<section>5</section>
II. Incorporating nutrition concerns into forestry projects
Define individual roles
Obtain background information
Define nutritional objectives
Decide on forestry and nutrition activities
Use nutrition indicators to monitor and evaluate projects
The first section of this manual described the theoretical links between forestry and nutrition. It will now address a series of questions such as: how can foresters incorporate nutrition into forestry projects; how do foresters link their knowledge of trees with the nutritional well-being of villagers?
The following guidelines provide an approach to incorporating nutrition into forestry projects when nutritional well-being is an overall project goal. They correspond to five steps: define roles; obtain background information; define specific objectives; decide on activities; and monitor and evaluate the project. The steps are not arranged in a sequence, they need to be adjusted to suit individual circumstances. For example, often the goals and objectives of the project will need to be determined prior to defining roles as they relate to nutrition objectives. Several steps, information collection for example, may have to be repeated as the project evolves. Finally it must be noted that the steps cannot be followed individually. That is, they must be completed keeping in mind the other elements of the process. Objectives may need to be reexamined given time and personnel limitations. The worksheets should be used to help tailor the approach.
An essential element of this methodology is the active participation of community members in all aspects of the project. By increasing the attention that is paid to local needs and uses of trees and forests in all forestry projects (not just community forestry projects), forestry can have a positive influence on nutritional well-being.
Define individual roles
If there are no nutritionists involved, who will be responsible for the nutrition part of the project? If a nutritionist is involved, at what stage and level will she/he be included? Worksheet A contains a list of some of the questions that may help clarify individual roles in the project.
Worksheet A
DEFINING ROLES
Objective: to determine the people that will be involved in the nutrition dimensions of the project and what role, if any, nutritionists will play.
Responsibility: project designer, staff and the community
Questions
1. What role do nutrition considerations play in the project?
2. How much time and how many people are needed to complete the tasks associated with the nutrition-related aspects of the forestry project?
3. Who is on the team?
4. If a nutritionist is part of the team, what is her/his responsibility?
5. Will a nutritionist be hired as a consultant? If so, what will she/he be contracted to do?
6. Is there a nutritionist that can act as a resource person? If so, what information can she/he provide?
7. To what extent can community members work to set nutrition goals and objectives, implement the plan and/or monitor progress?
8. If no nutritionist is involved, who will be responsible for the nutrition dimension of the project?
Obtain background information
Identify resources and collect data
Review basic information
Obtaining background information is an ongoing process. Team members must identify resources, including local people, sources of existing information, and methods for obtaining additional information. Then, together with the community, the team reviews basic information and/or collects additional information about the physical and socioeconomic characteristics, nutrition/food security concerns, and the use of forests and trees in the project area. Appendices 2 and 3 contain a list of sources and detailed background questions.
Identify resources and collect data
Rapid rural appraisal in northeast Thailand
Using rapid appraisal techniques, Somnasang et al. examined the use of natural food resources in northeast Thailand. Specifically, the researchers were interested in the sources of foods; kinds of foods; quantities and availability; factors influencing quantity and source; methods of acquisition; preparation and cooking methods; roles of taste, attitudes and beliefs; and methods of preparation. The information was used to evaluate effects of changes in farming patterns on nutrition. The primary techniques for gathering information were semi-structured interviewing, direct observation, and photography. The methods were fast, comprehensive and ideal for planning a more detailed study. Using a set of guidelines for the interviews, researchers visited eight villages in three provinces once during each of the different seasons in 1984-1985. In total 15 days were devoted to the field portion of the study (Somnasang et al. 1988).
Many individuals are potential sources of information. Interviews provide valuable insights into who has access to resources and how local people define poor diet. Possible key informants are health officials, project staff, extension workers, NGO workers (including religious organizations), teachers, leaders, and local nutritionists. In regard to nutrition, it is especially important to interview women's groups as women are generally in charge of feeding and caring for the family. Often, these groups can supply information about food, medicine and health in the community. Moreover, they will be able to suggest nutrition objectives and indicators that are of local concern. Project managers and planners may also want to visit a limited number of carefully selected men and women farmers of different strata and the landless to discuss issues of crops, income, and uses of trees and their products. Once the nutritionally vulnerable have been defined, they, themselves, may be able
to provide critical information about their situation, its causes, and how they would like to see the problems addressed.
In addition to interviews, visual inspection can be extremely helpful. Direct observation and photographs of routine activities in the forests (or involving trees) will provide some information about who uses the land and for what purposes. Photographs of children may provide an indication of acute nutrition problems.
Other possible resources are printed materials. A literature search of the area describing class/caste distinctions, and resource uses in terms of tenure and access, can contain information about nutrition and forest use. The search should be done across different fields of thought, among them history, political science, economics, anthropology, and ethnobotany. The search will help to determine those groups that may be nutritionally vulnerable, those who benefit from activities aimed at particular resources, and possibly, the uses of trees and forests. Health studies (including those on traditional health practices) and records of malnutrition and infection will give a picture of the nutrition problems in the area. Nutritional surveys and studies of the causes of malnutrition in an area provide additional information about the nutrition situation in the project area. Appendix 2 lists some sources of information and Table 1 in Section I lists different types of information
used in determining nutritional well-being.
When defining the resources that will be tapped for useful information, the planners always need to consider the personnel, time and resource availability. For example, photographic or video equipment may not be reasonable options because they are too expensive or unavailable. Additionally, the level of expertise of collectors and the amount of time and energy the project may want to spend training on techniques of collection need to be considered and determined.
Consideration must also be given to the kinds of information that will really be needed. It is tempting to try to access every available, potential information source, but this often isn't helpful. The only information that needs to be collected is that which can and will be used. Some information may be extremely important. For example, the information that is gathered before a project begins can provide baseline information for monitoring, evaluation and indicating project efficacy.
Finally, the data analysis resources that are available must also be a factor when deciding what information to collect. While it is nice to plan for collection of all relevant data, it is not always feasible or desireable.
Worksheet B
IDENTIFY SOURCES AND COLLECT DATA
Objectives: to identify information sources, including local people, printed material and others.
Responsibility: team members and the community
Questions
1. What are the information needs of the project at this stage?
2. What are the existing sources of information about the community and the women and men that live there (see also Appendix 2)?
e.g. local people:
teachers (school or college)
health staff (nurses, paramedics, doctors)
development staff
religious leaders
community groups and their leaders
agricultural extension officer
community nutritionist
books
journals
government serials and other government reports
3. Which of these sources are accessible?
4. Is additional information needed beyond these existing sources? If so, is rapid rural appraisal appropriate? Interviewing? Photography?
5. How much labour is available to gather and analyse information (either within the staff or the community)? What is the skill level of the collectors? Are they capable of doing the necessary research and collection? Does the project want to train either collectors or analysts?
After the information needs and the optimal data sources have both been determined, collection can begin. What are the particular problems in the community and who are the vulnerable groups? What criteria are used for determining nutritional vulnerability? For example, are the nutritionally vulnerable those households that face seasonal food insecurity, or are they children under five? Community input is especially important, as the community's assessment of the project, based on their own needs, should be the basis for the foresters' assessment of the sustainability of the project's initiatives. Local people's information needs can be included as part of project information needs. Information must flow in both directions between the community and the project planners.
Information must be gathered on the uses of trees and forests that are directly or indirectly related to nutrition in the community. Who eats what foods from the forest, and what are the foods' nutrient content? Are there seasonal variations in diet and food supply? It is also essential to determine who eats what snack foods; what products are sold, what foods purchased. Appendix 3 lists questions to facilitate information collection.
Review basic information
Once all of the information is collected it must be reviewed. The information that is obtained will be helpful in determining project objectives and activities. For example, if blindness from vitamin A deficiency was found to be a local problem, project objectives might be to reduce the incidence of vitamin A deficiency by supplying selected perennials to the community. Certain perennials are good sources of carotene,^6 and might be supplied to the nurseries in a school planting programme. Changes in the incidence of blindness may be difficult to monitor in the short-term. However, forestry project planners can monitor the food sources rich in carotene that are available to those family members and groups prone to this deficiency.
^6 The body converts carotene into Vitamin A. There are several different carotenes; one of these, beta carotene, is the most important source of vitamin A in African diets (Latham 1979).
Information gathering may be important but information needs will change. Information obtained after a project has begun may be more valuable than, or at least complementary to, background data.^7 Information on local forest/tree use and nutrition problems can be used to make modifications or additions to project objectives and/or activities. Moreover, a nutritionist can be consulted at any time throughout the project in order to provide further information.
^7 Possible advantages of data gathered "in progress" include:
1. The team can perhaps have more confidence in data that they have gathered themselves.
2. Background data may be outdated.
3. Team-gathered data can serve as a cross-check of the reliability of background data.
Worksheet C
REVIEW AND COLLECT ADDITIONAL INFORMATION
Objectives:
to identify the nutrition problems and the nutritionally vulnerable;
to identify the uses of forest and tree resources;
to obtain basic information about the physical and socioeconomic characteristics of the community;
to create a base of information against which to measure progress towards achievement of objectives.
Responsibility:
a nutritionist or the person(s) responsible for the nutrition dimension of the project along with the community.
Questions
1. What are the nutrition and food security concerns of the community?
2. How are forests and trees used in the area?
3. Who are the nutritionally vulnerable? (eg. the landless, households in a particular area, pregnant women, babies, etc.).
4. What are the physical, socioeconomic, and cultural characteristics of the area?
5. Based on the information that has now been gathered, what more needs to be known? How can this additional information be obtained?
Define nutritional objectives
After collecting background information, the nutritional objective(s) must be set forth clearly.^8 The objectives may be both short- and long-term. Among possible nutritional objectives are the following. The objectives may be to improve the availability, through forest sources, of nutrients not available from non-forest sources, or to supply nutrients to combat a specific deficiency. Reducing seasonal food shortages could also be a nutritional objective. Nurseries or plantations could supply trees that offer food or fodder in the interval between annual crop harvests or during the dry season. Another objective might be to mitigate the possible negative effects of the project on the availability of a particular nutrient by compensating for reduced access to forest resources. The objectives could be to increase available food or household income, to expand women's available time for child care and food preparation or to improve environmental or living conditions.
^8 A distinction must be made between project goals and project objectives. Defined here, a project goal is an overall category of improvement such as nutrition. A project objective is a specific improvement such as increased availability of carotene-rich foods within the goal of increased nutritional well-being.
The specific nutritional objectives of a forestry project will depend on overall project goals, the time frame of the project and what the community wants. It is very important that individuals in the community help determine the objectives. Nutritionists can be of assistance by offering a perspective on what the nutrition problems are and what causes them (or could alleviate them).
Forest rehabilitation in northeast Thailand
In a multidisciplinary, diversified forest rehabilitation project in northeast Thailand, conceived more as an integrated rural development project with forestry as the core activity than as a single sector project, project activities of planting trees, woodlots, hedgerows, and shelter-belts were predicted to have beneficial impacts on women's activities, soil fertility, agricultural production and employment. These impacts contribute to the nutritional well-being of individuals (see Figure 1). Agricultural production was expected to increase due to nitrogen-fixing leguminous tree planting and the labour-intensive project provided 200 people with employment each day (Thompson 1984; see also FAO, Forestland for the People).
If a forestry project has already been started or is being implemented, a nutrition objective can be added. The additional objective might be monitoring of the project to avoid project-related injury to the nutrition situation.
Worksheet D
DETERMINING THE NUTRITION OBJECTIVE(S)
Objective: to define the nutrition objective(s) and the beneficiaries(s) based on the initial review/assessment of the area (worksheet C).
Responsibility: nutritionist or individual(s) responsible for the nutrition component in conjunction with the community.
Questions
1. What do rural men and women view as the community's nutritional needs? How do they prioritize those needs?
2. What additional nutritional problems have been identified (if any)?
3. What do the nutrition needs relate to:
household food security?
diet diversity?
seasonal shortages?
income?
women's time?
infection?
the environment?
a particular nutritional problem in the community?
4. Who would benefit if the identified type of nutritional needs were met: a particular type of household (eg. all families within the community, female-headed, unemployed, landless, land-poor or other category of deprived); households located in a particular area; particular individuals (eg. those suffering from nutritional problems, children, pregnant women, elderly, others)?
5. How can forests and trees be used to improve the project areas' nutrition situation? What kinds of forest and tree related activities would the community prefer to use to improve its nutritional status?
Decide on forestry and nutrition activities
Food supply
Income generation
Environmental conditions
Women's time
The next step is to select the forestry activities that can be implemented to reach the nutritional objectives. There are many forestry activities that relate to nutrition. They include managing natural and man-made forests for locally needed food products; supporting activities that maximize the benefits that reach the poor; and increasing the diversity of project outputs in order to minimize risk and maximize nutrition benefits.
Individuals from the community, leaders, health workers, and teachers should be consulted. Activities related to nutrition will necessarily vary by project. Community members, project planners and nutritionists need to select project activities based on the objectives and available resources.
Choosing the appropriate activities
In choosing the best activities for achieving the nutrition goals and objectives of the project, there are several important things to keep in mind:
1 Involve the community in linking activities to objectives:
"[One of the] main reasons for the frequent mismatch between intervention and needs... is poor communication with farmers and their families (Arnold 1991:22)."
2 Assess the potential for unforeseen project effects:
An irrigation scheme in Northern Nigeria had among its primary objectives increasing national food supply, providing employment and improving living standards. Unfortunately, the project activities had several large unforeseen effects. The irrigation led to an increase in the number of weeds and pests which increased the labour intensive nature of the farming, led to shifts in production and led to a decrease in crop diversity. Additionally, the decrease in forested area following construction increased the amount of time women had to spend gathering fuelwood which changed daily routines and decreased the time available for income generating activities (DAWN 1985).
3 Design activities to fit within the social context:
"Trees and tree products are almost invariably intimately emedded in often complex resource and social systems... Important though it is, community forestry can never be more than a minor component of the rural system. It is unrealistic to expect community forestry projects and programmes to achieve social or institutional changes at a pace faster than is taking place within society as a whole. If they are to succeed, they need to be compatible with the broader framework within which they are located... Initiatives are much more likely to succeed if they are compatible with deeply entrenched practices and rights... (Arnold 1991:23)"
The remainder of this section (see also Appendix 3) contains ideas for forestry activities that relate to nutrition and are directed specifically at food supply, income generation, the environment and women's time.
Worksheet E
DECIDING ON ACTIVITIES RELATED TO NUTRITION
Objectives: to select forestry activities and assess their effect on nutritional well-being.
Responsibility: nutritionist, or the individual responsible for nutrition, foresters, and the community.
Questions
1. What activity(ies) is(are) being considered? (See Appendix 3 for examples of activities).
2. Is(Are) the activity(ies) aimed at:
household food security?
the environment?
income generation?
women's time?
infection/health?
a particular nutrition problem?
3. What inputs and how much of these inputs are needed (funds, labour power, etc.)?
4. Will the activity(ies) affect nutrition negatively? By, for example: reducing the access to forests for those most dependent on those resources; reducing food production; or increasing the time women spend involved in a particular activity (eg. collecting fuelwood).
5. What are the other potential social, cultural, economic or other tradeoffs? Are they worth the benefits to those involved?
Food supply
If a project objective is to increase the availability of non-purchased food supply, project activities may relate to food production, food gathering, food aid or food storage. Projects can involve the production of, or increasing access to mushrooms, honey, nuts, leaves, fruit, roots and wild animals obtained from the forest. Border and boundary plantings that contain fruits or berries, or tree plantings in homegardens, could be project activities. Forestry activities can provide direct nutritional assistance if they focus on the selection of edible species that produce during slack periods and that are compatible with local diets. In addition, building materials from the forest can be used to build crop storage containers and thus contribute to more uniform food supplies over the year.
Forestry projects can improve diets indirectly if they provide fodder and livestock medicines. These improvements may increase milk and meat supplies, as well as contribute to animal power for increased agricultural production. The introduction of food preservation techniques such as smoke drying and fermenting might also be beneficial to the community. Production of firewood may increase the amount of food prepared and consumed or reduce the incidence of infections resulting from food contaminated due to improper cooking. Forestry activities should strive to meet local food needs, and defend meeting those needs even when there are competing uses of the forest, such as production of timber for foreign exchange or industrial consumption, or use of forests for tourism.
Forestry activities that contribute to food supply might focus on particularly vulnerable groups in the community.
Forest fruits
In Swaziland, Ogle and Grivetti found that wild fruits are primarily consumed as snacks while working or walking. Moreover, children often snack on wild fruits and these fruits appear to provide the majority of ascorbic acid (vitamin C) during the winter months. (Ogle and Grivetti 1985).
Income generation
An important short-term indirect nutrition benefit of forestry activities is through improved income opportunities. Consequently, the objective of a forestry project might be to increase nutritional well-being through income generation. The sale of fruits, mushrooms, medicines, fuel wood and other forest materials provides income to women and others who are resource poor. One survey found that more than 50% of the villagers in a Philippine community earned income from timber and rattan sales (Siebert and Belsky 1985). Small-scale wood furniture industries have also provided income for families in many countries including Egypt (Mead 1982).
However, improvement of income earning opportunities for the rural poor requires careful examination of local circumstances. Forestry projects geared to improving nutrition through increasing cash incomes can also result in deterioration of nutritional well-being. This can happen if the most vulnerable or dependent lose access to the forest, if food prices increase, if villagers become exposed to market fluctuations, or if required labour time increases (FAO 1989b). Furthermore, the development of forest crops may increase the dependency on food from outside the region. Combined with unreliable transportation systems less stable local food supplies may result. This in turn may increase food and housing prices, affecting the poorest (and possibly most nutritionally vulnerable) people in the community. Although no consistent results about cash cropping and nutrition exist, several studies show that without careful project planning, cash cropping (including forest crops) can
have negative effects on nutritional status (von Braun and Kennedy 1986).
Earning income from Zambian forests
Poverty remains the most important contributing factor in undernutrition. In Zambia many poor households spend 7080% of their income on food. Small-scale forest-based enterprises provide opportunities to these households. Charcoal making, furniture production, honey collection, food vending and beverage production are common. Moreover, individuals, particularly women, earn money marketing caterpillars, mushrooms, fruits and honey. Generally income controlled by women is used to a greater extent to feed the family (than is income controlled by men). Thus, it is important to understand women's access to credit, markets and business as well as their time and labour availability. In Zambia, the Ministry of Cooperatives and Marketing, Small Industries Development Organization, and non-governmental organizations (ea. Village Industry Services) help provide such information (Ogle 1987).
The possible negative effects of a project should be anticipated so that planning adjustments can be made. An estimate must be made of the effect of the project on food availability. If the project is going to reduce food availability, it should yield enough income for people to replace the lost food. Moreover, food must be available in the markets. It is also particularly important to note who in the community is most vulnerable to the negative effects of the project and target beneficial activities to those individuals.
Environmental conditions
There are three categories of forestry activities related to the environmental aspects of nutritional well-being. First, environmental protection activities help stabilize food and fodder production. Second, activities aimed at watershed protection can improve the water supply and lessen the transmission of water-borne disease. Third, forestry products can be used to build housing.
In the long-term, specific activities aimed at improving environmental conditions are crucial to improved nutrition. Sustainable agricultural production often involves forest-related inputs, especially in hilly, overworked, or otherwise erosion-prone areas. For instance, grasses, shrubs, or trees may be essential for contour planting, wind barriers, or provision of leaf manure.
Moringa oleifera as a water coagulant
Villagers from the northern Sudan cultivate the multipurpose tree, Moringa oleifera, from the single-genus Moringaceae family of shrubs and trees, as a water coagulant Women not only use the leaves in sauces, they also treat the turbid Nile river water with them. Depending on the raw water quality, 30 to 200 mg of seeds per litre of water clarifies turbid water to tap-water within two hours. Reduction of bacteria by 98-99% accompanies the elimination of the turbidity. New water purifying projects employing this tree have been started in Indonesia (Jahn et al. 1986).
Molluscicides from the Cameroon forests
Some cultivated and indigenous plants in Cameroon contain molluscicidal phytochemicals. The most common active ingredients in the plants, saponasides and saponins, degrade rapidly and, unlike man-made pesticides, lose their toxicity within days. As a potential control of schistosomiasis the plant extract could be added directly to the water or combined with soap for washing clothes. Selected trees and shrubs with molluscicidal properties include Acacia nilotica, Balanites aegyptiaca, Croton macrostachyus, Dichrostachys glomerata, Jatropha gossypiifolia, J. curcas, and Phytolacca dodecandra (Thomas and Tobias 1987).
Addressing problems of water supply and water quality, through watershed protection, can be an important aspect of forestry projects. Projects might supply water wells as part of tree nursery activities, watershed protection, erosion control measures and water harvesting. The management of molluscicides derived from tree products can contribute to safer water supplies. Thus, through reduction in the rate of infection from Schistosomiasis, the incidence of malnutrition may be reduced. Moreover, natural coagulants from trees may be used to clean water.
Forestry projects can also increase the supply of raw materials for housing. Enhancements in housing with such things as out houses can contribute significantly to a decrease in infection and thus an increase in nutritional well-being.
Women's time
Activities that attempt to increase women's available time, by introducing labour-saving technologies leave more time available for food processing and preparation, food production, child care, leisure and, if appropriate, income-earning activities. Projects that increase the availability of water, fodder or fuel supplies may reduce the amount of time women spend collecting those items. Of course, the selection of activities needs to correspond to women's priorities and the constraints of the household food production system.
Women do not always benefit from income-earning activities. These activities may lead to a shift in responsibility over production and the returns of production. In some cases women work while men control the income. Moreover, women's available time for food production, preparation and processing may be reduced. Consequently, care must be taken in the planning process to avoid negative effects on women's time resulting from project activities.
<section>6</section>
Use nutrition indicators to monitor and evaluate projects
Forestry projects and nutrition projects each have their own systems for monitoring and evaluation. Forestry often looks at the physical outputs from forests (i.e number of seedlings planted or nurseries established). Nutrition, on the other hand, often uses anthropometric measurements. In a forestry project that incorporates nutrition concerns, but does not have a nutritionist on hand, new measures may need to be designed. Measures of nutritional well-being and indicators for monitoring/evaluation should focus only on those items that are relevant to the project. For example, clinical examinations, laboratory tests and anthropometric measurements are not the most appropriate measurements of nutritional well-being for forestry projects without nutritionists. These measures require trained personnel and/or equipment. Moreover, it is difficult to determine the specific effects of forestry activities on nutritional well-being through these measurement techniques. Change in the
weights of children, for example, might be due to factors involving changes in household food distribution, which forestry cannot influence. The goal is to measure the impact of the project activities on the target population's nutritional well-being.
Measuring the impact of a forestry project with nutrition indicators requires creative thinking. No single indicator is appropriate for all projects. The choice of indicators will depend on the resources and skills of the people involved. The indicators chosen should reflect project objectives as determined by the community. Nutritionists, if involved in the project, can help select indicators. If the objective is to increase employment, the number of jobs created for the nutritionally vulnerable could be an indicator for project monitoring and evaluation. Agroforestry projects that seek to introduce technologies to increase agricultural productivity, to spread work across the seasons, or to increase fodder, could monitor and evaluate how project results contribute to the availability of year-round food supply. Thus, indicators for these projects could assess the year-round food supply. Possible measures include seasonal availability of foods (especially for the selected
beneficiary groups), food diversity, food storage supplies, and how long supplies last. Projects that aim to improve nutrition by expanding women's available time (through labour-saving technologies or an increase of water and fuelwood supplies) might assess the project impact by monitoring time for child care and the number of daily household meals.
The selection of appropriate indicators might begin with determining how the community assesses its food and nutrition situation. It is important to know what nutrition or food supply problems are of major concern to different rural men and women within the community and how they would like to approach the problem. Furthermore, many indicators might be chosen based on how the local people define the success or failure of the project. Some possible suggestions for indicators based on Ogle (1987) are given in Appendix 4. Indicators are divided into categories based on possible nutrition-related objectives and should be modified in light of particular circumstances.
Worksheet F
MONITOR AND EVALUATE THE PROJECT
Objectives: to select indicators based on project objectives that will measure the impact of the activities on nutritional well-being and to implement monitoring and evaluation.
Responsibility: nutritionist or individual responsible for nutrition component.
Questions
1. What is the nutrition objective?
2. How does the community define the criteria for success or failure of the project? Are local systems of measurement already in place?
3. What indicators can be used to monitor the current and future situation with respect to (see Information Bank F for a list of possible indicators):
household food security;
environmental conditions;
infection rates;
women's time constraints;
income levels;
4. How often do the indicators need to be measured?
5. What is the project and community's capacity to carry out monitoring and evaluation?
<section>7</section>
Appendices
Appendix 1 Information sources
Appendix 2 Background questions
Appendix 3 Forestry Activities
Appendix 4 Possible indicators
Appendix 1 Information sources
Interviews
Farmers (men and women)
Food purchasers
Teachers
Food preparers
Local leaders
Market economist
Local nutritionists
Agricultural extension agents
NGO workers
Ministry of Health officials
Religious workers
Ministry of Education
Women's groups
Ministry of Rural Development
Midwives
Ministry of Agriculture officials
Storekeepers and intermediary agents
Published data
FAD/WHO/UNICEF publications
Food balance sheets
Private voluntary organizations' publications
National and regional data sets
Health studies
Data compiled by other donors
Consumption survey data
Existing survey data
Household expenditure survey data
Project documents
Other data
Unpublished survey data
Project survey
Rapid reconnaissance
Key informant survey
Photographs of children and routine activities
Field trip(s)
Appendix 2 Background questions
Nutrition
1 What are the major nutrition problems of the area?
2 What are the contributing factors to the nutrition problems (geographic area, farming system, poverty, labour, land, policies, infection, food supply, women's time, cultural/religious factors, etc.)?
3 Who are the nutritionally vulnerable? Is vulnerability related to gender, age, landholding or ethnic group?
4 Are there seasonal dimensions to nutrition problems? (A nutritional stress calendar laying out food availability and nutrition over time might be a helpful tool.)
Forest and tree resources
1 Who uses and to what end are the forests and trees used (food production, income generation, fuelwood, etc.)?
2 Are there limitations in terms of access to forest and tree resources?
3 Do access restrictions have a more serious effect on food supply or nutrition during particular seasons?
4 If fuelwood is collected, who collects it and what is the estimated fuel collection time?
5 Does fuelwood supply limit the number of meals cooked a day or limit the time available to women or men for other activities?
6 What food processing/preservation or income generating activities require fuelwood?
Food
1 What are the most common forest foods consumed (classified by season)?
2 Who eats them?
3 Are they consumed for snacks or meals?
4 What is the nutrient content of these foods?
5 What is the food storage capacity and what are the storage methods?
6 What are strategies during periods of food scarcity (reduce the number/size of meals in a day, reduce food consumption, use more gathered foods, use more snack foods, purchase greater amounts of food, borrow from neighbors/relatives, borrow from other sources, go to the city in search of wage employment, etc.)?
7 What is the duration of food-scarce periods and when do they happen (for humans and animals)?
Income
1 Who is employed in forestry or earns money from forest/tree products or processing?
2 What forestry products are traded?
3 Do they vary by season?
4 What products are used by small-scale enterprises or for processing?
5 When are the cash need periods?
6 Are some forest products sold to obtain cash for the purchase of basic foods?
7 Are there periodic shortages of these products?
8 Are there community property regimes that regulate the exploitation of these products?
Living environment
1 Is clean water available?
2 Do water sources contain disease-carrying vectors?
3 Is housing adequate? Are there sanitation facilities?
Women's time
1 What do women spend their time doing?
2 What do they want to be spending their time doing?
3 How much time do women spend at major tasks (farming, trading, income earning, child care, etc.)?
Health/Infection
1 What are the major health and infection problems in the area?
2 Are there medicines derived from trees and forests that can alleviate these problems?
Community input
1 What do community members say about the nature and importance of wild foods?
2 What do the residents say about food related problems?
3 Do they identify constraints in availability/scarcity of specific food items?
Appendix 3 Forestry Activities
Food and fodder supply
1 Carefully select and plant trees and shrubs to supply food with needed nutrients and to contribute to diet diversity.
2 Include food for work schemes in a multidisciplinary forestry project where food supplies are inadequate and project goals help address long-term food supply issues.
3 Incorporate forest food, fodder, and medicine producing trees into farming systems in such management schemes as border plantings and hedgerows.
4 Provide seedlings and plant bushes or trees that provide snack foods.
5 Provide an alternative source of food during drought or periods of stress.
6 Measure seasonality and select locally valued trees that provide food during hunger periods.
7 Use building materials from the forest to construct crop storage containers.
8 Compensate the community for possible negative factors (eg. keep livestock away from fields while trees are young, perhaps by providing fodder trees for fodder banks).
Income
1 Develop small-scale forest-based industries to provide income.
2 Locate forest product processing facilities nearby (to provide employment).
3 Provide support that encourages local people to sell fruits, mushrooms and other forest materials.
4 Create compensatory programs during periods when trees generate costs but no benefits (eg. food for work).
Environment
1 Create wind breaks that serve multiple functions (eg. with edible fruits or seeds).
2 Create clean water sources as part of nurseries placed.
3 Manage molluscicides and natural coagulants from tree products.
4 Increase the supply of or access to raw materials for housing.
Women
1 Develop methods to increase women's available time for income-generating activities by supplying nearby woodlots (which can lead to increases in income and enhanced nutritional status).
2 Select low labour input species.
3 Incorporate local women into the decision-making process. Form user groups, cooperatives or farmer associations.
Health
1 Provide health education if the project increases the prevalence of disease-carrying vectors.
2 Increase the availability of forest/tree derived medicines.
3 Increase the availability of fuelwood.
Appendix 4 Possible indicators
Assessing changes in the quality of the diet
1 Frequency of meals and snack foods
2 Number of meals reheated, dishes saved but not reheated before eating
3 Diet diversity (range of foods used over the seasons, snack food consumption, gathered forest foods, number of different foods consumed)
4 Consumption of key foods (those consumed only in famine situations, those considered luxuries or delicacies, those with particularly high nutrient contents, those with special nutrient contents)
5 Child feeding practices (medicines and "health" foods fed to children when ill, extent of consumption of snack foods and availability to the nutritionally vulnerable, meal frequency, weaning foods)
Assessing the household food supply
1 Amount of stored foods, storage capacity, length of food storage
2 Duration of crop availability, season when crop supplies dwindle, duration of hunger periods, reliability of crop production year to year, number of months of staple food self-sufficiency.
3 Emergency measures during hunger periods
4 Seasonal patterns of consumption of key foods
5 Duration of milk supply
6 Availability of alternative food sources, especially forest foods
7 Periods of market availability and prices of foods in hunger periods
Assessing the impact of income earning activities
1 Change in purchasing power and debts
2 Increased food purchases during the hunger season?
3 More livestock sold to tide through emergency period?
4 How income spent (on more food) and invested (eg. in land, livestock, new tools)
5 Who within the household earns, spends and controls money
6 What are the cash needs (tax payments, school fees, agricultural inputs, etc.)
Assessing changes in environmental conditions
1 Housing
2 Water quality and quantity
3 Incidence of environmentally induced disease
4 Environmental stability of food production systems (eg. soil conservation)
Assessing changes in pressures on women's time
1 Time preparing, processing and collecting food
2 Time collecting fuelwood
3 Income earning activities - time required, contribution to household income, role in society
4 Child care
5 Food production
6 Incidence of disease or health problems
Assessing nutritional status
1 Anthropometric measurements
2 Infant mortality rates
3 Nutrient deficiencies
<section>8</section>
References
Arnold, M. 1991. Community forestry: ten years in review. Forestry Department, FAO, Rome, Italy.
Becker, B. 1983. The contribution of wild plants to human nutrition in the Ferlo (northern Senegal). Agroforestry Systems, 1:257-267.
von Braun, J. and Kennedy, E. 1986. Commercialization of subsistence agriculture: income and nutritional effects in developing countries. Working Papers on Commercialization of Agriculture and Nutrition Number 1, International Food Policy Research Institute, Washington D.C, USA.
Campbell-Asselbergs, E. 1987, revised version. Nutrition, forests and trees: linkages, concerns and indicators. Policy and planning service, Forestry Department, FAO, Rome, Italy.
Chambers, R. 1989. Editorial introduction: vulnerability, coping and policy. IDS Bulletin, 20(2): 1-7.
Falconer, J. 1987. Satellite paper: forestry and diets. Background paper for the Expert Consultation on Forestry and Food Production/Security. Bangalore, India, 14-20 February 1988. FAO, Rome, Italy.
FAO. 1989a. Forestry and household food security: an analysis of socioeconomic issues. FAO, Rome, Italy.
FAO. 1989b. Forestry and nutrition: a reference manual. Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific (RAPA), FAO, Bangkok, Thailand.
FAO. 1988. Participatory monitoring and evaluation, handbook for training field workers. RAPA, FAO, Bangkok, Thailand.
FAO. 1987. Forestland for the people: A forest village project in Northeast Thailand. RAPA, FAO, Bangkok, Thailand.
Hassan, N. Huda, N. and Ahmad K. 1985. Seasonal patterns of food intake in rural Bangladesh: it's impact on nutritional status. Ecology of Food and Nutrition 17(2):175-186.
Hoskins, M. 1985. The promise in trees. Food and Nutrition, 11(2):44-46.
Jahn, S.A.A., Musnad, H.A. and Burgstaller, H. 1986. The tree that purifies water: cultivating multipurpose Moringaceae in the Sudan. Unasylva, 38(152):23-29.
Jonsson, U. 1981. The causes of hunger. Food and Nutrition Bulletin, 3(2): 1-9.
Khon Kaen University. 1987. Proceedings of the 1985 International Conference on Rapid Rural Appraisal. Rural Systems Research and Farming Systems Research Projects, Khon Kaen, Thailand.
Latham, M.C. 1988. Personal communication.
Latham, M.C. 1979. Human nutrition in tropical Africa. FAO, Rome, Italy.
Longhurst, R. 1987a. Household food security, tree planting and the poor: the case of Gujarat. Overseas Development Institute (ODI) Network Paper, London, UK.
Longhurst, R. 1987b. Cash crops, household food security and nutrition. Cash Crops Workshop, Institute of Development Studies, University of Sussex, Brighton, UK.
Mead, D.C. 1982. Small industry in Egypt: an exploration of the economics of small furniture producers. International Journal of Middle East Studies, 14:159-171.
O'brien-Place, P. and Frankenberger, T.R. 1989. Food availability and consumption indicators. A.I.D. Evaluation Occasional Paper No. 36, United States Agency for International Development, Washington, DC, USA.
Ogle, B. 1987. Nutrition in the forests, trees and people project in Zambia. Rural Development Centre, Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences (SUAS), Uppsala, Sweden.
Ogle, B.M. and Grivetti, L.E. 1985. The legacy of the Chameleon: edible wild plants in the Kingdom of Swaziland, Southern Africa. Parts I-IV. Ecology of Food and Nutrition, volumes 16 and 17.
Pacey, A. and P. Payne 1985. Agricultural Development and Nutrition, Hutchinson for FAO and UNICEF, London, UK.
Raintree, J. 1991. Socioeconomic attributes of trees and tree planting practices. Community Forestry note 9. FAO, Rome, Italy.
Sen, G. and Grown, K. 1985. Development, Crisis, and Alternative Visions: Third World Women's Perspectives, A.s. Verbum, Norway. Written for Development Alternatives with Women for a New Era (DAWN), New Delhi, India.
Sene, E.H. 1985. Trees, food production and the struggle against desertification. Unasylva 37(159):19-26.
Siebert, S. and Belsky, J.M. 1985. Forest product trade in a lowland Filipino village. Economic Botany, 39(4):522-533.
Somnasang, P., Rathakette, P. and Rathanapanya, S. 1988. The role of natural foods in Northeast Thailand. In Rapid Rural Appraisal in Northeast Thailand edited by G.W. Lovelace et al. KKU-FORD Rural Systems Research Project Khon Kaen University, Khon Kaen, Thailand.
Tagwireyi, J.T. 1987. The role of women in family nutrition. In: Improving Food Crop Production on Small Farms in Africa. FAO, Rome, Italy.
Tandberg, A. 1989. Household food security in development efforts focusing on fisheries: manual for a systematic approach. Institute for Nutrition Research, Section for International Nutrition, University of Oslo, Norway. Completed for FAO Fisheries Division.
Thomas, D.W. and Tobias, M.F. 1987 Medicine and food plants from Cameroon's forests: development and conservation. Paper prepared for the UNDP/FAO Forestry sector review of Cameroon.
Thompson, B. 1984. Introducing nutrition considerations into the diversified forest rehabilitation project, North-East Thailand. Paper presented for the FAO/EWC Workshop on the Socioeconomic aspects of social forestry in the Asia-Pacific region.
Unasylva 41: 160. 1990. Forestry and food security. FAO, Rome, Italy.
United Nations ACC Task Force on Rural Development. 1984. Guiding principles for the design and use of monitoring and evaluation in rural development projects and programmes, Rome, Italy.
Warner, K. 1991. Shifting Cultivators: local technical knowledge and natural resource management in the humid tropics.
Community Forestry Note 8. FAO, Rome, Italy.
