<title>Virus and virus - Like diseases of citrus in the near east region. Virus and virus-like diseases of citrus in the Near East region</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
Citriculture is an important feature of agriculture in the Near East region. It covers about a million hectares and is in continuous expansion. The crop contributes to the nutrition and refreshment of the people of the region, to agro-industries and to foreign revenue and employment.
Citrus, a native of Southeast Asia' has been introduced gradually into the Near East over the centuries. However, significant expansion in citriculture in the region has only occurred during this century. Until recently, expansion of citriculture was accomplished by the propagation and distribution of material originally introduced via nurseries. within and between countries of the region.
The absence of plant quarantine and sanitation programmes has resulted in the perpetuation of infectious graft-transmissible diseases caused by virus and virus-like agents that accompanied the planting material from its source of origin. This has contributed and still contributes significantly to the low productivity and quality of citrus in the Near East. The situation was recently aggravated by the introduction into Saudi Arabia and Yemen of the devastating citrus greening disease and its vectors, and the discovery of witches' broom disease of lime in Oman and its spread to the United Arab Emirates.
In order to assess the extent of these and other serious disease problems. the Regional Office for the Near East and the Plant Protection Service of the Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations have undertaken a joint programme of consultancies in almost all countries of the region, aiming to assess existing citrus diseases and advise on the production, maintenance and distribution of healthy (pathogen-tested) citrus planting material.
This publication, which reflects the findings of various missions to the Near East and is complemented by the findings of the author during further visits to selected countries in the region, provides a comprehensive picture of the situation of the diseases as found in the citrus orchards, collections and experiment stations surveyed. The text is amply illustrated by photographs taken at identified sites in each country visited.
It is hoped that, in providing baseline information on the status of citrus diseases in the Near East during the last decade as well as ways and means for their diagnosis and exclusion' this publication will stimulate the development of national, subregional and regional programmes on citrus sanitation.
Such programmes should be aimed at eliminating or containing existing diseases and improving production, maintenance and distribution of healthy (pathogen-tested) planting material. This will contribute towards the high quality and productivity of citrus in the region, and will help to minimize the threat posed by devastating citrus diseases that are not yet present or that are of limited distribution.
Mahmoud M. Taher
FAO Regional Plant Protection Officer for the Near East
<section>2</section>
Abbreviations
BLO
Bacterium-like organism
CCaV
Citrus cachexia viroid
CCLV
Citrus crinkly leaf virus
cDNA
Complementary DNA
CEV
Citrus exocortis viroid
CHSU
Citrus hop stunt viroid
CLRV
Citrus leaf rugose virus
CLV
Citrus leprosis virus
CPV
Citrus psorosis virus
CRSV
Citrus ringspot virus
CTLV
Citrus tatterleaf virus
CTV
Citrus tristeza virus
CVEV
Citrus vein enation virus
CV
Citrus viroid
CVV
Citrus variegation virus
DNA
Deoxyribonucleic acid
ELISA
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
IgG
Immunoglobulin
MA
Monoclonal antibody
MLO
Mycoplasma-like organism
PCR
Polimerase chain reaction
PSTV
Potato spindle tuber viroid
RGG
Rio Grande gummosis
RNA
Ribonucleic acid
SDV
Satsuma dwarf virus
sPAGE
Sequential polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis
TMV
Tobacco mosaic virus
TNV
Tobacco necrosis virus
<section>3</section>
Introduction
The Mediterranean and subtropical zones, situated approximately between latitudes 20° and 35°N and extending from Morocco in the west to Pakistan in the east, together represent one of the largest and most ancient citrus-growing regions of the world. Mediterranean countries also contribute to make this region one of the foremost commercial citrus production areas, and other countries in the region have recently begun to develop modern citrus industries or are ready to do so.
Diseases are among the major factors limiting plant production. Infectious, graft-transmissible diseases caused by viruses, viroids or phloem-restricted prokaryotes (mollicutes and bacteria) must receive special attention since plants, once contaminated by these virus and virus-like agents, cannot be cured. The only control measure is prevention. This is of particular importance in the case of woody perennial plants, such as citrus, which have a productive life extending over many years. If such plants are propagated from infected budwood, they stay infected throughout their life and eventually deteriorate owing to the presence of infectious agents (pathogens) over many years. If the effect is severe, the trees either die or have to be destroyed.
Several techniques are known for producing plants free of virus and virus-like agents. More than any other fruit, citrus has greatly benefited from these methods. One such technique is shoot-tip grafting, which was developed specifically for citrus and has been used with great success over the last ten years. Hence, large-scale production of citrus trees free of virus and virus-like agents is no longer a technical research problem. Programmes for the production of such trees are in progress in several countries, where thousands of healthy nursery trees have already been planted in the field.
Unfortunately, a young orchard planted with healthy trees will not necessarily stay free of infectious agents, some of which are transmitted by insect vectors. For instance, citrus tristeza virus (CTV) is spread by aphids; Spiroplasma citri, the mycoplasmal agent of stubborn disease, has leafhopper vectors; the bacterium associated with greening disease is transmitted by psyllids. Therefore, if both the vector and the disease agent occur in a given area, healthy trees may become infected by natural contamination. It is not enough to produce healthy trees. It is also important to see that the trees stay healthy by controlling the vectors as much as possible so as to keep natural contamination to a minimum. In the case of tristeza, this cannot be achieved but, fortunately, one can "live with" this disease by choosing tolerant rootstocks and scion varieties. Indeed, it is well known that, for a given disease, certain citrus species or varieties are tolerant while others are
susceptible. A tolerant species or host plant is one in which the virus or virus-like agent is able to multiply but in which it does not induce symptoms. In a susceptible host, on the other hand, multiplication of the agent results in symptom development. In a resistant host, the agent cannot multiply and hence there can be no symptoms.
About 30 economically important virus and virus-like diseases of citrus are known. Some agents of these diseases have insect vectors. Not all of these agents are necessarily present in every citrus-growing area of the world, and this is especially true for insect-transmitted agents. While CTV is endemic in Asia and killed 20 million trees in South America between 1930 and 1950, it has not yet reached North Africa, even though it has been spreading in Spain since the 1950s.
It is thus essential to assess periodically the disease status of citrus in the various citrus-growing regions of the world. An accurate knowledge of the disease agents and/or vectors present or absent in a given area is a prerequisite for the development, maintenance and improvement of commercial citrus production.
In 1969-70, FAO consultant H. Chapot visited several countries in North Africa and the Near East to determine the nature of the problems, including diseases, affecting citrus. However, major developments have occurred since then. The agents of stubborn and greening have been characterized and shown to be entirely unrelated. Their respective insect vectors have been identified. Exocortis and cachexia have been shown to be viroids. Lethal diseases, such as blight, have assumed unprecedented importance. Entirely new diseases, such as witches' broom disease of lime trees in Oman, have appeared and are causing great concern. New techniques for the detection and characterization of the agents of tristeza, exocortis, cachexia, stubborn, greening, etc. have been developed. Finally, many countries in the Near East and the Arabian peninsula wish to produce more and better citrus.
For these reasons, a survey of virus and virus-like diseases of citrus was carried out by FAO in the Near East region. Surveys were carried out by the author and A. Salibe of Faculdade de Ciencias Agronômicas, Universidade Estadual Paulista Horticultura, Botucatu, Brazil.
The author surveyed the following countries: the Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Jordan, Oman, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, the Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, the United Arab Emirates and Yemen. His experience with citrus in Algeria, Cyprus, Egypt, Morocco and Turkey was also taken into account. Prof. Salibe visited Algeria, Cyprus, Egypt, Jordan, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Morocco, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia and Turkey. In previous years he had visited France, Greece, Israel, Italy, Lebanon, Portugal and Spain. Mediterranean countries for which the citrus disease situation is already well documented were not included in the surveys.
Pakistan is particularly important because it is at the point where the Near East meets Asia and it is via Pakistan and Afghanistan that citrus diseases typical of Asia, such as tristeza and greening, may find their way to the Near East. Vice versa, stubborn disease might pass this way from the Near East to Asia. Moreover, being relatively close to Oman, Pakistan could have harboured the new, lethal witches' broom disease which is killing more and more lime trees in the former country.
Somalia was surveyed because of its proximity to the tristeza- and greening-infected countries, Ethiopia and Kenya. The surveys were carried out between 1981 and 1987 but additional data, obtained by the author from various colleagues at a later date, have also been included in this review.
The review includes the essential points of FAO reports on virus and virus-like diseases of citrus in the various countries surveyed by Bové and Salibe. In order to make it as complete and as useful as possible, the first seven chapters were prepared by the author to precede the chapters concerned more specifically with the diseases in the various countries. These supplementary chapters cover: "The nature of virus and virus-like disease agents of citrus" (Chapter I); "interactions between virus and virus-like pathogens and the host plant: susceptible, tolerant and resistant citrus species" (Chapter 2); "Transmission and spread of virus and virus-like pathogens" (Chapter 3); "Techniques for the detection and identification of virus and virus-like pathogens" (Chapter 4); "Production of citrus clones free of virus and virus-like pathogens" (Chapter 5); "Short description of major citrus diseases in the Near East" (Chapter 6); "Citrus stubborn disease in the Syrian Arab Republic
and natural transmission of its causal agent, Spiroplasma citri" (Chapter 7). Prof. Bové also wrote the conclusion to the review and updated Tables 5, 6, 7 and 8 on host susceptibility and tolerance and the Annex Table on geographical distribution of citrus diseases, which first appeared in Bové and Vogel, 1980.
The preparation of this review was proposed by Dr M.M. Taher, FAO Regional Plant Protection Officer for the Near East and North Africa. Without his perseverance, it would never have been published. Many thanks to him.
Last but not least, Colette Bové (IRFA-INRA) has devoted a considerable amount of her time to getting everything into shape. Many thanks to her, also.
MAP 1 Near East region
<section>4</section>
Part I
Chapter 1: The nature of virus and virus-like disease agents of citrus
Chapter 2: Interactions between virus and virus-like pathogens and the host plant: susceptible, tolerant and resistant citrus species
Chapter 3: Transmission and spread of virus and virus-like citrus pathogens
Chapter 4: Techniques for the detection and identification of virus and virus-like citrus pathogens
Chapter 5: Production of citrus clones free of virus and virus-like pathogens
Chapter 6: Short description of major citrus diseases in the near east
Chapter 7: Citrus stubborn disease in the syrian arab republic and natural transmission of its causal agent, Spiroplasma citri
Chapter 1: The nature of virus and virus-like disease agents of citrus
Viruses, viroids and phloem-restricted prokaryotes
Graft-transmissible diseases of unknown aetiology
Bibliography
Several of the virus and virus-like agents of citrus diseases have been characterized. These are viruses, viroids or phloem-restricted prokaryotes, the term "virus-like" applying to the latter two. Like viruses, viroids and phloem-restricted prokaryotes are graft-transmissible and are therefore said to be "virus-like", a term that is also conveniently used for infectious, graft-transmitted agents that have not yet been characterized.
Viruses, viroids and phloem-restricted prokaryotes
Properties
Viruses, viroids and phloem-restricted prokaryotes are pathogens that produce diseases in susceptible hosts.
Viruses and viroids are obligate cellular parasites which can only multiply in living host cells. In the absence of such cells they are inert, incapable of autonomous replication nor can they be cultured in cell-free media. These properties reflect the fact that viruses and viroids do not possess the structure of cells, but have a simpler structure and are macro-molecules. In contrast, phloem-restricted prokaryotes have a cellular structure. Some, such as the spiroplasmas, can be cultured in cell-free media - others cannot, perhaps because adequate media have not yet been developed or because they are obligate parasites.
Thus, viruses and viroids, on the one hand, and phloem-restricted prokaryotes, on the other, are totally different in nature. However, they have in common the fact that they are endocellular, that is, they are localized within certain cells of their host: for instance, the sieve tubes of the phloem tissue for the spiroplasmas; the sieve tubes and their companion cells for tristeza virus and the parenchyma cells for the exocortis viroid. This endocellular localization explains why viruses and viroids as well as the phloem-restricted prokaryotes can all be propagated by bud multiplication. In addition, they can be transmitted by graft inoculation of tissue-inoculum (bark, bud, leaf-piece, budwood stick) from an infected to a healthy plant. The successful transmission of a pathogen by graft inoculation implies that the transmitted pathogen is able to spread from the inoculum into the receiver plant, which it will then invade, becoming systemically distributed throughout the
plant. Plants that are invaded by the pathogen are "systemic" hosts, in contrast to "local" hosts in which the pathogen is only present locally. In systemic hosts, however, certain agents, such as Spiroplasma citri, are sometimes unevenly or poorly distributed.
Until the discovery of viroids and phloem-restricted prokaryotes in the late 1960s, only viruses were thought to be graft-transmissible. Consequently, the graft transmissible pathogens of greening and stubborn diseases of citrus were thought to be viruses. Today they are known to be prokaryotic cells, not viruses. Their endocellular localization and ability to invade host plants systemically explains their graft transmissibility.
Structure and replication of viruses
Viruses are formed in their host cells by the association of their constituents. Simple viruses have only two constituents: a nucleic acid molecule contained within a protein coat or capsid. Therefore, the virus particle or virion is called a nucleoprotein or nucleocapsid. The nucleic acid is the genome of the virus, serving as the chemical support of the properties of the virus. The nature of a given virus is determined by its nucleic acid.
The nucleic acid is either ribonucleic acid (RNA) or deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA). Hence, certain viruses are RNA viruses while others are DNA viruses. Most plant viruses are RNA viruses; for example, CTV and citrus variegation virus (CVV). The protein coat of the virus protects the internal nucleic acid from the harsh extracellular environment and against degradation by nucleases (enzymes that hydrolyse nucleic acids).
The protein coat is made up of a large number of identical proteins, the so-called coat proteins or capsid proteins. The gathering or assembly of the capsid proteins to form the coat or capsid follows two major paths. In one, the capsid proteins are assembled according to a helical mode or symmetry (Fig. 1A). This helical symmetry leads to virus particles or virions with a rod-shaped (Fig. 1B) or filamentous (Fig. 1C) morphology. Virions of CTV have a helical symmetry and are filamentous (Fig. 1C).
In other viruses, the capsid proteins are arranged according to icosahedral symmetry (Fig. 2A). The icosahedron is a body with 20 equilateral triangular facets, 12 vertices and 30 edges. As a geometric body, the icosahedron has a centre of symmetry as well as planes and axes of symmetry. Icosahedral virions, however, have only axes of symmetry. Hence, icosahedral symmetry, as applied to viruses, is restricted to the symmetry axes of the icosahedron (Fig. 2A). In the simplest icosahedral virion there are three capsid proteins on each of the 20 facets of an imaginary icosahedron and they are placed in such a way as to respect the axial symmetries of the icosahedron. The capsid of such a virion contains 20x3=60 capsid proteins. However, most icosahedral viruses have more than 60 capsid proteins. Virions have been found with 180 (Fig. 2B), 240, 420, 540, 960 and 1 500 capsid proteins.
In the case of CTV, the genome of the virus consists of one large RNA molecule. Each CTV virion contains one such molecule and there is only one type of nucleocapsid. Other RNA viruses have divided genomes; for example, in the case of the icosahedral CVV, there are four nucleocapsids. The smallest has a diameter of 25 nm and contains the shortest RNA. The largest measures 32 nm and contains the longest RNA. Here, the genome is made up of several RNA pieces, each one encapsulated in a specific nucleocapsid. Such viruses have divided genomes and are characterized by multiple nucleocapsid components: four in the case of CVV and citrus leaf rugose virus (CLRV) and two in the case of satsuma dwarf virus (SDV) (see Table 1).
The helical or icosahedral nucleocapsid of certain viruses is surrounded by a membraneous envelope derived from a host cell membrane in which proteins of viral origin are embedded. Although most plant viruses are non-enveloped, enveloped animal viruses are common, and an enveloped RNA virus is associated with citrus leprosis.
Table I lists the viruses which have been shown to be the causal agents of, or associated with, diseases of citrus. The pathogens of additional citrus diseases are probably viruses also (see Table 1), but they have not yet been fully characterized. The agent of citrus ring-spot virus (CRSV) is filterable through a 220 nm filter but is highly unstable and difficult to concentrate or purify. It apparently has two nucleoprotein components, as long and short filamentous particles containing single-stranded RNA have been isolated. Similar particles have been observed in Spanish isolates of ringspot, psorosis A and psorosis B (Navas-Castillo, 1991). It is interesting to note that Florida isolate CRSV-6 is able to induce psorosis-like bark scaling on sweet orange plants. In the case of vein enation-woody gall (citrus vein enation virus [CVEV]), spherical virus-like particles of approximately 28 nm in diameter have been observed in gall tissue by electron microscopy and purified
from excised enations. The virus is probably a member of the luteovirus group. Flexuous, rod-shaped particles, approximately 654 to 680 nm, were purified from citrons infected with the agent of a California isolate of citrus psorosis virus (CPV). Cowpeas, mechanically infected with the agent of tatterleaf-citrange stunt (citrus tatterleaf virus [CTLV]), were found to contain isometric particles composed of two RNA molecules and a putative capsid protein with a molecular weight of 22 x 103. Other reports indicate CTLV to be a helical virus of 650 nm with a helix pitch of 3.5 nm. These particles could, however, be those of a latent virus found in symptomless citrus material.
Viruses are infectious. In molecular terms, therefore, a virion that has entered a host cell induces this cell to produce hundreds or thousands of new progeny virions, all identical to the infecting virion. In other words, the virus "replicates" in this host cell. The essence of virus replication is becoming increasingly understood. For new virions to be formed, the cell has to produce the two constituents of the virions: nucleic acid molecules and capsid protein molecules. The new virions will be produced by the combination or association of the capsid proteins with the nucleic acid. In the case of icosahedral RNA viruses, capsids without RNA may be formed in an initial stage, and the RNA molecule will penetrate into an empty capsid at a later stage. Most plant viruses are single-stranded RNA viruses. The RNA of these viruses carries at least two important genes which healthy, uninfected cells obviously do not possess: one gene codes for the viral enzyme, RNA replicase,
which will be responsible for the synthesis of the new viral RNA molecules; the other gene codes for the capsid protein.
Thus, the formation of new virions occurs in four steps:
i) infecting viral RNA codes for RNA replicase;
ii) RNA replicase synthesizes new viral RNA;
iii) new viral RNA codes for new capsid proteins; and
iv) new viral RNA from ii) and new capsid proteins from iii) combine to form new virions.
TABLE 1 Characterized or partially characterized citrus viruses
Disease or agent Virus Envelope Symmetry Nucleo- capsid
components Diameter of isometric virions (nm) Length of helical virions (nm) Virus group
Algerian navel orange virus ANOV No H 780
Infectious variegation-crinkly feat CVV No I 4 25-32 Ilarvirus
Leaf rugose CLRV No I 4 25-32 Ilarvirus
Leprosis-zonate chlorosis CLV Yes H 1 120
Psorosis (Calif. isolate) CPV No H 1 654-680³
Ringspot CRSV No H 2
Satsuma dwarf² SDV No 1 2 26
Tatterleaf -citrange stunt CTLV No I 2 30
Tobacco necrosis virus citrus isolate TNV-CI No I 1 30
Tristeza CTV No H 1 2 000 Closterovirus
Vein enation-woody gall CVEV No I 1 28 Luteovirus
Yellow mottle CYM No H 1 690-740
Notes:
^1 H: helical. I: icosahedral, isometric
^2 Citrus mosaic virus, natsudaidai dwarf virus and navel orange infectious mottling virus from Japan are serologically related to SDV.
^3 Short and long filamentous particles with single-stranded RNA.
Structure and replication of viroids
Viroids differ from viruses both in their structure and their mode of replication.
Viroids, such as the pathogens of exocortis and cachexia diseases of citrus (citrus exocortis viroid [CEV] and citrus cachexia viroid [CCaV], are small, infectious, single-stranded circular RNA molecules without a protein capsid. While in the virion, viral RNA is coated by capsid proteins, viroids are naked (non-coated) RNA molecules. Viroid RNA is ten times smaller than the smallest viral RNA. For instance, CCaV and CEV have, respectively, 300 and 371 nucleotide residues; the RNA of bacteriophage MS2 has 3 569 residues while that of tobacco mosaic virus (TMV) has 6 399. With some 20 000 residues, the RNA of CTV is one of the largest viral RNAs of plants.
The replication of viroids does not involve viroid-coded proteins. Such proteins have never been detected in viroid-infected cells, nor have they ever been obtained with cell-free systems for in vitro protein synthesis using viroid RNA as messenger RNA. Therefore, the replication of viroid RNA must be dependent on host enzymes.
TABLE 2 Biological properties of citrus viroid RNAs
Viroid RNA
Infectivity and symptom intensity^1 on
Gynura
Cucumber
Citron^2
Chrysanthemum
CEV 
CV-Ia 
CV-Ib 
CV-IIa 
CV-IIb 
CV-IIc 
CV-IIIa 
CV-IIIb 
CV-IIIc 
CV-IIId 
CV-IV 
Source: Duran-Vila et al.,1988a, 1988b and personal communication.
Notes:
^1 Symptom intensity: ++++, severe; +++, moderate; ++, mild; +, symptomless carrier (positive viroid replication); -, symptomless (no viroid replication).
^2 Note that all viroids replicate in citron.
Other viroids besides those of exocortis and cachexia have been identified in citrus. The citrus viroids (CVs) can be classified into five different groups: CEV, CV-I, CV-II, CV-III and CV-IV. CCaV is a member of group CV-II (CV-IIb, c). Tables 2 and 3 list the biological properties of these viroids. Hop stunt viroid (CHSV) has recently been found in commercial citrus in Sicily, on the basis of DNA-hybridization using DNA-HSV as probe. In fact, this probe reacts with all members of the CV-II group.
Finally, with the knowledge available at present, it appears that exocortis disease constitutes a complex of apparently unrelated viroids, some of which may not produce the classical symptom of the disease (bark scaling) on trifoliate orange.
Phloem-restricted prokaryotes
All living organisms belong to one of three large kingdoms: the archaea (formerly archae-bacteria), the bacteria (formerly eubacteria) and the eucaryota. The latter comprises the so-called "higher" organisms such as plants and animals, including fungi. The cell of these organisms, the eucaryotic cell, is characterized by the presence of a nucleus, a structure in which the cell genome - i.e. the DNA - is surrounded by a double membrane envelope which separates the DNA from the cytoplasm, except during cell division. In contrast, the cell of archaea and bacteria has no nucleus the genomic DNA is not separated from the cytoplasm by a membrane system. Such cells are called prokaryotic. Hence, prokaryotes are unicellular organisms belonging to the archaea or the bacteria.
There are two types of known phloem-restricted prokaryote: bacteria and mollicutes (previously called mycoplasmas) (see Table 4). For instance, the organism associated with citrus greening is a bacterium; the causal agent of citrus stubborn is a mollicute. One of the basic distinctions between bacteria and mollicutes is that bacteria have cell walls while mollicutes do not. The latter are simply surrounded by their cell membrane, a structure common to all living cells. In addition to the cell membrane, the bacteria are enveloped by a bacterial cell wall which is characterized by the presence of a peptidoglycan network, while the archaeal cell wall contains no peptidoglycan.
It has been shown in recent years that mollicutes evolved from bacteria - more precisely from ancestors of the clostridia. Clostridia are bacteria of the Gram-positive type with a low percentage of the bases guanine plus cytosine (G + C) in their DNA. The mollicutes have derived from ancestors of the clostridia by degenerative evolution, that is, by loss of DNA or genome reduction. The amount of DNA in the cell of a mollicute is three to six times less than that in the genera Clostridium, Bacillus and Escherichia. In fact, the mollicutes have the smallest amount of DNA of all self-replicating prokaryotes: they are the smallest and simplest of all living cells. However, they are not primitive organisms as they are the descendants of certain bacteria. Like the clostridia, they have a DNA with a low percentage of G + C, for example, only 26 percent in the case of S. citri.
TABLE 3 Biological properties of citrus viroid RNAs
Viroid RNA
Symptoms in citron
Symptoms in Parson's Special mandarin
Symptoms in Poncirus trifoliata
Stunting
Leaf epinasty
Midvein necrosis
Petiole necrosis
Leaf tip browning
CEV ++++ leaf
curling
++++ general
necrosis
+++ + ? - bark scaling (stunting)^2
CV-Ia + leaf
bending
+ point
necrosis
+ - - - inverse pitting^3
CV-Ib + + + - - - ?
CV-IIa - - - +/- +/-^3 - bark cracking^4
CV-IIb - - - - - +++ ?
CV-IIc - - - - - +++ ?
CV-IIIa ++ leaf
dropping
++ general
necrosis
CV-IIIb ++ ++ + + - - grooving^3
CV-IIIc ++ ++ + + - - ?
CV-IIId ++ ++ + + - - ?
CV-IV ++ leaf
dropping
++ general
necrosis
Source: Duran-Vila et al., 1988a, 1988b; Semancik, 1988; Semancik, Roistacher and Duran-Vila, 1988; and personal communications of Duran-Vila and Semancik in 1989.
Notes:
^1 Symptom intensity: ++++, severe; +++, severe to moderate; ++, mild; +, very mild; +/-, barely visible; -, no symptoms, but positive viroid replication; ?, the type of symptoms induced by infections with single viroids is not yet known.
^2 According to Garnsey, personal communication, 1989.
^3 According to Roistacher, Bash and Semancik, 1994.
^4 According to Nauer et al., 1988.
TABLE 4: Phloem restricted - prokaryotes of citrus
Characteristics Spiroplasma citri Mycoplasma-like organisms (MLOs) Bacteria-like organisms (BLOs)
Disease in citrus Stubborn Witches'broom of lime Rubbery wood of lemon Greening
Type of prokaryote Mollicute Mollicute Mollicute Bacterium
Cell wall No No No Yes (Gram-negative type)
Habitat, plant Phloem Phloem Phloem Phloem
Habitat, insect Gut, haemolymph, salivary glands Probably Probably Gut, haemolymph,
Gut, haemolymph, salivary glands Gut, haemolymph, salivary glands salivary glands
Morphology Helical Pleiomorphic Pleiomorphic Filamentous and round forms
Mobility Yes Not known Not known Not known
Cultured Yes (1971) No No No
Koch's postulates fulfilled Yes (1974) No No No
Polyclonal antibodies available Yes (1971) No No No
Monoclonal antibodies available Yes (1981)) Yes (1988) No Yes (1987)
Molecular probes available Yes (1984) Yes (1990) No Yes (1990)
Insect vector Leafhoppers Not yet identified Not yet identified Psyllids
To date, only one phloem-restricted bacterium has been found in citrus: the organism associated with greening disease (Figs 3 to 21). It has been shown that this bacterium has a membraneous cell wall of the Gramnegative type. Reports claiming culture of the greening bacterium have appeared but, at present, there is no experimental evidence to show that the cultured organism is indeed the bacterial agent of greening.
There are two types of phloem-restricted mollicute. The spiroplasmas, such as S. citri (Figs 22 to 24) - the agent of citrus stubborn-disease - have a helical morphology, are mobile and can be cultured. The mycoplasma-like organisms (MLOs) have no defined morphology: they are "pleiomorphic" and have never been obtained in culture. The MLOs have no cell wall, which is why they have always been assumed to be mollicute-like.
It was shown in 1989 that the MLOs are indeed true mollicutes, as they have DNA with a low percentage of G + C, the size of their genome is similar to that of the mollicutes and the nucleotide sequence of their 16 S ribosomal RNA is that of members of the mollicutes. An MLO is associated with the new citrus disease of increasing concern that is affecting more and more lime trees in Oman (Figs 25 to 30). In India, rubbery wood of citrus also involves an MLO.
Graft-transmissible diseases of unknown aetiology
The virus-like agents of the following graft-transmitted diseases of citrus have not yet been characterized: blight; brittle twig yellows; bud-union crease in Parson's Special mandarin on Volkamer lemon rootstock; concave gum-blind pocket; cristacortis; fatal yellows; fovea; gummy bark; gum pocket-gummy pitting; impietratura; Kassala disease of grapefruit; leaf curl; leathery leaf of mandarins in India (similar to satsuma dwarf); mosaic disease of citrus in India; Meiwa kumquat disease complex; tarocco pit; yellow corky vein (India) and yellow vein.
As the pathogens of these diseases are graft-transmissible, and on the basis of symptomatology, they are assumed to be viruses or viroids rather than phloem-restricted prokaryotes. For instance, the symptoms of gummy bark in sweet orange or those of Kassala disease in grapefruit are similar to those produced by the cachexia viroid in mandarin, which would seem to suggest a viroid aetiology for gummy bark and Kassala disease.
Blight (young tree decline) in Florida, declinio in Brazil, marchitamiento repenting in Uruguay, fruta bolita or declinamiento in Argentina and amachamiento in Mexico are similar diseases. The pathogen has not been transmitted by ordinary graft inoculation with buds or shoots from affected trees. However, the disease has recently been reproduced in Florida by placing mature, healthy trees adjacent to blighted trees and grafting the roots together. Positive transmissions have also been obtained with pieces of root from blight infected trees graft-inoculated to roots of healthy trees, indicating that blight is caused by an infectious graft-transmissible agent. Blight has not yet been reported in the Mediterranean or Near East regions.
Brittle twig yellows in Iran, fatal yellows in California, Meiwa kumquat disease complex in Spain, yellow corky vein in India, kumquat disease in Corsica and yellow vein in California are only of local significance. Leaf curl has been eradicated in Brazil; its agent is kept under quarantine greenhouse conditions in Bordeaux, France.
Kassala disease of grapefruit has not yet been shown to be graft-transmissible. However, as the symptoms of the disease in grapefruit are similar to those of cachexia in mandarin or gummy bark in sweet orange, the possibility of a viroid aetiology is apparent.
Bibliography
Ahlawat, Y.S. & Chenulu, V.V. 1985. Rubbery wood - a hitherto unrecorded disease of citrus. Curr. Sci., 54: 580-581.
Ahlawat, Y.S., Nariani, T.K. & Sardar, K.K. 1979. Leathery leaf - a new virus disease of citrus in India. Phytopathol., 32: 198201.
Ahlawat, Y.S., Chenulu, V.V., Viswanath, S.M., Pandley, P.K. & Bhagabati, K.N. 1985. Mosaic disease of citrus in India. Curr. Sci., 54: 873-874.
Albertini, D., Vogel, R., Bové, C. & Bové, J.M. 1988. Transmission and preliminary characterization of citrus tristeza virus strain K. In Proc. 10th Conf: IOCV, p. 17-21. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Bar-Joseph, M., Garnsey, S.M. & Gonsalves, D. 1979. The closteroviruses: a distinct group of elongated plant viruses. Adv. Virus Res., 25: 93-168.
Bar-Joseph, M., Loebenstein, G. & Cohen, J. 1970. Partial purification of virus-like particles associated with the citrus tristeza disease. Phytopathol., 60: 75-78.
Bové, J.M. 1984. Wall-less prokaryotes of plants. Ann. Rev. Phytopathol., 22: 361396.
Bové, J.M. 1988. Spiroplasma citri: fifteen years of research. p. 274-278. In Proc. 10th Conf: IOCV, Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Bové, J.M. & Vogel, R., eds. 1981. Description and illustration of virus and virus-like diseases of citrus. A collection of colour slides. Paris, IRFA SETCO-FRUITS.
Bové, J.M., Garnier, M., Mjeni, A.M. & Khayrallah, A. 1988. Witches' broom disease of small-fruited acid lime trees in Oman: first MLO disease of citrus. In Proc. 10th Conf IOCV, p. 307-309. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Bové, C., Vogel, R., Albertini, D. & Bové, J.M. 1988. Discovery of a strain of tristeza virus (K) inducing no symptoms in Mexican lime. In Proc. 10th Conf: IOCV, p. 14-16. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Bové, J.M., Carle, P., Garnier, M., Renaudin, J. & Saillard, C. 1989. Molecular and cellular biology of spiroplasmas. In R.F. Whitcomb & J.G. Tully, eds. The mycoplasmas p. 244-364. New York, Academic Press.
Brlansky, R.H., Lee, R.F. & Timmer, L.W., eds. 1991. Proc. 11th Conf. IOCV, Florida. 24-28 October 1989. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Calavan, E.C., ed. 1976. Proc. 7th Conf: IOCV, Greece, 29 September-4 October 1975. Riverside, Univ. Calif. 229 pp.
Calavan, E.C., Garnsey, S.M. & Timmer, L.W., eds. 1980. Proc. 8th Conf IOCV, Australia, 13-31 May 1979. Riverside, Univ. Calif. 300 pp.
Calvert, L.A., Lee, R.F. & Hiebert, E. 1988. Characterization of the RNA species of citrus variegation virus with complementary DNA clones. In Proc. I 0th Conf. IOCV, p. 327-333. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Childs, J.F.L., ed. 1968. Proc. 4th Conf: IOCV, Italy, 2-12 October 1966. Gainesville Univ. Fla. Press. 401 pp.
Da Graca, J.V. & Maharaj, S.B. 1991. Citrus vein enation virus, a probable luteovirus. In Proc. 11th Conf IOCV, p. 391-394. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Davino, M. & Garnsey, S.M. 1984. Purification, characterization and serology of a mild strain of citrus infectious variegation virus from Florida. In Proc. 9th Conf: IOCV, p. 196-203. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Derrick, K.S., Brlansky, R.H., Lee, R.F., Timmer, L.W. & Nguyen, T.K. 1988. Two components associated with citrus ring-spot virus. In Proc. 10th Conf: IOCV, p. 340-342. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Derrick, K.S., Lee, R.F., Hewitt, B.G., Barthe, G.A. & da Graca, J.V. 1991. Characterization of citrus ringspot virus. In Proc. 11th Conf: IOCV, p. 386-390. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Diener, T.O. 1987. The viroids. New York, Plenum Press.
Duran-Vila, N., Pina, J.A., Ballester, J.F., Juarez, J., Roistacher, C.N., Rivera-Bustamante, R. & Semancik, J.S. 1988a. The citrus exocortis disease: a complex of viroid-RNAs. In Proc. 10th Conf: IOCV, p. 152-164. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Duran-Vila, N., Roistacher, C.N., Rivera-Bustamante, R. & Semancik, J.S. 1988b. A definition of citrus viroid groups and their relationship to the exocortis disease. J. Gen. Virol., 69: 3069-3080.
Fraser, L.R., Broadbent, P. & Cox, J.E. 1976. Gummy pitting of Poncirus trifoliata: its association with dwarfing of citrus in New South Wales. In Proc. 7th Conf: IOCV, p. 147-151. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Garnier, M., Danel, N. & Bové, J.M. 1984. The greening organism is a Gramnegative bacterium. In Proc. 9th Conf IOCV, p. 115-125. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Garnsey, S.M. 1975. Two mechanically transmissible viruses in navel orange selections introduced from Algeria. Plant Dis. Rep., 59: 689-693.
Garnsey, S.M. 1975. Purification and properties of citrus leaf-rugose virus. Phytopathol., 65: 50-57.
Garnsey, S.M., Timmer, L.W. & Dodds, J.A., eds. 1984. Proc. 9th Conf: IOCV, Argentina, 9-13 May 1983. Riverside, Univ. Calif. 300 pp.
Gonsalves, D. & Garnsey, S.M. 1976. Association of particle size with sedimentation velocity of nucleoprotein components of citrus variegation and citrus leaf rugose viruses. In Proc. 7th Conf: IOCV, p. 109115. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Gonsalves, D., Purcifull, D.E. & Garnsey, S.M. 1978. Purification and serology of citrus tristeza virus. Phytopathol., 68: 553-559.
Igwegbe, E.C.K. & Calavan, E.C. 1970. Occurrence of mycoplasma-like bodies in phloem of stubborn-infected seedlings. Phytopathol., 60: 1525-1526.
Kitajima, E.W., Silva, D.M., Oliviera, A.R., Muller, G.W. & Costa, A.S. 1964. Thread-like particles associated with tristeza disease of citrus. Nature, 201: 1011-1012.
Klug, A. & Caspar, D.L.D. 1960. The structure of small viruses. Adv. Virus Res., 7: 225.
Levy, L. & Gumpf, D.J. 1991. Studies on the psorosis disease of citrus and preliminary characterization of a flexuous virus associated with the disease. In Proc. 11th Conf: IOCV, p. 319-336. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Marco, G.M., Semancik, J.S. & Gumpf, D.J. 1991. Cucumo-like virus isolated from cow pea indicator plants manifesting the citrus tatterleaf virus syndrome. In Proc. 11th Conf: IOCV, p. 352-357. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Markham, P.G., Townsend, R., Bar-Joseph, M., Daniels, M.J., Plaskitt, A. & Meddins, B.M. 1974. Spiroplasmas are the causal agents of citrus little-leaf disease. Ann. Appl. Biol., 78: 49-57.
Matthews, R.E.F. 1981. Plant virology, 2nd ed. New York, Academic Press.
Nauer, E.M., Roistacher, C.N., Calavan, E.C. & Carson, T.L. 1988. The effect of citrus exocortis viroid (CEV) and related mild citrus viroids (CV) on field performance of Washington navel orange on two rootstocks. In Proc. 10th Conf: IOCV, p. 204-210. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Navarro, L., Pina, J.A., Ballester, J.F., Moreno, P. & Cambra, M. 1984. A new graft-transmissible disease found in Nagami kumquat. In Proc. 9th Conf: IOCV, p. 234-240. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Navas-Castillo, J. 1991. Caracterización de las infermedades del grupo psoriasis de los cítricos y ensayos de purificación de virus associados. Univ. Valencia, Spain. (Ph.D. thesis)
Nour-Eldin, F. 1956. Phloem discoloration of sweet orange. Phytopathol., 46: 238239.
Price, W.C., ed. 1961. Proc. 2nd Conf. IOCV, 7- 11 November 1960. Gainesville, Univ. Fla. Press. 265 pp.
Price, W.C., ed. 1965. Proc. 3rd Conf: IOCV' Brazil, 16-25 September 1963. Gainesville, Univ. Fla. Press. 319 pp.
Price, W.C., ed. 1972. Proc. 5th Conf: IOCV, Japan, 30 October-8 November 1969. Gainesville, Univ. Fla. Press. 295 pp.
Reichert, I. 1959. A survey of citrus virus disease in the Mediterranean area. In J.M. Wallace, ed. Citrus virus diseases, p. 23-28. Berkeley, Div. Agric. Sci., Univ. Calif.
Reuther, W., Calavan, E.C. & Carman, G.E. 1978. The citrus industry, vol. IV. Crop protection. Revised ed. Berkeley, Div. Agric. Sci., Univ. Calif.
Roistacher, C.N. 1988. The cachexia and xyloporosis diseases of citrus - a review; Citrus tatterleaf virus: further evidence for a single virus complex. In Proc. 10th Conf IOCV, p. 116-124; 353-359. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Roistacher, C.N., Bash, J.A. & Semancik, J.S. 1993. Three distinct disease symptoms in Poncirus trifoliata induced by three citrus viroids from three specific groups. In Proc. 12th Conf. IOCV, p. 173-179. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Saglio, P., Lhospital, M., Laflèche, D., Dupont, G., Bové, J.M., Tully, J.G. & Freundt, E.A. 1973. Spiroplasma citri gen. and sp.n.: a mycoplasma-like organism associated with "stubborn" disease of citrus. Int. J. Syst. Bacteriol., 23: 191-204.
Salibe, A.A. 1965. Susceptibility of citrus varieties to leaf-curl virus. In Proc. 3rd Conf: IOCV, p. 175-178. Gainesville, Univ. Fla. Press.
Samadi, M., Cochran, L.C. & Martinez, A.L. 1977. Brittle twig yellows, a new disorder of sweet orange in southern Iran. Proc. Int. Soc. Citricult., 3: 900.
Schneider, H. 1984. Host range of the fatal yellows disease. In Proc. 9th Conf IOCV, p. 222-228. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Schwarz, R.E. & McClean, A.P.D. 1969. Gumpocket, a new virus-like disease of Poncirus trifoliata. Plant Dis. Rep., 53: 336-339.
Semancik, J.S. 1987. Viroids and viroid-like pathogens. Boca Raton, Florida, CRC Press.
Semancik, J.S. 1988. Citrus exocortis disease - 1976 to 1986. In Proc. 10th Conf IOCV, p. 136-151. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Semancik, J.S. & Duran-Vila, N. 1991. The grouping of citrus viroids: additional physical and biological determinants and relationships with diseases of citrus. In Proc. 11th Conf IOCV, p. 178-188. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Semancik, J.S., Roistacher, C.N. & Duran-Vila, N. 1988. A new viroid is the causal agent of the citrus cachexia disease. In Proc. 10th Conf IOCV, p. 125-135. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Timmer, L.W., Garnsey, S.M. & Navarro, L., eds. 1988. Proc. 10th Conf IOCV, Valencia, Spain, 17-21 November 1986. Riverside, Univ. Calif. 430 pp.
Timmer, L.W., Brlansky, R.H., Derrick, K.S. & Lee, R.F. 1991. Transmission of citrus blight by root graft inoculation. In Proc. 11th Conf. IOCV, p. 244-249. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Ushiyama, K., Usugi, T. & Hibino, H. I 984. A new citrus virus disease: citrus yellow mottle. In Proc. 9th Conf. IOCV, p. 204210. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Usugi, T. & Saito, Y. 1979. Satsuma dwarf virus. CMI/AAB Descriptions of plant viruses, No. 208.
Vogel, R. & Bové, J.M. 1968. Cristacortis, a virus disease inducing stem pitting on sour orange and other citrus species. In Proc. 4th Conf: IOCV, p. 221-228. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Vogel, R. & Bové, J.M. 1988. Graft transmission from kumquat of an agent inducing bud-union crease in Parson's Special mandarin grafted on Volkamer lemon rootstock. In Proc. 10th Conf: IOCV, p. 367-369. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Wallace, J.M., ed. 1959. Citrus virus diseases. Berkeley, Div. Agric. Sci., Univ. Calif.
Wallace, J.M. & Drake, R.J. 1959. Citrus vein enation. In J.M. Wallace, ed. Citrus virus diseases. p. 163-165. Berkeley, Div. Agric. Sci., Univ. Calif.
Wallace, J.M. & Drake, R.J. 1961. Induction of woody galls by wounding of citrus with vein enation virus. Plant Dis. Rep., 45: 682-686.
Wallace, J.M. & Drake, R.J. 1962. Tatterleaf, a previously undescribed virus effect on citrus. Plant Dis. Rep., 46: 211 -212.
Weathers, L.G. 1960. Yellow-vein disease of citrus and studies of interactions between yellow-vein and other viruses of citrus. Virology, 11: 753-764.
Weathers, L.G. & Cohen, M., eds. 1974. Proc. 6th Conf: IOCV, Swaziland, 21-28 August 1972. Berkeley, Div. Agric. Sci., Univ. Calif. 235 pp.
Whitcomb, R.F. & Tully, J.G. 1989. The mycoplasmas, vol. V. New York, Academic Press.
Whiteside, J.O., Garnsey, S.M. & Timmer, L.W. 1988. Compendium of citrus diseases. St Paul, Minnesota, APS Press.
<section>5</section>
Chapter 2: Interactions between virus and virus-like pathogens and the host plant: susceptible, tolerant and resistant citrus species
Bibliography
Virus and virus-like pathogens were discovered because they produce diseases. For instance, in the 1930s citrus growers in Argentina noted that sweet orange trees on sour orange rootstock declined and died. This disease was called tristeza. Two other observations were made: trees on certain rootstocks other than sour orange did not decline and sour orange trees and sweet orange trees on their own roots showed no symptoms. Intensive research into the cause of tristeza disease, which eventually killed 20 million trees in South America, led to the discovery in the 1940s that the tristeza agent is transmissible by aphids and graft inoculation. The agent was eventually identified as a virus in the 1960s. It is now recognized that CTV has probably been present in India and the Far East for several centuries although the virus did not attract attention there as the infected citrus trees showed no symptoms and were tolerant of CTV. In Japan, there are many satsuma trees grafted on
trifoliate orange (Poncirus trifoliata), which are infected by CTV but remain symptomless.
These examples show that, for a given virus or virus-like pathogen, not only are there susceptible hosts and host associations, but also tolerant hosts and host associations. In the case of CTV, sweet orange and mandarin species are tolerant of the virus. Sour orange is also tolerant, but when sweet orange or mandarin is grafted on sour orange, the association obtained is susceptible. In fact, most commercial citrus species, except lemon, give a susceptible association when grafted on sour orange. When trifoliate orange and rough lemon are used as rootstocks for sweet orange, mandarin or satsuma, however, the trees are tolerant of CTV. Rough lemon is a tolerant rootstock. Trifoliate orange is more than tolerant, it is resistant to CTV.
Resistant plants are those in which the pathogen is unable to multiply, and such plants do not act as hosts for the agent. Unlike tolerant plants, resistant plants are not only symptomless, they are also free of the agent. In tolerant host plants, the pathogen multiplies without inducing symptoms, but the plants nevertheless carry the agent. Therefore, tolerant plants are sometimes called symptomless carriers. Mandarin is a symptomless carrier of CTV, for instance.
Susceptible host plants are those in which the agent both multiplies and induces symptoms. In tolerant and susceptible plants, the agent is present throughout the host. Such plants are systemic hosts. Furthermore, with certain viruses, such as tobacco necrosis virus (TNV), hypersensitive host plants are known.
When TNV is mechanically inoculated on a leaf, certain leaf cells become infected. The hypersensitive reaction of the plant lies in the production of necrotic rings of dead cells around the points of entry of the virus. These so-called necrotic local lesions prevent the virus from becoming systemically distributed throughout the plant. Such plants are thus free of virus except in the necrotic local lesions. TNV induces necrotic local lesions in several citrus species when it is mechanically inoculated on their leaves.
Tables 5 and 6 list, in alphabetical order, rutaceous and non-rutaceous plants and indicate their susceptibility to or tolerance of the various virus and virus-like pathogens of citrus. Inversely, Tables 7 and 8 list the virus and virus-like diseases of citrus and indicate the symptomatic or symptomless plants. Most citrus species given as symptomless are tolerant. Resistant species are indicated but sometimes it is not known whether species are tolerant or resistant.
The above discussion considered species as susceptible, tolerant or resistant. The situation is, however, more subtle. For instance, there are many sweet orange varieties and many strains of CTV. While Washington navel and Valencia sweet oranges are tolerant of Brazilian strains of CTV, these same strains induce severe symptoms (stem pitting) in Pera sweet orange. Certain strains of CTV from the Far East produce symptoms even on Washington navel and Valencia late sweet orange. Small-fruited acid lime (Kagzi, Key, Mexican, West Indian) seedlings are susceptible to CTV and show CTV-specific symptoms - leaf vein clearing and stem pitting. However, a strain of CTV, discovered recently in Corsica (France), produces no symptoms whatsoever in lime seedlings even though the virus strain multiplies well in the infected lime plants.
These examples show that a given host plant can be tolerant or susceptible, depending on the strain involved and that, vice versa, a given strain can induce symptoms in certain varieties of a species but be symptomless in others. Hence, the distinction between tolerance and susceptibility is not as clear as it would appear to be. According to the strains considered, a given host may show severe, moderate or mild symptoms or even none at all. Moreover, a strain giving a severe reaction in one citrus species may well give a moderate or mild reaction in a different species. When referring to the severity of a strain, therefore, one must indicate the nature of the host in which the severity of the strain is evaluated. For instance, in South Africa there are strains of CTV from sour orange or lemon sources that induce severe stem pitting in acid lime seedlings but no reaction (decline) in sweet orange on sour orange rootstock.
Various strains of an agent can infect a single plant. In Spain, up to 23 different sub-isolates of CTV have been obtained from a single Mexican lime seedling carrying an aphid-transmitted field isolate of the virus. These results suggest that a field plant is rarely infected by a pure strain of an agent, but rather by a population of various strains.
Cross-protection or pre-immunization is based on interference between different strains of a virus in a single plant and refers to the phenomenon in which infection of a plant by a mild strain of a virus protects the plant against a severe strain of that virus. A classical case of cross-protection concerns Pera sweet orange in Brazil. This variety is sensitive to
TABLE 5 Rutaceous and non-rutaceous plants: their susceptibility to citrus virus and virus-like disease agents^1
TABLE 6 Rutaceous and non-rutaceous plants: their tolerance to citrus virus and virus-like disease agents^1
Brazilian strains of CTV in that it shows severe stem pitting in the orchard after natural aphid transmission of the virus. When a nucellar clone of Pera sweet orange was infected with a mild CTV strain, this preimmunized clone showed only mild CTV stem pitting in the field as it was protected against the severe, aphid-transmitted strains of CTV. Over the last 20 years, the preimmunized Pera sweet orange clone has yielded more than 50 million trees without any loss of cross-protection. Today, efforts to find mild CTV strains for cross-protection are carried out in many CTV-affected countries. While cross-protection with mild strains against severe stem pitting strains has generally met with success, mild strains capable of protecting sweet orange trees on sour orange rootstock against CTV-induced decline have yet to be found.
The above considerations apply not only to viral agents, but also to viroids. A good example is that of the viroid responsible for potato spindle tuber (PSTV). This viroid also affects tomatoes. Various PSTV isolates cause mild, moderate, severe or lethal symptoms in tomato. Assuming the isolate that produces the mildest symptoms to be standard, all other isolates differ in certain nucleotides which are either exchanged, inserted or deleted, with the total number of nucleotides (359) being strictly maintained. All these changes are found in only three regions of the PSTV primary nucleotide sequence. For instance, the deletion of a uridylic residue (-U) in region I and insertion of an adenylic residue (+A) in region III changes a mild isolate into a severe one. A lethal isolate has the following modifications: -G and +A in region I,-U +AA in region II, and +C -C -U in region III. In the case of CEV, similar differences in the nucleotide sequences of mild, moderate and severe
isolates probably exist. However, viroids other than CEV are also involved in what is called citrus exocortis disease.
TABLE 7 Citrus virus and virus-like diseases: rutaceous and non-rutaceous plants that are symptomatic
TABLE 8 Citrus virus and virus-like diseases: rutaceous and non rutaceous plants which are symptomless
When a series of stable exocortis isolates (judged by symptoms on inoculated citron plants) were recovered from different citrus sources in California (United States of America and Spain and then analysed by a sequential polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (sPAGE) procedure, some isolates contained CEV but always in association with additional viroids; other isolates did not show the presence of CEV but harboured some of the other viroid RNAs. The effect on P. trifoliata rootstocks of the various viroids listed in Table 3 on p. 12, when singly inoculated into trees on this rootstock, is only partially known, and Table 3 therefore has question marks in the column for P. trifoliata. However, the reactions of P. trifoliata and Troyer citrange rootstocks to the individual viroids are being studied. It is already known that CV-IIa alone induces bark cracking, not bark scaling, on P. trifoliata grafted with sweet orange. This viroid causes the mildest symptoms in citron (see Tables
2 and 3). Recent observations have shown that CV-Ia causes inverse pitting (pinholing) on P. trifoliata and that CV-IIIb causes stem grooving (finger marks) on the same host (see Table 3).
A striking synergism has been observed between CVEV woody gall and citrus yellow vein virus. The symptoms of yellow vein are greatly enhanced in host plants (lime, sweet orange, lemon, rough lemon) also infected with CVEV. This synergism has been used in the identification of virus strains. An unexpected phenomenon of protection by CVEV against CTV has been observed in Japan.
Interferences and interactions among citrus viroids have also been found. Certain citrus viroids (CV-IIa) or viroid combinations (CVIIa + CV-III) may mask or suppress symptom expression of cachexia (CV-IIb). Indeed, there seems to be mutual antagonism between CV-IIa, the viroid producing mild symptoms on citron, and CV-IIb, the cachexia viroid. If CV-IIa prevents CV-IIb from becoming established in Parson's Special mandarin, for instance, there will be no symptom expression of cachexia in the mandarin. This may explain certain irregularities and inconsistencies in symptom expression that have been observed in routine indexing of cachexia on Parson's Special mandarin.
Strain differences have also been established in the case of uncharacterized virus-like agents. For instance, while all isolates of the cristacortis agent induce severe stem pitting on Orlando and Wekiwa tangelos and sour orange, only some isolates cause symptoms on Clementine and a single isolate produces symptoms on lemon.
Bibliography
Bar-Joseph, M., Marcus, R. & Lee, R.F. 1989. The continuous challenge of citrus tristeza virus control. Ann. Rev. Phytopathol., 27: 291-316.
Bové, C., Vogel, R., Albertini, D. & Bové, J.M. 1988. Discovery of a strain of tristeza virus (K) inducing no symptoms in Mexican lime. In Proc. 10th Conf: IOCV, p. 14-16. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Calavan, E.C. & Weathers, L.G. 1961. Evidence for strain differences and stunting with exocortis virus. In Proc. 2nd Conf: IOCV, p. 26-33. Gainesville, Univ. Fla. Press.
Calavan, E.C., Christiansen, D.W. & Weathers, L.G. 1965. Variability of cachexia reactions among varieties of rootstocks and within clonal propagations of citrus. In Proc. 3rd Conf IOCV, p. 78-85. Gainesville, Univ. Fla. Press.
Costa, A.S. & Muller, G.W. 1980. Tristeza control by cross protection: a US-Brazil cooperativesuccess. Plant Dis., 64: 538-541.
Costa, A.S., Grant, T.J. & Moreira, S. 1954. Behaviour of various citrus rootstockscion combinations following inoculation with mild and severe strains of tristeza virus. Proc. Fla Hort. Soc., 67: 26-30.
Duran-Vila, N., Pina, J.A. & Navarro, L. 1991. Exclusion and/or uneven distribution of viroids in four citrus hosts. In Proc. 11th Conf: IOCV, p. 219-223. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Duran-Vila, N., Roistacher, C.N., Rivera-Bustamante, R. & Semancik, J.S. 1988. A definition of citrus viroid groups and their relationship to the exocortis disease. J. Gen. Virol., 69: 3069-3080.
Duran-Vila, N., Pina, J.A., Ballester, J.F., Juarez, J., Roistacher, C.N., Rivera-Bustamante, R. & Semancik, J.S. 1988. The citrus exocortis disease: a complex of viroid-RNAs. In Proc. 10th Conf IOCV, p. 152-164. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Frolich, E.F., Calavan, E.C., Carpenter, J.B., Christiansen, D.W. & Roistacher, C.N. 1965. Difference in response of citron selections to exocortis virus infection. In Proc. 3rd Conf: IOCV, p. 113- 118. Gainesville, Univ. Fla. Press.
Grant, T.J. 1959. Tristeza virus strains. In J.M. Wallace, ed. Citrus virus diseases. p. 45-55. Berkeley, Div. Agric. Sci., Univ. Calif.
Grant, T.J. & Higgins, R.P. 1957. Occurrence of mixture of tristeza virus strains in citrus. Phytopathol., 47: 272-276.
Hughes, W.A. & Lister, C.A. 1949. Lime disease in the Gold Coast. Nature, 164: 880.
Kitajima, E.W., Silva, D.M., Oliveira, A.R., Muller, G.W. & Costa, A.S. 1964. Thread-like particles associated with tristeza disease of citrus. Nature, 201: 1011-1012.
Koizumi, M. & Sasaki, A. 1980. Protection phenomena against tristeza in trees preinoculated with vein enation virus. In Proc. 8th Conf IOCV, p. 48-50. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Koizumi, M., Kano, T., Ieki, H. & Mae, H. 1988. China laurestine: a symptomless carrier of satsuma dwarf virus which accelerates natural transmission in the fields. In Proc. 10th Conf IOCV, p. 348352. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
McClean, A.P.D. 1974. The tristeza virus complex. In Proc. 6th Conf. IOCV, p. 59-66. Berkeley, Div. Agric. Sci., Univ. Calif.
Meneghini, M. 1946. Sobre a natureza e transmisiblade da doença "tristeza" dos citrus. O Biológico, 12: 285-287.
Moreno, P., Guerri, J. & Ballester Olmos, J.F. 1991. Segregation of citrus tristeza virus strains evidenced by double stranded RNA analysis. In Proc. 11th Conf: IOCV, p. 20-24. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Muller, G.W. & Costa, A.S. 1968. Further evidence on protective interference in citrus tristeza. In Proc. 4th Conf: IOCV, p. 71-82. Gainesville, Univ. Fla. Press.
Muller, G.W. & Costa, A.S. 1977. Tristeza control in Brazil by preimmunization with mild strain. Abstr. Int. Citrus Congr., Orlando, Florida.
Muller, G.W., Rodriguez, O. & Costa, A.S. 1968. A tristeza virus complex severe to sweet orange varieties. In Proc. 4th Conf: IOCV, p. 64-71. Gainesville, Univ. Fla. Press.
Muller, G.W., Costa, A.S., Castro, J.L. & Guirado, N. 1988. Results from preimmunization tests to control the Capao bonito strain of tristeza. In Proc. 10th Conf: IOCV, p. 82-85. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Pina, J.A., Duran-Vila, N. & Navarro, L. 1991. Interference of citrus viroids with cachexia symptoms on Parson's Special mandarin. In Proc. 11th Conf: IOCV, p. 206-208. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Rodriguez, O., Moreira, S., Salibe, A.A. & Sobrinho, J.T. 1972. Further study of the tolerance to citrus tristeza virus of citrus varieties suitable for rootstock in Brazil. In Proc. 5th Conf: IOCV, p. 121-124. Gainesville, Univ. Fla. Press.
Roistacher, C.N., Dodds, J.A. & Bash, J.A. 1988. Cross protection against citrus tristeza seedling yellows and stem pitting viruses by protective isolates developed in greenhouse plants. In Proc. 10th Conf: IOCV p. 91-100. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Rossetti, V., Fassa, T.G. & Nakadaira, J.T. 1965. Reaction of citrus varieties to the stem pitting of Pera orange. In Proc. 3^rd Conf: IOCV, p. 46-48. Gainesville, Univ. Fla. Press.
Salibe, A.A. 1965. Occurrence of stem pitting in citrus types in Brazil. In Proc. 3rd Conf: IOCV, p. 40-45. Gainesville, Univ. Fla. Press.
Sanger, H.L. 1984. Minimal infectious agents: the viroids. p. 281 -33. In B.W. Mahy & J.R. Pattison, eds. The microbe. Part I: Viruses. Cambridge, Cambridge University Press.
Semancik, J.S. 1988. Citrus exocortis disease - 1976 to 1986. In Proc. 10th Conf: IOCV, p. 136-150. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Semancik, J.S., Gumpf D.J. & Bash, J.A. 1991. Interactions among group 11 citrus viroids: a potential for protection from cachexia disease. In Proc. 11th Conf: IOCV, p. 189-195. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Speroni, H.A. & Frezzi, M. 1939. Podredumbre de la raicilla del naranjo. Rev. Corpor. Frutic. Argentina, 5: 25-31.
Vogel, R. & Bové, J.M. 1976. Evidence for the existence of strains of the cristacortis pathogen. In Proc. 7th Conf IOCV, p. 101-104. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Vogel, R. & Bové, J.M. 1991. Strains of cristacortis characterized by specific host range susceptibility. In Abstracts' brochure, Proc. 11th Conf: IOCV. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Chapter 3: Transmission and spread of virus and virus-like citrus pathogens
Polyembryony of citrus seeds
Bud propagation
Mechanical transmission
Insect and mite transmission
Other means of transmission
Bibliography
Polyembryony of citrus seeds
Most virus and virus-like citrus pathogens are not seed-borne
The seeds of many varieties of the genera Citrus Fortunella and Poncirus, used as scions and rootstocks, have two types of embryo: a single, sexual (zygotic) embryo; and several non-sexual, nucellar embryos. The origin of these embryos is as follows. In a mature ovule of a citrus flower, the embryo sac containing the female gamete or egg cell (n chromosomes) is surrounded by the nucellus; at the apex of the nucellus is an opening, the micropyle. On pollination, when the pollen tube has reached the embryo sac by way of the micropyle, the nucleus of a male gamete or sperm eel] (n chromosomes) passes into the embryo sac where it fuses with the egg cell nucleus to yield the fertilized egg (2n chromosomes), thus accomplishing fecundation. The embryo resulting from the development of the fertilized egg is the sexual, zygotic embryo.
The extra embryos derive from somatic cells (2n chromosomes) of the nucellus. These nucellar embryos grow into the embryo sac and lie alongside the sexual embryo. Although there may be exceptions, pollination is usually necessary for the formation of nucellar embryos. Since nucellar embryos develop asexually by ordinary mitotic division of 2n chromosome cells of the nucellus, no male cells contribute to their formation and no reduction division (meiosis) occurs in the seed-parent cells which produce them. Nucellar seedlings, therefore, not only inherit from the seed parent alone but they are actually identical with it in genetic constitution, except for possible differences brought about by somatic (bud) variation. The growth of the nucellar embryos into seedling plants thus represents a true-to-type vegetative propagation of the seed parent or mother tree.
The zygotic embryo must compete for space and nutrients with the nucellar embryos. The result of this competition depends on the number of nucellar embryos, their time of starting, their location and the relative genetic vigour of the two kinds of embryo. In many varieties, a seed produces only one or more nucellar seedlings and no zygotic seedlings, indicating that the sexual embryo was crowded out or was simply too weak to survive. In such cases, all or nearly all of the seedlings produced will be from nucellar embryos and the seed parent will "breed true" with respect to all or nearly all of its offspring.
Nucellar polyembryony is used in citriculture for two purposes: the production of homogeneous, ready-to-graft rootstock seedlings and the production of scion seedlings from which nucellar clones can be developed. Both the rootstock seedlings and the scion seedlings will not only be true to type, they will also be free of virus and virus-like agents. Indeed, while several non-rutaceous viruses are known to be transmitted through the seed embryos (seed-borne viruses), transmission of virus and virus-like agents of citrus through embryos of citrus seeds (seed transmission) is of minor importance. Seed transmission of citrus crinkly leaf virus (CCLV) and the related CVV has been observed but is rare. Observations indicating psorosis (concave gum) transmission by seed of Carrizo and Troyer citranges and Poncirus trifoliata have been reported. SDV is transmitted through the seed of bush bean, but not citrus. Seed transmissions of exocortis have not been confirmed. None of the
other virus and virus-like agents of citrus seems to be seed-transmitted.
Phloem-restricted prokaryotes, in particular, are not transmitted from an infected mother tree to seedling progeny plants via the seeds. This absence of seed transmission does not imply, however, that the seeds as a whole are free of the pathogens. CVV was detected at a high level in the seed-coats of Volkamer lemon seeds. It is also well known that homogenates of seeds from stubborn-infected trees are good sources for the isolation and culture of Spiroplasma citri, the causal agent of stubborn. It has been shown that, in this case, the embryo is free of the spiroplasma but the seed-coats, or, more precisely, their phloem tissue where the spiroplasma is located, are not. Seeds from stubborn- or greening-affected trees often show various degrees of abortion, probably related to the presence of the pathogens in the seed-coats.
Bud propagation
A grafted citrus tree is composed of two elements: a rootstock and a scion. The rootstock is practically always derived from a seedling which is, in essence, free of virus and virus-like pathogens. Hence, when grafted trees are found to be infected by a virus or virus-like pathogen, the infection often comes from the scion bud that was grafted on the rootstock seedling, not from the seedling itself. Indeed, the propagation of buds taken from trees infected by virus and virus-like pathogens is one of the main means by which these agents have been, and still are being, spread. In this form of dissemination, humans are the vector! Spreading graft-transmissible agents of citrus in this way can easily be prevented by taking buds only from trees known to be free of virus and virus-like agents.
However, under certain circumstances, the use of budwood free of such agents is not enough. A tree obtained from a healthy rootstock seedling and a "clean" bud can become infected by a given pathogen as a result of mechanical and/or insect vector transmission. Hence, three classes of virus and virus-like pathogens of citrus can be considered: i) agents that are mechanically transmitted (see Table 9); ii) agents that are transmitted by insect and mite vectors (see Table 10); and iii) agents that are transmitted neither mechanically nor by insect or mite vectors.
Mechanical transmission
Under orchard conditions, mechanical transmission occurs when the pathogens (cachexia and exocortis viroids) are carried unintentionally from an infected tree to a healthy one by way of budding knives, pruning scissors or hedging or topping machines. In the laboratory, mechanical inoculation can be carried out in several ways. In the stem-slash procedure, slashing the stem of an infected plant with a knife or scalpel will contaminate the blade, which is then used to slash the stem of a healthy plant.
TABLE 9 Mechanically viruses and viroids of citrus
Disease or agent Type of agent Mechanically transmitted to:
Algerian navel orange virus Virus Sweet orange, Chenopodium quinoa
Cachexia Viroid Etrog citron, cucumber
Dweet tangor agent Virus Etrog citron
Exocortis Viroid Etrog citron, gynura, cucumber, chrysanthemum, tomato
Infectious variegation-Crinkly leaf Ilarvirus Lemon, cowpea. cucumber, Gomphrena globosa, Crotalaria spectabilis
Leaf rugose Ilarvirus As for Infectious variegation plus Chenopodium quinoa, Phaseolus vulgaris, Petunia hybrida, Nicotiana tabacum
Psorosis (Calif) Virus Etrog citron, Nicotiana benthamiana, Nicotiana megalosiphon, C quinoa, Capiscum annuum and frutescens
Psorosis P 203 (Psorosis A) Virus Etrog citron C quinoa
Psorosis B Virus Etrog citron C quinoa, Gomphrena globosa
Ringspot Virus Etrog citron, C quinoa (not system c), G globosa, Crotalaria spectabilis, Petunia hybrida, Zinnia elegans cowpea, bean
Satsuma dwarf Virus Sesame, cowpea, bean, petunia, tobacco, Chenopodium spp, Physalis floridana, G. globosa
Tatterleaf-Citrange stunt Virus Etrog citron rough lemon seedling, Valencia late sweet orange on Poncirus trifoliata, cowpea, bean, C quinua (systemic)
Tobacco necrosis virus citrus isolate Virus Lemon, sweet orange sour orange Orlando tangelo, Etrog citron, acid lime cowpea, cucumber, Xanthni n.c. tobacco
Tristeza Closterovirus Etrog citron, sweet orange
Notes:
^1 Phloem-restricted prokaryotes are not mechanically transmissible.
^2 Serologically related to infectious variegation-crinkly leaf virus.
This technique has been found to be most effective in the mechanical transmission of exocortis and cachexia viroids as well as tristeza virus to citron plants. To prevent such transmission occurring in the field or laboratory, budding knives and other such tools can easily be disinfected with domestic bleach diluted to give a 1 percent sodium hypochlorite solution.
Herbaceous plants can be mechanically infected by rubbing sap or extracts from infected plants on the leaves of healthy plants in the presence of carborundum powder. the presence of this fine abrasive results in mild mechanical damage to the cell wall, a condition that allows the pathogen to enter the cell (leaf-abrasion method). Depending on the plant and/or the pathogen in question, the inoculated leaves will show either chlorotic or necrotic local lesions and the infection will either become systemic or remain local.
TABLE 10 Insect and mite vectors of virus and virus-like disease agents of citrus
Mechanically inoculated plants may be tolerant of the inoculated agent and remain symptomless, such as citron infected with cachexia viroid. Table 9 lists the citrus pathogens that have been mechanically transmitted and some of the mechanically infected plants are also indicated. Note that phloemrestricted prokaryotes have not been mechanically transmitted. In the case of exocortis and cachexia viroids, the efficiency of mechanical transmission varies according to the donor and receptor hosts.
Insect and mite transmission
Several virus and virus-like citrus pathogens are transmitted by insect vectors (see Table 10). Healthy field trees in a given region will become infected by one or other of these pathogens if the agent and the vector occur together in the region. For instance, CTV was not present in Argentina in the 1900s but the tropical citrus aphid, Toxoptera citricida, was. Around the 1920s, citrus budlings infected with CTV were introduced, probably from South Africa. From then on, the spread of CTV occurred swiftly as T. citricida turned out to be a very efficient vector of CTV, with one viruliferous aphid being enough for transmission to occur. After invading Argentina and Brazil, where CTV killed 20 million trees between 1930 and 1950, the virus is now widespread in the northern parts of South America. In Venezuela it has destroyed almost 500 000 trees and it has recently been found in Costa Rica, Honduras, Panama, El Salvador, Nicaragua, Belize and Guatemala. F. citricida has been
isolated in Panama. Costa Rica, Salvador, Nicaragua and Martinique in the French West Indies.
Aphid species other than T. citricida are also vectors of CTV. One of the second most important CTV vectors is Aphis gossypii, which can transmit destructive isolates of CTV at relatively high rates of efficiency. In Israel, CTV strain VT was transmitted by A. gossypii at a much higher efficiency rate (40 percent) than other isolates (5 percent). In Spain, A. gossypii transmitted the common CTV isolate T-300 at a higher efficiency rate 190 percent) than the seedling yellows isolate T-387 (60 percent). These results underline the fact that certain virus strains are transmitted at higher rates than others by a given vector.
Other CTV aphid vectors are: Aphis citricola (syn. A. spiraecola), Toxoptera aurantii and My-us persicae. A. citricola is a less efficient vector than A. gossypii but it is frequently abundant on citrus and may be more important in spreading the virus in the field than laboratory transmission tests indicate. In Spain, A. citricola is the most abundant aphid species in citrus areas and is believed to be responsible for the natural spread of CTV in the field. In the Mediterranean and the Near East, including Pakistan, T. citricida has not been reported but A. gossypii and some of the other aphid vectors are pandemic from Morocco to Pakistan. They are responsible for the spread of CTV in Mediterranean countries, such as Spain and Israel, where this virus has been introduced. They could become the major CTV vectors in other countries of the Mediterranean area and the Near East if CTV were introduced. In other words, even in the absence of T. citricida, other vectors of CTV are
present in the Mediterranean and Near East regions. Hence, efforts have to be made to keep CTV out of countries where it is not yet present. Both T. citricida and T. aurantii are black aphids. The drawings on p. 36 show how one can easily distinguish between them on the basis of the venation of their front wings and the pigmentation of their antennae.
Other insect vectors of citrus viruses are indicated in Table 10. Note that all insect vectors of citrus viruses are aphids, except in the case of leprosis, where mites are responsible for transmission.
In the case of the phloem-restricted prokaryotes, the insect vectors are leafhoppers and/or psyllids. the two psyllid vectors of the bacterium-like organism (BLO) associated with greening are restricted to rutaceous hosts, both cultivated and wild. In contrast, the leafhopper vectors of S. citri (Figs 34 and 35) are polyphagous and live primarily on non-rutaceous hosts, visiting citrus only occasionally and under certain conditions. This explains why natural spread of the greening BLO is much more efficient than that of the stubborn spiroplasma, except under special conditions. For instance, when young citrus trees are grown in the presence of the weed Salsola kali (Fig. 174), high infection rates of citrus with S. citri can be observed, as in the Syrian Arab Republic. This weed is the major host plant of the two leafhopper vectors of the spiroplasma. Thus, the presence of S. kali favours high populations of the leafhoppers which, in turn, favour the spread of the
spiroplasma, in particular to young citrus trees nearby. In Oman and the United Arab Emirates, witches' broom disease of lime, an MLO disease, is spreading very fast. The putative insect vector, probably a leafhopper or a psyllid, has not yet been identified but monoclonal antibodies (MAs) and DNA probes for the detection of the MLO have now become available and enable identification of the vector(s). Indeed, in May 1991 in Oman, and in February 1993 in the United Arab Emirates, the leafhopper Hishimonus phycitis was found in great numbers on arid lime trees and it might be the vector of the witches' broom MLO. This is the first time that this leafhopper has been found in the Arabian peninsula although it is a well-known leafhopper in India where it transmits the MLO of eggplant little leaf disease.
Differential morphological characteristics of the front wings and antennae of Toxoptera aurantiiand Toxoptera citricida
A situation similar to that in Argentina prior to the introduction of CTV exists today in Brazil for greening. An abundant population of Diaphorina citri, the Asian psyllid vector of the greening BLO (Fig. 37), thrives on citrus throughout the State of Sao Paulo, and probably elsewhere. Introduction of the greening BLO would probably result in an epidemic as bad as that of tristeza in the 1930s.
Aphids, leafhoppers and psyllids, the major insect vectors of virus and virus-like disease agents of citrus, are members of the Homoptera. All members of the Homoptera feed in the same way, by means of sucking mouthparts, which consist of two pairs of stylets- mandibles and maxillae - sliding in the grooved labium. The mandibular stylets lie outside the maxillary stylets. Grooves on the inner faces of the maxillary stylets match in such a way as to form two canals, down one of which saliva is injected into the plant while a mixture of sap and saliva passes up the other. Thus, such insects are ideally equipped for pathogen transmission. The relationships between these homopterous vectors and the pathogens are of three major types (see Table 11). the phloem-restricted prokaryotic agents (spiroplasmas, MLOs and BLOB) are persistent in the vectors in which they multiply. Once infected, the vectors remain infected and can transmit the pathogen throughout their lifetime. The
leafhopper and psyllid vectors acquire the pathogen when feeding on infected plants. These insects suck up the rich sap in the sieve tubes of their specialized mouth parts. If the sieve tubes contain pathogens, such as spiroplasmas, MLOs or BLOB, they are also sucked up, and subsequently enter the gut, cross the intestinal membrane, reach the blood (haemolymph) of the insect, multiply and invade tissues and organs, eventually reaching the salivary glands.
Only when the pathogen is established in the salivary glands can the insect transmit it to the healthy plants on which it feeds. Indeed, the saliva formed in the salivary glands is required to lubricate the stylets in the search for phloem and sieve tubes. When the saliva contains pathogens, these may be introduced into the phloem with the saliva. Thus, they circulate all the way from the gut to the salivary glands, passing through the whole body of the insect. This is why these pathogens are sometimes called "circulative" agents; they are also termed "propagative" because they multiply in the insect (see Table 11). The time required for the insect to acquire the pathogen while feeding on the infected plants - acquisition feeding- is the acquisition period. This period is fairly long: 24 to 48 hours for Neoaliturus haematoceps feeding on S. citri-infected periwinkle plants (Catharanthus roseus syn. Vinca rosea). The time required for the agent to multiply within the insect
and arrive in the salivary glands is the incubation period. This is the period required for the insect to become viruliferous, i.e. able to transmit the disease (eight to 12 days in the case of IV. haematoceps). The retention period is the time during which the insect remains viruliferous. With the phloem restricted pathogens of citrus, the retention period is the remaining lifetime of the insects.
CTV behaves as a semi-persistent agent in relation to its aphid vectors. Citrus mosaic virus of India is a non-persistent or stylet-borne agent. CVEV, a luteovirus, is a persistent agent. The virus circulates in the insect vector but, unlike the spiroplasmas, MLOs and BLOB, there is no multiplication of the virus in the insect. The incubation period is long, since the circulative virus has to reach the salivary glands of the insect before it can be transmitted. The retention period is about two or three weeks. Table 11 lists some of the characteristic relationships of persistent, semi-persistent and non-persistent agents with their insect vectors. The term "stylet-borne" indicates that the pathogen adheres to the stylets after they have been introduced into and then removed from the infected plant. Stylet-borne pathogens can be transmitted almost immediately to a healthy plant, an action that is accomplished in a minute or so. In serial transfers, usually only the first
plant is infected, after which the insect loses its infectivity; hence, the pathogen is termed non-persistent. It does not multiply or circulate in the insect. Semi-persistent agents resemble circulative ones in that they are not generally acquired during brief acquisition probes. The probability of transmission increases with longer acquisition-access feeding periods of 12 to 24 hours or more' suggesting that these pathogens are somehow able to accumulate in the vector's anterior alimentary canal and resist being quickly flushed through with clean sap from healthy plants. The pathogen is not present in the insect's haemolymph. Furthermore, experimental injection of the agent directly into the haemolymph does not render the recipient insect viruliferous. With persistent circulative agents. such injections render the insect inoculative, but only after an adequate incubation period. For instance, when S. citri is injected into the leafhopper vectors Neoaliturus haematoceps or
N. tenellus, the minimum incubation period is eight days.
TABLE 11 Relationships between citrus disease agents and homopterous insect vectors
Other means of transmission
It is often desirable to transmit citrus pathogens to herbaceous, non-rutaceous hosts. This can be done with certain pathogens by mechanical transmission (see Table 9). In the case of S. citri, infected leafhopper vectors are able to transmit the spiroplasma to a whole range of herbaceous, non-rutaceous host plants. This is because the leafhoppers are not restricted to rutaceous hosts. However, the psyllid vectors of the greening BLO are strictly restricted to rutaceous hosts, and attempts to vector-transmit the BLO to herbaceous plants have failed. In the case of the witches' broom MLO, the natural vector of the agent is not known, and insect transmission with known leafhopper species has not yet been achieved. Fortunately, the use of the parasitic plant dodder, Cuscuta campestris, has made it possible to transmit the following agents to periwinkle seedlings (Fig. 219): S. citri (Fig. 175), the witches' broom MLO (Fig. 142) and several serotypes of the greening BLO (Fig.
220). However, when using dodder, one must remember that certain viruses pass through its seed.
No pathogens of citrus are known to be naturally transmitted through nematodes or pollen. Pollen from cristacortis graft-infected Orlando tangelo seedling trees, when placed under a strip of bark on the cambial surface of the wood of healthy Orlando tangelo seedlings, was able to transmit the cristacortis agent. indeed, stem pitting and psorosis young leaf symptoms typical of cristacortis developed on five of the six pollen-inoculated seedlings. However, no natural infection of citrus by the cristacortis agent has ever been observed and, therefore, pollen is not a natural means of cristacortis dissemination. Some viruses, such as psorosis, can be maintained in callus tissues grown from infected citrus shoot internodes. Virus transmission can be achieved by placing callus pieces under the bark of healthy plants.
<section>6</section>
Bibliography
Bar-Joseph, M. & Loebenstein, G. 1973. Effects of strain, source plants and temperature on the transmissibility of citrus tristeza virus by the melon aphid. Phytopathol., 63: 716-720.
Bar-Joseph, M., Raccah, B. & Loebenstein, G. 1977. Evaluation of the main variables that affect citrus tristeza virus transmission by aphids. Proc. Int. Soc. Citricult., 3: 958-961.
Bridges, G.D., Youtsey, C.O. & Nixon, R.R. 1965. Observations indicating psorosis transmission by seed of carrizo citrange. Proc. Fla. Hort. Soc., 78: 48-50.
Calavan, E.C. & Bové, J.M. 1989. Ecology of Spiroplasma citri. In R. F. Whitcomb & J.G. Tully, eds. The mycoplasmas, p. 425485. New York, Academic Press.
Cameron, J.W. & Frost, H.B. 1968. Genetics, breeding and nucellar embryony. In W. Reuther, L.D. Batchelor & H.J. Webber, eds. The citrus industry, vol. II. Anatomy, physiology, genetics and reproduction, p. 325-370. Berkeley, Div. Agric. Sci., Univ. Calif.
Capoor, S.P., Rao, G. & Viswanath, S.M. 1967. Diaphorina citri Kuwayama, a vector of the greening disease of citrus in India. Indian J. Agric. Sci., 37: 572-576.
Celino, S.C., Cortez, E.R. & Salibe, A.A. 1966. Diaphorina citri Kuwayama, the insect vector for the leaf mottle virus of citrus in the Philippines. Manila, Bureau of Plant Industry.
Chagas, C.M. & Rossetti, V. 1984. Transmission of leprosis by grafting. In Proc. 9th Conf: IOCV p. 215-217. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Chiavegato, L.G. & Salibe, A.A. 1984. Transmissibility of leprosis symptoms by Brevipalpus phoenicis to young citrus plants under laboratory conditions. In Proc. 9th Conf IOCV, p. 218-221. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Childs, J.F.L. 1965. The question of seed transmission of cachexia-xyloporosis virus. In Proc. 3rd Conf: IOCV, p. 90-94. Gainesville, Univ. Fla. Press.
Duran-Vila, N., Cambra, M., Pina, J.A., Ballester, J.E. & Navarra, L. 1988. Virus content and growth patterns of callus cultured in vitro from healthy and virus-infected citrus species. In Proc. 10th Conf: IOCV, p. 310-321. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Fos, A., Bové, J.M., Lallemand, J., Saillard, C., Vignault, J.C., Ali, Y., Brun, P. & Vogel, R. 1986. La cicadelle Neoaliturus haematoceps (Mulsant et Rey) est vecteur de Spiroplasma citri en Méditerranée. Ann.lnst.Pasteur/Microbiol., 137A:97-107.
Frost, H.B. 1926. Polyembryony, heterozygosis and chimeras in citrus. Hilgardia, 1: 365-402.
Frost, H.B. & Soost, R.K. 1968. Seed reproduction: development of gametes and embryos. In W. Reuther, L.D. Batchelor & H.J. Webber, eds. The citrus industry, vol. II. Anatomy, physiology genetics and reproduction p. 290-324. Berkeley, Div. Agric. Sci., Univ. Calif.
Fulton, R.W. 1966. Transmission of tatter-leaf virus from cowpea to citrus. Phytopathol., 56: 575.
Garnier, M. & Bové, J.M. 1983. Transmission of the organism associated with citrus greening disease from sweet orange to periwinkle by dodder. Phytopathol., 73: 1358-1363.
Garnsey, S.M. 1974. Mechanical transmission of a virus that produces tatterleaf symptoms in Citrus excelsa. In Proc. 6th Conf: IOCV, p. 137-140. Berkeley, Div. Agric. Sci., Univ. Calif.
Garnsey, S.M. & Jones, J.W. 1967. Mechanical transmission of exocortis virus with contaminated budding tools. Plant Dis. Rep., 51: 410-413.
Garnsey, S.M. & Muller, G.W. 1980. Efficiency of mechanical transmission of citrus tristeza virus. In Proc. 10th Conf: IOCV, p. 46-54. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Garnsey, S.M. & Timmer, L.W. 1980. Mechanical transmissibility of citrus ringspot virus isolates from Florida, Texas and California. In Proc. 8th Conf: IOCV, p. 174-179. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Garnsey, S.M. & Weathers, L.G. 1972. Factors affecting mechanical spread of exocortis virus. In Proc. 5th Conf IOCV, p. 105-111. Gainesville, Univ. Fla. Press.
Harris, K.F. & Maramorosch, K. 1980. Vectors of plant pathogens. New York, Academic Press.
Hermoso de Mendoza, A., Ballester-Olmos, J.F. & Pina Lorca, J.A. 1984. Transmission of citrus tristeza virus by aphids (Homoptera, Aphididae) in Spain. In Proc. 9th Conf IOCV, p. 23-27. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Hermoso de Mendoza, A., Ballester-Olmos, J.F., Pina Lorca, J.A., Serra, J. & Fuerte, C. 1988. Differences in transmission efficiency of citrus tristeza virus by Aphis gossypii using sweet orange, mandarin or lemon trees as donor or receptor host plants. In Proc. 10th Conf: IOCV, p. 62-64. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Kaloostian, G.H., Oldfield, G.N., Pierce, H.D., Calavan, E.C., Granett, A.L., Rana, G.L. & Gumpf, D.J. 1975. Leafhopper natural vector of citrus stubborn disease. Calif. Agric., 29: 14-15.
Lallemand, J., Fos, A. & Bové, J.M. 1986. Transmission de la bactérie associée à la forme africaine de la maladie du "greening" par le psylle asiatique Diaphorina citri Kuwayama. Fruits, 41(5): 341-343.
Liu, H.Y., Gumpf, D.J., Oldfield, G.N. & Calavan, E.C. 1983. Transmission of Spiroplasma citri by Circulifer tenellus. Phytopathol, 73(4): 582-585.
Martinez, A.L. & Wallace, J.M. 1967. Citrus leaf-mottle yellows disease in the Philippines and transmission of the causal virus by a psyllid: Diaphorina citri. Plant Dis. Rep., 51: 692-695.
Massonie, G., Garnier, M. & Bové, J.M. 1976. Transmission of Indian citrus decline by Trioza erytreae Del Guercio, the vector of South African greening. In Proc. 7th Conf IOCV, p. 18-20. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
McClean, A.P.D. 1957. Tristeza virus of citrus: evidence for absence of seed transmission. Plant Dis. Rep., 41: 281.
McClean, A.P.D. & Oberholzer, P.C.J. 1965. Citrus psylla, a vector of the greening disease of sweet orange. S. Afr. J. Agric. Sci., 8: 297-298.
Meneghini, M. 1946. Sobre a natureza e transmisiblade da doença "tristeza" dos citrus. O Biológico, 12: 285-287.
Nault, L.R. & Rodriguez, J.G. 1985. The leafhoppers and planthoppers New York, Wiley.
Oldfield, G.N. & Kaloostian, G.H. 1979. Vectors and host range of the citrus stubborn disease pathogen, Spiroplasma citri. In Proc. ROC- US Cooperative Science Seminar on Mycoplasma Diseases of Plants, p. 119-124.
Olson, E.O. 1965. Evidence that xyloporosis virus does not pass through the seeds of Palestine sweet lime. In Proc. 3rd Conf IOCV, p. 86-89. Gainesville, Univ. Fla. Press.
Reuther, W., Batchelor, L.D. & Webber, H.J., eds. 1968. The citrus industry, vol. 11. Anatomy, physiology, genetics and reproduction. Berkeley, Div. Agric. Sci., Univ. Calif.
Roistacher, C.N. & Bar-Joseph, M. 1957. Transmission of citrus tristeza virus by Aphis gossypii and by graft inoculation to and from Passiflora species. Phytophylactica, 19: 179-182.
Roistacher, C.N. & Bar-Joseph, M. 1984. Transmission of tristeza and seedling yellows-tristeza virus by Aphis gossypii from sweet orange, grapefruit and lemon to Mexican lime, grapefruit and lemon. In Proc. 9th Conf: IOCV, p. 9-18. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Roistacher, C.N., Calavan, E.C. & Blue, R.L. 1969. Citrus exocortis virus - chemical inactivation on tools, tolerance to heat and separation of isolates. Plant Dis. Pep., 53: 333-336.
Roistacher, C.N., Nauer, E.M. & Wagner, R.L. 1980. Transmissibility of cachexia, dweet mottle, psorosis, tatterleaf and infectious variegation viruses on knife blades and its prevention. In Proc. 8th Conf: IOCV, p. 225-229. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Roistacher, C.N., Nauer, E.M., Kishaba, A. & Calavan, E.C. 1980. Transmission of citrus tristeza virus by Aphis gossypii reflecting changes in virus transmissibility in California. In Proc. 8th Conf IOCV, p. 76-82. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Schneider, H. 1968. The anatomy of citrus. In W. Reuther, L.D. Batchelor & H.J. Webber, eds. The citrus industry, vol. 11. Anatomy, physiology, genetics and reproduction, p. 1-85. Berkeley, Div. Agric. Sci., Univ. Calif.
Smith, K.M. 1977. Plant viruses. London, Chapman and Hall.
Tanaka, H. & Imada, J. 1974. Mechanical transmission of satsuma dwarf, citrus mosaic, navel infectious mottling and Natsudaidai dwarf to herbaceous hosts. In Proc. 6th Conf: IOCV, p. 141-145. Berkeley, Div. Agric. Sci., Univ. Calif.
Timmer, L.W. & Garnsey, S.M. 1980. Natural spread of citrus ringspot virus in Texas and its association with psorosis-like diseases in Florida and Texas. In Proc. 8th Con/: IOCV, p. 167-173. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Toxopeus, H.J. 1936. Die Zuchtung von unterlagen für Citrus sinensis Osb. immun gegen Phytophthora parasitica, die Ursache der "gum-disease" in Java. Zuchter, 8: 1-10.
Vogel, R. & Bové, J.M. 1980. Pollen transmission to citrus of the agent inducing cristacortis and psorosis young leaf symptoms. In Conf: IOCV, p. 188-190. Riverside, Univ. Calif.Proc. 8th
Weathers, L.G. & Harjung, M.K. 1967. Dodder transmission of citrange stunt virus -a virus associated with tatterleaf of citrus. Plant Dis. Pep., 51: 629-630.
Whitcomb, R.F. & Tully, J.G. 1989. The mycoplasmas, vol. V. New York, Academic Press.
Chapter 4: Techniques for the detection and identification of virus and virus-like citrus pathogens
Visual inspection and its limitations
Indicator plants: Biological indexing
Laboratory indexing
Bibliography
Visual inspection and its limitations
As indicated in Chapter 2, a given citrus species can be susceptible to certain pathogens and tolerant of others (see Tables 5 and 6). For instance, sweet orange is susceptible to the pathogens of scaly bark psorosis and gummy bark, among others, but tolerant of those of cachexia and exocortis, to mention only two diseases. However, a field tree is most frequently grafted on a rootstock; for example, a sweet orange tree grafted on Poncirus trifoliata rootstock. If the tree is infected by scaly bark psorosis, gummy bark, cachexia or exocortis, these pathogens will be uniformly distributed throughout the scion and rootstock of the tree. However, symptoms of scaly bark and gummy bark will be shown only by the susceptible sweet orange scion while symptoms of exocortis will affect only the susceptible P. trifoliata rootstock. Hence, symptoms of three diseases can be seen by visual inspection. Two will affect the sweet orange scion: bark scaling as a result of the psorosis agent
and the presence of gum in the bark because of the gummy bark agent. One will affect the P. trifoliata rootstock: bark scaling caused by the exocortis viroids. However, cachexia infection will remain undetected, as both the sweet orange scion and the P. trifoliata rootstock are tolerant of the cachexia viroid. The tree is therefore a symptomless carrier of the cachexia pathogen. This example illustrates that visual inspection is most often ineffective for the detection of all the pathogens present, and the pathogens of which the tree is tolerant must be detected by other means. Even those pathogens to which the tree is susceptible are not always detected by visual inspection. the tree might be too young for psorosis and/or exocortis symptoms to be expressed, for instance. In a cool climate, symptom expression of exocortis takes longer than it does under hot conditions. Inversely, psorosis young leaf flecking is present only in cool weather. The time required for symptom
expression in certain hosts is longer with mild strains of certain pathogens than with severe strains. Symptoms sometimes fade away and are seen only at certain times of the year for short periods. The leaf flecking and oak-leaf patterns associated with psorosis, concave gum, cristacortis and impietratura are only seen in young, immature leaves from the spring or autumn flush of growth when the weather is cool. These so-called psorosis young leaf symptoms fade as the leaf matures.
These examples show that visual inspection must be supplemented by indexing, i.e. experimental detection of the virus and virus-like pathogens. The experimental techniques used for indexing are essentially of two types: i) those that are based on the use of the most susceptible indicator plants (biological indexing); and ii) those that directly detect the pathogen or the pathogen's constituents through a range of methods (laboratory indexing), such as electron microscopy, electrophoretic analysis, serological reactions, molecular probes, gene amplification by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) or culture of the agent (e.g. Spiroplasma citri) when possible.
Indicator plants: Biological indexing
Table 12 lists the major virus and virus-like citrus pathogens as well as the indicator plants used for their detection. For instance, tristeza virus is indexed on small-fruited acid lime (Citrus aurantifolia) seedlings. A bud, a piece of bark, a piece of leaf or a budwood stick from a candidate tree is graft-inoculated on to a lime seedling. If the inoculum contains the tristeza virus, the indicator lime seedling will become systemically infected and will then show the specific symptoms of tristeza: leaf vein clearing (Fig. 128) and stem pitting. The presence of these symptoms on the inoculated lime seedling proves that the candidate tree (from which the graft inoculum was taken for indexing) is infected with tristeza virus. Generally, several identical indicator plants are graft-inoculated with tissue from the candidate tree to take into account the possibility of uneven distribution of the agent in the candidate tree. Uninoculated indicator plants must be kept as negative
controls. Indicator plants that have been graft-inoculated with tissue inoculum known to be infected with the relevant pathogen agent are used as positive controls. In the case of blight, successful graft transmission of the agent was achieved by approach-grafting pieces of roots from affected trees on to roots of healthy Valencia late sweet orange trees on rough lemon rootstock. Table 12 also lists non-rutaceous herbaceous plants that can be infected through mechanical inoculation of their leaves. As shown in the table, it takes only a few days to obtain a positive reaction on these mechanically infected herbaceous plants. In contrast, it might take several years for the symptoms to appear on citrus indicator plants. Of course, a good indicator plant is one that shows specific symptoms within a short time -a few weeks to a few months. For instance, the best indicator plant for the exocortis viroid complex is Etrog citron selection "861 S1". Symptoms are obtained within
weeks or months. Prior to the discovery of the Etrog citron test, P. trifoliata and Rangpur lime were used as indicator plants and the test took from several months to several years. Similarly, the cachexia test on Parson's Special mandarin is much faster than the previous test which used Orlando tangelo.
Laboratory indexing
In spite of the progress made in identifying new, fast-reacting indicator plants, techniques based on the direct detection of the pathogens or their constituents have recently emerged. Table 13 lists the four main techniques for the detection of specific citrus pathogens. With time, more and more of the virus and virus-like pathogens will be characterized and this will probably lead to the development of additional laboratory indexing methods. The four methods currently available are:
TABLE 12 Indicator plants for the detection of the major virus and virus-like agents of citrus
* Detection or visualization of the agents themselves:
* electron microscopy of the phloem-restricted prokaryotes (Spiroplasma citri, witches' broom MLO, rubbery wood MLO, greening BLO);
* culture of S. citri and observation of the cultured spiroplasma by dark field microscopy; or
* sPAGE and staining of the viroid RNAs of cachexia and exocortis.
* Production of antibodies (polyclonal or monoclonal) against proteins of the pathogens for use in enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays (ELISAs), immunofluorescence or western immunoblotting. Antibodies have been produced against the viral coat proteins of infectious variegation-crinkly leaf virus, leaf rugose virus and tristeza virus, and the outer membrane protein(s) of S. citri, the witches' broom MLO or the greening BLO.
* Use of DNA probes prepared against the nucleic acids of the pathogens. So far available are complementary DNA (cDNA) probes for the viral RNAs of tristeza virus and infectious variegation virus, as well as DNA probes for S. citri and the witches' broom MLO. These DNA probes are used most often in dot-hybridizations on nitrocellulose or nylon membranes, and they can also be used in southern hybridizations. The amplification of certain DNA sequences carried out by PCR, with the amplified DNA detected by ethidium bromide staining on PAGE. This has been used to detect sequences of the spiralin gene of S. citri.
TABLE 13 Techniques for the detection of virus and virus-like agents of citrus or constituents of the agents
Some of these methods are not yet routine indexing techniques. For instance, the MAs against the greening BLO turn out to be highly specific and they will only detect the homologous serotypes of the BLO. Hence, electron microscopy detection of the BLO is still the most reliable technique. Eventually, serological techniques such as ELISA will be replaced by the more sensitive molecular hybridization techniques and ultimately by PCR. While the MAs against the greening BLO are too specific to be used in routine indexing, they have been most useful as research tools in the purification of the BLO by immunoaffinity chromatography. The purified BLOs are now available for DNA extraction and the DNA can be cloned in Escherichia cold and sequenced, thus opening up the way for the detection of the greening BLO by molecular hybridization and PCR.
Finally, it should be noted that more and more strains of virus and virus-like pathogens of citrus are being discovered and that diseases thought to be caused by a single pathogen now appear to involve several such agents. For instance, many strains of tristeza virus have been detected, but detection of these strains, mild or severe, requires the joint use of indicator plants and ELISA, showing that indexing on indicator plants and serological techniques are complementary. A strain of tristeza virus from kumquat induces no symptoms whatsoever on acid lime, the normal indicator plant for the virus. Only ELISA is able to detect the strain. One last example concerns exocortis. indexing various isolates of exocortis on Etrog citron gave a whole range of symptoms on the indicator plants, leading to the belief that there were mild, moderate and severe strains of the same exocortis viroid RNA molecule (CEV viroid RNA). Electrophoretic analysis of the viroid RNAs present in the
various exocortis isolates has revealed that, besides CEV viroid RNA, other viroid RNAs are present and also produce a reaction on Etrog citron (Tables 2 and 3, p. 11 - 12). Thus, the combined use of Etrog citron as an indicator plant and of the electrophoretic analysis of viroid RNAs results in a new understanding of exocortis as a disease caused by a complex of various viroid RNAs rather than only one.
Bibliography
Bar-Joseph, M. & Loebenstein, G. 1970. Leaf flecking on indicator seedlings with citrus in Israel. Plant Dis. Rep., 54: 643646.
Bar-Joseph, M., Garnsey, S.M., Gonsalves, D., Moscovits, D.E., Clark, M. F. & Loebenstein, G. 1979. The use of enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for detection of citrus tristeza virus. Phytopathol., 69: 190- 195.
Bové, J.M. 1980. Spiroplasma citri identification. In J.M. Bové & R. Vogel, eds. Description and illustration of virus and virus-like diseases of citrus, p. 22. A collection of colour slides. Paris, IRFA SETCO-FRUITS.
Calavan, E.C., Frolich, E.F., Carpenter, J.B., Roistacher, C.N. & Christiansen, D.W. 1964. Rapid indexing for exocortis of citrus. Phytopathol., 54: 1359-1362.
Calvert, L.A., Lee, R.F. & Hiebert, E. 1988. Characterization of the RNA species of citrus variegation virus with complementary DNA clones. In Proc. 10th Conf: IOCV, p. 327-333. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Childs, J.F.L. et al., eds. 1968. Indexing procedures for 15 virus diseases of citrus trees. Washington, DC, Agricultural Research Service, United States Department of Agriculture.
Christie, R.G. & Edwardson, J.R. 1986. Light microscopic techniques for detection of plant virus inclusions. Plant Dis., 70: 273-279.
Dodds, J.A. & Bar-Joseph, M. 1983. Double-stranded RNA from plants infected with closteroviruses. Phytopathol., 73(3): 419-423.
Dodds, J.A., Jarupat, T., Lee, J.G. & Roistacher, C.N. 1987. Effects of strain, host, time of harvest and virus concentration on double-stranded RNA analysis of citrus tristeza virus. Phytopathol., 77(3): 442-447.
Duran-Vila, N., Pina, J.A., Molina, M.l. & Navarro, L. 1991. A new indexing method for cachexia. In Proc. 11th Conf IOCV, p. 224-229. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Flores, R. 1988. Detection of citrus exocortis viroid in natural and experimental citrus hosts by biochemical methods. In Proc. 10th Conf IOCV, p. 192-196. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Garnier, M., Martin-Gros, G. & Bové J.M. 1987. Monoclonal antibodies against the bacterium-like organism associated with citrus greening disease. Ann. Inst. Pasteur/Microbiol., 138: 639-650.
Garnier, M., Zreik, L. & Bové, J.M. 1991. Witches' broom disease of lime trees: transmission of the mycoplasma-like organism (MLO) to periwinkle and citrus, production of monoclonal antibodies for the detection of the MLO. In Proc. 11th Conf. IOCV, Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Garnsey, S.M., Bar-Joseph, M. & Lee, R.F. 1981. Application of serological indexing to develop control strategies for citrus tristeza virus. Proc. Int. Soc. Citricult., 1: 448-452.
Garnsey, S.M., Gonsalves, D. & Purcifull, D.E. 1979. Rapid diagnosis of citrus tristeza virus infections by sodium dodecyl sulfate [SDS]-immunodiffusion procedures. Phytopathol., 691: 88-95.
Gillings, M.R., Broadbent, P. & Gollnow, B.I. 1988. Biochemical indexing for citrus exocortis viroid. In Proc. 10th Conf. IOCV, p. 178-187. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
La Rosa, R., Albanese, G., Azzaro, A., Sesto, F. & Domina, F. 1988. Suitability of nucleic acid analysis to diagnose viroid infections in citrus. In Proc. 10th Conf. IOCV, p. 188-191. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Martin-Gros, G., Garnier, M., Iskra, M.L., Gandar, J. & Bové, J.M. 1987. Production of monoclonal antibodies against phloem-limited prokaryotes of plants: a general procedure using extracts from infected periwinkles as immunogen. Ann. Inst. Pasteur/Microbiol., 138: 625-637.
Roistacher, C.N. 1991. Graft-transmissible diseases of citrus. handbook for detection and diagnosis. Rome, FAO. 286 pp.
Roistacher, C.N., Blue, R.L. & Calavan, E.C. 1973. A new test for cachexia. Citrograph, 58: 261-262.
Roistacher, C.N., Calavan, E.C., Blue, R.L., Navarro, L. & Gonzales, R. 1977. A new more sensitive citron indicator for detection of mild isolates of citrus exocortis viroid (CEV). Plant Dis. Rep., 61: 135139.
Saillard, C., Garcia-Jurado, O., Bové, J.M., Vignault, J.C., Moutous, G., Fos, A., Bonfils, J., Nhami, A., Vogel, R. & Viennot-Bourgin, G. 1980. Application of ELISA to the detection of Spiroplasma citri in plants and insects. In Proc. 8th Conf: IOCV, p. 145-152. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Vela, C., Cambra, M., Sanz, A. & Moreno, P. 1988. Use of specific monoclonal antibodies for diagnosis of citrus tristeza. In Proc. 10th Conf: IOCV, p. 55-61. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Villechanoux, S., Garnier, M., Renaudin, J. & Bové, J.M. 1992. Detection of several strains of the bacterium-like organism of citrus greening disease by DNA probes. Curr. Microbiol., 24: 89-95.
Chapter 5: Production of citrus clones free of virus and virus-like pathogens
Visual inspection and indexing
Production of nucellar clones
Shoot-tip grafting
Bibliography
The works of Murashige et al. (1972) and Navarro, Roistacher and Murashige (1975) have led to the technique of shoot-tip grafting and its use in recovering citrus clones free of virus and virus-like agents. Over the last ten years, shoot-tip grafting has become the major, if not the only, technique used for producing citrus material free of graft-transmissible pathogens. Before the era of shoot-tip grafting, the production of citrus material free of disease agents followed three approaches: selection by visual inspection and indexing, the production of nucellar clones and recovery of virus-free material from infected plants by thermotherapy.
Visual inspection and indexing
In this technique, outstanding candidate trees were selected by visual inspection and were then indexed on indicator plants for the major virus and virus-like pathogens. The candidate trees were mainly old-line clones, i.e. clones that had lost their juvenile characters long ago. Only a small percentage of candidate trees were found to be free of all the agents for which they were indexed. A tree selected by this technique becomes a "mother tree". The progeny trees, propagated from buds of the mother tree, will have the same horticultural properties as the mother tree and, in particular, they will have no juvenile characters if the mother tree is an old-line clone. This is the major advantage of the "inspection indexing" technique over the "nucellar clone" technique where juvenile characters affect the nucellar trees for several years.
Production of nucellar clones
The nucellar clone technique is based on the fact that most virus and virus-like pathogens of citrus do not pass through the seed (see Chapter 3) and that most commercial citrus species and varieties have not only a sexual hybrid embryo resulting from the development of the pollinated ovule, but also several somatic, asexual embryos resulting from the development of nucellar cells into nucellar embryos.
Nucellar cells are somatic cells with 2n chromosomes and they have the same chromosomal composition as the mother tree. Thus, the development of a nucellar embryo yields a nucellar seedling plant identical to the mother plant, i.e. true to type. In fact, there is some variability among the various nucellar seedlings and only those with the most desirable properties would be kept to yield nucellar clones. In the production of nucellar clones, pollination has to be controlled. Flowers of the mother tree will be pollinated with Poncirus trifoliata pollen. As the inheritance of the trifoliate leaf character is dominant, the seedling from the sexual embryo will have trifoliate leaves; the nucellar seedlings will have no trifoliate leaves and can thus be easily identified. In their early years, nucellar trees show the typical juvenile characters of vegetative vigour, thorniness, upright growth, slowness in fruiting, abnormal fruit characters and alternate bearing. The juvenile
condition tends to decrease with time and, in general, ten to 15 years are necessary to evaluate nucellar clones.
Commercial nucellar clones have been produced for the major commercial citrus species, including sweet orange, mandarin, grapefruit and lemon. Some of the better known nucellar clones were produced by Frost (1938). It should be remembered that shaddock, citron, Clementine, King mandarin, Meyer lemon and Tahiti lime are monoembryonic and have no nucellar embryos. However, techniques have been developed to induce nucellar embryos artificially in monoembryonic species. Rangan, Murashige and Bitters (1968) were the first to induce formation of such embryos in vitro. Esan (1973) made an extensive study of adventive embryogenesis in monoembryonic species. Juarez, Navarro and Guardiola (1976) obtained nucellar plants of several clementine cultivars.
Even in the case of seedless polyembryonic varieties, nucellar plants can still be obtained. In certain varieties, seeds and, hence, nucellar embryos can be easily induced by cross-pollination but, in other varieties, such as the navel sweet orange, megasporocite degeneration makes it difficult to obtain any seed. This problem can be avoided by culturing, in vitro, unpollinated and unfertilized ovules before they are aborted. In this way, Navarro and his co-workers obtained nucellar plants of several navel cultivars by culturing whole ovules excised from ovaries at the flower bud stage and from developing fruits.
Shoot-tip grafting
White (1934) was the first to show, at the Rockefeller Institute in New York, that root tips of tomato plants infected with TMV were free of the virus. Limasset, Cornuet and Gendron (1949) at INRA in Versailles, suggested that shoot tips could also be free of viruses. This hypothesis was confirmed by Morel and Martin (1952, 1955) who showed, also at INRA in Versailles, that shoot tips or meristems could be cultured in vitro into plants on special media, and that these plants would be free of viruses. The first plant to be freed of viruses in this way was a dahlia hybrid, then potato, carnation and strawberry. Today, many cultivated plants have been "regenerated" by shoot-meristem culture. Unfortunately, meristems of woody plants such as citrus do not grow, or grow only poorly, on the media devised for herbaceous plants. This is why Murashige et al. (1972), at Riverside, California, had the idea of replacing the medium by a small, test-tube grown citrus rootstock. The
meristem was placed on the decapitated rootstock where it bound to the rootstock by a graft union and, being adequately fed by the rootstock, grew into a shoot. The technique has been carefully standardized by Navarro and his co-workers in Spain. The rootstock used is Troyer citrange, a trifoliate hybrid of P. trifoliata. The shoot grown from the meristem is not trifoliate and is easily detected. Once the shoot is well developed, the small, test-tube plantlet (rootstock and shoot) is transplanted to soil. Alternatively, when difficulties are encountered in the transplant process, the plantlet can be grafted on a vigorous, one-year-old rootstock seedling in the greenhouse.
Shoot-tip grafted plants have all the characteristics of the mother tree from which the shoot tips have been taken. Contrary to nucellar plants, they have no juvenile characters and they are able to flower and produce fruit within a year after grafting. The shoot-tip grafting process has been so carefully worked out by Navarro and his co-workers that it can easily be reproduced, even in laboratories without much experience. However, shoot-tip grafting in itself is only part of the whole procedure. It must be followed by the indexing of every plant grown from a shoot tip. Indeed, some shoot-tip grafted plants are still found to be infected by virus and virus-like pathogens. This is because, for the shoot tip to take and grow on the rootstock, it has to be of a minimum size. Normally, the grafted shoot tip comprises the meristem and two to three leaf primordia (0.10 to 0.15 mm). If the shoot tip is too small, it will not grow. If it is too large, it will not be free of
pathogens. Conditions for indexing the shoot-tip grafted plants are at least as important as the shoot-tip grafting laboratory itself. They must be grown free of nutritional deficiencies and pests, under controlled greenhouse or screenhouse conditions. They must be of the highest possible quality so as to express even the mildest symptoms. The gradual replacement of indicator plants by serological and other techniques will probably make the indexing procedure simpler. Tristeza virus is already indexed by ELISA; cachexia and exocortis viroids by PAGE; and stubborn by ELISA as well as culture of the spiroplasma. Hopefully, similar techniques will soon be available for other citrus pathogens. In the Mediterranean area, Spain has entirely regenerated its citrus species and varieties through shoot-tip grafting and indexing. Only clones that are free of virus and virus-like pathogens are now propagated by nurseries. Similarly, many disease free citrus clones are available from
Corsica (France). The Corsican disease-free citrus collection is being duplicated in Martinique while Morocco has also started a shoot-tip grafting programme and produces many nursery trees free of infectious agents.
Bibliography
Button, J. & Bornman, C.H. 1971. Development of nucellar plants from unpollinated and unfertilized ovules of Washington navel orange in vitro. J. S. Afr. Bot., 37: 127-134.
Cameron, J.W. & Frost, H.B. 1968. Genetics, breeding and nucellar embryony. In W. Reuther, L.D. Batchelor & H.J. Webber, eds. The citrus industry, vol. II. Anatomy, physiology, genetics and reproduction, p. 325-370. Berkeley, Div. Agric. Sci., Univ. Calif.
Esan, E.B. 1973. A detailed study of adventive embryogenesis in the Rutaceae. Riverside, Univ. Calif. (Ph.D. thesis)
Frost, H.B. 1938. Nucellar embryony and juvenile characters in clonal varieties of citrus. J. Hered., 29: 423-432.
Juarez, J., Navarro, L. & Guardiola, J.L. 1976. Obtention de plantes nucellaires de divers cultivars de clémentiniers au moyen de la culture de nucelle in vitro. Fruits, 31(12): 751-762.
Kochba, J., Spiegel-Roy, P. & Safran, H. 1972. Adventive plants from ovules and nucelli in citrus. Planta, 106: 237-245.
Limasset, P., Cornuet, P. & Gendron, Y. 1949. Recherche du virus de la mosaïque du tabac (Marmor tabaci Holmes) dans les organes aériens de tabac infectés. C.R. Acad. Sci., Paris, 228: 1888-1896.
Morel, G. & Martin, C. 1952. Guérison de dahlias atteints d'une maladie à virus. C.R. Acad. Sci., Paris, 235: 1324-1325.
Morel, G. & Martin, C. 1955. Guérison de pommes de terre atteintes de maladies à virus. CR Acad. Agric., France, 41: 472475.
Murashige, T., Bitters, W.P., Rangan, E.M., Nauer, E.M., Roistacher, C.N. & Holliday, P.B. 1972. A technique of shoot apex grafting and its utilization towards recovering virus-free citrus clones. Hort. Sci., 7 118-119.
Navarro, L. & Juarez, J. 1977. Elimination of citrus pathogens in propagative budwood. 11. In vitro propagation. Proc. Int. Soc. Citricult., 3: 973-981.
Navarro, L., Roistacher, C.N. & Murashige, T. 1975. Improvement of shoot-tip grafting in vitro for virus-free citrus. J Am Soc. Hort. Sci., 100: 471-479.
Navarro, L., Roistacher, C.N. & Murashige, T. 1976. Influence of size and source of shoot-tips on psorosis A and exocortis content of navel orange plants obtained by shoot-tip grafting in vitro. In Proc 7th Conf: IOCV, p. 194-197. Riverside, Univ. Calif
Navarro, L., Juarez, J., Pina, A., Ballester, J.F. & Arregui, J.M. 1988. The citrus variety improvement program in Spain after eleven years. In Proc. 10th Conf: IOCV, p. 400-406. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Rangan, T.S., Murashige, T. & Bitters, W.P. 1968. In vitro initiation of nucellar embryos in monoembryonic citrus. Hort/ Sci., 3: 226-227.
Reuther, W., Batchelor, L.D. & Webber, H.J., eds. 1968. The citrus industry, vol. 11. Anatomy, physiology, genetics and reproduction. Berkeley, Div. Agric. Sci., Univ. Calif.
Roistacher, C.N. & Calavan, E.C. 1974. Inactivation of five citrus viruses in plants held at warm glasshouse temperatures. Plant Dis. Rep., 58: 850-853.
Roistacher, C.N. & Kitto, S.L. 1977. Elimination of additional citrus viruses by shoot-tip grafting in vitro. Plant Dis. Rep., 61: 594-596.
Roistacher, C.N., Navarro, L. & Murashige, T. 1976. Recovery of citrus selections free of several viruses, exocortis viroid and Spiroplasma citri by shoot-tip grafting in vitro. In Proc. 7th Conf: IOCV, p. 186193. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Su, H.J. & Chu, J.Y. 1984. Modified technique of citrus shoot-tip grafting and rapid propagation method to obtain citrus budwoods free of citrus viruses and likubin organism. Proc. Int. Organ. Citricult.
Vogel, R., Bové, J.M. & Nicoli, M. 1988. Le programme français de sélection sanitaire des agrumes. Fruits, 43(12): 709-720.
Vogel, R., Nicoli, M. & Bové, J.M. 1988. Le microgreffage de méristèmes in vitro, son utilisation en Corse pour la génération des agrumes. Fruits, 43(3): 167-173.
Weathers, L.G. & Calavan, E.C. 1959. Nucellar embryony: a means of freeing citrus clones of viruses. In J.M. Wallace, ed. Citrus virus diseases, p. 197-202. Berkeley, Div. Agric. Sci., Univ. Calif.
White, P.R. 1934. Multiplication of the viruses of tobacco and ancuba mosaics in growing excised tomato root tips. Phytopathol., 24: 1003- 1011.
<section>7</section>
Chapter 6: Short description of major citrus diseases in the near east
Viroid and viroid-like diseases
Virus and virus-like diseases
Diseases involving phloem restricted prokaryotic agents
Fungal diseases
Bacterial diseases: Citrus canker
Bibliography
Viroid and viroid-like diseases
Cachexia and exocortis are diseases caused by viroid RNA molecules (see Tables 2 and 3, p. 11-12). Gummy bark is included in this chapter because its symptoms on sweet orange are similar to those of cachexia on mandarin. The possibly viroid nature of gummy bark is under investigation. Grapefruit trees affected by the new]y discovered Kassala disease show gum impregnation of the grapefruit bark similar to that of cachexia in mandarin and gummy bark in sweet orange. Unlike gummy bark and cachexia, Kassala disease has not yet been shown to be graft-transmissible. Its possibly viroid nature is also being investigated.
Cachexia
Xyloporosis was first described as a disease affecting sweet lime rootstocks in the country then known as Palestine (Reichert and Perlberger, 1934). In 1950, a disease with symptoms resembling those of xyloporosis, but affecting Orlando tangelo, was described under the name of cachexia in Florida (Childs, 1950) and shown to be caused by a graft-transmissible agent. Later, both diseases were considered to be caused by the same agent, and the expression "cachexia-xyloporosis" came into common usage. The terms cachexia and xyloporosis have been widely used as synonyms, but this view has recently been challenged (Roistacher, 1988).
The agent of cachexia is of a viroid nature (Semancik et al., 1988) (see Tables 2 and 3) and induces pitting of the woody cylinder (stem pitting) and bark gumming in mandarin, tangelo, sweet lime, Citrus macrophylla and some other citrus types (see Tables 5 to 8, p. 21-27). Bark gumming shows up when the trunk of an affected tree is scratched with a knife to remove the outer layers of bark at the bud-union area (Figs 38, 40, 42, 49 and 52). Removal of a piece of bark across the bud-union line is required to see pits in the stem (Figs 38, 41, 44 and 54). If the tree is affected by cachexia, the cambial face of the piece of bark will show pegs matching the pits in the stem (Figs 39, 41, 43, 45 and 55).
In addition, the presence of gum can be seen within the bark (Figs 39, 41, 43 and 45). Symptoms range from the severe in Orlando, Wekiwa and Seminole tangelos, Clementine and Parson's Special mandarin, Murcott and Ellendale tangors (C. sinensis x C. reticulata), to the undetectable in sweet orange, sour orange, grapefruit and trifoliate orange. Symptoms occur on the trunk of infected trees, above or below (Fig. 57) the bud-union according to the position of the susceptible variety. In severe cases, bark cracking (Figs 47, 52, 55 and 57) and pinholing (Figs 51 and 53) are observed.
Since the cachexia-xyloporosis viroid is perpetuated by the use of infected budwood and no insect vector is known, it can be eliminated from new plantings by the use of healthy propagation material. Parson's Special mandarin on a vigorous rootstock is used for indexing (Roistacher, Blue and Calavan, 1973) (Figs 58 and 59).
Gummy bark of sweet orange
This is a graft-transmissible disease which affects sweet orange trees in some Mediterranean countries and most countries of the Near East region (Nour-Eldin, 1956, 1968). The disease is suspected to be of a viroid nature. Diseased trees are usually stunted, and when the bark of the trunk above bud-union is scraped it shows gum deposits (Figs 60 to 62, 66, 69, 70 and 73). Removal of a piece of bark across the bud-union is required to see stem pitting (Figs 64 and 66). Symptoms of gummy bark on sweet orange resemble those Of cachexia-xyloporosis on mandarin, but the cachexia agent fails to induce any symptoms on sweet orange and the gummy bark agent does not cause symptoms on mandarin. Rough lemon is also susceptible to the gummy bark agent (Nour-Eldin, 1981). Sweet orange trees on rough lemon exhibiting gummy bark symptoms in sweet orange scion also show bark pegging and gumming, and stem pitting on the rootstock, as well as bud-union crease (Figs 74, 75 and 77). The amount
of gum in the sweet orange bark above bud-union can be considerable and, in such cases, bark scaling is observed (Figs 68 and 69). No vector is known. Propagations from only healthy trees are recommended for preventing the introduction of the problem into new orchards.
Gummy bark has never been reported from North or South America and, until recently, the disease was thought to be of little concern. However, its prevalence in the Near East countries shows it to be of major importance.
Kassala disease
This disease of grapefruit trees was seen for the first time in Kassala in the Sudan by Bové in 1987. The affected trees show gum impregnations in the bark and mild stem pitting (Figs 80 to 82). The symptoms resemble those of cachexia on mandarin or those of gummy bark on sweet orange. However, the amount of gum in the bark seems to be smaller, even though bark gumming can extend up to 2 m above bud-union. The disease was seen on Foster and Marsh seedless grapefruit trees in many parts of the Sudan. Cases were also seen in southern Yemen. Kassala disease has not yet been shown to be graft-transmissible. However, its putative viroid nature is under investigation.
Exocortis
Exocortis disease is caused by a viroid or complex of viroids (Duran-Vila et al., 1988) and has been reported from practically all citrus-growing areas of the world (see Tables 2 and 3). The disease affects Poncirus trifoliata and most of its hybrids, especially the citranges, as well as Rangpur lime, Palestine sweet lime, some citrons and lemons and a number of other citrus varieties. It is symptom-less in many varieties, such as sweet and sour oranges, grapefruits, mandarins and rough lemon (see Tables 5 to 8). Therefore its symptoms are only manifested when exocortis viroid-infected budwood taken from symptomless carriers is used for propagation on susceptible rootstocks. Symptoms of exocortis include stunting of trees, bark splitting and scaling of the rootstock portion of the tree (Figs 83, 85 to 87). The time for bark scaling to appear usually ranges from four to eight years on trees budded on P. trifoliata or Rangpur lime rootstocks. Bark symptoms of exocortis,
including yellowing of the bark of young branches, also appear when susceptible varieties such as P. trifoliata (Figs 319 to 321) and citron (Figs 88 and 89) are used as scion and rootstock become infected.
No insect vector is known for exocortis, but the viroid is transmissible via sap to citrus and non-citrus herbaceous hosts, and it is quite resistant to heat, drying and some chemicals (Garnsey and Weathers, 1972). Etrog citron and lemons are apparently effective sources of contamination of cutting instruments. Decontamination of budding knives and other tools by the use of household bleach or other solutions containing 5 percent sodium hypochlorite is recommended to prevent the spread of the disease in nurseries and commercial orchards. Mechanical transmission of exocortis in the field also seems to be affected by the nature of the donor and host plants. Infected Etrog citron plants of certain selections, e.g. "60-13" or "861-S1", develop leaf epinasty and are used as indicators for exocortis (Fig. 90).
The disease known as exocortis and characterized by tree stunting, bark scaling and shoot blotching of P. trifoliata is induced by the well-known CEV. Additional viroids have been identified in various field trees, in which they occur as mixtures of two to six different viroid groups. Those of groups 1, 111 and IV are believed to be responsible for mild forms of the exocortis disease. The cachexia viroid is part of group II. (See also Tables 2 and 3.)
Virus and virus-like diseases
Diseases with psorosis young leaf symptoms
Psorosis young leaf symptoms were first described in the case of scaly bark psorosis (psorosis A) (Fawcett, 1933). They range from pure vein flecking (Fig. 91) to a mixture of vein flecking and oak-leaf pattern (Figs 92 to 96).
The symptoms are induced by several graft-transmissible agents, namely those of scaly bark psorosis (psorosis A and B), ringspot, concave gum-blind pocket, impietratura and cristacortis, and are thus shared by several diseases. The well-characterized crinkly leaf and infectious variegation viruses (Ilarvirus group) are also able to induce these symptoms. Leaf flecking is sometimes considered specific to scaly bark psorosis, while oak-leaf pattern is thought to be characteristic of concave gum-blind pocket. In Corsica, no such specificities could be observed. Here even sources of budwood producing only leaf flecking or oak-leaf pattern in California induced both symptoms on young leaves. Similar observations have been made in Spain (Moreno, personal communication).
The psorosis young leaf symptoms fade as the leaf matures and require cool temperatures for expression. The trunk symptoms associated with scaly bark psorosis and concave gum-blind pocket usually require at least two or three years for expression. On the contrary, the psorosis young leaf symptoms show up very early on young trees, a long time before the trunk symptoms appear. In such cases, the leaf symptoms only indicate that the trees are infected with any one of the above disease agents. They do not permit identification of the agent involved.
Many commercial citrus varieties exhibit psorosis young leaf symptoms (see Table 7): sweet orange, mandarin, grapefruit, etc. Seedlings of sweet orange, mandarin or dweet tangor are used as indicator plants. The symptoms to be observed are those shown in Figs 91 to 96. Inoculated indicator seedlings should be kept in a cool greenhouse (18-25°C).
The psorosis complex: psorosis A (scaly bark psorosis), psorosis B and ringspot
Psorosis A. The agent of psorosis A or scaly bark psorosis is easily graft-transmissible and induces psorosis young leaf symptoms (vein flecking and/or oak-leaf patterns) as well as bark scaling on the trunk and major branches of susceptible varieties such as sweet orange (Figs 99 to 101), grapefruit and mandarin (see Table 7). Varieties such as sour orange and lemon (see Table 8), which remain free of bark scaling, do however show young leaf symptoms.
Wallace (1978) described the development of bark scaling as follows. Lesions first appear as very small, pimply eruptions, followed by scaling of the bark in dry, irregular flakes. On older, active lesions, the bark breaks away in fairly extensive sections at the margins and new bark forms within the lesion area. There is a continuous cracking and sloughing of dead tissue. Bark lesions usually develop first on the trunk and primary limbs. Initially, there may be a single lesion, but sometimes several lesions begin at about the same time. Gum deposits are sometimes evident under the scales and gum may exude, but gum is not a consistent accompaniment. Lesions may encircle small branches, large limbs and even the trunk, causing parts above the encircled area to deteriorate. Advanced decline is experienced when bark scaling has become severe, affecting large areas and encircling the trunk.
Most sources of psorosis A induce shock symptoms on sweet orange, dweet tangor and small-fruited acid lime seedlings. The shock reaction is defined as the sudden wilting and necrosis of young shoots which develop after inoculation.
Scaly bark psorosis exists worldwide and has caused considerable damage. No insect vectors are known and mechanical transmission in the field has not been observed. The disease can be eliminated easily by the use of disease-free propagative material.
Psorosis B. Psorosis B is a severe form of psorosis A in which bark lesions are rampant and expand rapidly, with sloughing of large strips of bark (Fawcett, 1933; Fawcett and Bitancourt, 1943). Twigs develop gum-impregnated lesions. Symptoms are observed on mature leaves (Fig. 97) and include ringspots and/or large irregular chlorotic patterns with the lower leaf surface showing brownish gum-impregnated eruptions. Psorosis B occurs in the field, but it can also be induced experimentally when a psorosis A lesion is used as inoculum to graft-inoculate young sweet orange seedlings. Bark blistering and scaling quickly develop on the seedling stem and psorosis B mature leaf symptoms appear. These severe reactions do not appear on sweet orange seedlings previously inoculated with psorosis A non-lesion bark. This challenge inoculation can be used to identify the agent present in non-lesion bark as that of psorosis A.
When severe bark scaling is observed in the orchard, it is not always easy to determine whether one is dealing with psorosis A or psorosis B. However, the presence of symptoms on mature leaves with gum-impregnated eruptions on the lower leaf surface (Fig. 97) is indicative of psorosis B.
The agent of psorosis B can be mechanically transmitted from citron to non-rutaceous, herbaceous plants and back to citron. Graft transmission from the mechanically infected citron back to sweet orange results in psorosis B symptoms.
Ringspot. In the United States of America and Argentina, many isolates of CRSV are associated with bark scaling of sweet orange and grapefruit. In several aspects this bark scaling resembles that of psorosis B. More generally, CRSV and the agent of psorosis B have the same host range and induce essentially the same symptoms, including psorosis B mature leaf symptoms. The two agents are mechanically transmissible to a number of herbaceous hosts and cause diagnostic local lesions on Chenopodium quinoa. Recently, several psorosis A isolates have been shown to induce the same type of lesions on C. quinoa. Furthermore, CRSV shows cross-protection against the agent of psorosis B. Interestingly, the original isolate of CRSV described by Wallace and Drake (1968) did not protect against psorosis B. Therefore, citrus ringspot as described by Timmer and Garnsey (1980) and psorosis B as described by Fawcett and Bitancourt (1943) are considered synonymous by Timmer and Garnsey.
In Argentina, a form of psorosis-like bark scaling is spreading naturally (Beñateña and Portillo, 1984). This is also happening in Texas (Timmer and Garnsey, 1980) and Florida, but to a much lesser extent. An aphid vector is suspected in Argentina, but this needs confirmation. It seems clear, however, that the transmitted agent in both North and South America is CRSV, even though, in Argentina it is called psorosis.
In the Mediterranean and the Near East countries, ringspot patterns can be observed on sweet orange fruits and leaves in the absence of bark scaling, suggesting that this type of ringspot is not caused by CRSV. This shows that more than one agent may induce ringspot patterns in citrus. (See the section on ringspot diseases in this chapter.)
Final elucidation of the relationships between psorosis A and psorosis B or ringspot requires that the agents involved in this so-called psorosis complex be identified and characterized. This work is in progress.
Concave gum-blind pocket
The symptoms of concave gum-blind pocket were first described in California (Fawcett, 1936; Fawcett and Bitancourt, 1943), but the disease exists worldwide. The term "concave gum" refers to conspicuous broad concavities of various sizes on trunk or limbs (Figs 102 to 106), with concentric gum deposits present in the layers of wood beneath. Gum-filled layers may alternate with normal layers and gum may exude through a crack in the bark at certain seasons. Washington navel sweet orange and Orlando tangelo are especially good producers of gum.
The term "blind pocket" refers to relatively large, longitudinal depressions of trunk or limbs with the two lateral sides of the depressions coming close together (Fig. 102). Gum is rarely forced to the surface. Concave gum and blind pocket often occur together on the same tree (Fig. 102) and are thought to be due to a single agent. Psorosis young leaf symptoms are also characteristically associated with the disease.
Cristacortis is another disease in which depressions appear on the trunk and limbs, but these are much smaller than those of concave gum-blind pocket and the pits in the stem correspond to matching pegs on the cambial face of the bark. No stem pitting-bark pegging is associated with the depressions or concavities of concave gum-blind pocket. For a full description of cristacortis, see the section below.
Severe symptoms of concave gum-blind pocket can be seen on mandarin, tangelo and sweet orange trees. Symptoms can be so severe that the trunks are completely deformed. Sour orange is tolerant. See Tables 5 to 8 for further host range data.
No vectors are known. Seed transmission of an agent inducing psorosis young leaf symptoms in P. trifoliata and Troyer and Carrizo citranges has been reported and could be the agent of concave gum-blind pocket.
Infectious variegation-crinkly leaf
The agent of infectious variegation-crinkly leaf (Fawcett and Klotz, 1939) is an ilarvirus (Uyeda and Mink, 1983) (see Table 1, p. 10). It was one of the first citrus viruses to be mechanically transmitted (Grant and Corbett, 1961) and purified (Corbett and Grant, 1967; Davino and Garnsey, 1984) (see Table 9, p. 33). CLRV (Garnsey, 1975) is serologically related. Symptoms affect leaves and fruit of lemon, sour orange, sweet orange, grapefruit, citron, satsuma, etc. In the case of the more severe infectious variegation virus, leaves are variegated, somewhat crinkled and distorted, irregular in outline and narrow. They can also be boat-shaped. With the milder crinkly leaf virus, the major leaf symptoms are crinkling (Fig. 107), warping and pocketing. Leaf size is normal or even larger than normal and there is little or no variegation. Both strains of the virus cause chlorotic pinpoint spotting. Crinkly leaf virus and, especially, infectious variegation virus may cause lemons
to be small, coarse, bumpy and misshapen. Infectious variegation virus has a marked effect on lemons, satsumas, oranges (Fig. 108), grapefruits, etc.
Under field conditions in Corsica, it is difficult to tell the two diseases apart by the leaf symptoms only. On experimentally inoculated Hamlin sweet orange, Wase satsuma and Eureka lemon trees, leaf symptoms are similar to those of the crinkly leaf (Fig. 107) rather than the variegation type. However, only infectious variegation virus induces fruit symptoms on sweet orange and satsuma, although both viruses induce symptoms on lemon fruits.
The virus is present in most Mediterranean countries, the United States of America, Argentina and Australia. Lemon seedlings are good indicator plants. Cowpea (Vigna sinensis) can be used for mechanical inoculation. Immunosera are available for serological detection.
Cristacortis
The cristacortis disease was first described by Vogel and Bové (1964) in Corsica on Tarocco sweet orange trees grafted on sour orange rootstock, and shown to be a distinct disease (Vogel and Bové, 1968, 1972). Previously, trees with cristacortis symptoms were thought to be affected by xyloporosis or concave gum-blind pocket. The disease is widespread throughout Mediterranean countries and certain islands (Corsica, Sardinia). In northern Yemen (Figs 109 to 115), the disease was probably introduced from Italy via Ethiopia. Susceptible species are numerous and include tangelo, sour orange, sweet orange, mandarin, satsuma, grapefruit, rough lemon and sweet lime (see Table 7). Only one of many isolates is able to induce symptoms on lemon. Small-fruited acid lime is among tolerant varieties (see Table 8).
On leaves, symptoms are vein flecking and oak-leaf patterns (psorosis young leaf symptoms). Symptoms also affect trunk, limbs and shoots, and are typically vertical or lengthwise depressions or pockets (Figs 109 and 114) due to pits in the wood (Figs 110, 112, 113 and 115) with corresponding pegs on cambial side of bark (Figs 111, 113 and 115). With certain species, such as tangelos, gum-like material stains the tissues at the top of the peg and bottom of the pit. Young pits in the wood can occur without accompanying external depressions, and depressions, even severe ones, disappear with time as a consequence of radial growth. Traces of previous depressions and pitting remain buried in the wood, and can be seen in cross-sections as radially oriented clear lines perpendicular to the wood layers. These radial traces of previous pits are of diagnostic value and distinguish cristacortis from concave gum-blind pocket in which the stain beneath the concave depressions follows the
concentric wood layers. Although old depressions disappear, new pits and pegs can develop anywhere on the tree.
Cristacortis is probably the only disease inducing stem pitting on sour orange. The presence of stem pitting on the sour orange stock, in addition to stem pitting on the scion, is valuable for diagnosis.
The cristacortis agent is easily graft-transmitted. Leaf and trunk symptoms can be induced by placing pollen from infected trees under the bark of Orlando tangelo seedlings (Vogel and Bové, 1980). However, natural spread of cristacortis by pollen has never been observed.
Impietratura
Impietratura, a disorder that affects citrus fruit, is considered to be of a viral nature, based on graft transmissibility (Ruggieri, 1955, 1961). The disease has been found in most citrus-growing countries of the Mediterranean basin: Algeria, Cyprus, France (Corsica), Greece, Israel, Italy, Lebanon, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Morocco, Portugal, Spain, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia and Turkey. Its symptoms have also been seen in Saudi Arabia, Somalia and the Islamic Republic of Iran. Trees affected by impietratura display leaf vein clearing and oak-leaf patterns (psorosis young leaf symptoms) and characteristic fruit symptoms, though not all fruits on diseased trees are affected. Affected fruits are small, malformed and hardened, hence the Italian name of the disease impietratura, meaning that the fruits become as hard as a stone. Affected fruits have characteristic gum pockets in the albedo (Figs 116 and 117) resulting in protuberances on the fruit surface. However, it
should be remembered that boron deficiency also induces gum pockets in the albedo. During ripening, affected areas appear green (Fig. 1 16). Protuberances can disappear as fruits approach maturity and affected areas may remain depressed. Among susceptible varieties are bergamot, Clementine, grapefruit, lemon, rough lemon, sour orange, sweet orange and Citrus volkameriana (see Table 7). Citron, on the other hand, is tolerant (see Table 8).
Impietratura causes heavy losses to citrus growers because of off-season fruit drop, and because affected fruits are not suitable for commercial export. In some instances, as much as 80 percent of the fruit from impietratura-infected trees is unmarketable as fresh fruit and has to be processed for juice, if not discarded. Finally, infected trees do not show symptoms regularly each year. A tree with badly affected fruit this year might well produce normal fruit the following year. The reasons for this behaviour are not known.
Satsuma dwarf
The agent of satsuma dwarf is a well-characterized, isometric RNA virus (26 nm in diameter) with two nucleocapsid components (see Table 1). The disease is widespread in Japan where it was first described by Yamada and Sawamura (1952). It has since been reported from China and the Korean peninsula. In Turkey, about 2 percent of the satsuma trees on P. trifoliata grown in the Izmir region, and probably of Japanese origin, are affected by satsuma dwarf. In addition they carry tristeza virus. There is probably also a similar situation in the former Yugoslavia and Albania. Satsuma trees affected by satsuma dwarf are stunted and look bare because the shoots are short (short internodes) and the leaves small. The typical symptom is mature, boat-shaped leaves (Fig. 118). In cultivars other than satsuma, symptoms are mild or absent.
The virus has been mechanically transmitted to many herbaceous plants (see Table 9). In Japan, local natural spread, apparently by a soil-borne vector, has been observed. Symptomless infection occurs in a windbreak tree, China laurestine (Viburnum odoratissimum), which markedly enhances natural transmission (Koizumi et al., 1988).
Antibodies against SDV are available and are used in ELISA to detect the virus. Indexing can also be done by mechanical inoculation to white sesame.
Yellow vein clearing
Yellow vein clearing (Figs 119 to 122) is a new, as yet unidentified, disorder that was first seen on lemon leaves in Pakistan. The disease is described and compared with known disorders in Chapter 17.
Ringspot diseases
Several agents probably induce ringspot patterns in citrus, but the most studied agent is CRSV. Two filamentous RNA nucleocapsids, one short and one long, have been detected and both are required for infectivity. CRSV and psorosis B are considered synonymous (see the section above on psorosis), as their host range (see Table 7) and symptoms are essentially the same. Symptoms affect leaves and trunk, and sometimes fruit. Symptoms on young leaves are variable, but they usually include irregular yellow spots (Fig. 126), and some ring patterns (Fig. 124), which may coalesce and form mottled chlorotic areas (Fig. 123). Necrotic etching may also occur. The chlorotic patterns persist in mature leaves (psorosis B mature leaf symptoms). Trunk symptoms on sweet orange and grapefruit trees consist of psorosis B-type bark scaling. Furthermore, on soft stems up to 1 cm in diameter, yellowish blotches may appear and develop into necrotic lesions (stem lesions) encircling the stem and
causing the parts above it to die. This reaction is different from the psorosis A shock reaction. Fruit may also exhibit ringspot symptoms (Figs 124 and 127).
Field trees may show the above symptoms. Leaf symptoms and stem lesions are best seen on experimentally graft-inoculated seedlings of sweet orange and grapefruit.
CRSV (or psorosis B) can be mechanically transmitted to citrus and to numerous herbaceous hosts. All isolates produce chlorotic to necrotic local lesions in C. quinoa but infection does not become systemic. For best results, fully expanded leaves of C. quinoa should be inoculated with fresh inoculum prepared from a symptomatic young flush. Tatterleaf-citrange stunt virus also infects C. quinoa but, in contrast to CRSV, infection is systemic.
Ringspot is not always associated with bark scaling. For instance, in Greece, 30-year-old Navelina sweet orange trees showed ringspot patterns on leaves but no bark scaling. In Corsica, a 30-year-old Clementine tree without bark scaling was infected with a ringspot agent as shown by graft inoculation to Parson's Special mandarin and Etrog citron. In the Islamic Republic of Iran, ring pattern disease (Figs 123 and 124) occurs in the absence of bark scaling, especially on sweet orange. In Spain, two ringspot isolates not associated with bark scaling showed yellow spots and rings with sharp edges in old leaves, shoots and fruits. These isolates differed from the ringspot isolates associated with bark scaling in that they did not induce a shock reaction on inoculated seedlings, did not cross-protect against psorosis B, were not mechanically transmissible to C. quinoa, and did not have associated to them a 48 kDa protein usually present in psorosis A and B and other CRSV
isolates. Whether the ringspot agents apparently not associated with bark scaling are isolates of CRSV remains to be seen.
Finally, the CRSV (psorosis B agent) is naturally spread in Argentina, perhaps by an aphid vector (Beñateña and Portillo, 1984). In Texas and Florida, natural transmission occurs, but to a much lesser extent than in Argentina (Timmer and Garnsey, 1980).
Tristeza
Tristeza is a very destructive virus disease which affects trees of sweet orange, mandarin, grapefruit and other cultivars - but not lemon -when they are grafted on sour orange and certain other rootstocks (see Tables 5 to 8). It occurs in most citrus-growing areas of the world and is naturally spread by aphids. It has been reported from Argentina, Australia, Brazil, China, Israel, Japan, Paraguay, Peru, the United States of America (California), Uruguay, Venezuela, Southeast Asia in general and most countries of sub-Saharan Africa. Tristeza has destroyed about 25 million trees in South America and about 3 million in California. The disease represents a very serious threat to citrus in the Mediterranean and Near East countries, one of the last areas still essentially free from the virus and planted extensively with the intolerant scion-sour orange combination. In Spain, large-scale spread of tristeza began in 1957 in the Alcira-Carcagente-Corbera district of the province of
Valencia. Since then it has caused the death of about 15 million trees. More recently, tristeza was found to be spreading in Israel. In spite of an extensive eradication programme based on ELISA for CTV testing, the virus could not be eradicated and has produced severe damage in certain areas.
The symptoms of tristeza disease on susceptible scion-rootstock combinations include stunting and slow dieback (trees take two, three or more years to die) or quick decline with sudden wilting, defoliation and death of the tree (within a few months following infection). Trees showing the slow decline type of tristeza generally develop an overgrowth of the scion trunk just above the bud-union. These reactions result from the basic histological symptom, namely the collapse and death of sieve tubes in the sour orange phloem below the bud-union. When a strip of bark is removed across the bud-union of tristeza-affected trees on sour orange, exposed wood shows bristly pegs fitting into the pinholes of the cambial side of the bark (Fig. 129).
CTV, in addition to the typical tristeza disease, i.e. the disease of trees on sour orange, is also responsible for stem pitting, a disorder that occurs in susceptible varieties, independent of the rootstock (see Tables 5 to 8) (McClean, 1974b). Stem pitting refers to small or long depressions or grooves in the wood of shoots, branches and trunk, and its early stages may be observed by removing the bark. Generally, the pits in the outer wood have corresponding pegs or projections on the inner surface of the bark. Species or varieties most susceptible to stem pitting are acid limes, grapefruit, Citrus macrophylla, Citrus hystrix, and certain sweet orange varieties such as Pera in Brazil and Mediterranean sweet in South Africa (Salibe, 1977). Leaves of CTV-infected, small-fruited acid lime seedlings and other sensitive varieties show CTV-specific vein clearing (Fig. 128), a symptom which is of diagnostic value. The presence and intensity of vein clearing and/or stem pitting in
a given variety depends on the CTV strain involved. Polyclonal and monoclonal antibodies against CTV are available and widely used for tristeza virus detection by ELISA.
A third abnormal condition related to the presence of tristeza virus is "seedling yellows", a reaction experimentally induced by tissue-graft inoculation of certain strains of the virus into young seedlings of sour orange, grapefruit, lemon and some citron (Wallace, 1957).
CTV is a member of the closterovirus group (Bar-Joseph, Garnsey and Gonsalves, 1979). It is a flexuous filament about 2 000 nm long and 12 nm in diameter (see Fig. 1). Many strains of this virus, varying in pathogenicity, are known to occur. CTV is transmitted by aphids (see Table 10, p. 34) in a semi-persistent mode (Bar-Joseph, Raccah and Loebenstein, 1977) (see Table 11, p. 38). Toxoptera citricida, known as the brown or black tropical aphid (see the drawing on p. 36), is an efficient vector of CTV, since a single insect moving from an infected to a healthy tree can transmit the virus. Much less efficient vectors, where movement of about 50 individuals is required for transmission, are the aphids Aphis gossypii, Aphis spiraecola, Toxoptera aurantii and Myzus persicae. T. citricida has not been found in the Mediterranean basin or the Near East, but it is present in parts of India, most countries of Southeast Asia, sub-Saharan Africa, Central and South America. This insect
has the ability to adapt to various climatic conditions and to spread rapidly from country to country. Recently it entered Venezuela, resulting in the destruction of 400 000 trees within five years. It has also recently been found in Costa Rica, El Salvador and Nicaragua, showing a clear movement towards the Northern Hemisphere.
Another alarming discovery was that tristeza virus can mutate, causing changes that permit rapid spread by alternative aphids. In California, tristeza in its more severe seedling yellows form was found to spread rapidly when carried by A. gossypii (Roistacher et al., 1980). In Israel, it was shown that this same aphid could transmit tristeza virus strain VT at a rate averaging 40 percent, compared with a rate of less than 5 percent with two other strains (Bar-Joseph and Loebenstein, 1973). Favourable climatic conditions allowing the buildup of high aphid populations, as happened in Spain and Florida after freeze damage, may lead to the rapid dissemination of tristeza. Mechanical transmission under controlled laboratory conditions has recently been achieved (see Table 9).
Generally speaking, the citrus areas of the world may be currently divided into three categories in relation to tristeza.
Category I. This includes areas in which practically all citrus trees are infected with the virus, or where the virus is spreading rapidly -the vector being T. citricida - namely Southeast Asia; Australia; Africa south of the Sahara; and most South American countries.
Category II. This includes areas not yet infected by the virus, but in which most trees are susceptible to the disease. T. citricida is not present. Mediterranean countries (except Spain and Israel) and Mexico and certain areas of the United States of America are in this category.
Sour orange is used extensively in these areas. Isolated declining trees have been found to be infected with the virus in this region, but no evidence of field spread has been observed except in Spain and Israel. T. citricida has not been reported here, but other aphids exist.
Category III. This includes citrus areas where the tristeza virus is known to be spreading but the vector is not T. citricida.
* California. The virus is endemic in southern California; seedling yellows strains are present and spread by Aphis gossypii. Eradication of the virus is carried out in the Central Valley.
* Florida. The virus is probably endemic in many citrus areas. Infected trees on sour orange remain symptomless for may years.
* Spain. The virus is spreading in the Valencia area. Vectors are T. aurantii, A. gossypii, Myzus persicae and possibly others.
* Israel. Rapid spread has occurred and could not be controlled by an eradication programme. A. gossypii is an active vector.
Vein enation-woody gall
The agent of vein enation-woody gall (CVEV) is probably a luteovirus (Da Graca and Maharaj, 1991). The virion is 28 nm in diameter (see Table I). CVEV induces two types of symptoms (Wallace and Drake, 1960): enations on the veins of citrus species such as small-fruited acid lime, sour orange and rough lemon, and galls on the stem or trunk of small-fruited acid lime (Fig. 130) Citrus volkameriana and rough lemon. In Iran, galls were also observed on Bakravi rootstocks, a hybrid of small-fruited acid lime and mandarin (Fig. 131). In the field, sour orange and small-fruited acid lime develop strong enations and galls are seen on rough lemon and small-fruited acid lime growing near thorns or in association with wounds. The pathogen is transmitted in a persistent mode by several aphid species, including T. citricida, M. persicae and A. gossypii (see Table 10). Symptoms of the disease occur in Australia, California, India, Japan, Peru and Spain. In the Near East the disease has
been seen in Iran and Turkey, although it is relatively unimportant. From the point of view of interaction between viruses, there is a synergistic effect between vein enation virus and yellow vein virus, in that the symptoms induced by yellow vein virus are strikingly enhanced by co-infection with vein enation virus (Weathers, 1960, 1961). Also, it has been shown in Japan that CVEV protects against tristeza virus (Koizumi and Sasaki, 1980).
Bud-union crease
Bud-union crease is an abnormality characterized by an intermittent or continuous necrotic line in the wood at the union of certain scion-rootstock combinations (Figs 132 to 135). Corresponding pegs or projections on the inner surface of the bark are also present (Fig. 135). Sometimes gum impregnation occurs in the affected area (Figs 132 and 133) and bark breaks easily at the bud-union line (Fig. 133). Trees with the disorder often die while young or remain stunted. Some forms of bud-union crease result from genetic incompatibilities, while others have been shown to be graft-transmissible (McClean, 1974a). Common scion-rootstock combinations showing bud-union crease include Shamouti (a Palestine Jaffa), Bloodred, Musambi and Pera oranges on rough lemon rootstock; Pera orange on Volkameriana lemon; and Lisbon and Eureka lemon on trifoliate orange. McClean has shown that bud-union crease of Triumph grapefruit on rough lemon and of lemon on trifoliate orange are
non-transmissible. In the case of Shamouti sweet orange on rough lemon rootstock, certain abnormal bud-unions could be reproduced by graft inoculation, but others may be due to seed transmission of the pathogen or represent true incompatibility. Graft-transmissible bud-union crease of Cadenera sweet orange and a navel clone on rough lemon has recently been described in Spain. The causal agent of this crease could be eliminated by shoot-tip grafting (Navarro et al., 1992). Bud-union crease is also seen in the case of gummy bark-affected sweet orange trees on rough lemon (Figs 74 and 75). A graft-transmissible agent inducing bud-union crease of Parson's Special mandarin on Citrus volkameriana has been reported (Vogel and Bové, 1988).
Rumple
Rumple affects lemons of certain clones of Lisbon and some other varieties (Knorr and Koo, 1969), and is known in Cyprus, Ethiopia, Italy, Lebanon, Spain, Turkey and the United States of America. The disorder appears in late summer, first as faint chlorotic speckles on the rind surface of the fruit, which then turns brownish-black and finally collapses. Large fruits develop a higher incidence of rumple than smaller ones. The number of affected fruits varies from year to year and from orchard to orchard. There are no apparent tree symptoms. Rumple is suspected to be of a viral nature but no definite proof has been presented. Careful selection of budwood from disease-free trees is recommended for propagation in order to avoid the problem in new plantings.
<section>8</section>
Diseases involving phloem restricted prokaryotic agents
Witches' broom disease of lime
Witches' broom disease is a lethal disorder of small-fruited acid lime trees in Oman. The disease was first studied and shown to involve an MLO in 1986 (Bové, 1986b; Bové et al., 1988). It has now reached the United Arab Emirates (Taher, personal communication, 1990). Chapter 16, which deals with Oman, describes the disease.
Stubborn
In view of the progress made in the study of stubborn in the Mediterranean and the Near East, and because of its wide distribution in these regions, the disease will be covered in some detail. See also Chapter 7.
Name and synonyms. The term stubborn was applied as early as 1921 to non-productive navel orange trees in California, as indicated by Fawcett, Perry and Johnston when they described the disease in 1944. Less commonly used names in California include acorn disease of oranges (Haas, Klotz and Johnston, 1944), stylar end greening, and blue albedo of grapefruits. In the country then known as Palestine, Reichert and Perlberger described little leaf disease of citrus in 1931. Citrus stubborn disease as known in California and little leaf disease as described in Palestine are identical.
The causal agent, Spiroplasma citri, infects and produces diseases in non-rutaceous hosts as well as in citrus (Caravan, 1980; Gumpf and Calavan, 1981). The name "stubborn" should be restricted to the disease in citrus.
Causal agent. The causal agent of citrus stubborn disease is the helical mollicute (mycoplasma) S. citri (Saglio et al., 1971a; Fudl-Allah, Calavan and Igwegbe, 1972: Fudl-Allah and Calavan, 1974) (see Figs 22 to 24). S. citri was the first spiroplasma to be characterized (Saglio et al., 1973) and for which Koch's postulates were fulfilled (Markham and Towsend, 1974).
Like other mollicutes, spiroplasmas require sterol for growth but they are unique in that they are motile and have a helical morphology (see Figs 22 to 24). Since the discovery of S. citri more than 30 other spiroplasmas have been identified, and at the present time they fall into 23 defined serogroups. S. citri is part of serogroup I. This group is further subdivided into eight subgroups, S. citri representing subgroup I-1 (Bové, 1984). Like other members of group I, S. citri has DNA with 26 mole percent Guanine plus Cytosine, and a genome size of 10^9 daltons. S. citri is serologically related only to spiroplasmas of group 1, and especially to those of subgroup I-2 (honeybee spiroplasma or Spiroplasma melliferum) and I-3 (corn stunt spiroplasma or Spiroplasma kunkelii). By DNA-DNA hybridization it shows relatedness not only to these spiroplasmas but also to those of subgroup I-8 (spiroplasma P40 or Spiroplasma phoeniceum). S. citri, S. kunkelii (Whitcomb et al., 1986) and
S. phoeniceum (Saillard et al., 1987) are the only three sieve tube-restricted, plant pathogenic spiroplasmas known today. S. citri can be identified unambiguously by a number of techniques, including serology and analysis of its proteins by one- and two-dimensional PAGE (Mouchès and Bové, 1984). Spiralin (26 x 10^5 daltons) is the major protein of the S. citri membrane (Wroblewski, Johansson and Hjerten, 1977); it is specific to S. citri in that anti-spiralin monospecific immunoglobulins (IgGs) do not recognize proteins of other spiroplasmas. However, spiralin-like proteins are probably present in all spiroplasmas. The spiralin gene has been cloned in Escherichia coli, in which it is expressed (Mouchès et al., 1984), and its nucleotide sequence has been established (Chevalier, Saillard and Bové, 1990).
S. citri can be infected by three different viruses: SpV1, SpV2 and SpV3 (Cole, 1979) but not by SpV4, a virus specific to S. melliferum. The nucleotide sequence of the single-stranded, circular DNA of the filamentous SpV1 virus has been determined (Renaudin et al., 1987 and 1990).
S. citri can be cultured in relatively simple mycoplasma media (Bové, Whitcomb and McCoy, 1983). The optimum temperature for growth is 32°C. The smallest viable S. citri cell is a two-turn "elementary" helix that grows essentially by one end into a longer parental helix. A four-turn parental helix divides by constriction into two elementary helices. Longer parental helices undergo multiple divisions. Genome replication is not coupled to cell division (Garnier, Clerc and Bové, 1984). S. citri, like eubacteria, contains three DNA polymerases but, unlike eubacteria, its RNA polymerase is insensitive to rifampicin (Gadeau, Mouchès and Bové, 1982). Like all other mollicutes, S citri is insensitive to penicillin and other antibiotics interfering with bacterial cell wall synthesis. Data on the cellular and molecular biology of spiroplasmas have recently become available (Bové et al., 1989).
Host range. Symptoms of stubborn disease in the field are seen essentially on sweet orange and grapefruit. Table 7 lists other susceptible species, while Table 8 gives symptomless species. Tolerant rootstocks do not make susceptible scions tolerant. Susceptible species are sometimes symptomless carriers under cool temperature conditions.
In the southwestern United States of America many cultivated and wild non-rutaceous plant species were found to be naturally infected with S. citri (Oldfield and Calavan, 1980). In the eastern United States, S. citri-infection of horse radish causes brittle-root disease. In Cyprus, Morocco, Oman, the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey and the United Arab Emirates, periwinkle plants (C. roseus) exposed to natural contamination in the field became infected with S. citri (see Figs 175 and 176).
In addition to natural infection, experimental transmission of S. citri to many non-rutaceous plants by leafhoppers has increased the host range of the spiroplasma (Oldfield and Calavan, 1980). For insect hosts, see the section below on transmission.
Symptoms of citrus stubborn disease.
Aspect of affected trees. These are slightly to severely stunted (Figs 144, 147, 148, 152 and 157), frequently with abnormally densely bunched and upright foliation. Excessive dieback of shoots and branches is present in severe cases (Fig. 144). Multiple buds develop resulting in mild witches' brooms.
Fruit symptoms. Affected trees have low yields. The proportion of symptomatic fruit on a tree is variable. Fruits can be small and/or lopsided (curved columella) (Fig. 168). They sometimes show colour inversion, the peduncular end becoming coloured while the stylar end remains green (Fig. 167). They are acorn-shaped when, at the peduncular end, the albedo is thick and the flavedo coarse while, at the styler end, they are respectively thin and smooth (Fig. 165). The vascular network in the albedo is sometimes prominent and the vascular bundles brownish-red. Blue albedo is sometimes observed (Fig. 169). The type of fruit symptoms may depend on the environmental conditions in which the trees grow.
Foliar symptoms. The presence of small, cupped leaves (Figs 149 and 150) is typical of stubborn, hence "little leaf" for the disease in Israel. Leaves can also have abnormally upright positions. internodes are short (Figs 147 and 163). Various types of mottle can affect the leaves (Figs 153, 154 and 158). The distal portion of certain expanding leaves can be pinched-in and yellowish-green (Fig. 155). This is of diagnostic help, especially on indicator plants. Under hot dry conditions (Iran, Iraq), leaves of certain shoots are palmate or cordate with pinched-in, yellow tips (Fig. 160). Such shoots (Figs 161 to 163) are highly diagnostic (Bové et al., 1984).
Trunk symptoms. With severely affected, mature trees grafted on sour orange there is sometimes pinholing (honeycombing) on the cambial side of the bark immediately below the bud-union line (Fig. 145). This symptom is common to both stubborn and tristeza diseases, and therefore can be misleading.
In the field, fruit symptoms are more useful than leaf symptoms for positive diagnosis. Culture of S. citri and ELISA (see next section) are most helpful in confirming diagnosis based on symptoms.
Indexing.
Use of indicator plants. Vigorously growing Madame Vinous sweet orange seedlings kept at temperatures close to 32°C (optimum growth temperature of S. citri) in the day and near 27°C at night are used as the indicator plants. Inoculum usually consists of young leaf patches, including the midrib (Caravan, Olson and Christiansen, 1972), but side grafts have also been used. Inoculation grafts are made directly below the indicator bud to be forced. Seven or more indicator seedlings should be used per tree to be indexed, together with healthy controls for comparison.
Symptoms to be observed are: slow growth; small cupped leaves; short internodes between leaves; and mottled leaves, with the distal portion being pinched-in and yellowish-green.
Detection of S. citri by culture and ELISA. There is very good correlation between symptom expression of stubborn in Mediterranean countries and the detection of the causal agent (S. citri) by culture and ELISA (Bové et al., 1984).
The plant materials used as a source are: seeds with various degrees of abortion, the peduncular ends of fruit axes and mature, mottled leaves from the summer flush of growth, collected in October under Mediterranean conditions.
For culture assay for S. citri the M1A or SP4 media of Whitcomb (1983) are used. Isolation of the stubborn spiroplasma is done by the filter method of Bové, Whitcomb and McCoy (1983). For assay using ELISA, the assay procedure using anti-S. citri IgGs, as described by Saillard and Bové (1983), is used.
Detection of S. citri by DNA probes, PCR and IC-PCR. Techniques more sensitive than ELISA and the culture assay are currently being developed and should be available soon. They are based on DNA hybridization with DNA probes, gene amplification by PCR and immuno-capture (IC) of the spiroplasma prior to PCR (IC-PCR).
MAP 2 Citrus-growing areas (dotted zones) in the Islamic Republic of Iran. Salsola kaliis present in all major citrus growing areas. This favours the presence of Neoaliturus haematoceps (light blue circles) and Neoaliturus tenellus (dark blue circles) and explains the prevalence of stubborn disease (white circles)
MAP 3 Map of the western region of the Syrian Arab Republic. The open circles and the blue circles show the sites where Neoliturushaematoceps has been captured on Salsola kali. The blue circles indicate that the leafhoppers were infected with S. citri. As shown by the map, S. citri-infected leafhoppers were captured not only along the coast, but also inland in the Ghab (Orontes) valley, a sugar beet-growing area. Not shown on the map is Palmyra (eastern Syria) where S. citri infected M haematoceps leafhoppers were also captured. These results were obtained by the Bordeaux group (Bové, Fos, Saillard, Vignault) and the Jablé-El Annadeh-Tartus group (Ali, Raie, Ahmed) in the frame of the FAO-TCP cooperation programme on stubborn disease in Syria
Transmission. Natural transmission is through budwood, in highly varying percentages, and through leafhopper vectors (Caravan and Bové, 1989). The following leafhoppers transmit S. citri in California: Neoaliturus (ex-Circulifer) tenellus (sugar beet leafhopper see Fig. 35), Scaphytopius nitridus and Scaphytopius delongi. In the Mediterranean area, N. tenellus is present but N. haematoceps (ex-N. opacipenis - see Fig. 34) - also a sugar beet leafhopper and from which S. citri could be consistently cultured -is the major vector (Fos et al., 1986).
A much preferred host plant of N. tenellus and N. haematoceps is Salsola kali (Chenopodiaceae) (see Fig. 36 and Figs 170 to 174). This plant is widely distributed throughout the Mediterranean and the Near East. Its presence near or within nurseries or young orchards (Fig. 174) can provide the focus for epidemics of stubborn disease (see Chapter 7).
Geographical distribution. Citrus stubborn disease is widespread throughout the Mediterranean and Near East areas, and the southwestern United States of America. S. citri is present in at least the following countries or regions: Algeria, Cyprus, Egypt, France (Corsica), Greece, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Israel, Italy, Lebanon, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Mexico, Morocco, Oman, Saudi Arabia, Spain, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, Turkey, the United Arab Emirates and the United States of America (Arizona and California). In Iran the presence of stubborn correlates well with the presence of N. haematoceps and N. tenellus (see Map 2). In turn, the presence of the two leafhoppers is related to the presence of S. kali. A similar situation is observed in Cyprus, Morocco and the Syrian Arab Republic (see Map 3).
Economic importance. Stubborn disease is destructive in most countries that grow citrus under hot, dry, desert or semi-desert conditions. Fruit quality is inferior and many fruits are malformed. Production from diseased trees can be reduced by 50 to 100 percent. In California, 5 to 10 percent of sweet orange and grapefruit trees are estimated to be affected. In certain Mediterranean areas the damage is even more severe.
Greening
In view of the importance of greening for Near East countries and the threat it represents for the Mediterranean region, still free of the disease and its vectors, greening is described more thoroughly than some of the other diseases. The following description is an updated version of a recent European Plant Protection Organization data sheet on greening (EPPO, 1988).
Names and synonyms. Greening has received different names according to the country affected, but in each case the same type of Gram-negative bacterium is involved, even though strain differences may exist, in particular, heat-tolerant (Asian) and heat-sensitive (African) forms of the disease, as discussed below. The disease is known under various names: greening in Africa; huang longbing, i.e. yellow shoot disease, in China; likubin. i.e. Ieaf mottle disease, in Taiwan Province; leaf mottling in the Philippines; citrus decline in India and vein phloem degeneration in Indonesia.
Principal hosts.
Rutaceous hosts. The bacterium may persist and multiply in most Citrus spp., but most severe symptoms are found on sweet orange (C. sinensis), mandarin (C. reticulata) and tangelo (see also Tables 9 to 11).
The vectors are confined to Rutaceae, including both wild hosts (Clausena anisata, Vepris undulata) and commercial citrus varieties. Lemon (C. limon), lime (C. aurantifolia) and Murraya paniculata, a rutaceous plant often used for hedges or ornamental purposes (Fig. 218), are preferred hosts for Diaphorina citri.
Non-rutaceous host. Experimental transmission of the citrus greening bacterium from citrus to periwinkle (Catharanthus roseus) by dodder (Cuscuta campestris) has been achieved (Garnier and Bové, 1983).
Geographical distribution. The African (heat-sensitive) form of the disease has been reported from the Comoros, Ethiopia, Kenya, Madagascar, the Republic of South Africa, Swaziland and Zimbabwe, and more recently from northern Yemen. The Asian (heat-tolerant) form is present in China, India, Indonesia, Malaysia, Nepal, Pakistan, the Philippines, Taiwan Province and Thailand, as well as Saudi Arabia. Both forms of the disease exist in Mauritius, Reunion and southwestern Saudi Arabia (Bové and Garnier, 1984). The Mediterranean area and most of the Near East (e.g. the Islamic Republic of Iran) are still free from the disease. The infected area closest to the Mediterranean zone extends south of Mecca, along the Red Sea.
D. citri occurs throughout the Asian zone of greening (and also in Brazil and Japan, but in the absence of greening), while Trioza erytreae occurs throughout the African zone, in northern Yemen, and also in Cameroon and Saint Helena. Both insects occur together in Mauritius, Reunion and southwestern Saudi Arabia.
The citrus greening bacterium. Transmission of the greening pathogen by graft inoculation was first reported in China (Lin, 1956). Laflèche and Bové (1970) found that the disease was characterized by the presence of an apparently mycoplasma-like micro-organism, not a virus, in the sieve tubes of affected plants. However, when soon thereafter the agent of citrus stubborn disease was discovered (Igwegbe and Calavan, 1970) and found to be a mycoplasma (Fudl-Allah and Calavan, 1974; Saglio et al., 1971a) and more precisely a spiroplasma (Saglio et al., 1973), comparison between the greening agent and S. citri showed the greening agent to be different from a mycoplasma (Saglio et al., 1971b). Since then, considerable work has confirmed this view and shown the greening agent to be a bacterium with a peptidoglycan-containing membranous cell wall of the Gram-negative type (Moll and Martin, 1974; Garnier, Latrille and Bové, 1976; Garnier and Bové, 1977; Garnier, Danel and Bové,
1984a, b). The bacterial nature of the greening organism explains why penicillin treatment of infected plants results in symptom remission (Bové et al., 1980; Aubert and Bové, 1980). A report claiming culture of the citrus greening bacterium has appeared (Garnett, 1985). There is, however, at the time of writing (March 1993), no experimental evidence to show that the cultured organism is the greening bacterium.
As stated above, two forms of greening disease are known (Bové et al., 1974). One, in the southern part of Africa, is heat-sensitive, as symptoms do not develop in hot climates where temperatures above 30°C are reached for several hours a day. The other form is heat-tolerant and withstands high temperatures. It is present in China, India, Nepal, Southeast Asia and probably Pakistan. The Asian heat-tolerant form of the disease has been discovered in Saudi Arabia, and the African heat-sensitive form in northern Yemen (Bové and Garnier, 1984). When the African and the Asian forms of the greening bacterium were transmitted from citrus to periwinkle (Fig. 220) by dodder (Fig. 219) (Garnier and Bové, 1983), the African form remained heat-sensitive and the Asian form remained heat-tolerant in periwinkle as well as in citrus.
Monoclonal antibodies (MAs) to the citrus greening bacterium, and more specifically to Indian, Chinese and South African strains, have recently been obtained for the first time (Garnier, Martin-Gros and Bové, 1987; Garnier et al., 1991). By immunofluorescence on sections (Fig. 221) or ELISA, the MAs react essentially with the homologous strains, indicating that there are strain differences. Purification of the greening bacterium by immunoaffinity has been achieved (Villechanoux, Garnier and Bové, 1990).
Insect vectors. Under natural conditions the greening pathogen is transmitted in Africa, Madagascar and northern Yemen by T. erytreae (McClean and Oberholzer, 1965) and in Asia (including Saudi Arabia) by D. citri (Capoor, Rao and Viswanath, 1967). However, it has been shown experimentally that T. erytreae can transmit the Indian form of the greening agent (Massoniée, Garnier and Bové, 1976) and that D. citri is able to transmit the African form (Lallemand, Fos and Bové, 1986).
The two psyllid vectors of the greening organism are restricted to rutaceous hosts and especially citrus. They are citrus pests in their own right (Figs 212 and 213), in addition to being vectors of greening.
T. erytreae (see Fig. 37). The vector of the African form of the greening bacterium, the psyllid T. erytreae, behaves like the African form of the bacterium with respect to temperature sensitivity (Calling, 1973a; Schwarz and Green, 1970). It is very sensitive to extremes of hot, dry weather (the eggs and first instar nymphs being particularly vulnerable), and is favoured in cool, moist areas over 500-600 m above sea level, where citrus growth flushes tend to be prolonged. Green and Catling (1971) have used maximum saturation deficit as an accurate predictor of the geographical distribution of T. erytreae. Sex ratios fluctuate in the field, but females always dominate. Eggs are often laid along the leaf midrib and margins (Fig. 188). Nymphal development (five instars) takes 17 to 43 days. The temperature threshold for nymphal development is, apparently, around 10-12°C. There is no diapause. Developing nymphs live in concave depressions on the lower surface of the leaf,
resulting in the presence of convex, gall-like bumps on the upper surface (Figs 189 to 193, 207 and 209). No such bumps are associated with D. citri.
Diaphorina citri (see the drawing on p. 75 and Fig. 37; Figs 210 and 211). D. citri has a short life cycle and high fecundity (Calling, 1970; Schwarz and Knorr, 1973). It is more prevalent in hot coastal areas. Pairing starts soon after emergence, the insects being most active during March to April in India (Pande, 1971) and May to June in the Philippines (Calling, 1970). Eggs are laid singly from March to May inside half-folded leaves of the buds, in leaf axils or other suitable places on the young tender parts of the tree. Females have a preoviposition period of about 12 days, and are capable of laying up to 800 eggs within two months. Eggs hatch within a period varying from three days in summer to 23 days in winter, and nymphs pass through five instars in 11 to 30 days. In dry periods the adults are numerous, but nymphs are usually absent. The complete life cycle thus takes from 14 to 48 days, and there can be up to ten overlapping generations per year.
Diaphorina citri (Kuw.)
The adults overwinter and can live for up to six months. They are very active and jump at the slightest disturbance. Nymphs will move away when disturbed, but normally lead a sedentary existence clustered in groups. Population fluctuations are closely correlated with the flushing rhythm of citrus trees, since eggs are laid exclusively on young flush points.
Economic importance Citrus greening is an extremely severe disease. In the Republic of South Africa, in 1965, fruit losses from the disease were 30 to 100 percent in individual orchards, many of which had subsequently to be abandoned or removed. Earlier outbreaks occurred in 1932-36 and 1939-46. Current annual losses are estimated at 35 million South African rends (Van den Berg, Van Vuuren and Deacon, 1987). In Mauritius, Reunion and Thailand, large areas of citrus cultivation have had to be abandoned (Calling, 1973b; Schwarz and Knorr, 1973). In the Philippines, mandarin production fell from 11 700 tonnes in 1960 to 100 tonnes in 1968 (Commonwealth Department of Health, 1982). In southwestern Saudi Arabia, sweet orange and mandarin practically disappeared during the 1970s (Bové, 1986a). In Southeast Asia, an FAO-UNDP programme has recently been established to try to control the disease.
Heavy infestations with T. erytreae cause leaf distortion and gall-like bumps on the upper surface of the leaves, but not the defoliation or dieback typical of D. citri, which can also cause serious damage to growing points, leading to dwarfing as well as lack of juice and taste in fruit. Heavy D. citri populations can cause blossom and fruitlet drop.
In the Transvaal, citrus is treated against greening by injection of tetracycline (up to 20 g per adult tree) with high-capacity compressors working at 10 kg/cm². Such methods have been tried out, but not widely used, in Asia. Dimethoate can be used against the vectors on orchards with low infection rates, while the highly toxic aldicarb is used in South Africa as a soil-applied biocide (Bové, 1986a). In Reunion, the vectors have been successfully controlled by the introduction of parasites - Tetrastichus dryi Waterston, from South Africa, for T. erytreae and T. radiatus Waterston, from India, for D. citri (Aubert, Bové and Etienne, 1980). In Saudi Arabia, however, T. radiatus is present but does not keep D. citri populations down to a low level (Bové, 1986a). T. erytreae, and especially D. citri, could probably establish and spread in Mediterranean and Near East countries with out difficulty. It should be remembered, too, that both these, psyllids have significant damage
potential in themselves. Though biological control may be possible, there is no guarantee that it could keep populations to a sufficiently low level to prevent the transmission of greening. In view of its severity, it is essential to keep the disease (and its vectors) out of the Mediterranean basin and to prevent its spread in the Near East.
The situation in Brazil, and possibly other South American countries, is different. D. citri is present in Brazil, but greening itself has never been reported from North, Central or South America. Hence introduction of infected plant material, even without the vectors, would be most dangerous.
The rutaceous plant, Murraya paniculata, frequently used as an ornamental bush or hedge, is one of the best hosts of D. citri (Fig. 218). This plant can carry eggs or nymphs of the vector, thus its introduction into disease-and vector-free regions could be dangerous. Quarantine services should be advised.
General aspect of affected trees (Figs 177 to 179, 196, 197, 200, 204 and 205). Affected trees show: open growth, stunting, twig die-back, sparse yellow foliage and severe fruit drop. On certain trees and in certain countries (China), symptoms are seen initially on one limb of an affected tree (this is known as yellow branch aspect) (Fig. 217). Severe decline is seen mainly with Asian greening.
Symptoms on fruits (Figs 194 and 195). Some fruits are underdeveloped, lopsided and poorly coloured. Seeds are often aborted (Figs 195 and 201). The so-called "greening" fruit symptom refers to fruit which matures only on the side exposed to the sun, the unexposed side remaining a dull olive green.
Symptoms on leaves (Figs 180, 184, 187, 202, 203 and 214). Mottling and zinc deficiency-like symptoms are the most common and characteristic leaf symptoms. Mature leaves often show irregular patches between the main veins and the veins are often prominent and yellow.
Symptoms on trunk, limbs and shoots. No symptoms are apparent.
Histological symptoms. Localized zones of necrotic phloem are scattered throughout the vascular system of the leaf. Massive accumulation of starch in the plastics is seen, together with aberrations in cambial activity and excessive phloem formation.
Symptoms due to vectors. T. erytreae severely distorts leaves, which become stunted and galled as the nymphs induce depressions on the lower sides of the leaves. These are viewed as "bumps" on the upper sides (Figs 187, 189 to 193, 207 and 209). Leaves appear to be dusted with faecal pellets. D. citri stunts and twists young shoots, so that the growing tips present a rosetted appearance.
Leaves are severely curled (Fig. 212), and may be covered with honeydew (Fig. 211) and sooty mould, dropping prematurely.
Indexing and detection.
Biological indexing. Suspect material may be grafted on sensitive indicator plants - sweet orange seedlings are preferred. Inoculation should preferably be with pieces of mottled leaves. Because of the variable results in graft transmission, at least ten seedlings should be used for each tree to be indexed. After inoculation, the indicator seedling should be kept at 24°C (South African form) or 32°C (Asian form). The symptoms usually show up after four to five months. The presence of a specific fluorescent marker, gentisoyl glucoside (Feldman and Hanks, 1969) in greening-infected tissue has been used for indexing (Schwarz, 1968a, b).
Electron microscopy (see Figs 3 to 21). As there are no symptoms specific to greening, suspect trees have to be examined using electron microscopy to confirm bacteria in the sieve tubes (elongated, sinuous, rod-like structures 0.150.25 µm in diameter and several microns long, as well as a round form, 0.3-1.0 m in diameter). Similar structures have been seen in both vectors (Moll and Martin, 1973; Chen, Miyakawa and Matsui, 1973).
Serological identification. The MAs against the Indian and the Chinese strains of the citrus greening bacterium have been successfully used to detect the homologous bacterium in greenhouse-grown citrus and periwinkle, using immunofluorescence (Fig. 211) and ELISA (Garnier et al., 1987, 1991). However, the MAs against the greening BLO are too strain-specific to be suitable for general diagnostic work.
DNA probes. DNA probes for the detection of the greening BLO have recently been obtained (Villechanoux et al., 1992 and 1993). One of these probes is able to detect all Asian BLO strains tested, even when it is used at high stringencies of hybridization. At lower stringencies it also detects South African strains. The probe has been extensively used to detect the greening BLO in orchard trees in India.
Fungal diseases
Even though this review concerns essentially virus and virus-like diseases, some widespread and often encountered fungal diseases have been included.
Phytophthora gummosis or footrot
This disease is caused by soil fungi (Phytophthora citrophthora and Phytophthora nicotiana var. parasitica) which kill the bark of affected trees. This very serious disease is controlled by using resistant rootstocks to prevent the fungus from attacking the susceptible mandarin, sweet orange or grapefruit scion varieties.
Sour orange is a phytophthora-resistant rootstock, and this is the major reason why this species has been used so widely as a rootstock for more than 100 years. The benefit of using a phytophthora-resistant rootstock is lost, however, when the tree is budded too low, bringing the susceptible scion too close to the soil or, even worse, when the tree is planted too deep, with the bud-union becoming buried in the soil (Fig. 228). Phytophthora gummosis is also favoured when farmers put soil around the trunks and cover up the bud-union lines (Figs 224 to 226). Severe forms of gummy bark are associated with bark cracking and scaling (Figs 68 and 74) and these outer bark lesions may become ports of entry for the fungus (Fig. 68), especially when, in addition, the bud-union line is close to the soil.
Phytophthora gummosis is essentially a disease of the bark; only a thin layer of wood under the affected bark may be stained brown. The entire bark, not only the outer layer as in Rio Grande gummosis (see below) or scaly bark psorosis, is affected by the fungus. Unlike Rio Grande gummosis, there are no pockets of gum in the wood. The disease often begins at the soil level when a susceptible citrus species (scion or rootstock) is directly in contact with the soil (Fig. 230). Trunk lesions rarely extend higher than 35-40 cm from the ground or the bud-union line.
Good horticultural practices to protect trees from Phytophthora
Symptoms of phytophthora gummosis above ground are: dead areas of bark that remain firm; exudation of small or large amounts of gum, depending on citrus varieties and weather (Fig. 230); infiltration with gum and brown staining of a thin layer of wood and presence of gum between bark and wood (Fig. 228); and a subsequent drying and vertical cracking of bark.
In early stages, the decayed bark is firm and intact, but with age it becomes shrunken and cracked, shredding in lengthwise strips as it dries. Much gumming may accompany advanced stages of footrot, but because of the solubility of gum in rainwater this symptom is not always conspicuous. The bark remaining alive above the lesions often develops callus rolls that check further spread, especially in an upward direction. In some cases the disease appears to be arrested, only to resume extension at a later date. Ultimately, the lesion may encircle the trunk, killing the tree. However, the effects of footrot in the tops vary according to the extent of the trunk lesion. A characteristic development of footrot is that the tree dies irregularly, one side failing while the other side remains sound. In declining parts of the top, the foliage at first is hard and dull, assuming a light yellow cast, and eventually becomes distinctly yellow, especially along the midribs. These are
nothing but the characteristic symptoms of acute starvation brought on by girdling of all or part of the trunk. Starvation patterns are not only seen in the foliage but also include reduction in fruit size, leaf drop and dieback, and a reduction in vegetative growth.
In the following cases footrot can also occur below ground, and soil must be removed from around the tree to expose the lesions.
The rootstock is phytophthora-susceptible. The order of susceptibility among rootstocks commonly used is, starting with the most susceptible: sweet lime, lemon, acid lime, sweet orange, rough lemon, Cleopatra mandarin, citranges, sour orange and P. trifoliata.
The bud-union line is below soil level. The rootstock trunk and part of the scion trunk are in the soil. Footrot lesions can develop on the rootstock, and on the scion part, if susceptible. This is the case with grapefruit and sweet orange, for instance.
Soil is put around the trunk, burying the bud-union line. Removal of the soil exposes phytophthora lesions (Fig. 228).
In the above cases, development of the pathogen, Phytophthora spp., requires that the soil in contact with the phytophthora-susceptible trunk be moist or wet. Soil moisture at or near saturation is most favourable for fungal growth, spore production and movement of zoospores. The fungus is very sensitive to moisture fluctuations and its activity ceases when soil dries out.
P citrophthora grows fastest when the temperature is near 25°C. P. parasitica has a higher optimum, near 30°C. A pH of 6.0-7.5 favours the growth and multiplication of the fungi. Control of phytophthora gummosis is through good horticultural practices. Trees should be planted on a heap of soil with the crown above soil level, not below. The scion bud should be grafted at about 15-20 cm above the crown of the seedling rootstock. Flood irrigation water should be prevented from reaching the trunk by building soil levees around the trees (see the drawings on P. 79).
Mal secco
Mal secco (an Italian name meaning dry disease) is a highly destructive disease of lemon trees. The causal organism is the fungus Phoma tracheiphila (Petri) Kantsch & Gik. (syn. Deuterophoma tracheiphila Petri). It is readily cultured and on potato-dextrose agar the mycelium produces abundant red pigments. A similar red-orange coloration is seen in xylem recently invaded by the fungus. This diagnostic coloration is revealed by cutting through the wood (Fig. 234) or peeling off the bark (Fig. 235). Mal secco affects primarily lemon, but also sour orange and citron trees. Susceptible rootstocks are rough lemon, sour orange and Troyer and Carrizo citranges. Femminello lemon is particularly susceptible, while Monachello, Interdonato and Santa Teresa show some resistance. The disease attacks trees of any age but is more severe on young ones. Infection by the fungus is either in the canopy or in the roots. In the first case, the leaves wilt, dry up and are shed, and die-back
occurs (Figs 232 and 233). The pathogen proceeds slowly downwards from young shoots to branches, main limbs, trunk and roots, and it may take several years for the infection to reach the trunk. In Italy and Cyprus, infections can also occur in the roots. The fungus proceeds rapidly upwards, producing symptoms on the whole tree or only on one limb. The disease may develop so suddenly that the leaves dry up on the tree. In another type of root infection, the pathogen invades the inner xylem vessels without at first inflicting any apparent damage to the tree. Eventually, however, the pathogen reaches the external rings of the wood and then causes a sudden collapse of the canopy (Solel and Salerno, 1989).
Mal secco is widespread throughout the citrus-growing countries of the Mediterranean and Black Sea regions: Cyprus; France, but not Corsica; Greece; Israel; Italy, including Sicily; Jordan; Lebanon; the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya; the former Union of Soviet Socialist Republics; the Syrian Arab Republic; Tunisia; and Turkey. The disease is apparently not yet present in Iraq, Iran or the Arabian Peninsula.
Rio Grande gummosis
The causal organism of Rio Grande gummosis (RGG) (Caravan, 1961; Childs, 1978) has been identified only recently (Davis, 1980). In Florida, Godfrey (1946) and Childs (1953) had attributed the disease to an actinomycetous fungus. In Texas, Olson (1952) and Olson and Waibel (1953) attributed it to a Diplodia sp. In California, Calavan and Christiansen (1958) and Calavan (1961) suggested an unidentified basidiomycetous fungus. Calavan et al. (1962-1963) found two fungi commonly associated with the disease. One, the unidentified fungus of Calavan and Christiansen (1958), enters through pruning wounds and other injuries and invades the pith and heart wood. The other, Hendersonula toruloidea Nattrass, invades wounds and heat- or frost-injured areas (Caravan and Wallace, 1954). There is also some circumstantial evidence that the disease is related to a high concentration of chlorides in the soil (Childs, personal communication).
Based on the following observations, Diplodia natalensis Evans (syn. Physalospora rhodina Cke.) appears to be the causal agent of RGG, at least in Texas (Davis, 1980): D. natalensis was consistently isolated from RGG-affected tissue; symptoms of RGG developed in healthy tissue inoculated with pure cultures of D. natalensis and the fungus was subsequently reisolated, fulfilling Koch's postulates; the disease was transmitted with affected tissue, establishing the infectious nature of the disease; and disease development was arrested with applications of the fungicide benomyl.
The most obvious symptom of RGG is profuse gum production (Figs 236 to 240). The gum oozes out of vertical cracks in the bark (Figs 244 and 245) and runs down along the trunk or hangs down from the branches, stalactite fashion (Figs 236 to 240). At the time of initial gumming there is no scaling of the bark at the sites where the bark is split (Fig. 244). However, the first stage in the healing-over process is the sloughing of thin scales of dead outer bark. Then follows the development of scar tissue generated by the bark. Repair is only temporary and healed-over lesions may again start gumming and enlarging (Figs 241 and 242). In this way, lesions may pass through repeated cycles of recovery and relapse, in the course of which they progressively enlarge and expose more and more wood. In old, inactive lesions (Figs 240 and 243) the wood is exposed. The gum pockets may be located deep in the wood and the gum travels a considerable distance in and along the wood, so that gum
pockets may exist well removed from the nearest active, gum-producing lesion. The bark scaling associated with the healing-over process and the sloughing of scales of dead outer bark can be pronounced (Fig. 243) but should not be confused with that of scaly bark psorosis (Figs 98 to 100) or "popcorn" symptoms (Fig. 101). Nor should RGG be confused with phytophthora gummosis or footrot. Table 14 helps to distinguish between RGG, scaly bark psorosis and phytophthora gummosis.
Grapefruit and lemon are more frequently affected than other varieties. In decreasing order of susceptibility these varieties are sweet orange, tangerine and sour orange, the last being practically immune. In one Somalian orchard, grapefruit trees were grafted on sour orange with the bud-union line high above the soil. There was abundant gumming on the grapefruit part of the trunk but none on the sour orange part. In lemon trees, gumming breaks out just above the bud-union and involves progressively more and more of the trunk. In grapefruit and orange trees, symptoms appear higher up the trunk and out on the larger branches. Trees on rough lemon rootstocks appear to gum more profusely than those on sour orange.
There seems to be a correlation between the first symptoms of RGG and the year when the grapefruit trees are pruned for the first time. It has been pointed out that the symptoms show up soon after the trees are first pruned. In Somalia, for instance, trees are pruned at six to seven years, and RGG appears when the trees are seven to eight years old. These observations correspond with results obtained in California, where it was found that the causal fungal agent enters the tree through pruning wounds. If this is so, in orchards where trees are not pruned or are pruned only slightly, very little sign of the disease should be present and this was precisely the case in one of the orchards visited in Somalia. Even though this gummosis-free, unpruned grapefruit orchard was only nine years old, many other orchards in the same area showed severe gummosis, and in all of these orchards pruning is carried out.
TABLE 14 How to distinguish between Rio Grande gummosis, scaly bark psorosis and phytophthora gummosis
RGG SBP^1 PG^2
Gumming Very copious (stalactites) Inconspicuous Copious
Site of gumming or scaling All trunk and major branches All trunk and major branches Trunk at soil level
Part of bark affected Outer layers Outer layers Entire bark
Gum pockets in wood Present Absent Absent
Exposed wood at old lesions Yes No Yes
Typical illustration Figs 236 to 239 Figs 98 to 100 Figs 222 and 230
Notes:
^1 Scaly bark psorosis.
^2 Phytophthora gummosis.
Once infection invades the trunk it is practically impossible to eliminate the disease by surgery. Control has to be by prevention. Pruning should be reduced to a minimum and only small branches with a diameter not larger than 25 mm should be cut. Pruning cuts should be disinfected and, when dry, covered with wound dressing or asphalt. In California, carbolineum with 2 percent phenols has been recommended as a disinfectant for pruning wounds, and for final coating on the disinfected wood, low melting-point asphalt mixed with an equal quantity of carbolineum.
Heat- or frost-injured areas are also ports of entry of the RGG agent. Whitewashing of trunks and branches that might become exposed to sun (after heavy pruning) should be carried out with a zinc-copper-lime mix.
<section>9</section>
Bacterial diseases: Citrus canker
Citrus canker in its Asiatic form (canker A) is a highly infectious disease that affects not only leaves and shoots but also fruit of susceptible citrus hosts, such as small-fruited acid lime and grapefruit. The causal agent is a rod-shaped, Gram-negative bacterium, Xanthomonas campestris pv. citri. Five pathotypes of X. c. pv. citri are known: A, B, C, D and E (Hartung and Civerolo, 1987, 1989). Pathotype A is the most common and is endemic throughout Pakistan, India, the islands of the Indian Ocean, Southeast Asia, China and Japan. It is most severe on small-fruited acid lime, grapefruit and P. trifoliata. Sour orange, lemon and sweet orange are moderately susceptible, while mandarin is moderately resistant. The pathotype identified in Oman is A (see Chapter 16). The same pathotype is probably also involved in Yemen, Saudi Arabia and the United Arab Emirates. Pathotype B occurs in Argentina, Paraguay and Uruguay. It is less severe than pathogen A and does not affect sweet
orange or grapefruit. Pathotype C has been reported in Brazil as a very severe type on small-fruited acid lime, which also affects sour orange but no other citrus. Pathotype D is responsible for a leaf disease similar to canker A (see below for symptom description) discovered in Mexico in 1981, on small-fruited acid lime, Tahiti lime and grapefruit growing close to affected acid lime trees. No infection of the fruit has been reported. In 1984 Florida experienced an outbreak of an apparently new form of X. c. pv. citri, restricted almost entirely to nurseries. Isolates of this form have been classed as pathotype E. Strains belonging to group E do not produce raised lesions on diseased plants, in contrast to all strains belonging to groups A to D, but instead produce flat, water-soaked lesions of various sizes.
Diagnosis of citrus canker in the field is based on the presence of typical lesions on fruit, leaves and twigs. These lesions are similar for all strains of pathotypes A to D, although those of pathotype B are smaller than those of A, C or D. A leaf lesion develops first on the lower leaf surface about a week after infection and soon thereafter begins to grow on the corresponding upper surface, so that a lesion affects both the lower and upper surfaces of the leaf. The lesions or pustules become crater-like with raised margins and a sunken centre on both sides of the leaf (Figs 248 to 250). This is in contrast to the pustules of scab, a fungal disease of citrus, where a protuberance develops on the invaded side of the leaf, and a corresponding depression forms on the opposite side. Canker lesions on leaves are characteristically, but not specifically, surrounded by a yellow halo. Also, a water-soaked margin, detected with transmitted light, encircles the necrotic tissue, and
is a most favourable tissue for isolation of the bacterium. Lesions or pustules on fruit and twigs are raised and cork-like (Fig. 251). As mentioned above, the lesions due to pathotype E are flat with necrotic centres.
The canker bacterium is spread by wind and rain. It develops more severely on the side of the tree exposed to wind, where wounds on thorn-injured leaves or twigs are more numerous and favour infection by the bacterium.
Control of canker in countries or regions where the disease is not present is by rigid restrictions on the importation of citrus plant material and fruit from areas where the disease is present. The presence of canker in Oman, the United Arab Emirates, northern Yemen and the Jizan area in Saudi Arabia is probably due to unwitting importation of citrus material from countries known to be infected by the canker bacterium.
In countries where canker is present, control requires appropriate cultural practices, such as the use of windbreaks and copper treatments, or even the replacement of very susceptible cultivars (grapefruit and small-fruited acid lime) by more resistant ones (sweet orange or mandarin).
Bibliography
Aubert, B. & Bové, J.M. 1980. Effect of penicillin or tetracycline injections of citrus trees affected by greening disease under field conditions in Reunion Island. In Proc. 8th Conf: IOCV, p. 103-108. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Aubert, B., Bové, J.M. & Etienne, J. 1980. La lutte contre la maladie du "greening" des agrumes à l'île de la Réunion. Résultats et perspectives. Fruits, 35: 605-624.
Bar-Joseph, M. & Loebenstein, G. 1973. Effects of strain, source plants and temperature on the transmissibility of citrus tristeza virus by the melon aphid. Phytopathol., 63: 716-720.
Bar-Joseph, M., Garnsey, S.M. & Gonsalves, D. 1979. The closteroviruses: a distinct group of elongated plant viruses. Adv. Virus Res., 25: 93-168.
Bar-Joseph, M., Raccah, B. & Loebenstein, G. 1977. Evaluation of the main variables that affect citrus tristeza virus transmission by aphids. Proc. Int. Soc. Citricult., 1: 958-961.
Bar-Joseph, M., Garnsey, S.M., Gonsalves, D., Moscovits, D.E., Clark, M.F. & Loebenstein, G. 1979. The use of enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay for detection of aphid-borne citrus tristeza virus from Israel and Florida. Phytopathol., 69(2): 190-194.
Beñateña, H.N. & Portillo, M.M. 1984. Natural spread of psorosis in sweet orange seedlings. In Proc. 9th Conf: IOCV, p. 159-164. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Bové, J.M. 1984. Wall-less prokaryotes of plants. Ann. Rev. Phytopathol., 22: 361396.
Bové, J.M. 1986a. Greening in the Arabian Peninsula: toward new techniques for its detection and control. FAO Plant Prot. Bull., 34(1): 7- 14.
Bové, J.M. 1986b. Witches' broom disease of lime. FAO Plant Prot. Bull., 34(4): 217218.
Bové, J.M. & Garnier, M. 1984. Citrus greening and psylla vectors of the disease in the Arabic Peninsula. In Proc. 9th Conf: IOCV, p. 109-114. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Bové, J.M., Whitcomb, R.F. & McCoy, R.E. 1983. Culture technique for spiroplasmas from plants. In J.G. Tully & S. Razin, eds. Methods in mycoplasmology. p. 225234. New York, Academic Press.
Bové, J.M., Bonnet, P., Garnier, M. & Aubert, B. 1980. Penicillin and tetracycline treatments of greening disease-affected citrus plants in the glasshouse and the bacterial nature of the prokaryote associated with greening. In Proc. 8th Conf: IOCV, p. 91-97. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Bové, J.M., Garnier, M., Mjeni, A.M. & Khayrallah, A. 1988. Witches' broom disease of small-fruited acid lime trees in Oman: first MLO disease of citrus. In Proc. 10th Conf: IOCV, p. 307-309. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Bové, J.M., Saillard, C., Vignault, J.C. & Fos, A. 1984. Citrus stubborn disease in Iraq and Syria: correlation between symptom expression and detection of Spiroplasma citri by culture and ELISA. In Proc. 9th Conf: IOCV, p. 145-152. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Bové, J.M., Calavan, E.C., Capoor, S.P., Cortez, R.E. & Schwarz, R.E. 1974. Influence of temperature on symptoms of California stubborn, South Africa greening, India citrus decline and Philippines leaf mottling diseases. In Proc. 6th Conf: IOCV, p. 12-15. Berkeley, Div. of Agric. Sci., Univ. Calif.
Bové, J.M., Carle, P., Garnier, M., Renaudin, J. & Saillard, C. 1989. Molecular and cellular biology of spiroplasmas. In R.F. Whitcomb & J.G. Tully, eds. The mycoplasmas, vol. V. p. 244-364. New York, Academic Press.
Calavan, E.C. 1961. Ferment gum disease (Rio Grande gummosis) in grapefruit. Calif: Citrog., 46: 231-232.
Calavan, E.C. 1980. Stubborn. In J.M. Bové & R. Vogel, eds. Description and illustration of virus and virus-like diseases of citrus. A collection of colour slides. Paris, IRFA SETCO-FRUITS.
Calavan, E.C. & Bové, J.M. 1989. Ecology of Spiroplasma citri. In R. F. Whitcomb & J.G. Tully, eds. The mycoplasmas, p. 425485. New York, Academic Press.
Calavan, E.C. & Christiansen, D.W. 1958. Production of ferment gum disease in Marsh grapefruit trees by fungus inoculation. Phytopathol., 48: 391. (Abstract only)
Calavan, E.C. & Wallace, J.M. 1954. Hendersonula toruloidea Nattrass on citrus in California. Phytopathol., 44: 635639.
Calavan, E.C., Olson, E.O. & Christiansen, D.W. 1972. Transmission of the stubborn pathogen in citrus by leaf-piece grafts. In Proc. 5th Conf: IOCV, p. 11-14. Gainesville, Univ. Fla. Press.
Calavan, E.C., Dewolfe, T.A., Roistacher, C.N., Carpenter, J.B. & Halsey, D. 19621963. Unpublished data on file in Dept. of Plant Pathology. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Capoor, S.P., Rao, G. & Viswanath, S.M. 1967. Diaphorina citri Kuwayama, a vector of the greening disease of citrus in India. Indian J. Agric. Sci., 37: 572-576.
Catling, H.D. 1970. Distribution of the psyllid vectors of citrus greening disease with notes on the biology and bionomics of Diaphorina citri. FAO Plant Prot. Bull., 18: 8-15.
Catling, H.D. 1973a. Notes on the biology of the South African citrus psylla Trioza erytreae. J. Entomol. Soc. S. Afr., 36: 299306.
Catling, H.D. 1973b. Results of a survey for psyllid vectors of citrus greening disease in Reunion. FAO Plant Prot. Bull., 21: 78-82.
Chen, M.H., Miyakawa, T. & Matsui, C. 1973. Citrus likubin pathogens in salivary glands of Diaphorina citri. Phytopathol., 63: 194-195.
Chevalier, C., Saillard, C. & Bové, J.M. 1990. Spiralins of Spiroplasma citri and Spiroplasma melliferum: amino acid sequences and putative organization in the cell membrane. J. Bacteriol., 172(5): 6090-6097.
Childs, J.F.L. 1950. The cachexia disease of Orlando tangelo. Plant Dis. Rep., 34: 295298.
Childs, J.F.L. 1953. An actinomycete associated with gummosis disease of grapefruit trees. Phytopathol., 43: 101-103.
Childs, J.F.L. 1978. Rio Grande gummosis disease of citrus trees. Part 1. A brief review of the history and occurrence of Rio Grande gummosis. Plant Dis. Rep., 62: 390-394.
Cole, R.M. 1979. Mycoplasma and spiroplasma viruses: ultrastructure. In M.F. Barile & S. Razin, eds. The mycoplasmas, vol. 1. Cell biology, p. 385-410. New York, Academic Press.
Commonwealth Department of Health. 1982. Citrus dieback and greening. Canberra, Australian Government Publishing Service.
Corbett, M.K. & Grant, T.J. 1967. Purification of variegation virus. Phytopathol., 57: 137-143.
Da Graca, J.V. & Maharaj, S.B. 1991. Citrus vein enation virus, a probable luteovirus. In Proc. 11th Conf: IOCV, p. 391-394. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Davino, M. & Garnsey, S.M. 1984. Purification, characterization and serology of a mild strain of citrus infectious variegation virus from Florida. In Proc. 9th Conf. IOCV, p. 196-203. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Davis, R.M. 1980. Evidence for the involvement of Diplodia natalensis in Rio Grande gummosis of citrus. J. Rio Grande Val. Hort. Soc., 34: 55-60.
Duran-Vila, N., Pina, J.A., Ballester, J.F., Juarez, J., Roistacher, C.N., Rivera-Bustamante, R. & Semancik, J.S. 1988. The citrus exocortis disease: a complex of viroid-RNAs. In Proc. 10th Conf: IOCV, p. 152-164. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
EPPO. 1988. Data sheet on greening. EPPO Bull., 18: 497-507.
FAO. 1983. International plant quarantine treatment manual. FAO Plant Prod. and Prot. Paper, 50.
Fawcett, H.S. 1933. New information on psorosis or scaly bark of citrus. Calif: Citrog., 18: 326.
Fawcett, H.S. 1936. Citrus diseases and their control. 2nd ed. New York, McGraw-Hill.
Fawcett, H.S. & Bitancourt, A.A. 1943. Comparative symptomatology of psorosis varieties on citrus in California. Phytopathol., 33: 837-864.
Fawcett, H.S. & Klotz, L.J. 1939. Infectious variegation of citrus. Phytopathol., 29: 911-912.
Fawcett, H.S., Perry, J.C. & Johnston, J.C. 1944. The stubborn disease of citrus. Calif: Citrog., 29: 146-147.
Feldman, A.W. & Hanks, R.W. 1969. The occurrence of a gentisic glucoside in the bark and albedo of virus-infected citrus trees. Phytopathol., 59: 603-606.
Fos, A., Bové, J.M., Lallemand, J., Saillard, C., Vignault, J.C., Ali, Y., Brun, P. & Vogel, R. 1986. La cicadelle Neoaliturus haematoceps (Mulsant et Rey) est vecteur de Spiroplasma citri en Méditerranée. Ann. Inst. Pasteur/Microbiol., 137 A: 97-107.
Fudl-Allah, A.E.-S.A. & Calavan, E.C. 1974. Cellular morphology and reproduction of the mycoplasma-like organism associated with citrus stubborn disease. Phytopathol., 64: 1309- 1313.
Fudl-Allah, A.E.-S.A., Calavan, E.C. & Igwegbe, E.C.K. 1972. Culture of a mycoplasma-like organism associated with stubborn disease of citrus. Phytopathol., 62: 729-731.
Gadeau, A., Mouches, C. & Bové, J.M. 1982. Resistance of mollicutes to rifampicin. In 4th Int. Cong. Int. Organ. Mycoplasmol., p. P-127. Tokyo, 1-7 Sept.
Garnett, H.M. 1985. Isolation of the greening organism. Citrus & Subtrop. Fruit J., 611: 4-6.
Garnier, M. & Bové, J.M. 1977. Structure trilamellaire des deux membranes qui entourent les organismes prokaryotes associés à la maladie du "greening" des agrumes. Fruits, 32: 749-752.
Garnier, M. & Bové, J.M. 1983. Transmission of the organism associated with citrus greening disease from sweet orange to periwinkle by dodder. Phytopathol., 73: 1358- 1363.
Garnier, M., Clerc, M. & Bové, J.M. 1984. Growth and division of Spiroplasma citri: elongation of elementary helices. J. Bacteriol., 158(1): 23-28.
Garnier, M., Danel, N. & Bové, J.M. 1984a. Aetiology of citrus greening disease. Ann. Inst.Pasteur/Microbiol., 135 A: 169-179.
Garnier, M., Danel, N. & Bové, J.M. 1984b. The greening organism is a Gram-negative bacterium. In Proc. 9th Conf: IOCV, p. 1 15-125. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Garnier, M., Latrille, J. & Bové, J.M. 1976. Spiroplasma citri and the organism associated with likubin: comparison of their envelope system. In Proc. 7th Conf: IOCV, p. 13-17. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Garnier, M., Martin-Gros, G. & Bové, J.M. 1987. Monoclonal antibodies against the bacterium-like organism associated with citrus greening disease. Ann/lnst. Pasteur/ Microbiol., 138: 639-650.
Garnier, M., Gao, S., He, Y., Villechanoux, S., Gandar, J. & Bové, J.M. 1991. Study of the greening organism (GO) with monoclonal antibodies: serological identification, morphology, serotypes and purification of the GO. In Proc. 11th Conf: IOCV, p. 428-435. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Garnsey, S.M. 1975. Purification and properties of citrus leaf-rugose virus. Phytopathol., 65: 50-57.
Garnsey, S.M. & Weathers, L.G. 1972. Factors affecting mechanical spread of exocortis virus. In Proc. 5th Conf: IOCV, p. 105-111. Gainesville, Univ. Fla. Press.
Godfrey, G.H. 1946. Infections wood necrosis and gummosis of citrus. Proc. Lower Rio Grande Val. Citrus Inst., 1: 66-70.
Grant, T.J. & Corbett, M.K. 1961. Mechanical transmission of infectious variegation virus in citrus and non-citrus hosts. In Proc. 2nd Conf: IOCV, p. 197-204. Gainesville, Univ. Fla. Press.
Green, G.C. & Catling, H.D. 1971. Weather-induced mortality of the citrus psylla Trioza erytreae (Del Guercio) a vector of greening virus in-some citrus producing areas of Southern Africa. Agric. Meteorol., 8: 305-307.
Gumpf, D.J. & Calavan, E.C. 1981. Stubborn disease of citrus. In K. Maramorosch & S.P. Raychaudhuri, eds. Mycoplasma diseases of trees and shrubs, p. 97-134. New York, Academic Press.
Haas, A.R.C., Klotz, L.J. & Johnston, J.C. 1944. Acorn disease in oranges. Calif: Citrog., 29: 168- 169.
Hartung, J.S. & Civerolo, E.L. 1987. Genomic fingerprints of Xanthomonas campestris pv. citri strains from Asia, South America and Florida. Phytopathol., 77(2): 282-285.
Hartung, J.S. & Civerolo, E.L. 1989. Restriction fragment length polymorphisms distinguish Xanthomonas campestris strains isolated from Florida Citrus Nurseries from X. c. pv. citri. Phytopathol., 79(7): 793-799.
Igwegbe, E.C.K. & Calavan, E.C. 1970. Occurrence of mycoplasma-like bodies in phloem of stubborn-infected citrus seedlings. Phytopathol., 60: 1525-1526.
Knorr, L.C. & Koo, R.C.J. 1969. Rumple - a serious rind collapse of lemons in Florida and in Mediterranean countries. In H.D. Chapman, ed. Proc. 1st Int. Citrus Symp., p. 1463-1472. Riverside, Univ. Calif
Koizumi, M. & Sasaki, A. 1980. Protection phenomena against tristeza in trees pre-inoculated with vein enation virus. In Proc. 8th Conf: IOCV, p. 48-50. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Koizumi, M., Kano, T., Ieki, H. & Mae, H. 1988. China laurestine: a symptomless carrier of satsuma dwarf virus which accelerates natural transmission in the fields. In Proc. 10th Conf. IOCV, p. 348352. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Laflèche, D. & Bové, J.M. 1970. Structures de type mycoplasme dans les feuilles d'orangers atteints de la maladie du greening. C. R. Acad. Sci. Ser. D, 270: 1915-1917
Lallemand, J., Fos, A. & Bové, J.M. 1986. Transmission de la bactérie associée à la forme africaine de la maladie du "greening" par le psylle asiatique Diaphorina citri Kuwayama. Fruits, 41(5): 341-343.
Lin, K.H. 1956. Observations on yellow shoot of citrus: aetiological studies of yellow shoot of citrus. Phytopathol. Sinica, 2: 1-42.
Markham, P.G. & Towsend, D. 1974. Transmission of Spiroplasma citri to plant. In J.M. Bové & J.F. Duplan, eds. Les mycoplasmes/mycoplasmas, p. 201-206. Coll. Inst. Nat. Sante Rech. Med., Paris, INSEAM.
Massonié, G., Garnier, M. & Bové, J.M. 1976. Transmission of Indian citrus decline by Trioza erytreae (Del Guercio), the vector of South African greening. In Proc. 7th Conf: IOCV, p. 18-20. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
McClean, A.P.D. 1974a, 1974b. Abnormal bud-union between some sweet oranges and rough lemon rootstock: evidence of cause by a transmissible pathogen. The tristeza virus complex. In Proc. 6th Conf IOCV, p. 203-210, p. 59-66. Berkeley, Div. Agric. Sci., Univ. Calif.
McClean, A.P.D. & Oberholzer, P.C.J. 1965. Citrus psylla, a vector of the greening disease of sweet orange. S. Afr. J. Agric. Sci., 8: 297-298.
McClean, A.P.D. & Schwarz, R.E. 1970. Greening or blotchy-mottle disease of citrus. Phytophylactica, 2: 177-194.
Moll, J.N. & Martin, M.N. 1973. Electron microscopy evidence that citrus psylla Trioza erytreae (Del Guercio) is a vector of greening disease in South Africa. Phytophylactica, 5: 41-44.
Moll, J.N. & Martin, M.N. 1974. Comparison of the organism causing greening disease with several plant pathogenic Gram-negative bacteria, rikettsia-like organisms and mycoplasma-like organisms. In J.M. Bové & J.F. Duplan, eds. Les mycoplasmes/mycoplasmas, p. 89-96. Coll. Inst. Nat. Santé Rech. Méd., Paris, INSEAM.
Moran, V.C. 1968. The development of citrus psylla Trioza erytreae on Citrus limon and four indigenous host plants. J. Entomol. Soc. S. Afr., 31: 391-402.
Mouches, C. & Bové, J.M. 1984. Electrophoretic characterization of mycoplasma proteins. In S. Razin & J.G. Tully, eds. Methods in mycoplasmology, p. 241-255. New York, Academic Press.
Mouches, C., Candresse, T., Gadeau, A., Barroso, G., Saillard, C., Wroblewski, H. & Bové, J.M. 1984. Expression of the Spiroplasma citri spiralin gene in Escherichia coli: use of the recombinant plasmid carrying this gene as a molecular probe. Isr. J. Med. Sci., 20: 773-777.
Navarro, L., Pina, J.A., Juarez, J. & Ballester-Olmos, J.F. 1992. Elimination of a bud-union abnormality of sweet orange grafted on rough lemon by shoot tip grafting in vitro. In Proc. 12th Conf: IOCV.
Nour-Eldin, F. 1956. Phloemdiscoloration of sweet orange. Phytopathol., 46: 238-239.
Nour-Eldin, F. 1968. Gummy bark of sweet orange. In J.F.L. Childs, ed. Indexing procedures for 15 virus diseases of citrus trees, p. 50-53. ARS/USDA Handbook.
Nour-Eldin, F. 1981. Gummy bark. In J.M. Bové & R. Vogel, eds. Description and illustration of virus and virus-like diseases of citrus. A collection of colour slides. Paris, IFRA SETCO-FRUITS.
Oldfield, G.N. & Calavan, E.C. 1980. Spiroplasma citri: non-rutaceous hosts. In J.M. Bové & R. Vogel, eds. Description and illustration of virus and virus-like diseases of citrus. A collection of colour slides. Paris, IRFA SETCO-FRUITS.
Olson, E.O. 1952. Investigations of citrus rootstock diseases in Texas. Proc. Rio Grande Val. Hort. Soc., 6: 28-34.
Olson, E.O. & Waibel, C.W. 1953. Rio Grande gummosis in relation to Diplodia infection in Texas citrus. J. Rio Grande Val. Hort. Soc., 7: 84-94.
Pande, Y.D. 1971. Biology of citrus psylla Diaphorina citri. Isr. J. Entomol., 6: 307311.
Reichert, l. & Perlberger, J. 1931. Little-leaf disease of citrus trees and its causes. Hadar, 4: 193- 194.
Reichert, 1. & Perlberger, J. 1934. Xyloporosis, the new citrus disease. Bull. Agric. Exp. Sta., Rehovot, Palestine, 12: 49.
Renaudin, J., Aullo, P., Vignault, J.C. & Bové, J.M. 1990. Complete nucleotide sequence of the genome of Spiroplasma citri virus SpV1-R8A2 B. Nucleic Acids Research, 18(5): 1293- 1294.
Renaudin, J., Bodin-Ramiro, C. & Bové, J.M. 1987. Spiroplasma citri virus SpV1-78, a non-lytic rod-shaped virus with single-stranded, circular DNA: presence of viral sequences in the spiroplasma genome. In Proc. 10th Conf: IOCV, p. 285-290. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Roistacher, C.N. 1988. The cachexia and xyloporosis diseases of citrus - a review. In Proc. 10th Conf: IOCV, p. 116-124. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Roistacher, C.N., Blue, R.L. & Calavan, E.C. 1973. A new test for cachexia. Citrograph, 58: 261-262.
Roistacher, C.N., Nauer, E.M., Kishaba, A. & Calavan, E.C. 1980. Transmission of citrus tristeza virus by Aphis gossypii reflecting changes in virus transmissibility in California. In Proc. 8th Conf: IOCV, p. 76-82. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Ruggieri, G. 1955. Le arance impietrate. Rivista Agrumicoltura, I (2): 65-69.
Ruggieri, G. 1961. Observations and research on impietratura. In Proc. 2nd Conf: IOCV, p. 182-186. Gainesville, Univ. Fla. Press.
Saglio, P., Laflèche, D., Bonissol, C. & Bové, J.M. 1971a. Isolement et culture in vitro des mycoplasmes associés au "stubborn" des agrumes et leur observation au microscope électronique. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris, 272: 1387-1390.
Saglio, P., Laflèche, D., Bonissol, C. & Bové, J.M. 1971b. Isolement, culture et observation au microscope électronique des structures de type mycoplasme associées à la maladie du stubborn des agrumes et leur comparaison avec des structures observées dans le cas de la maladie du greening des agrumes. Physiol. Veg, 9: 569-582.
Saglio, P., Lhospital, M., Laflèche, D., Dupont, G., Bové, J.M., Tully, J.G. & Freundt, E.A. 1973. Spiroplasma citri gen. and sp.n.: a mycoplasma-like organism associated with "stubborn" disease of citrus. Int. J. Syst. Bacteriol., 23: 191-204.
Saillard, C. & Bové, J.M. 1983. Application of ELISA to spiroplasma detection and classification. In S. Razin & J. G. Tully, eds. Methods in mycoplasmology, p. 471476. New York, Academic Press.
Saillard, C., Vignault, J.C., Bové, J.M., Raie, A., Tully, J.G., Williamson, D.L., Fos, A., Garnier, M., Gadeau, A., Carle, P. & Whitcomb, R.F. 1987. Spiroplasma phoeniceum sp. nov.: a new plant-pathogenic species from Syria. Int. J. Syst. Bacteriol., 37(2): 106- 115.
Salibe, A.A. 1977. The stem pitting effects of tristeza on different citrus hosts, and their economic significance. Proc. Int. Soc. Citricult., 3: 953-955.
Schwarz, R.E. 1968a. Indexing of greening and exocortis through fluorescent marker substances. In Proc. 5th Conf: IOCV, p. 118-124. Gainesville, Univ. Fla. Press.
Schwarz, R.E. 1968b. Thin-layer chromatographical studies on phenolic markers of the greening virus in various citrus species. S. Afr. J. Agric. Sci., 11: 797-801.
Schwarz, R.E. & Green, G.C. 1970. Citrus greening and the citrus psyllid Trioza erytreae, a temperature dependent agent-vector complex. Zeits. Pflanzenkr. Pflanzenschutz, 79: 490-493.
Schwarz, R.E. & Knorr, L.C. 1973. Presence of citrus greening and its psylla vector in Thailand. FAO Plant Prot. Bull., 21: 132138.
Semancik, J.S., Roistacher, C.N., Rivera-Bustamente, R. & Duran-Vila, N. 1988. Citrus cachexia viroid, a new viroid of citrus; relationship to viroids of the exocortis disease complex. J. Gen. Virol., 69(12): 3059-3068.
Solel, Z. & Salerno, M. 1989. Mal secco. In Compendium of citrus diseases, p. 18- 19. St Paul, Minnesota, APS Press.
Timmer, L.W. & Garnsey, S.M. 1980. Natural spread of citrus ringspot virus in Texas and its association with psorosis-like diseases in Florida and Texas. In Proc. 8th Conf: IOCV, p. 167-173. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Uyeda, I. & Mink, G.I. 1983. Relationship among some ilar viruses: proposed revision of subgroup A. Phytopathol. 73.
Van den Berg, M.A., Van Vuuren, S.P. & Deacon, V.E. 1987. Cross-breeding and greening disease transmission of different populations of the citrus psylla Trioza erytreae. Phytophylactica, 19: 353-354.
Villechanoux, S., Garnier, M. & Bové, J.M. 1990. Purification of the bacterium-like organism associated with greening disease of citrus by immunoaffinity chromatography and monoclonal antibodies. Curr. Microbiol., 21 (3): 175- 180.
Villechanoux, S., Garnier, M., Laigret, F., Renaudin, J. & Bové, J.M. 1993. The genome of the non-cultured, bacterial-like organism associated with citrus greening disease contains the nusG-rp/KAJL-rpoBC gene cluster and the gene for a bacteriophage type RNA polymerase. Curr. Microbiol., 26: 161-166.
Villechanoux, S., Garnier, M., Renaudin, J. & Bové, J.M. 1992. Detection of several strains of the bacterium-like organism of citrus greening disease by DNA probes. Curr. Microbiol., 24: 89-95.
Vogel, R. & Bové, J.M. 1964. Stem pitting sur bigaradier et sur oranger tarocco en Corse: une maladie à virus. Fruits, 19: 264-276.
Vogel, R. & Bové, J.M. 1968. Cristacortis, a virus disease inducing stem pitting on sour orange and other citrus species. In Proc. 4th Conf: IOCV, p. 221-228. Gainesville, Univ. Fla. Press.
Vogel, R. & Bové, J.M. 1972. Relation of cristacortis to other citrus viruses. In Proc. 5th Conf: IOCV, p. 178-183. Gainesville, Univ. Fla. Press.
Vogel, R. & Bové, J.M. 1980. Pollen transmission to citrus of the agent inducing cristacortis and psorosis young leaf symptoms. In Proc. 8th Conf IOCV, p. 188190. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Vogel, R. & Bové, J.M. 1988. Graft transmission from kumquat of an agent inducing bud-union crease in Parson's Special mandarin grafted on Volkamer lemon rootstock. In Proc. 10th Conf: IOCV, p. 367-369. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Wallace, J.M. 1957. Tristeza and seedling yellows of citrus. Plant Dis. Rep., 41: 394397.
Wallace, J.M. 1978. Virus and virus-like diseases. In W. Reuther, E.C. Calavan & G.E. Carman, eds. The citrus industry, vol. IV. Crop production, p. 67-74. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Wallace, J.M. & Drake, R.J. 1960. Woody galls on citrus associated with vein enation. Plant Dis. Rep., 44: 580-584.
Wallace, J.M. & Drake, R.J. 1968. Citrange stunt and ringspot, two previously unde-scribed virus diseases of citrus. In Proc. 4th Conf: IOCV, p. 177-183. Gainesville, Univ. Fla. Press.
Weathers, L.G. 1960. Yellow-vein disease of citrus and studies of interactions between yellow-vein and other viruses of citrus. Virology, 11: 753-764.
Weathers, L.G. 1961. Responses of citrus to concurrent infection with two or more unrelated viruses. In Proc. 2nd Conf: IOCV p. 187-196. Gainesville, Univ. Fla. Press.
Whitcomb, R.F. 1983. Culture media for spiroplasmas. In S. Razin & J.G. Tully, eds. Methods in mycoplasmology, p. 147159. New York, Academic Press.
Whitcomb, R.F., Chen, T.A., Williamson, D.L., Liso, C., Tully, J.G., Bové, J.M., Mouches, C., Rose, D.L., Coan, M.E. & Clark, T.B. 1986. Spiroplasma kunkelii sp. nov.: characterization of the etiological agent of corn stunt disease. Int. J. Syst. Bacteriol., 36(2): 170-178.
Wroblewski, H., Johansson, K.E. & Hjerten, S. 1977. Purification and characterization of spiralin, the main protein of the Spiroplasma citri membrane. Biochim. Biophys. Acta., 465: 275-289.
Yamada, S. & Sawamura, K. 1952. Studies on the dwarf disease of satsuma orange, Citrus unshiu Marcovitch (preliminary report). Hort. Div. Tokai-Kinki Agric. Exp. Stn., Bull, 1: 61-71.
Chapter 7: Citrus stubborn disease in the Syrian Arab Republic and natural transmission of its causal agent, Spiroplasma citri
Natural spread of S. citri in the Tadla region of Morocco
Stubborn in the Syrian Arab republic
Natural transmission of S. Citri in the Syrian Arab republic
Conclusion
Bibliography
Stubborn disease of citrus was observed in California in the early 1900s and first described in 1944 (Fawcett, Perry and Johnston, 1944). Its causal agent was first seen under the electron microscope in 1970 (Igwegbe and Calavan, 1970; Laflèche and Bové, 1970) and cultured in the same year (Saglio et al., 1971; Fudl-Allah, Calavan and Igwegbe, 1972). In 1972, the organism was fully characterized as being a mollicute (mycoplasma) with helical morphology and motility, and it was given the name Spiroplasma citri (Saglio et al., 1973).
Historically, S. citri was the first mollicute of plant origin that was obtained in culture and for which Koch's postulates could be fulfilled (Markham and Towsend, 1974). The work on S. citri led to the discovery of many more spiroplasmas. Today about 30 spiroplasmas besides S. citri are known, classified in 23 different serogroups (Bové, 1984; Tully, 1989).
The main vector of S. citri in California is the leafhopper Neoaliturus (ex-Circulifer) tenellus. This insect is not usually associated with citrus, which probably explains why it was not identified as a vector until 1976 (Oldfield et al., 1976), when techniques became available that made it possible to screen candidate vectors for the presence of
S. citri. This spiroplasma can be detected in plants as well as in insects by two major techniques - culturing of the spiroplasma and the use of ELISA (Saillard et al., 1980) (Tables 15 and 16). Both techniques have played a major role in the discovery of Neoaliturus haematoceps Mulsant and Rey as a major vector of S. citri in the Mediterranean area and the Near East (Fos et al., 1986). They were also useful in the discovery of a new plant pathogenic spiroplasma, S. phoeniceum (Saillard et al., 1987). Today, DNA-DNA hybridization and DNA amplification are even more promising for the detection of this group of pathogens, since the techniques appear to be at least 100 times more sensitive than previous methods.
Stubborn, like tristeza and greening, is of major concern to citrus growers because the disease is transmitted by insect vectors. Hence, trees propagated from healthy bud-wood will become reinfected when planted in areas where the pathogen and its insect vectors are both present. Obviously, information on natural transmission of stubborn in a given location is of paramount importance. For this reason, such studies were undertaken in Morocco in 1978 and in the Syrian Arab Republic in 1982. The results of these investigations are reported here.
MAP 4 Map of Morocco. Salsola kali,the host plant of Neoaliturus haematoceps and Neoaliturus tenellus, the two leafhopper vectors of the stubborn agent (Spiroplasma citri), was found north of Agadir all the way up to Kenitra. At Agadir only H. tenellus was captured on S. kali; at El Jadida, the two leafhopper species were present, and at Rabat and Kenitra, only M haematoceps was collected
TABLE 15 Detection of Spiroplasma citri in the Syrian Arab Republic: number of samples analysed by ELISA and culture
Nature of sample 1982 
1984 Total
July October October December
Citrus 105 118 242 60 36 561
Periwinkle 33 12 38 66 149
Leafhopper 49 104 87 9 249
Others 4 1 2 0 7
Total 966
Even though accurate data are missing, citrus trees with severe stubborn symptoms appear most frequently in countries of the Mediterranean area and the Near East where summer temperatures are high. This is in keeping with the fact that S. citri also multiplies best at 32°C. This is certainly so in the Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Morocco and Syria, where the diagnosis of this disease has been based not only on symptomatology, but also on the detection of S. citri by culture and ELISA (Bové, 1981; Bové et al., 1984). In California, the use of infected budwood was one of the main reasons for the early widespread distribution of stubborn. However, the subsequent availability of plant material certified free of infectious agents, including S. citri, has not resulted in the disappearance of stubborn from young orchards. This is because three leafhoppers were found to be the insect vectors of S. citri, namely, Neoaliturus tenellus, Scaphytopius nitridus and Scaphytopius acutus
delongi (Oldfield and Kaloostian, 1978). In the Mediterranean area, the first evidence for natural spread of S. citri was obtained in Morocco between 1978 and 1981 (Bové, 1981; Nhami et al., 1980). Work in Syria from 1982 to 1986 resulted in the identification of the leafhopper N. haematoceps as a major vector of S. citri, and of Salsola kali as the preferred host plant of the leafhopper. The following account is an updated version of an earlier publication(Bové, 1986).
Natural spread of S. citri in the Tadla region of Morocco
The Tadla region of Morocco (of which the major town is Beni Mellal) is a hot depression at the western foot of the High Atlas mountain range (see Map 4), where citrus, sugar beet and cotton are grown in irrigated zones.
Many trees of Washington navel and Valencia late sweet oranges, although they were believed to be healthy, showed stubborn symptoms and were found to be infected with S. citri.
Observations made on periwinkle plants (Catharanthus roseus) growing as ornamentals in the area showed that many of these plants became diseased and died in the summer and autumn owing to S. citri-induced lethal wilting (Fig. 175). Experiments were then begun using periwinkles as indicator plants for S. citri infection. Plants exposed to natural contamination during the summer near stubborn-infected citrus orchards became infected with 5. citri (Fig. 176).
TABLE 16 Detection of Spiroplasma citri in fruit axes and various types of leaves from stubborn-affected sweet orange trees in the Syrian Arab Republic
Plant material analysed Results of S. citri detection by:
ELISA Culture
Anderson orchard
Washington navel tree R3A1: 
Very young, tender leaves 1-2 cm long - -
Young, tender leaves 3-5 cm long - -
Mature, mottle-affected + +
Terminal, mature cup-shaped + +
Fruit axis + +
Washington navel tree R3A5: 
Young, tender leaves 3-5 cm long - -
Mature, mottle-affected, cup-shaped leaves + +
Fruit axis + +
Sweet orange mother tree plot, El Annadeh nursey
Hamlin tree R8A7: 
Young, tender leaves 3-5 cm long - -
Mature, mottle-affected + +
Fruit axis + +
Washington navel (204) tree R6A13: 
Young, tender leaves 3-5 cm long - -
Mature, mottle-affected + +
Fruit axis ND +
Washington navel (141) tree R4A2 
Young, tender leaves 3-5 cm long - -
Mature, mottle-affected + +
Key:
-: assay was negative.
+: assay detected S. citri.
ND: not done.
In one experiment, as many as 16 percent of 165 exposed periwinkles became contaminated. Other periwinkles became infected with MLOs.
Out of many leafhopper species tested as potential vectors, only one yielded a S. citri culture. This insect was identified as N. haematoceps.
This same species was then found to be the dominant insect caught from July to September in two yellow traps placed in an experimental periwinkle bed, and some of these plants were found to be infected with S. citri the next autumn (Bové, 1981) All these observations suggested that N. haematoceps might be a major vector of S. citri.
<title>Virus and virus - Like diseases of citrus in the near east region. Virus and virus-like diseases of citrus in the Near East region</title>
TABLE 28 Detection of Spiroplasma citriin Cyprus in sweet orange trees, periwinkle (Catharanthus roseus) seedlings and Neoaliturus haematoceps leafhoppers
Fruit (F) or leaf (L) - sample designation Specks and varieties Age (years) Name of orchard or site Location Daft of survey S. citri cultured
2 F Valencia late 30 Lanitis Limassol January 1987 Yes
9 F Valencia late 30 Lanitis Limassol January 1987 Yes
3 F Valencia late 25 A. Pirillis Liopetri (Famagusta) January 1987 Yes
4 F Valencia late 25 A. Pirillis Liopetri (Famagusta) January 1987 Yes
5 F Valencia late 25 A. Pirillis Liopetri (Famagusta) January 1987 No
6 F Valencia late 25 A. Pirillis Liopetri (Famagusta) January 1987 Yes
7 F Valencia late 30 A. Katsaris Phrenaros (Famagusta) January 1987 Yes
8 F Valencia late 30 A. Katsaris Phrenaros (Famagusta) January 1987 Yes
12 F Valencia late 7 Agric. Res. Inst. (Mother trees) Akhelia (Paphos) January 1987 Yes
13 F Valencia late 7 Agric. Res. Inst. (Mother trees) Akhelia (Paphos) January 1987 Yes
14 F Washington navel 7 Agric. Res. Inst. (Mother trees) Akhelia (Paphos) January 1987 Yes
15 F Washington navel 7 Agric. Res. Inst. (Mother trees) Akhelia (Paphos) January 1987 Yes
16 F Valencia late 6 Agric. Res. Inst. (Exp. St.) Akhelia (Paphos) January 1987 Yes
17 F Valencia late 6 Agric. Res. Inst. (Exp. St.) Akhelia (Paphos) January 1987 Yes
52 L Valencia late 6 Agric. Res. Inst. (Exp. St.) Akhelia (Paphos) October 1987 Yes
53 F Valencia late 6 Agric. Res. Inst. (Exp. St.) Akhelia (Paphos) October 1987 Yes
54 F Valencia late 6 Agric. Res. Inst. (Exp. St.) Akhelia (Paphos) October 1987 No
55 L Valencia late 6 Agric. Res. Inst. (Exp. St.) Akhelia (Paphos) October 1987 Yes
56 F Valencia late 6 Agric. Res. Inst. (Exp. St.) Akhelia (Paphos) October 1987 Yes
57 F Valencia late 6 Agric. Res. Inst. (Exp. St.) Akhelia (Paphos) October 1987 Yes
58 F Valencia late 6 Agric. Res. Inst. (Exp. St.) Akhelia (Paphos) October 1987 Yes
18F Washington navel 6 Agric. Res. Inst. (Exp. St.) Akhelia (Paphos) January 1987 Yes
19 F Valencia late 20 Coffee shop Astromeritis January 1987 No
20 F Valencia late 20 Coffee shop Astromeritis January 1987 Yes
1 L C. roseus 0.5 Agric. Res. Inst. (Exp. St.) Akhelia (Paphos) October 1987 Yes
2 L C. roseus 0.5 Agric. Res. Inst. (Exp. St.) Akhelia (Paphos) October 1987 Yes
3 L C. roseus 0.5 Agric. Res. Inst. (Exp. St.) Akhelia (Paphos) October 1987 Yes
4 L C. roseus 0.5 Agric. Res. Inst. (Exp. St.) Akhelia (Paphos) October 1987 Yes
5 L C. roseus 0.5 Agric. Res. Inst. (Exp. St.) Akhelia (Paphos) October 1987 Yes
6 L C. roseus 0.5 Agric. Res. Inst. (Exp. St.) Akhelia (Paphos) October 1987 Yes
7 L C. roseus 0.5 Agric. Res. Inst. (Exp. St.) Akhelia (Paphos) October 1987 No
69 N. haematoceps Seashore Zygi October 1987 Yes
<title>Virus and virus - Like diseases of citrus in the near east region. Virus and virus-like diseases of citrus in the Near East region</title>
<section>1</section>
TABLE 31 Stubborn in sweet orange trees in certain regions of Iran in November 1985 as diagnosed by visual symptoms and/or Spiroplasma citri
Location Varieties Origin Stubborn diagnosis
Mahdasht orchard (Mazandaran province) Moro Mediterranean 1933-19341 Visual: 7,8,9²
Kotra Citrus Experiment Station (Mazandaran province) Valencia on P. trifolatia and sour orange W & N 1963-19643 Visual: 5, 8 S. citri culture
Gillette navel W & N. 1963-64 Visual: 3, 8
Hamlin on P. trifoliata W & N. 1971 Visual: 3, 8. S. citri culture
Khorram Abed Citrus Experiment Station (Mazandaran province) Salustiana W & N, 1971 Visual: 5. 13, S. citri culture
Ramsar Citrus Experiment Salustiana W & N, 1971 Visual: 3, 8, S. citri culture
Station (Mazandaran province) Hamlin on P. trifoliata Nucellar line obtained in Iran Visual: 2, 3, 4, 8,13, S. citri culture
Hamlin W & N. 1971 Visual: 2, 3
Valencia on P. trifolatia W & N, 1963-1964 Visual: 4, 8. S. citri culture
Minab Citrus Collection (Hormozgan province) Salustiana W & N, 1971 Visual: 1, 2, 3, 13
Skaggs bonanza W & N, 1971 Visual: 1, 2, 3, 8
Washington navel W & N. 1971 Visual: 1, 2. 3
Jiroft Development Organization (Kerman province) Navel orange W & N, 1971 Visual: 1, 2, 6, 8, 11, 12
Campbell Valencia W & N, 1971 Visual: 1, 2, 3, 6,13
Salustiana W & N, 1971 Visual: 1, 2, 3, 6. 8.13
Skaggs bonanza W & N, 1971 Visual: 1, 2, 3, 6, 8, S. citri culture
Parent navel W & N. 1971 Visual: 1, 2, 3, 6, 10
Washington navel W & N, 1971 Visual: 1, 2. 3, S. citri culture
Sweet orange Local Visual: 1, 2, 3 S. citri DNA-DNA hybridization
Abas Abed orchard, Jiroft (Kerman province) Washington navel Jiroft Dev. Organ. Visual: 1. 2. 3, 6, 7. 8
Moïn orchard at Jezeh (Khafr, Fars province) Local Local Visual: 1 to 8, 12,13, S. citri culture
Notes:
^1 Year of budwood importation.
^2 Numbers refer to the following symptoms:
1: stunting of tree (Fig. 152 compared with 15 1);
2: tree with bushy growth (Figs 147, 148, 152, 285, 286, 288, 289);
3: tree with poor crop (Fig. 147 compared with 146);
4: leaf mottle (Figs 153, 154, 158);
5: shoots carrying leaves with yellow lips and margins (Figs 155, 160 to 163);
6: small, spoon-shaped leaves (Fig. 150);
7: off-season flowering (Fig. 149);
8: fruits of various sizes and ages (Figs 149, 164);
9: fruit with inverse coloration (peduncular and is orange while stylar end is still green) (Fig. 167 compared with 166);
10, acorn-shaped fruit (Fig. 165);
11: fruit with closed navel (Fig. 165);
12: lopsided fruit (Figs 168, 303);
13: fruit with aborted seeds (Figs 168, 304).
^3 W & N: Willits and Newcomb nurseries, California.
<section>2</section>
TABLE 41 Virus and virus like diseases of citrus in India
Disease (related or identical disease) Agent Year of discovery or first report in India (refer.) First seen or found on trees of following species in India Symptomatic hosts in India Symptomless host in India Mechanical transmission Insect vector in India
Natural Experimental
Bud-union crease Not yet reproduced by graft transmission 1972 (1)^1 Musambi and Bloodred sweet orange on rough lemon Musambi, Bloodred orange on rough lemon 
Crinkly leaf Virus 1976 (2) Lisbon and Nepali round lemons Lemon Lemon Sweet orange Rangpur lime Kagzi lime² Yes 
Exocortis Viroid 1968 (3) Mandarin Sweet orange Grapefruit Mandarin Sweet orange Grapefruit Yes 
Greening BLO 1960 (4) Sweet orange Mandarin Grapefruit Sweet orange Mandarin Grapefruit Tangelo Others Many citrus species Aegle marmelos Diaphorina citri Kuw.
Impietratura Virus-like 1973 (5) Pomelo Pomelo Grapefruit Sweet orange Pomelo Grapefruit Sweet orange 
Infectious variegation Virus 1977 (6) Lemon Lemon Lemon, Lime Sour orange Sweet orange Herbac. plants Yes 
Leathery leaf (Satsuma dwarf) Virus 1972 (7) Mandarin (Sikkim "orange") Mandarin Grapefruit Pomelo Rough lemon Herbac. plants Yes Aphis gossypii
Leaf curl Virus-like 1976 (8) 
Mosaic Virus-like 1975 (9) Musambi sweet orange Sweet orange Sweet orange Kagzi lime Rangpur lime Grapefruit Mandarin Lemon, Pomelo Aegle marmelos M. persicae A. craccivora
Psorosis young leaf symptoms Virus-like 1986 (10) Sweet orange Aegle marmelos 
Rubbery wood MLO 1973 (11) Lisbon lemon Lemon Kagzi lime Lemon Lime Mandarin Sweet orange Rangpur lime Sour orange Sweet lime 
Tristeza Virus 1952 (12) 1955 (13) Musambi sweet orange on rough lemon Kagzi lime C. pennive siculata Pomelo Jamberi³ C. maderaspatana Kagzi lime Sweet orange Mandarin on rough lemon T. citricida A. gossypii A. craccivora M. persicae Dactynorus jaceae
Seedling yellows Virus 1965 (14) Musambi sweet orange on rough lemon ^4 Mandarin Kagzi lime Sour orange Lemon and grapefruit seedlings T. citricida
Wound tumour (vein enation woody gall) Virus 1975 (15) T. citricida^5
Yellow midvein (yellow vein) Virus-like 1986 (16) Lime 
Notes:
The following key refers to numbered references in the bibliography of Chapter 17.
^2 Kagzi lime is the Indian equivalent of Mexican lime, C. aurantifolia (Christm.) Swing.
^3 Jamberi or rough lemon is normally known to be tolerant of tristeza virus.
^4 Symptoms seen were probably those of greening.
^5 The agent of vein enation-woody gall is transmitted by T. citricida.
TABLE 42 Geographical distribution of virus and virus-like diseases of citrus in India
Area Disease
CL EX GR^1 IM IV LC LL MO MS OS PS RW SY TR TC WT² YM³
Andhra Pradesh + S^4 + 
Hyderabad + + + 
Kodur + + + 
Tirupati + + +
Arunachal Pradesh + 
Along + + 
Baser + 
Assam + + + S + 
Burnihat + + + 
Ranchi + 
Bihar 
Chianki + 
Ranchi + + 
Delhi + + + + + + + 
Gujarat 
Anand + 
Haryana + 
Chandigarh + + 
Himachal Pradesh 
Dhaulakuan + + 
Jammu and Kashmir 
Jammu + + 
Karnataka (+)^5 
Chetali + + 
Gonicoppal + + 
Kerala (+) 
Ambalvoyal + + 
Nellyampathy + + 
Madhya Pradesh 
Jabalpur + + 
Prabat Pattan + 
Sausar + 
Maharashtra S + 
Aurangabad + 
Nagpur + + 
Poona + + + + + + + + +
Shrirampur + + + + + + + 
Meghalaya 
Shilong + 
Orissa + 
Guma + + 
Udaigiri + + 
Punjab 
Aborar + + + 
Rajasthan S (+) 
Bhawani Mandi + + 
Jhalawar + 
Jodhpur + + 
Kota + + + + + + 
Pilani + 
Sriganganagar + + + + 
Udaipur + 
Sikkim S + 
Gayalsing + + + + + + + 
Namchi + + + + + + + 
Rangpo + + + + + + + 
Tamil Nadu (+) 
Coimbatore + + + 
Uttar Pradesh 
Gopeshwar + + 
Khanpur + 
Pantnagar + + 
Saharanpur + + + 
West Bengal S + 
Darjeeling + + + + + + + + + 
Kalimpong + + + + + + + + + 
Key:
CL=Crinkly leaf-, EX=Exocortis; GR=Greening; IM=Impietratura; IV=Infectius variegation; LC=Leaf curl; LL=Leathery Leaf; MO=Mosaic; MS=Multiple sprouting; OS=Oily specks; PS=Psorosis A; RW=Rubbery wood; SY=Seedling yellows; TR=Tristeza; TC=Presence of T. citricida; WT=Wound tumour; YM=Yellow midvein.
Notes:
^1 Presence of greening is based on symptoms in most cases and must be confirmed by electron microscopy and/or DNA hybridization.
^2 Vein enation-woody gall.
^3 Yellow vein.
^4 S means that severe strains are present.
^5 (+) indicates that presence is inferred from reports that T. citricida occurs in southern parts of India (Raychaudhuri, Nariani and Ahlawat, 1977; Ahlawat, 1988a).
<section>3</section>
TABLE 44 Greening. psyllids and psyllid parasites and citrus canker in Saudi Arabia as of 1983
Location
Altitude (m)
Presence of greening based on
Presence of Asian psylla (Diaphorina citri)
Presence of African psylla (Trioza erytreae)
Presence of Tetrastychus radiatus parasite of D. citri
Presence of citrus canker
Symptom
Electron microscopy
Usfan 150 Not clear No Yes No Yes No
Khulais 200 Not clew No Yes No Yes^1 No
Haddat Ash Sham 200 Not clear ND² Yes No D. citri nymphs parasitized No
Zaimah 500 Yes Yes Yes No D. citri nymphs parasitized No
Wadi Nahman 500 Yes ND Yes No Yes No
Taif 1700 Yes Yes Yes No NS³ No
Turabah 1400 Yes Yes Yes No Yes No
Khurmah 1400 Yes Yes Yes No NS No
Boua 1500 Yes Yes None seen No None seen No
Bishah 1000 Yes Yes Yes No None seen No
Al Ullayah 2000 No ND No No No No
Brehim Khaibar 1500 Yes Yes Yes Yes^4 Yes No
Najran 900 No No No Yes No No
Jizan 20 No No No No No No
Sabia 100 No No No No No Yes
Fayfa 1200-1800 Not clear Yes No Yes^4 No No
Ad Darb No ND No No No No
Muraibah No ND No No No No
Al Ugdah No ND No No No No
Medina area No ND No No No No
Notes:
^1 Cheiloneurus cyanonotus, a psyllid hyperparasite, was present.
^2 ND: not done.
^3 NS: not surveyed in December 1983.
^4 Based on the typical T. erytreae-induced leaf galls.
TABLE 45 Monthly mean temperatures (T) in °C, relative humidity (RH) and saturation deficit (SD) in millibars, at midday for six stations in Saudi Arabia
Station (altitude)
Month
J F M A M J J A S O N D
Najran T 26.3 26.7 28.1 34.0 36.0 38.5 38.8 38.2 33.3 30.2 21.2 26.2
(1150 m) RH 32 27 41 18 17 10 11 13 17 19 30 24
SD 22.9 25.2 22.0 43.1 48.8 60.6 60.8 57.3 41.9 34.3 17.4 255
Bishah T 28.4 26.4 29.4 34.0 35.6 38.7 38.7 39.1 35.8 31.8 29.5 26.2
(1040 m) RH 18 17 23 13 13 4 7 6 7 9 15 15
SID 31.7 28.2 31.1 45.7 50.0 65.3 63.3 64.9 54.0 41.9 34.6 30.1
Jizan T 30.1 30.0 31.9 34.9 37.0 38.2 38.0 38.5 37.7 34.7 33.9 30.7
(40 m) RH 63 53 61 49 53 49 47 47 49 46 53 59
SID 15.6 19.7 18.2 28.2 29.1 34.7 34.5 35.7 32.9 29.5 24.5 17.8
Khamis Mushait T 22.4 22.6 22.4 26.1 28.3 31.6 30.4 30.9 29.1 26.3 24.7 22.9
(2000 m) RH 29 36 47 30 26 49 25 25 21 24 29 29
SID 18.9 17.3 14.1 23.3 28.1 23.4 32.1 33.0 31.2 25.6 21.7 19.5
Taif T 24.4 23.9 25.4 29.5 33.1 35.2 34.3 34.9 33.6 29.7 26.1 25.6
(1634 m) RH 46 58 53 27 25 16 17 17 20 21 31 31
SID 16.3 12.3 15.0 29.7 37.5 47.2 44.4 45.9 41.2 32.6 23.0 22.4
Medina T 24.6 26.5 28.6 35.0 39.5 42.5 39.3 43.2 41.5 36.5 30.3 27.9
(500 m) RH 25 20 16 15 16 7 9 10 10 24 30 40
SD 22.8 27.3 32.5 47.2 59.4 77.6 64.0 77.9 71.2 45.6 29.8 22.2
<section>4</section>
TABLE 52 Citrus species and varieties affected by infectious diseases in the Sudan
Species and varieties on sour orange rootstock unless otherwise stated Gummy bark Cachexia Bark gumming (Kassala disease) Psorosis young leaf symptoms Concave gum-Blind pocket Scaly bark psorosis Pop-corn Exocortis Stubborn Phytophthora gummosis Rio Grande gummosis
Sweet orange var.
Atbara (1) 
Balady (1)(3) (1) (1)(3) (1) (1) (1) (1)(3) (1)
Gebeit (1) (1) 
Navel (3) (1)(3) (3) 
Nouri (Jaffa) (3) 
Sinhari (1) 
Succari (1) 
Valencia 
Valencia on sweet lime (1)^1 (1) 
Mandarin var.
Balady (Willowleaf) (1)(3) (1) (1) (1)
Yussef Effendi (2) 
Grapefruit var.
Foster pink (3) (1) (1) (1) (1)(3) (3) (1)(3)
Foster pink on: 
- C. macrophylla (2)^1 
- Rangpur lime (2)^1 (2)^1 
- Carrizo citrange (3)^1 
- Savage citrange (3)^1 
Marsh seedless (3) (1) (1)(3)
White marsh on citron (1)^1 
Duncan (1)
Pomelo (1)(3) (1) (1)
Balady lime (1)(3) (1)
Key:
(1) The disease was seen by Childs, 1964.
(2) The disease was seen by Krezdorn, 1983.
(3) The disease was seen by Bové, 1986.
Note:
^1 Symptoms were seen on the rootstock.
TABLE 53 Average maximum and minimum daily temperature (°C)
Location (alt. in m) 
Month
J
F
M
A
M
J
J
A
S
O
N
D
Addis Ababa (2400) Max.T 26 27 27 28 28 21 25 24 24 26 25 25
Min.T 3 5 7 7 7 8 8 8 7 5 3 3
Asmara (2340) Max.T 24 24 24 26 26 26 27 23 23 22 22 22
Min.T 10 11 12 13 13 13 14 13 13 11 10 8
Atbara (346) Max.T 31 32 36 39 42 43 41 39 41 39 35 32
Min.T 14 15 18 21 25 27 27 26 26 24 19 16
Dongola (375) Max.T 28 29 34 39 42 43 42 42 41 39 33 29
Min.T 9 10 14 18 23 24 25 26 25 21 15 11
El Fasher (730) Max.T 32 33 36 38 39 39 36 33 36 37 34 32
Min.T 10 12 14 18 21 22 22 21 20 18 13 10
Juba Max.T 37 38 37 36 33 33 31 31 33 34 36 37
Min.T 20 22 22 22 22 21 20 20 20 20 20 20
Kassala (529) Max.T 35 36 39 41 42 40 36 34 36 19 38 35
Min.T 16 16 19 22 25 25 23 23 23 23 21 17
Khartoum (378) Max.T 32 34 38 41 42 41 38 37 39 40 36 33
Min.T 16 16 19 22 25 26 25 24 25 24 20 17
Nairobi (1661) Max.T 25 26 25 24 22 21 21 21 24 24 23 23
Min.T 12 13 14 14 13 12 11 11 11 13 13 13
<section>5</section>
TABLE 57 Various cases of gummy bark in sweet orange in southern Yemen
Classification of gummy bark variety Sweet orange variety Scion bark Stock bark Bud-union crease
Gum Pegs Pinholing Gain Pegs
o Sweet orange bark with mild to moderate gum impregnation o Rootstock is not Unrecorded affected (sour orange) + + - - - -
o No scaling of sweet orange bark o No bud-union crease Hamlin + + + - - -
o Rootstock is affected (rough lemon) Valencia late + + ++ +++ ++ +++
Hamlin + + + + ++
Valencia late ++ + + + ++ +
o Bud-union crease Valencia late ++ + + ++ ±
o Sweet orange bark with severe gum impregnation o Rootstock is not affected (sour orange) Washington navel ++++ ++ + - ± -
Hamlin +++ + - ± -
Aboussoura navel +++ + - - -
o Roughness or scaling of sweet orange bark o No bud-union crease Unrecorded +++ + +++ - - -
Washington navel ++++ + +++ - -
Key:
- no symptoms;
+ mild symptoms;
++ moderate symptoms;
+++ severe symptoms;
++++ very severe symptoms.
TABLE 58 Virus and virus-like diseases and fungal diseases in southern Yemen
Citrus areas and orchards
Psyllid vector of greening
Stubborn
Gummy bark of sweet orange
Cachexia of mandarin
Bark gumming of grapefruit (Kassala disease)
Psorosis young leaf symptoms
Concave gum
Scaly bark psorosis
Phytophthora gummosis
Rio Grande gummosis
Sphaeropsis knot
Boron toxicity
Mukayras area +++ 
Jawl Madrum area +++ +++
Mudia-Lawdar area
Mudia nursery + +++ +++ +++ ++ +++ 
El Hayed orchard + +++ +++ ++ ++ ++ 
H. Al Khader orchard +++ +++ 
A. Ruwais orchard +++ 
A. Rabbash orchard +++ 
M.S. Al Daker orchard +++ +++ +++ 
A. Hosein orchard +++ +++ +++ 
Lawdar nursery + +++ +++ + +++ +++ + +++ +++ 
Say'un-Tarim area
Snahuh orchard +++
Jaima farm + +++ +++ +++ 
Al Radod orchard +++ +++ 
Quasr Al Qubba orchard +++ +++ 
Zinjibar-Gaar area
A. Mohson orchard +++ +++ 
Fourth Conf. orchard +++ 
Key:
+ disease is of little importance;
++ disease is of moderate importance;
+++ disease is of great importance.
<section>6</section>
Geographical distribution of citrus diseases (continued)
Country^1 Disease
BL CA CG CR EX GR GB GP IM IV KD LE MO MS PS PY RI RW RU SD SY ST TL TR^2 VE WB YV ZC CK MA PG RG AB
Oman + + + + + + + + + + + +
Pakistan (+) + +^3 + + + + 
Peru + + + + + + + + + + + 
Philippines + + + +^3 + + + + + + + + 
Portugal + + + + + + + 
Samoa + 
Saudi Arabia + + + +^3, 4 + + + + + + + 
Sierra Leone + 
Somalia + + (+) (+) +^4 (+) + + + + + 
South Africa + + + + +^4 + + + + + + + + + 
Spain + + + + + + + + + + + + + + 
Sudan + + + + + + + + + + 
Suriname + + + + + (+) + 
Syria + + + + + + + + + + + 
Thailand + + + +^3 + + + + 
Tonga + 
Trinidad and Tobago + + + + + 
Tunisia + + + + + + + + + + 
Turkey + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + 
United Arab Emirates + + + + + + 
Uruguay + + + + + + + + + + 
USA: 
- Arizona + + + + + + + + + + 
- California + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + 
- Florida + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + 
- Louisiana + + + + 
- Texas + + + + + + + + + + + 
USSR (former) + + + + 
Venezuela + + + + + + + + + 
Viet Nam + +^3 + + + + 
Yemen northern + + + (+) +^4 + + + + + 
Yemen southern + + (+) ^4 + + + + (+) + + 
Yugoslavia (former) + + + + (+) + + 
<section>a</section>
Stubborn in the Syrian Arab republic
The Latakia-Tartus coastal area
Map 3 on p. 71 is of western Syria. Table 17 shows that stubborn is widespread throughout the Latakia-Tartus citrus-growing area, with practically all mature Washington navel or Valencia late sweet orange orchards having at least some stubborn-affected trees.
In one orchard (Sidawi orchard at El Annadeh, 20 km south of Latakia) stubborn in Washington navel sweet orange trees was very severe. The owner had top-grafted the trees with Jaffa sweet orange. Table 16 shows that the Jaffa part of all top-grafted trees became infected with S. citri through the underlying Washington navel scion.
As shown in Table 17, stubborn disease mainly affects Washington navel (Figs 148 to 150, 167 and 285) and Valencia sweet orange trees, these being the main varieties grown. However, Hamlin, Jaffa, Butler and Navelina sweet orange trees as well as Ortanique tangor and shaddock have also been found to be affected, though less severely.
In 1986, the Agricultural Services in Latakia determined the percentage of stubborn-affected trees in several orchards planted in the period 1979-81. Table 18 shows that, in general, the percentage of affected trees is highest in orchards located close to the Mediterranean coast, especially when the trees were planted in 1979-80 rather than in 1981. Table 18 shows that these observations are particularly true for the 1979 orchards of the FAO project in El Annadeh and Amrit.
The FAO project
As part of a UNDP/FAO integrated Agricultural Development Project, a citrus nursery and several mother blocks were established from 1978 at El Annadeh. Mother blocks were also planted at Amrit near Tartus. Both locations are close to the Mediterranean coast. The budwood, certified free of known diseases, was introduced from the Citrus Experiment Station in Corsica between 1978 and 1981. In 1982, many trees with stubborn symptoms in the mother blocks were observed and these trees were shown to be infected with S. citri. An FAO Technical Cooperation Programme project was then started in order to try to elucidate the reasons for this high rate of infection. At the end of three years of investigation, it was observed that the percentage of stubborn-affected trees was 33 percent in the sweet orange mother block (see Table 19; Figs 285 and 286) and 45 percent in the grapefruit mother block (see Table 20; Figs 287 and 288). Thirty-three out of 34 sweet orange varieties and all
eight grapefruit varieties showed symptoms of stubborn, but only a few mandarins showed infection (Fig. 289). Similar observations were made at Amrit (see Table 21).
Two explanations could be offered to account for the high incidence of stubborn. Either the budwood received in Syria was already infected with S. citri in Corsica or it was free of S. citri, but the trees propagated from it became infected in Syria through natural transmission of stubborn. Both hypotheses were investigated.
Evaluation of budwood from Corsica
The citrus budwood shipped to Syria was taken from trees in the mother block of the San Giuliano Citrus Experiment Station. These trees had been indexed free of virus and virus-like diseases by Vogel prior to 1978. Indexing for stubborn disease had been carried out in a heated greenhouse at 32°C and repeated several times, always with negative results. Hence, the budwood was considered to be free of S. citri.
TABLE 17 Spiroplasma citridetection by ELISA and culture in adult citrus orchards in the Syrian
TABLE 18 Percentage of stubborn - affected trees in various orchards in the Latakia Tartus region
When, in 1982, it was found that many trees propagated from the Corsican budwood were infected with S. citri in Syria, fruit from the same mother trees from which budwood for Syria had been taken was collected and sent to Bordeaux for analysis. There, the fruit was analysed for the presence of S. citri by ELISA and by culture. The results of these tests, carried out in January 1983, were all negative. The same tests were repeated in the winter of 1983/84, again with negative results. In early October 1984, a search was conducted in Corsica in an attempt to detect S. citri in citrus leaf material and in experimental periwinkles, by ELISA and by culture. All these assays were negative. Finally, the citrus trees in the mother block at San Giuliano were carefully examined for stubborn symptoms, but none were seen.
All these negative results can be explained in two ways: either S. citri is indeed absent and the Corsican trees are truly free of it, or the trees are infected, but the pathogen is present in such a low concentration that it escapes detection by ELISA and by culturing. The latter possibility must be considered for two reasons. First, the optimum temperature for the growth of S. citri is around 32°C. When infected trees grow at this temperature, S. citri multiplies well in the tree and reaches a concentration at which symptoms develop, and the organisms can be detected by ELISA and by culture. In Corsica, the temperatures are much lower than 32°C, even at the height of summer. Expression of stubborn symptoms therefore would be poor or not occur. In this case, S. citri detection gives false negative results. When, however, the same plant material is placed at temperatures favourable for S. citri multiplication, symptoms will eventually occur. It should be remembered, however,
that, in Corsica, when indexing for stubborn at 32°C in the greenhouse, no symptoms had appeared. Second, the leafhopper N. haematoceps, now known to be a vector of S. citri, is present in Corsica (Brun et al., 1988), and the insect is occasionally found to be infected with S. citri.
For these reasons, the health status of citrus budwood in Corsica had to be further assessed. This was done by reindexing budwood derived from the mother block in San Giuliano for stubborn at 32°C. All the tests were negative.
A complementary test was also started at El Annadeh in Syria. Five hundred buds of Washington navel sweet orange (clones 39, 141, 204, 205 and 215), known to be infected with S. citri in Syria (see Table 19), were collected in Corsica and used for budding in situ under screenhouse conditions (Fig. 290) and on rootstocks treated with the systemic insecticide Temic. None of the screenhouse-grown plants developed symptoms of stubborn.
These assays and experiments indicate that the budwood from Corsica was free from S. citri. Therefore, only natural transmission of S. citri remains to explain the high incidence of stubborn in the FAO project, as well as in other orchards that were established in 1979-8O, such as those at Hmaymin (No. 1 in Table 18) or Saleh-Basatine (No. 6 in Table 18).
Natural transmission of S. Citri in the Syrian Arab republic
Several approaches were followed to study natural spread of S. citri in Syria.
The leafhopper N. haematoceps found infected with S. citri
Leafhopper collections were made at random with a D-vac aspirator (Fig. 291) in citrus orchards and on other plants. Forty-one species of leafhopper were identified (see Table 22), of which 21 were analysed for S. citri by ELISA and by culture. Each batch consisted of from five to ten leafhoppers. A positive reaction implied that at least one out of the batch of insects was infected. Only one species of leafhopper, N. haematoceps (see Fig. 34), was found to be infected with S. citri. This is the same species that had been found to be infected in Morocco in 1979 and, subsequently, in Corsica in 1984, Iraq in 1986 and Cyprus in 1987.
N. haematoceps is closely related to N. tenellus, the sugar beet leafhopper in California and Arizona, but the two species can easily be separated by the anatomy of their male plates. Regarding their vector properties, N. haematoceps is regarded as the most important vector of curly top virus of sugar beet in Turkey (Bennett and Tanrisever, 1958), as is N. tenellus in California. Both species are vectors of S. citri-N. tenellus in the United States of America (Oldfield et al., 1976) and N. haematoceps in the Mediterranean (see below). The two species are also thought to be similar in general habitat (Nielson, 1968). High populations of N. tenellus are commonly found in warm or hot, arid or semi-arid regions. Studies on the influence of temperature on the duration of egg and
TABLE 19 Stubborn-affected trees in the sweet-orange mother block of the El Annadeh project
Variety Trees removed^1 Trees remaining Remaining trees infected with S. citri^2 Infection rate (X)
Thompson navel 215 0 10 0 0
Thompson navel 216 3 9 0 25
Thompson navel 218 1 15 0 6
Thompson navel 219 4 8 0 33
Atwood navel 157 (see Fig 286) 3 13 2 31
Gillette navel 55 7 8 0 46
Newhall navel 182 9 7 0 56
Washington navel 141 (see Fig. 285) 7 9 1 50
Washington navel 215 0 13 0 0
Washington navel 205 4 10 0 29
Washington navel 204 3 12 2 33
Washington navel 39 7 25 0 22
Cadenera 232 8 8 0 50
Hamlin 250 7 8 1 53
Valencia late 35 5 27 1 19
Valencia late 11 3 13 2 31
Valencia late 53 4 11 0 27
Valencia late 139 8 23 0 26
Valencia late 247 9 7 2 69
Valencia late 246 7 9 1 50
Valencia late 248 7 7 1 57
Valencia late 185 4 11 1 33
Tarocco 240 4 8 0 33
Moro blood 1 9 1 20
Maltaise 236 2 10 0 16
Maltaise 237 2 8 0 20
Maltaise 238 4 6 0 40
Maltaise 239 3 7 0 30
Shamouti 25 5 7 0 42
Sanguinelli 243 7 2 1 89
Casa Grande 2 8 0 20
Parson Brown 3 7 0 30
Pineapple 5 2 0 71
Mme Vinous 2 13 0 3
Total 150 350 16 33
Notes:
^1 Trees removed in November 1982 as a result of positive S. citri detection in October 1982.
^2 As of October 1984.
In Syria, N. haematoceps was found only in low numbers in citrus orchards and on cultivated plants in the coastal area from Latakia to Tartus. However, larger numbers were collected in the dry, sandy, non-cultivated areas adjacent to the El Annadeh project, such as Fidio, as well as in many other sites along the coast (see Map 3). Exceptionally high numbers of N. haematoceps were collected in the Ghab (Orontes) Valley on a few stock plants (Matthiola annua or Cheiranthus matthiola) growing as ornamentals in the garden of the Apamea Mosaic Museum. S. citri was cultured from all samples analysed (five leafhoppers per sample). (It should be noted that, in Corsica, N. haematoceps could also be collected on wild stock plants growing on the dry, sandy east coast.) N. haematoceps was also captured in the ruins of Palmyra, where it was also found to be infected with S. citri. The fact that N. haematoceps infected with S. citri could be collected both in the Ghab Valley near Apamea
and other sites (see Map 3) and in Palmyra, far from the citrus-growing coastal zone, indicated that there must be host plants other than citrus that harbour this pathogen. This is an important conclusion in trying to explain natural transmission of S. citri in Syria.
TABLE 20 Stubborn-affected trees in the grapefruit mother block of the El Annadeh project
Variety Trees removed^1 Trees remaining Remanining trees infected with S. citri^2 Infection rate (%)
Little River 127 10 10 0 50
Star Ruby 15 5 1 80
Reed 4 16 4 40
Thompson 4 16 1 25
Marsh 119 (see Figs 287, 288) 7 13 4 35
Marsh 120 8 14 0 36
Red Blush 7 11 0 39
Shambar 10 17 0 37
Total/average 65 102 16 45
Notes:
^1 Trees removed in November 1982 as a result of positive S. citri detection in October 1982.
^2 As of October 1984.
Salsola kali, the preferred host plant of N. haematoceps
As indicated above, high numbers of N. haematoceps leafhoppers were collected in the arid, non-cultivated areas surrounding the El Annadeh site of the FAO project as well as in many other sites along the coast (see Map 3). The plant on which these leafhoppers were captured was identified as S. kali (see Figs 36 and 170 to 174), a Chenopodiaceae.
This plant is the preferred host of N. haematoceps. It is also the major host of N. tenellus in the United States of America where it is called Russian thistle or tumbleweed. S. kali is very widespread, with its natural distribution area covering the Mediterranean zone and most of the Irano-Turanian regions. In Cyprus, Iran, Iraq, Morocco and Syria the species is extremely common, particularly on disturbed habitats (ruderal sites in towns, villages, on roadsides, etc.) in arable land and on the seashore (see Map 3 and Figs 170 and 171). It grows at altitudes of 2 000 m and higher, but its highest densities are reached in the hot and arid to semi-arid lowlands. In Syria, S. kali is extremely frequent along the coast and its distribution explains the distribution of N. haematoceps (see Map 3 and Fig. 170). The leafhopper has been captured on S. kali at numerous sites all along the coast from Amrit, south of Tartus, up to Latakia, and many of the N. haematoceps samples were
infected with S. citri (Fig. 173). This also explains why the incidence of stubborn is higher in orchards close to the coast, where S. kali and N. haematoceps are much more abundant (see Table 17).
TABLE 21 Stubborn-affected trees in the mother block at Amrit
Variety Number of trees Trees with symptoms Infection rate (%)
Maltaise sweet orange 237 30 11 36
Washington navel sweet orange 39 30 19 63
Maltaise sweet orange 231 30 9 30
Sanguinelli sweet orange 243 30 12 40
Washington navel sweet orange 141 9 3 33
Clementine 21 3 14
Washington navel sweet orange 215 30 7 23
Total/average 180 64 35
The FAO citrus projects at El Annadeh and Amrit are close to the coast. In 1986 S. kali was seen growing as a weed in between the rows of a new extension of the citrus nursery at El Annadeh (Fig. 174). Undoubtedly, the same situation must have occurred in 1978-80 when the project was first started. The presence of S. kali within the newly planted mother tree blocks must have favoured an abundant population of N. haematoceps and, hence, a high incidence of S. citri transmission to the young trees. This explanation assumes that N. haematoceps is indeed a vector of S. citri. However, the mere fact that the leafhopper is found to be infected with S. citri does not suffice to make it a vector. Experimental transmission of S. citri by the leafhopper must be demonstrated.
Experimental transmission of S. citri by N. haematoceps
N. haematoceps leafhoppers free from S. citri were received from Corsica in July 1984 and raised in Bordeaux. Third generation individuals were injected in November 1984 with a pure culture of S. citri, obtained from infected N. haematoceps collected in Palmyra in October 1984. The injected leafhoppers supported the multiplication of S. citri to high titres (10^7 colony-forming units/ml) and were able to transmit the spiroplasma to healthy periwinkle plants. These plants developed leaf yellows symptoms, and S. citri was later reisolated from them. In addition, N. haematoceps leafhoppers were able to acquire S. citri by feeding on infected periwinkle plants and to transmit it to healthy plants. Transmission could be easily achieved with one infected leafhopper per plant. These experiments proved that N. haematoceps is a vector of S. citri (Fos et al, 1986).
Natural transmission of S. citri to periwinkle
Periwinkles exposed to natural infection in various locations from north of Latakia to south of Tartus became infected with various MLOs. Sixteen periwinkle plants became contaminated with a hitherto unknown spiroplasma, Spiroplasma phoeniceum (Sail lard et al., 1987). Six plants showed infection by S. citri (see Table 23; Fig. 292).
The number of periwinkle plants that became infected with S. citri in these experiments was low, indicating a low incidence of 5. citri transmission. The reason for this is now clear. When these experiments were initiated very little was known about natural transmission. The periwinkle plants were established within adult orchards containing a high number of stubborn-affected trees. Today it is know that natural transmission of S. citri within such orchards is low. The incidence is much higher in young, one- to three-year-old orchards and even higher in non-cultivated areas, close to the coast where S. kali is abundant. In 1985 in one such location (Fidio site), close to the El Annadeh project, several periwinkle plants became infected with S. citri.
TABLE 22 Relative frequency of leafhoppers and planthoppers in the Syrian Arab Republic and number of samples analysed for presence of Spiroplasma citri
TABLE 23 Periwinkle (Catharanthus roseus)plants naturally infected with Spiroplasma citri or S. phoeniceum in the Syrian Arab Republic
The search for infected seedling trees
5. citri does not pass through the seeds of affected fruits. Hence, seedling trees are free of stubborn. As is known, nucellar trees are seedling trees resulting from the development of a nucellar embryo. Nucellar trees are therefore free of S. citri unless they become contaminated by insect vectors.
Two of the seven Orlando tangelo seedling trees in the plot devoted to citrus seed production at the El Annadeh project were found to be infected by S. citri. Nucellar trees of Hamlin sweet orange had been obtained at the fable Experiment Station. Young trees propagated from this nucellar Hamlin were grown in one of the nurseries at El Annadeh. One of these trees was also infected with S. citri.
Finally, three out of six Madame Vinous sweet orange trees propagated at El Annadeh from budwood of a tree always kept in an insect-proof screenhouse in Corsica showed S. citri infection.
Conclusion
At the end of several years of research on stubborn and its transmission in Syria, a general picture emerges that satisfactorily explains the high incidence of stubborn observed in some of the orchards that were planted in 1979-80.
The vector, or at least the principal vector of S. citri, has been identified as the leafhopper IV. haematoceps. This leafhopper was frequently found infected with S. citri in nature. S. kali is the preferred host plant of the leafhopper and, since this plant is widespread along the Mediterranean coast of Syria, the stubborn vector is also abundant there. When new orchards of Washington navel and Valencia late sweet orange trees are planted close to the coast on reclaimed land, the presence of S. kali as a weed within or around the young orchards attracts the stubborn leafhopper and transmission eventually occurs. This is what has very probably happened at the El Annadeh and Amrit projects, and at private orchards such as those located close to the coast at Hmaymin or Saleh-Basatine (see Table 18). At El Annadeh, the incidence of stubborn is higher in the orchards planted in 1979 and 1980 than in those of 1981. This might be due to the fact that, by 1981, three to four years
had elapsed since the land was initially reclaimed. The population of S. kali had probably decreased during that period as a result of horticultural practices, weed control, etc. It is, however, not excluded that the population dynamics of IV. haematoceps are controlled by as yet unknown factors other than the presence of S. kali, and that epidemics of stubborn occur only in certain years, such as 1979-80 in Syria.
In California, it is a well-known fact that epidemics of stubborn occur only in certain years. During those years, a high incidence of S. citri transmission is observed. For instance, 1973 was an epidemic year in California. In one location (Moreno), 76 out of 105 plants became contaminated, while in the following years very little transmission took place.
In the Mediterranean area, stubborn disease was first reported in the country then known as Palestine in 1931 by Reichert and Perlberger, who indicated that the disease was in an epidemic form and was causing serious damage to young citrus orchards. More recently, in the Ghor (Jordan River valley), young citrus plantings established in a non-citrus-growing area showed a high incidence of stubborn infection. A similar situation might have occurred when the El Annadeh project was started. The land was cleared in 1978 and the natural vegetation removed. This left naked, sandy ground, with no windbreaks around the plots to be planted with citrus. The first trees in this open land were those in the sweet orange and grapefruit blocks. Without much natural vegetation except for S. kali plants, these young trees probably became the alternative host plants on which leafhoppers could feed. In other words, leafhoppers were practically forced to invade these young orchards. Part of the
land of the El Annadeh project has not yet been cleared or cultivated (Fidio area). Interestingly enough, N. haematoceps was captured in 1984 in this undisturbed area. This situation resembles that of El Annadeh before it was cleared in 1978. In short, it is believed that land-clearing operations under semi-desert conditions favoured leafhopper migration and feeding on young citrus trees, resulting in a local epidemic. It is, of course, the presence of S. kali in the area that accounts for the presence of the leafhopper vector of stubborn.
Besides such a localized increase in vector activity in a limited area, climatic and other factors could favour a general increase in N. haematoceps, resulting in more generalized epidemics in certain years. The understanding of such occasional epidemics requires further study of the biology and ecology of N. haematoceps. In particular, it is important that herbaceous host plants naturally infected with S. citri be identified in Syria. Finally, another important epidemiological consideration is that young citrus trees are especially susceptible to stubborn infection.
In California, nursery trees and trees in young orchards have been observed to be the main target for infection. Once these trees reach the age of six to seven years, their chances of becoming infected are low. This is very probably due to the fact that N. tenellus in California and N. haematoceps in Syria are not citrus leafhoppers. Their encounter with citrus is only occasional. The younger and smaller the trees, the higher the chances that these insects can penetrate deeply into the orchards and feed on them. At the El Annadeh project, the sweet orange and grapefruit mother trees that became infected were only two years old when they showed stubborn symptoms.
More work has been carried out on stubborn in Syria than anywhere else in the Mediterranean region. However, there is still insufficient knowledge about the biology and ecology of N. haematoceps, and about the herbaceous plants possibly infected with S. citri in Syria. This information is needed to explain stubborn epidemics better in this and other countries.
In the meantime, the following recommendations are given to assist in keeping stubborn disease under relative control.
* Use only budwood free of virus and virus-like pathogens.
* Since stubborn is an insect-transmitted disease, nurseries should be established in areas free of S. kali, where the incidence of stubborn is very low and where only very little or no transmission of S. citri occurs.
* If no suitable areas for nurseries can be found, nursery trees must be grown in greenhouses or screenhouses (Fig. 290). If this is not possible, young trees in open nurseries should be protected with a systemic insecticide (dimethoate, Temic).
* If stubborn is a problem, citrus varieties more tolerant than navel oranges should be used. They should not be top-grafted to stubborn-affected trees.
* Nurseries and young orchards should be surveyed at least once a year, and all infected or suspect trees should be pulled out and replaced by healthy ones.
Bibliography
Bennett, C.W. & Tanrisever, A. 1958. Curly top disease in Turkey and its relationship to curly top in North America. J. Am. Soc. Sugar Beet Technol., 10: 189-211.
Bindra, O.S. & Kaur, P. 1969. Influence of temperature on the rate of development of Circulifer opacipennis (Lethierry). Ludhiana, Dept. Zoology-Entomol., Punjab Agric. Univ.
Bové, J.M. 1981. Mycoplasma infections of plants. Isr. J. Med. Sci., 17: 572-585.
Bové, J.M. 1984. Wall-less prokaryotes of plants. Ann. Rev. Phytopathol., 22: 361396.
Bové, J.M. 1985. Virus and virus-like diseases of citrus in Saudi Arabia with special reference to citrus greening. Report to FAO.
Bové, J.M. 1986. Stubborn and its natural transmission in the Mediterranean area and the Near East. FAO Plant Prot. Bull., 34(1): 15-23.
Bové, J.M., Saillard, C., Vignault, J.C. & Fos, A. 1984. Citrus stubborn disease in Iraq and Syria: correlation between symptom expression and detection of Spiroplasma citri by culture and ELISA. In Proc. 9th Conf: IOCV, p. 145- 152. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Brun, P., Riolacci, S., Vogel, R., Fos, A., Vignault, J.C., Lallemand, J. & Bové, J.M. 1988. Epidemiology of Spiroplasma citri in Corsica. In Proc. 10th Conf IOCV, p. 300-303. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Fawcett, H.S., Perry, J.C. & Johnston, J.C. 1944. The stubborn disease of citrus. Calif. Citrog., 29: 146- 147.
Fos, A., Bové, J.M., Lallemand, J., Saillard, C., Vignault, J.C., Ali, Y., Brun, P. & Vogel, R. 1986. La cicadelle Neoaliturus haematoceps (Mulsant et Rey) est vecteur de Spiroplasma citri en Méditerranée. Ann. lnst. Pasteur/Microbiol., 137 A: 97-107.
Frazier, N.W. 1953. A survey of the Mediterranean region for the beet leafhopper. J. Econ. Entomol., 46: 551-554.
Fudl-Allah, A.E.-S.A., Calavan, E.C. & Igwegbe, E.C.K. 1972. Culture of a mycoplasma-like organism associated with stubborn disease of citrus. Phytopathol., 62: 729-731.
Igwegbe, E.C.K. & Calavan, E.C. 1970. Occurrence of mycoplasma-like bodies in phloem of stubborn-infected citrus seedlings. Phytopathol., 60: 1525-1526.
Laflèche, D. & Bové, J.M. 1970. Mycoplasmes dans les agrumes atteints de "Greening", de "Stubborn" ou de maladies similaires. Fruits, 25: 455-465.
Lallemand, J. 1987. Contribution à l'étude de la transmission par des homoptères d'agents phytopathogènes. Thèse de doctorat de l'Université de Bordeaux (Science de la vie).
Markham, P.G. & Towsend, D. 1974. Transmission of Spiroplasma citri to plant. In J.M. Bové & J.F. Duplan, eds. Les mycoplasmes/mycoplasmas, p. 201 -206. Coll. Inst. Nat. Santé Rech. Méd. Paris, INSEAM.
Nast, J. 1972. Palaearctic auchenorrhyncha (Homoptera). Warsaw, Polish Scientific Publishers.
Nhami, A., Bové, J.M., Bové, C., Monsion, M., Garnier, M., Saillard, C., Moutous, G. & Fos, A. 1980. Natural transmission of Spiroplasma citri to periwinkles in Morocco. In Proc. 8th Conf: IOCV, p. 153-161. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Nielson, M.W. 1968. The leafhopper vectors of phytopathogenic viruses (Homoptera, Cicadellidae): taxonomy, biology and virus transmission. USDA/ ARS Tech. Bull., 1382.
Oldfield, G.N. & Kaloostian, G.H. 1978. Vectors and host range of the citrus stubborn disease pathogen, Spiroplasma citri. In Proc. ROC-US Coop. Sci. Sem. on Mycoplasma Diseases of Plants, p. 119-125. NSC Symposium Series No. 1.
Oldfield, G.N., Kaloostian, G.H., Pierce, H.D., Calavan, E.C., Garnett, A.L. & Blue, R.L. 1976. Beet leafhopper transmits citrus stubborn disease. Calif. Agric., 30: 15.
Reichert, I. & Perlberger, J. 1931. Little-leaf disease of citrus trees and its causes. Hadar, 4: 193-194.
Saglio, P., Laflèche, D., Bonissol, C. & Bové, J.M. 1971. Isolement et culture in vitro des mycoplasmes associés au "stubborn" des agrumes et leur observation au microscope électronique. C.R. Acad. Sci. Paris, 272: 1387-1390.
Saglio, P., Lhospital, M., Laflèche, D., Dupont, G., Bové, J.M., Tully, J.G. & Freundt, E.A. 1973. Spiroplasma citri gen. and sp.n.: a mycoplasma-like organism associated with "stubborn'' disease of citrus. lnt. J. Syst. Bacteriol., 23: 191-204.
Saillard, C., Garcia-Jurado, O., Bové, J.M., Vignault, J.C., Moutous, G., Fos, A., Bonfils, J., Nhami, A., Vogel, R. & Viennot-Bourgin, G. 1980. Application of ELISA to the detection of Spiroplasma citri in plants and insects. In Proc. 8th Conf: IOCV, p. 145-152. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Saillard, C., Vignault, J.C., Bové, J.M., Raie, A., Tully, J.G., Williamson, D.L., Fos, A., Garnier, M., Gadeau, A., Carle, P. & Whitcomb, R.F. 1987. Spiroplasma phoeniceum sp. nov., a new plant-pathogenic species from Syria. Int. J. Syst. Bacteriol., 37: 106-115.
Tully, J.G. 1989. Class mollicutes: new perspectives from plant and arthropod studies. In R.F. Whitcomb & J.G. Tully, eds. The mycoplasmas, vol. V, p. 1-32. New York, Academic Press.
<section>b</section>
Part II
Chapter 8: Algeria
Chapter 9: Cyprus
Chapter 10: Egypt
Chapter 11: The islamic republic of Iran
Chapter 12: lraq
Chapter 13: Jordan
Chapter 14: The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
Chapter 15: Morocco
Chapter 16: Oman
Chapter 17: Pakistan
Chapter 18: Saudi Arabia
Chapter 19: Somalia
Chapter 20: The Sudan
Chapter 21: The Syrian Arab republic
Chapter 22: Tunisia
Chapter 23: Turkey
Chapter 24: The United Arab Emirates
Chapter 25: Yemen
Chapter 8: Algeria
Citriculture in Algeria
Virus and virus-like diseases
Other disease problems
Recommendations
Bibliography
Citrus are among the most popular fruits grown in Algeria. They are of an excellent quality and are greatly appreciated for their nutritional and refreshment value. Furthermore, citrus production represents an important agricultural and economic activity in the country. Oranges and mandarins are traditionally produced for local consumption and also for export.
Total citrus output in Algeria has been declining in the last decade owing to a number of unfavourable factors. Information available indicates yearly total citrus production as shown in Table 24.
Severe droughts reducing the water available for irrigation, unsuitable cultural practices, ageing of existing citrus orchards and increasing problems with pests and diseases, are among the more important factors accounting for lower yields. Old orchards are severely affected by virus diseases and this situation will extend to all existing citrus trees in time.
Productivity of citrus orchards has been fairly low. Considering an average production level of 400 000 to 500 000 tonnes per year in the last decades and the total area dedicated to citrus (somewhere around 40 000 ha), production is about 10 tonnes per hectare. This is a fairly modest output since in many other citrus-growing areas of the world the average annual yield of adult orchards ranges from 30 to 35 tonnes or more per hectare.
Fruit consumption is rapidly increasing in Algeria as a result of the growth in population. However, no matter how much modern orchard management technology is introduced in existing plantations, no great increase in productivity should be expected. Trees are old and diseased. New plantings using superior, virus-free nursery trees are necessary to increase citrus output.
In 1979, the Government of Algeria launched a programme for the propagation and maintenance of healthy citrus materials in the country. It is expected that new trees planted since then will produce virus-free, vigorous and productive citrus orchards. These are mainly nucellar clones of commercial varieties introduced from abroad. Their performance under the local environmental conditions in Algeria is now being studied.
Citriculture in Algeria
Citrus orchards in Algeria are distributed along the coastal area, at altitudes below 400 m, where the climate is mild and frosts rare. The total surface area dedicated to citrus growing is estimated at around 43 000 ha, of which 38 000 ha are used for fruit-bearing trees. The citrus orchards are concentrated in five main areas or wilaya, namely Blida (in the Valley of Mitidja), Mascara, Chlef, Mostaganem and Annaba, which together represent about 80 percent of the total surface of citrus.
TABLE 24 Citrus production in Algeria
Year Production (t)
Distribution of citrus production is shown in Table 25.
Citrus fruits have been grown commercially in Algeria, both for local consumption and for export since the beginning of the century. The excellent seedless Clementine mandarin, which originated in the garden of an orphanage near Oran, was for many years a major variety grown in the country. However, severe cold weather in 1925 caused extensive damage to citrus orchards and by 1940 oranges had emerged as the main citrus species. Plantings increased rapidly after the Second World War, as did fruit output and exports. However, during the war of independence and the following years, the Algerian economy went through difficult times. By 1974, total citrus exports were 4 000 tonnes, dropping to 34 000 tonnes in 1979. Exports had ceased by 1980, but were restarted in 1984. Ageing of trees, increasing virus disease and pest problems and growing internal consumption are among the major factors contributing to the decline in citrus exports.
Many citrus varieties are grown in Algeria, including oranges (49.1 percent), mandarins (35.4 percent), lemons (2 percent), grapefruits (pomelos) (0.5 percent) and other mixed varieties (13 percent). Among oranges, early ripening varieties account for 36.7 percent of production, mid-season, 50.4 percent and late ripening, 12.9 percent. Among mandarins, the Clementine accounts for 81.8 percent of production, but, of that, over half is the Monreal seedy variety. Lemons are grown only in small orchards and production is considered insufficient to meet local demand, especially during summer months. Grapefruits are not much favoured by local people and the industry only considers them at the end of the season. It is estimated that 20 000 tonnes of citrus fruits are processed every year for the production of juice and preserves. Information available for citrus varieties and area planted is shown in Table 26.
TABLE 25 Distribution of citrus production in Algeria
Area (Wilaya) Hectares Number of orchards
Blida 12609 3 184
Mascara 5 270 1 422
Chlef 4 552 722
Mostaganem 4 341 1085
Annaba 3 361 304
Skikda 1904 444
Algiers 1677 486
Tlemcen 1411 234
Bejaia 959 179
Tizi Ouzou 758 143
Oran 614 202
Jijel 454 72
Guelma 435 66
Bouira 183 40
Source: INAF.
Blossoming occurs in April-May and the harvesting season starts with Clementine mandarins in November, continuing until June. Lemons are produced throughout the year. Production per tree is low - an average of 8 to 17 tonnes per hectare according to age, availability of water for irrigation and general cultural practices. Generally, citrus orchards require irrigation every 15 days during summer months, but shortage of water during 1984/85 forced growers to reduce irrigation to three or four times only during the eight dry-months of the year. As a result, fruit production decreased considerably in that period.
TABLE 26 Area covered by citrus varieties in Algeria
Varieties Area (ha) Percentage of total
Oranges
Thompson navel 5130 2410
Washington navel 2 677 12.59
Hamlin 701 3 30
Cadenera and Salustiana 270 127
Blondes de saison 207 0.97
Maltaise blonde 37 017
Shamouti 182 0.88
Portuguaise 2 648 12.44
Sanguinelli 1718 8.07
Double fine 3 643 17.12
Double fine ameliore 1 307 6.14
Valencia late 2 501 11.75
Vernia and Ovale 255 1 20
Mandarins
Satsumas 206 134
Clementine Commune 4 241 27.66
Clementine Monreal 8 306 5416
Common mandarin (Willowleaf) 2126 13.86
Wilking 456 2.98
Other citrus
Lemons 877 -
Grapefruits 216 -
Various (citron, lime, kumquat, sour orange) 287 -
Other varieties 5 377 -
Source: Alloum and Bencheik, 1983.
Soil in the areas dedicated to citrus plantings is normally heavy, with a pH ranging from 7.0 to 8.0 and drainage is required during the rainy season. Cleaning the channel system is a constant problem.
Rootstock used in the orchards is nearly always sour orange, Citrus aurantium L. (about 98.4 percent of the total citrus area). Other rootstocks used in a very limited number are: Troyer citrange (0.7 percent), trifoliate orange (0.8 percent) and Cleopatra mandarin (0.1 percent). At present there are 11 official nurseries in the country plus about 50 small private nurseries, concentrated in the Mitidja plain.
A large government programme of reinvigoration of the citrus industry is under way. About 130 000 nursery trees were introduced recently from abroad and distributed to all citrus areas. They were imported (according to available information) from the Bertolami nurseries in Sicily, Italy. Strong support is being given to the production of nursery trees and the planting of new citrus orchards to ensure sufficient citrus output in the near future to cover both domestic requirements and exports.
Virus and virus-like diseases
Destructive diseases caused by virus and virus-like pathogens have been known to occur in citrus trees in Algeria for more than 40 years (Brichet, 1944; Lamour, 1950; Blondel, 1953; Amizet, 1954; Frezal, 1957; Chapot, 1959). A number of attempts have been made to prevent further spread of diseases into new orchards. However, infectious diseases continue to occur in the plantings and are a major factor restraining high-yield crops.
Virus and virus-like diseases reported in citrus trees in Algeria include scaly bark psorosis, concave gum-blind pocket, cachexia-xyloporosis, exocortis, cristacortis, impietratura and stubborn. Most of the disorders are widespread in all citrus areas of the Mediterranean, as indicated by Bové in 1966. Since most citrus propagative material used in Algeria was imported from Mediterranean countries and the United States of America before virus-free budwood was available, it may be assumed that the pathogens responsible for those diseases were inadvertently introduced at the same time.
Salibe, during his visit to Algeria, observed symptoms of virus and virus-like diseases in many trees of. several orchards. He also learned about the recent introduction of healthy nucellar lines of commercial varieties that will serve as a source of budwood for nursery workers and growers.
Scaly bark (psorosis A), concave gum-blind pocket and infectious variegation
Scaly bark psorosis, concave gum-blind pocket and infectious variegation have a worldwide distribution and are found in most orchards of practically all Mediterranean countries. Scaly bark (psorosis A) is a slow-acting disease that may take several years to produce bark scaling symptoms. This disease-and concave gum-blind pocket, as well as cristacortis and impietratura, induce typical vein flecking and/or oak-leaf patterns on young leaves during spring and autumn growth flushes (Klotz, 1973). Scaly bark psorosis causes decline of trees independent of the rootstock and is one of the most damaging citrus virus diseases (Wallace, 1978).
According to the reports of Brichet (1944), Frezal (1949), Lamour (1950), Amizet (1954) and others, these diseases have been found affecting citrus trees in Algeria. Disease is certainly a major factor constraining high production in the older orchards of the country. Salibe observed many trees exhibiting typical bark scaling psorosis and some trunk malformations and flat branches suggestive of concave gum, but no blind pocket. Diseased trees were always orange varieties over 15 years old. In one orchard of Washington navel orange trees located in Boufarik, at least half of the trees were declining because of severe psorosis. Other orange varieties affected were Hamlin, Peretta, Blood and some other, less common, types indicated to be of Spanish origin. Oak-leaf pattern was observed in the leaves of a few Vernia orange and Clementine mandarin trees.
Severe symptoms of a scaly bark psorosis were observed by Bové in 1966 on Valencia late sweet orange at Maison Carré, on Thompson navel at Boufarik, and on Clementine at Ferme Blanche (Oued Fodda, Orleanville region, Algeria). Very severe concave gum-blind pocket concavities affected Samson tangelo 2908 at Boufarik. Fruit and leaf symptoms of infectious variegation-crinkly leaf were seen at Boufarik and Oran on Jaffa sweet orange trees on sour orange rootstock, and at Boufarik on Sanguinelli sweet orange top-grafted on Sampson tangelo on sour orange rootstock. The tangelo sandwich showed symptoms of concave gum-blind pocket. indexing with proper indicator test plants is essential to determine the extent of psorosis spread in the commercial orchards, but it is possible that only a few trees will be found free from this debilitating parasite.
Virus-free budwood is being used for the production of nursery plants to try and exclude psorosis from new plantings. Nucellar clones of most varieties are now available, many produced in the country itself and others imported from Corsica. Attention should be given to seed transmission of psorosis virus, found to occur in trifoliate orange and some of its hybrids, such as Troyer and Carrizo citranges.
Cachexia-xyloporosis
Cachexia-xyloporosis is a disease widespread in the mandarin trees of the Mediterranean basin, and the orchards of Algeria are no exception. It was reported to be affecting mandarin trees (Frezal, 1957) and Wekiwa tangelo trees (Amizet, 1959, 1962). In 1966, Bové observed strong symptoms of cachexia on Wekiwa tangelo, Dancy tangerine and Australia mandarin trees at Ferme Blanche. Salibe observed that typical gum pockets, conoid pits and wood pinholing of cachexia-xyloporosis in many Clementine mandarin trees in orchards of the Mitidja. Symptoms ranged from mild to very severe, but not all trees in an orchard were affected, suggesting that more than one source of budwood was used in the formation of the trees. Since cachexia-xyloporosis viroid is perpetuated by the use of infected budwood and no insect vector is known, it can therefore be excluded from new plantings by using only healthy propagative material.
Stubborn
Chapot reported the prevalence of stubborn disease in the citrus orchards of Algeria in 1959. Salibe, in his visits to the citrus orchards of the Mitidja, observed many abnormal and declining trees but none displaying the typical stubborn syndrome.
During his recent tour to citrus areas of Mediterranean countries Salibe found trees exhibiting severe stubborn disease in Cyprus, Egypt, Jordan and the Syrian Arab Republic, but not in Algeria, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya or Tunisia. An intensive indexing programme is needed to reveal the exact situation of stubborn in these last three countries.
Tristeza
Tristeza disease represents a tremendous threat to the citrus industry of the Mediterranean basin, one of the last areas free from the virus where mainly intolerant scion-rootstock combinations are used. Spain is the first Mediterranean country where extensive spread of tristeza has occurred, more exactly in the Alcira-Carcagente-Corbera district of Valencia, where it started in 1957. More recently, tristeza was discovered in Israel, whereupon an identification and suppression programme was immediately launched (Raccah et al, 1976; Bar-Joseph et al., 1980), but has not met with success.
Apparently, all early cases of tristeza disease found in the citrus areas of the Mediterranean basin can be traced back to the introduction of infected budwood from abroad. All countries which have introduced the Meyer lemon variety have also introduced tristeza (Bové, 1966). Other varieties imported from Australia, South Africa, Japan and the United States of America have also been reported to have introduced tristeza into Mediterranean countries.
In 1957, Frezal reported that a number of Meyer lemon trees in Algeria were carrying tristeza virus. No natural propagation of the disease was observed at the time, except by bud propagation. During his visit to Algeria, Salibe found indications that tristeza virus is present in some citrus trees in the Mitidja area. The trees affected were two Marsh seedless grapefruits and two Salustiana oranges budded on sour orange, about 22 or 23 years old. The Marsh seedless grapefruit displayed a foliage of normal green colour, but with an overgrowth of the scion-trunk and typical honeycombing below bud-union. The Salustiana orange trees were stunted, with twig-dieback, trunk overgrowth above bud-union and honeycombing in the sour orange trunk.
During a visit to a large, state-owned citrus orchard in Massouma, about 40 orange trees, probably of Verna Peret (Pereta) variety, were encountered showing dieback, leaves with yellow veins and wilting and some trunk honeycombing. In the same orchard, about 500 m away, another group of about ten declining trees of Clementine mandarin and Pereta orange (interplanted) budded on sour orange rootstock was observed. All the trees were over 30 years old, some were dying and a few were dead. The cause of the abnormality was not determined, but it was suggested that ELISA (used for tristeza indexing) should used to index the trees. The INVP virus laboratory in Algiers is well equipped to perform the ELISA test, which can determine within 24 hours whether the virus is present in leaf samples from suspected trees.
At the Virus Indexing Service of the INAF Research Station at Boufarik, the consultant was shown a number of Mexican lime indicator plants inoculated with Cap Nartje orange introduced from South Africa and exhibiting severe stem pitting induced by tristeza virus. No vein corking or vein yellowing had occurred, but symptoms of stem pitting were indicative of a fairly severe form of the virus. A programme for identification and suppression of tristeza virus in Algeria is urgently needed to prevent the possible spread of the problem in the citrus orchards of the country.
Exocortis
Trifoliate orange, used on a small scale as rootstock for citrus in Algeria, is intolerant to exocortis and some trees with Clementine mandarin scions were found to show some symptoms resembling exocortis disease. On the basis of evidence obtained in most citrus-growing areas of the world, exocortis would appear to be the most widely distributed intracellular pathogen of citrus and it is probably infecting many trees in Algeria, reducing vigour and productivity.
At the Boufarik Citrus Experiment Station, Poncirus trifoliata was used as a rootstock in addition to sour orange. Severe symptoms of exocortis bark scaling were observed by Bové in 1966 on P. trifoliata rootstocks carrying Clementine scions (Fig. 316). These Clementine trees were severely stunted (Fig. 317, middle row of trees). The trees in one row were sidegrafted to sour orange seedlings (Fig. 318), and they recovered well (Fig. 317, row of trees on the right). Another interesting case of exocortis was observed by Bové at Ferme Blanche on P. trifoliata trees grafted on sour orange rootstock. This is an unusual combination since most often P. trifoliata occurs as a seedling tree or a rootstock, and almost always exocortis bark scaling is seen on P. trifoliata used as rootstock. Here severe exocortis symptoms were seen when it was used as scion (Figs 320 and 321). Some of the P. trifoliata scions were free of exocortis (Fig. 319), suggesting that the symptomatic trees
became infected through mechanical transmission of the exocortis viroid by pruning tools.
Indexing for exocortis is necessary to determine the distribution of the viroid in old plantations and to assure freedom from the pathogen in the selected nucellar mother trees.
Impietratura
Salibe, during his visit to citrus orchards in the Mitidja area, observed no fruit showing signs of impietratura. However, the occurrence of the disease in Algeria was reported by Catara and Scaramuzzi in 1975. It is well known that impietratura-affected trees do not show symptoms regularly each year, which probably explains why Salibe could see no impietratura symptoms.
Cristacortis
Cristacortis disease is present in Algeria, but the number of infected trees in the orchards is not known. Hamlin orange trees exhibiting very conspicuous symptoms of cristacortis were shown to Salibe in the Mitidja area. Bové and Vogel (1975) have already described the presence of cristacortis disease in citrus trees in Algeria.
Gummy bark of sweet orange
Salibe was informed by local scientists that gummy bark disease is probably affecting citrus trees in Algeria, but no survey had been conducted to confirm the presence and the extent of the problem. No diseased trees were found during the consultant's visit.
Rumple
No rumple has been found in the lemon orchards of Algeria. However, local scientists should be aware of the problem and special attention must be paid when introducing lemon budwood from abroad. Careful selection of lemon budwood from disease-free trees is recommended to avoid the spread of the problem in any new orchards in Algeria.
Bud-union crease
Bud-union crease is not a problem in Algeria, but may become a serious setback to the industry should incompatible scion-rootstock combinations be recommended in commercial plantings.
Other disease problems
Phytophthora root rot, anthracnose and mal secco disease are among problems of minor importance affecting citrus orchards in Algeria.
Autumn leaf drop, a serious problem affecting citrus in the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Morocco and Tunisia, may also be occurring in certain areas of Algeria. The syndrome is characterized by abnormal leaf drop during the late autumn and winter months. It probably results from a physiological disorder, caused by cold in the mornings (7-8°C) that acts as a form of localized frost. Damaged trees produce low yields.
None of the following virus or virus-like diseases was observed during Salibe's visits to citrus orchards: satsuma dwarf, vein enation-woody gall, citrus tatterleaf, gum pocket, leaf curl, leprosis, yellow vein, citrus blight and citrus decline. Local plant pathologists should, however, be aware of symptoms of these and other undesirable diseases in order to be able to recognize them and promptly eradicate any tree suspected of harbouring their pathogens. Good descriptions of disease problems have been given by Childs et al., (1968), Klotz (1973), Bové and Vogel (1975) and Wallace (1978).
Recommendations
The cultivation of citrus fruits is part of the traditional agriculture of Algeria and it constitutes a large proportion of the country's wealth. Fruit output has decreased in recent years owing to a number of unfavourable conditions. Algeria has the scientific knowledge and the human resources to develop an intensive programme to reverse this situation and to move towards higher yields of citrus. A number of appropriate measures have already been taken and a well-planned scheme for the production of healthy propagative material is being conducted by local scientists. Action has also been taken towards the introduction of sanitary measures to prevent future problems with virus and virus-like diseases. To assist the Algerian Government in its efforts towards an efficient programme of citrus yield improvement and plant protection, a number of recommendations are listed for immediate action.
* The programme of production, conservation, multiplication and control of healthy propagative material of citrus plants should be continued and should receive additional human and financial support in order to realize its aims fully.
* A fully equipped laboratory for shoot-tip grafting should be established at INAF to provide local scientists with the necessary tools for freeing superior local citrus varieties from intracellular pathogens.
* The citrus research programme should be expanded to include comparative trials of healthy, old-line and nucellar clones of commercial citrus varieties, before release of propagative materials to growers.
* New rootstock trials should be established, and should include the many selections of trifoliate orange and new hybrids available in various citrus areas of the world.
* Appropriate installations should be provided for a complete virus indexing programme to ensure freedom from intracellular pathogens of all mother trees producing budwood for nursery workers and growers.
* The programme of diversification of the use of sour orange rootstock should be continued as a safeguard against destruction by tristeza.
* A nationwide identification and suppression programme should be conducted, using modern virus identification technology (the ELISA test) to locate and eradicate all possible sources of tristeza virus from citrus orchards.
* Quarantine regulations should be strictly enforced to prohibit any plant importation into the country by private growers. At the same time, a quarantine station should be established to permit the safe introduction of new citrus varieties and root stocks.
* A programme should be established to allow Algerian citrus growers to visit countries with more advanced citrus industries, such as Brazil, Spain and Italy. Such a programme would give growers the opportunity to learn in situ about modern techniques in the various aspects of citrus production, and would permit an exchange of views with other citrus growers.
* An intensive extension programme for the transference of modern orchard management techniques to citrus growers should be planned and developed. It should include technical meetings, visits, seminars and distribution of technical bulletins prepared by local specialists.
* Opportunity should be given for personnel to train abroad in the identification and indexing of virus and virus-like diseases of citrus, as well as to learn about advances in citrus improvement and protection methods.
* Algeria, in association with all Mediterranean countries, should make a concerted effort to prevent the introduction and diffusion of new pathogens, particularly those of greening disease, tristeza-seedling yellows virus and citrus canker, into the region. In particular, it should be taken into consideration that massive destruction of all existing citrus orchards will occur should the greening bacterium and its efficient vectors invade the country.
Bibliography
Alloum, D. & Bencheik El Hocine, N. 1983. Situation générale de l'agrumiculture algérienne. Communication au Colloque de l'Agrumiculture Méditerranéenne (21-26 février). 12 pp.
Amizet, L. 1954. Contribution à l'étude des moyens pratiques de lutte contre certaines maladies virusiformes en Algérie. Fruits et Primeurs, 24(255): 165-168.
Amizet, L. 1959. Contribution to the study of xyloporosis in Algeria. In Citrus virus diseases, p. 125-128. Div. Agric. Sci., Univ. Calif.
Amizet, L. 1962. Contribution à l'étude de la xyloporose en Algérie. In Advances in horticultural sciences and their applications, p. 181 - 184. Oxford, Pergamon.
Bar-Joseph, M., Garnsey, S.M., Gonsalves, D. & Purcifull, D.E. 1980. Detection of citrus tristeza virus. 1. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and SDS-immunodiffusion methods. In Proc. 8th Conf IOCV, p. 1-8. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Blondel, L. 1953. Influence de la hauteur du point de greffe sur le comportement des agrumes greffés sur Poncirus trifoliata. Ann. Inst. Agric. Algérie, 7(8): 1-12.
Bové, J.M. 1966. Citrus virus diseases in the Mediterranean area. Report presented at the meeting on Phytiatry and Phytopharmacy, Marseilles (France), 1965, updated for the 4th Conf. IOCV. 44 pp. (mimeo)
Bové, J.M. 1985. Greening and stubborn: results and Perspectives. FAO Expert Consultation on Production, Maintenance and Distribution of Virus-free Fruit Tree Planting Material, Rome, FAO. 37 pp.
Bové, J.M. & Vogel, R. 1975. Description and illustration of virus and virus-like diseases of citrus: an IOCV project. Institut Français de Recherches Fruitières Outre-Mer. Paris, Editions SETCO.
Brichet, J. 1944. Une maladie redoutable qui se répand dans nos orangeraies: la psorose "scaly bark" des Américains. Fruits et Primeurs, 14(158): 228-230.
Catara, A. & Scaramuzzi, G. 1975. Impietratura. In J.M. Bové & R. Vogel, eds. Description and illustration of virus and virus-like diseases of citrus: an IOCV project. Institut Français de Recherches Fruitières Outre-Mer. Paris, Editions SETCO.
Chapot, H. 1959. First studies on stubborn diseases in citrus in some Mediterranean countries. In J.M. Wallace, ed. Virus diseases, p. 109-117. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Chapot, H. 1970. Problèmes de la production des agrumes au Proche-Orient et en Afrique du Nord. FAO Report AT 287. 93 pp.
Childs, J.F.L., Bové, J.M., Calavan, E.C., Fraser, L.R., Knorr, L.C., Nour-Eldin, F., Salibe, A.A., Tanaka, S. & Weathers, L.G. eds. 1968. Indexing procedures for 15 virus diseases of citrus trees. Washington, DC, USDA/ARS Handbook 333.
Frezal, M. 1949. L'agrumiculture algérienne. Réglementation de contrôle de la psorose dans les plantations d'arbres étalons et les pépinières. Rev. Fr. Oranger, 19(22): 154.
Frezal, P. 1957. Sur la présence en Algérie de la tristeza et de la xyloporose de citrus. C.R. Acad. Agric. France, 43: 190-193.
Klotz, L.J. 1973. Color handbook of citrus diseases. Citrus Res. & Agric. Exp. Sta., Riverside, Univ. Calif. 122 pp.
Lamour, R. 1950. Viroses des agrumes en Afrique du Nord. Rev. Fr. Oranger, 20(220): 381-384.
Raccah, B., Loebenstein, G., Bar-Joseph, M. & Oren, Y. 1976. Transmission of tristeza by aphids prevalent on citrus and operation of the tristeza suppression programme in Israel. In Proc. 7th Conf IOCV, p. 47-49. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Salibe, A.A. 1961. Contribuição ao estudo da doença exocorte dos citros. University of São Paulo, Brazil. 71 pp. (Thesis; mimeo)
Wallace, J.M. 1978. Virus and virus-like diseases. In The citrus industry, vol. IV, p. 67-184. Berkeley, Div. Agric. Sci., Univ. Calif.
Chapter 9: Cyprus
Citrus growing
Incidence of virus and virus-like diseases in citrus orchards
Bibliography
Citrus fruits, the "yellow gold" of Cyprus, and potatoes are by far the most important of the country's export crops. Citrus orchards occur throughout the coastal areas, enjoy a mild climate and produce high-quality fruit. Most of the fruit production, over 70 percent of all citrus, is exported in the form of fresh fruit to European markets. New plantings are being made in many areas of the island and an increase in production is likely in the near future.
Most young and old citrus orchards benefit from appropriate cultural practices and modern technology is being used in the pest control programmes. However, the establishment and management of a successful and highly productive citrus industry depend on a series of factors. One of these, which is frequently overlooked and is of paramount importance, is the sanitary status of the orchards.
Virus and virus-like diseases are known to cause severe yield losses, which occur even in the so-called tolerant scion-rootstock combinations. In some instances, these diseases can cause extensive tree losses and render large areas unsuitable for citrus growing.
Many infectious diseases, such as psorosis, exocortis, xyloporosis and impietratura, are known to occur in most Mediterranean citrus areas, including Cyprus. They can reduce productivity of trees by half. Although these diseases are of viral aetiology, natural vectors are not known. Consequently, their introduction into new orchards can be avoided by their detection in and eradication from mother tree collections, and by distributing only healthy stocks to growers.
Some other diseases are very difficult to control. Tristeza (of viral nature), stubborn (caused by the helical mycoplasma Spiroplasma citri), greening (caused by an intracellular bacterium) and blight (of unknown cause) are especially destructive to citrus trees. Tristeza, stubborn and greening have efficient air-borne vectors and thus a tremendous potential for rapid spread into new areas if not properly controlled.
Citrus growing
Cyprus is a large island, the third in size in the Mediterranean Sea, with an area of 9 251 km². Its maximum length is 225 km (east to west) and its maximum width is 97 km (north to south). The country enjoys a mild climate with relatively hot, dry summers and rainy winters. The agricultural sector is recognized as the backbone of the economy because of the importance of its exports and its employment of a high proportion of the population. The general aim of the government's agricultural policy has been to ensure the steady rise in the prosperity and income of the farming community (Louca, 1981).
Tree crops grown in Cyprus include olive, carob, vines, nuts, citrus and other fruits, which covered about 63 000 ha in 1981. The citrus plantations amount to about 10 percent of the total tree-crop area and are concentrated in the warm littoral regions of the island. Most orchards are small plantations, but a few cover areas as large as 600 ha. Many orchards have trees more than 30 or 40 years old, especially in the Nicosia, Famagusta and Limassol areas. In the Paphos area, citrus plantings are a new enterprise and trees are relatively young. The citrus species most commonly grown are grapefruit, sweet orange, lemon and mandarin. Marsh seedless is practically the only grapefruit variety grown.
Among oranges, Valencias and navels are extensively grown. Several lemon varieties are cultivated, including Lisbon and Eureka, as well as several local selections. Among mandarins, the most appreciated is Clementine. Other varieties grown include Shamouti orange, Willowleaf mandarin, Ortanique (Mandora) tangor and Minneola tangelo. Local citrus varieties include a lemon called Lapithos and a non-acid sweet orange known as Shekerika orange. Practically all citrus trees are grafted on sour orange rootstock and are therefore susceptible to tristeza disease.
For 1980 for the area under Greek-Cypriot control, Louca (1981) reported that the total area under citrus was about 5 400 ha, producing 6 300 tonnes, with a value of £C 8 268 000.
In 1981, this yield represented an increase of 15.7 percent over 1980 production. Exports were 85 900 tonnes, a 21.8 percent increase over the previous year. The main outlets for citrus exports were the countries of the European Economic Community which, in terms of value, accounted for 77.2 percent of total exports. Production and exports of citrus fruit in 1981 are shown by species in Table 27.
Exports thus reached £C 11 million in 1981, compared with £C 8.2 million in 1980. Citrus exports were expected to continue to increase in the near future.
<section>c</section>
Incidence of virus and virus-like diseases in citrus orchards
Field survey
A survey to determine the incidence of virus and virus-like diseases in citrus orchards was conducted during Salibe's short visit. Several farms in the districts of Paphos, Limassol, Nicosia and Famagusta were visited and their trees inspected for disease symptoms. They included various citrus species cultivated commercially, namely orange, grapefruit, lemon and mandarin. Various packing houses were also visited and the fruits inspected for symptoms of stubborn and impietratura diseases.
Reliable symptoms of psorosis scaly bark, infectious variegation, cachexia-xyloporosis, impietratura, stubborn and rumple diseases were observed. In a few trees in four orchards, symptoms resembling those induced by tristeza virus were observed, but all the symptoms of the disease were not present and the abnormalities were called "tristeza-like symptoms". Further indexing of these trees should be carried out to determine the possible presence of tristeza virus.
Virus and virus-like diseases
Psorosis A and concave gum. During the field survey, typical symptoms of psorosis A bark scaling were observed in trees of Valencia orange on sour orange rootstock in the districts of Limassol, Nicosia, Liopetri, Phrenaros (Fig. 98) and Famagusta. Diseased trees were more than ten years old and were scattered in large orchards. Only a few showed scaling symptoms, with diseased branches, and the entire tree was rarely affected. The existence of large orchards of Valencia orange apparently free from psorosis symptoms suggests that more than one introduction of this variety must have been made into the country and certainly some of them were from psorosis-affected trees.
TABLE 27 Cypriot production and exports of citrus fruit in 1981
Production (t) Exports
Volume
(t) Value
(£C)
Grapefruit 51600 40900 4229100
Orange 40600 28400 3691700
Lemon 21000 16400 3085000
Mandarin 3100 200 39700
Total 116300 85900 11045500
Some trees of Valencia orange with trunk and branch malformations and concavities were encountered, suggesting concave gum or "finger marks".
Psorosis A was also observed on Clementine mandarin trees in an orchard in the Limassol district that were about 25 years old. Nearly a quarter of the trees were diseased with trunks and branches displaying bark scaling.
Surprisingly, no symptoms of psorosis A were found in grapefruit trees, although they are commonly infected by this virus in most citrus areas of the world. A more extensive survey may reveal the presence of psorosis-infected grapefruit trees, but this does not appear to be an economically significant problem for this citrus species in Cyprus.
No psorosis A symptoms were found in trees of other citrus species and varieties, including lemons, mandarins and oval sweet oranges (Shamouti orange). The navel orange trees inspected in a few orchards were also apparently healthy. The absence of the disease in the orchards of the Paphos district was probably due to the young age of the trees and the extensive use of nucellar budlings in the area.
There is no economical means of eliminating psorosis virus from trees. Removal of bark lesions and chemical treatment may delay tree deterioration, but cure is impossible. The virus builds up through the use of budwood taken for propagation from infected mother trees. Prevention, through the selection and propagation of psorosis-free mother trees, will result in virus-free progenies. No mechanical or insect transmission of psorosis A is known to occur in the Mediterranean area.
Infectious variegation-crinkly leaf This disease is not commonly seen in citrus and, because of its severe and conspicuous symptoms, it can be easily avoided in commercial plantings. According to Bové (1966), infectious variegation has been seen in Algeria, Corsica, Sardinia, Sicily and Morocco. Salibe, during a visit to Greece in 1975, observed a much higher incidence of infectious variegation than he had seen in other citrus areas of the world.
In Cyprus, Salibe found Valencia sweet orange trees infected with infectious variegation, crinkling and distortion in three Valencia orange orchards. Most trees in these orchards displayed symptoms, with the exception of nearby Washington navel orange and lemon trees.
On affected trees, the number of leaves showing the yellow mosaic pattern varied, but on some nearly all the leaves were affected. Fruit production on the very severely affected trees was low and many fruits showed yellow sectorial lines.
Bové observed symptoms of infectious variegation-crinkly leaf virus on 1 7-year-old Jaffa sweet orange trees in the Limassol area. Leaves were crinkled and warped (Fig. 107) and fruits were bumpy (Fig. 108). The virus strain involved is the more severe infectious variegation strain as only it, and not the crinkly leaf strain, induces fruit symptoms. Both strains produce similar symptoms on sweet orange leaves in the field. The leaf symptoms induced by infectious variegation-crinkly leaf virus should not be confused with those resulting from chimera or mutations (Fig. 314).
Cachexia-xyloporosis. Cachexia-xyloporosis is widespread and is probably present in all citrus-growing areas of the world. It has been particularly important in the Mediterranean countries and was reported to occur in Cyprus by Littlejohn (1939).
Trees of sweet orange and of grapefruit on sour orange rootstock, the combinations most widely used in Cyprus, are tolerant of cachexia-xyloporosis. Therefore, trees of these combinations may be infected by the cachexia viroid without exhibiting symptoms.
Cachexia-xyloporosis in field trees having intolerant tissues requires an incubation period of five or more years before symptoms appear, and only rarely can they be seen without removing a piece of bark at the union. Typical symptoms of this disease were encountered in three trees of Clementine mandarin budded on sour orange root-stock. The trees were more than 20 years old and were growing in an orchard in the Astromerites area. Extensive gumming, pegs and pits occurred in the scion portion of the trees, beginning at the bud-union and extending about 50 cm above it on the larger limbs. Bové observed similar cachexia symptoms on Clementine trees on sour orange rootstock in the Liopetri area. The use of budwood from healthy mother trees is apparently responsible for the low incidence of cachexia-xyloporosis in Cyprus. However, further indexing of orange and grapefruit trees may disclose a high percentage of infection in a latent form. Indexing is thus extremely important in
the event that virus-intolerant rootstocks come into use in the country. It has not been determined how much reduction in tree size results from infection by cachexia-xyloporosis virus in the so-called tolerant combinations.
Cachexia-xyloporosis virus can be excluded from new orchards by using only budwood certified free of virus and virus-like pathogens in the new propagations. No insect vector of the cachexia viroid has been reported. Mechanical transmission has been obtained experimentally.
Impietratura. Impietratura is a disorder affecting citrus fruits and is considered to be of viral aetiology (Ruggieri, 1955). It occurs in most citrus-growing areas of the Mediterranean (Algeria, Corsica, Cyprus, Greece, Israel, Italy, Lebanon, Morocco, Sardinia, Spain, the Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey) and only a few locations elsewhere. Trees affected by impietratura show symptoms only in the fruits, many of which are small and hard. Deposits of brownish gum are present in the albedo and sometimes in the stem end of the fruit. Not all fruits from infected trees show these symptoms. On the surface of severely affected fruits, one can easily note brownish spots or bumps due to gum pockets in the albedo. Similar symptoms have been observed in Florida and Brazil, but have been found to be due to boron deficiency.
Impietratura causes heavy losses to citrus growers and packers because affected fruit is not suitable for the commercial export market. In some instances, as much as 80 percent of the mature fruit on impietratura-infected trees is unmarketable as fresh fruit and can only be used for juice.
Impietratura is widespread in Cyprus, and was first described there by Papasolomontos (1965), who pointed out that the problem had been increasing in recent years. Papasolomontos and Economides (1967) reported that impietratura-diseased fruits occurred in grapefruit trees budded on several different rootstocks, but that infected trees tended to produce a smaller percentage of abnormal fruits as they grew older.
Impietratura can be considered one of the main causes of loss to the Cypriot citrus industry. Its symptoms were found in fruits of Marsh seedless grapefruit in orchards of all four districts visited. They were also observed in one lemon orchard (probably Lisbon lemon) that was top-worked into old grapefruit trees in the Nicosia district.
Severe symptoms of impietratura were encountered on fruits of Valencia orange trees on sour orange rootstock, aged about 22 years, in Phrenaros (Famagusta district). Bové observed impietratura symptoms on fruit from Marsh grapefruit trees in Liopetri (Famagusta district). No impietratura symptoms were found on Washington navel and Shamouti oranges or on mandarins.
Impietratura is graft-transmitted (Ruggieri, 1955; Papasolomontos, 1965). There is no evidence of spread of the causal agent of impietratura other than by bud perpetuation or by grafting.
Tristeza and stem pitting Apparently, all cases of tristeza disease found in the citrus-growing areas of the Mediterranean basin can be traced back to introductions of infected budwood from abroad. All countries that have introduced Meyer lemon trees have also introduced tristeza (Bové, 1966). These include Algeria, Cyprus, Israel, Italy, Morocco and Tunisia. Other varieties imported from Australia, Japan, South Africa and the United States of America have also been reported to have introduced tristeza into the Mediterranean countries.
Tristeza was first suspected in Cyprus in 1956 in a few Meyer lemon and Cecily grapefruit trees (Mender, 1956). All the trees involved were uprooted. Papasalomontos and Economides (1968) reported the results of extensive indexing for tristeza, which showed a wide distribution of infected trees in the various citrus-producing areas of the country. Four varieties were found to carry tristeza: Washington navel orange and Naartjie mandarin, born on rough lemon rootstocks, an unidentified everbearing lemon and another citrus type locally referred to as "Koumandandas". The total number of infected trees was 24. There appeared to be very little natural spread of the disease agent, the local strains of aurantii being rather inefficient vectors of tristeza virus. The Aphis gossypii and Toxoptera presence of various aphid species that may eventually become vectors of CTV in citrus trees in Cyprus was reported by Eastop and Christophi (1981). These species included T. Aphis citricola
and A. gossypii.aurantii.
Salibe visited orchards in Limassol, Nicosia and Famagusta where a few trees of Marsh seedless grapefruit and Valencia orange were found with symptoms resembling those of tristeza. Sudden death of grapefruit, mandarin and Mineola tangelo trees on sour orange rootstock was reported by the growers in several plantations. Trees found with tristeza-like symptoms were all stunted, with some overgrowth about the bud-union and discoloration in the cambium of the sour orange rootstock. Recommendations were made for immediate elimination of these declining trees, as they may be a source of inoculum for the spread of CTV.
Kyriakou and Polycarpou (Agricultural Research Institute, Nicosia) conducted an extensive programme of indexing for CTV in Cyprus. During 1987-88, 435 trees of 28 citrus varieties grown in 92 blocks of the main citrus-producing areas of Cyprus were tested. Typical CTV symptoms developed only on two small-fruited acid lime seedlings inoculated with buds of five trees from a single block of ten-year-old Clementine trees on sour orange rootstock. Symptoms on the lime seedlings consisted of leaf vein clearing, reduction and cupping of lower leaves and stem pitting. The two lime seedlings with symptoms were tested by ELISA against CTV from Ingenasa, Spain, against polyclonal antibodies from California and against MAs purchased from Bioreba, Switzerland. Results were positive with all types of antisera, but the strongest and clearest reaction was obtained with the MAs from Spain.
In the spring of 1989, all trees of the Clementine block in which infection was detected in 1987-88 were tested by ELISA using a mixture of antisera from Ingenasa and Bioreba. Out of 332 Clementine trees tested 190 (57 percent) were found to be infected. Ninety-two trees of four other citrus varieties scattered among the Clementine trees were also tested, but only one tree of an unknown mandarin variety was found to be infected. About 40 percent of the Clementine trees positive for tristeza exhibited evident decline symptoms: tree stunting, general chlorosis, off-season flowering, vein chlorosis and vein corking of mature leaves.
The high incidence of CTV in the single Clementine block in which infection was located indicates that the disease arrived with infected budwood. However, the presence of the virus in one out of 92 trees of other citrus varieties indicates that limited natural spread has probably occurred. Future studies will focus on the transmissibility of CTV by aphid species infesting citrus in Cyprus, and efforts will be made to trace the source and spread of infected Clementine budwood. In the meantime, two control measures are strongly recommended. All trees of the infected Clementine block should be eliminated, and a routine indexing and eradication programme for tristeza should be undertaken in order to prevent severe damage to the island's citrus industry in the future.
Rumple. The name "rumple" has been given to a disorder affecting lemon fruits of certain clones of Lisbon and some other varieties. According to Klotz (1973), rumple disorder occurs in Cyprus, Ethiopia, Lebanon, Turkey and the United States of America. It appears in late summer, first as faint chlorotic specks on the rind surface, which subsequently turn brownish-black and finally collapse. Large fruits develop a higher incidence of rumple than smaller ones. The number of affected fruits varies from year to year and from orchard to orchard. There are no apparent tree symptoms. Rumple is suspected to be of a viral nature, but no definite proof of this has been obtained. Careful selection of budwood for propagation from disease-free trees is recommended to avoid the problem in new plantings.
Rumple-like symptoms were observed during a field survey of fruits in two lemon orchards, one in the Paphos district and the other in the Limassol district. The lemon variety grown in both orchards was unknown, but resembled Lisbon. The growers and owners complained that they were losing part of the crop because of the fruit abnormalities. They had not been advised that such problems could occur when they bought the trees. Some other lemon peel problems found in other orchards visited were attributed to hail damage.
Exocortis. Exocortis has been found in many Mediterranean citrus areas including Algeria, Corsica, Israel, Morocco, Spain and Tunisia (Bové, 1966). In Cyprus, Economides (1976) reported exocortis in Marsh seedless grapefruit trees. He pointed out that all trees planted in the country trace their origin back to a single Marsh seedless tree imported from South Africa. Thus, exocortis must be widespread, but no visual symptoms are usually present.
No tree showing typical exocortis symptoms (stunting and rootstock bark scaling) was found during the field survey. This was to be expected, since sour orange, the only rootstock used in the country, is tolerant of the pathogen. Only systematic indexing can reveal the true incidence of exocortis in Cyprus.
For this reason, a survey for citrus exocortis was conducted by Kyriakou in commercial groves of the main citrus-producing areas of Cyprus from 1987 to 1990. Out of 573 trees of 25 species and varieties sampled, 506 (88.3 percent) were found infected, when indexed on seedlings of Etrog citron (Citrus medica L.) selection Arizona 861. Isolates of exocortis from old-line citrus (introduced in the island before the 1940s) produced more severe symptoms on the citron indicators than isolates from new introductions. In greenhouse tests a severe isolate was readily transmitted from citron to healthy citron and gunura (Gynura aurantiaca DC.) by the method of knife-blade inoculation.
MAP 5 Map of Cyprus showing the distribution of: 1) Salsola kali,the favoured host plant of Neoaliturus haematoceps; 2) Neoaliturus haematoceps, the leafhopper vector of Spiroplasma citri; 3) Spiroplasma citri, the causal agent of stubborn - in citrus, periwinkles and N haematoceps
Multiple sprouting. Symptoms resembling multiple-sprouting virus disease were observed in a few old trees of Lapithos lemon and on three trees of Marsh seedless grapefruit in the Limassol area. In recent years, 35 trees of the same lemon type with similar symptoms had been eradicated. Affected trees showed a bushy aspect and willowy branches, with brittle branches growing to the ground and multiple branching throughout the tree. Leaves and fruits were small, with many fruits showing sectorial chimeras and a large number of aborted seeds. Symptoms in the grapefruit trees were less conspicuous, but leaves were generally distorted. Some conditions, such as copper deficiency, infestations of the bud mite, Aceria sheldoni Ewing, or genetic factors may be involved in the problem, but the highly abnormal conditions displayed by the severely affected trees resembled multiple-sprouting disease.
Bud-union crease. Typical symptoms of bud-union crease were found in four trees of Marsh seedless grapefruit on sour orange rootstock. The affected trees were about 12 years old, stunted and showed foliocelosis. Mild stem pitting was observed in young branches of two of them. They were surrounded by healthy trees. The line at the bud-union was typical of bud-union crease disorder, but only one out of the four diseased trees showed gum pockets in the bark. This disorder may result from genetic incompatibility. It may also be caused by tristeza or by a suspected "bud-union crease" virus.
Stubborn
For many years stubborn was suspected to be a limiting factor in citrus production in Cyprus. The situation was examined in a joint project between the Agricultural Research Institute, Nicosia, and the INRA laboratory in Bordeaux, France.
Surveys in January and November 1987 showed symptoms of stubborn disease to be present in many of the sweet orange orchards surveyed (see Table 28). The proportion of symptomatic trees was generally below 5 percent in the orchards, but in young plantations the proportion of affected trees was higher. For instance, in the six-year-old Valencia late and navel sweet orange blocks of the Experiment Station in Akhelia (Paphos area, see Map 5), there were 11 percent and 8 percent affected trees respectively (see Table 29). In the Marsh grapefruit block only 6 percent of trees were affected.
The navel oranges from stubborn-affected trees were often acorn-shaped (Fig. 165). The fruit from Valencia late orange trees was reduced in size and had a high percentage (85 percent) of aborted seeds (see Table 29). S. citri could be cultured from many symptomatic trees (see Tables 28 and 29).
The mother block of the Akhelia Experiment Station was also found to be infected with the stubborn agent, even though the budwood (of nucellar origin) was certified free of virus and virus-like agents and came, in 1970, from the University of California at Riverside. Trees of both Washington navel and Valencia late sweet oranges were found to be affected and S. citri was cultured from the trees (see Table 28). These observations suggested natural transmission of S. citri. This hypothesis was examined by exposing periwinkle (Catharanthus roseus) seedlings to natural contamination at the Akhelia Experiment Station in May 1987. The plants were examined in October. Six periwinkle plants showed typical symptoms of S. citri infection and the spiroplasma was cultured from them (see Table 28). These results prove that natural transmission of S. citri occurs in the Akhelia area.
TABLE 28 Detection of Spiroplasma citriin Cyprus in sweet orange trees, periwinkle (Catharanthus roseus) seedlings and Neoaliturus haematoceps leafhoppers
TABLE 29 Stubborn in sweet orange and grapefruit trees at Akhelia, Cyprus
Valencia Frost Navel Frost 3420 Marsh Frost
Origin of budwood California California California
Rootstock Sour orange Sour orange Various
Time of budding 1980 1980 1980
Number of trees 420 420 180
Number of trees with stubborn symptoms 
in 1986 44 24 Not done
in 1987 47 35 10
in 1988 47 35 10
in 1989 48 (11%) 35 (8%) 10 (6%)
Spiroplasma citri-infected trees^1/trees tested 20/24 11/11 1/5
Total number of seeds (N) and number of aborted seeds (n) in 92 fruits from 23 stubborn trees N = 328 Not done Not done
n = 277 (85%) Not done Not done
Total number of seeds (N) and number of aborted seeds (n) in 92 fruits from 23 normal trees N = 331 Not done Not done
n = 52 (17%) Not done Not done
Note:
^1 S. citri infection was detected by culture of the spiroplasma.
Work in Morocco and the Syrian Arab Republic has shown that the major vector of S. citri in the Mediterranean and the Near East is the leafhopper Neoaliturus haematoceps and that the preferred host plant of this leafhopper is Salsola kali. Therefore a survey for the leafhopper and its host plant was carried out in October 1987 in the southern part of Cyprus.
Map 5 shows the island and gives the results of the survey. S. kali was present in many locations and often in great abundance all along the southern coast (Figs 171 to 173), from the Paralimni area in the east to Argaka in the west. Occurrence of S. kali in northern
Cyprus as obtained from literature is also indicated on the map. Leafhoppers were collected wherever S. kali occurred. N. haematoceps was always present in great numbers within the leafhopper catches. Several of the N. haematoceps batches were found to be positive for S. citri either by culture or ELISA.
These results show that N. haematoceps, the major leafhopper vector of the stubborn spiroplasma, is abundant in Cyprus in the coastal areas. In particular, the leafhopper was found on the coast in the Paphos area near the Akhelia Experiment Station where natural transmission of S. citri was demonstrated, as noted earlier. The presence of up to 10 percent stubborn-affected trees in the sweet orange blocks at Akhelia is very probably due to natural spread of S. citri. Table 29 shows that 44 of the 420 Valencia late sweet orange trees were already infected in 1986, when the trees had been in the field for five years. Only three more infected trees were found in 1989. This indicates that in Cyprus, as elsewhere, infection by S. citri primarily affects young trees. The young orchards that are now being planted in Cyprus, and especially those close to the coast where N. haematoceps occurs, must be carefully inspected once a year for the first four or five years. Suspect trees
should be removed and replaced with healthy ones. This procedure will keep the percentage of stubborn-affected trees well below 10 percent.
Fungal diseases
Mal secco. Salibe noted that mal secco was severe on Eureka lemon trees, but that some local lemon trees, such as capithos, had resistance. Severe symptoms of mal secco were also observed by Bové on Ortanique tangor on sour orange rootstock in the Lanitis orchard at Limassol. The trees die suddenly (Fig. 315). Ioannou (personal communication) has shown that infection by the causal fungus Deuterophoma tracheiphila (Petri) is not through the canopy, but through the roots. The fungus moves up through the rootstock, invades the scion (Fig. 234) and kills the tree.
Rio Grande gummosis. Abundant gumming typical of Rio Grande gummosis was observed by Bové on many (70 percent) Jaffa sweet orange trees at the K. Hadji Georgiou orchard at Alaminos-Latouros (Figs 246 and 247). The severity of the Rio Grande gummosis problem in this orchard is probably due to the high salt content of the water (4 mmoles) which also results in severe leaf drop (Fig. 246).
In the same orchard, grapefruit trees were less affected by gumming and leaf drop, probably because they are more tolerant to salt. Marsh grapefruit trees were also affected in the Sotiris Yiorgallas orchard (15-year-old trees) at Latouros and the in Lanitis orchards (26-year-old trees) at Limassol.
A visit to northern Cyprus
A half-day trip was made to northern Cyprus to observe some aspects of the citrus industry in that part of the island, namely the Morphou (Guzulyurt) area. Citrus orchards here were very similar to others on the island. Some symptoms of malnutrition and iron deficiency were seen. No time was available for a virus survey, but fruits with impietratura were observed in the Cypfruvex packing house.
Since propagative materials used in the establishment of orchards in this and other areas of the island are probably of the same origin, findings on the incidence of virus and virus-like diseases in the Nicosia, Limassol and Famagusta areas may be considered valid for the Morphou area. Salibe was informed by local authorities that about 9 000 ha of citrus are grown in the northern area, with an estimated yearly production of 140 000 tonnes. About 70 percent of the fruit is exported by the government-managed Cypfruvex.
Because of the proximity of orchards to each other in the various areas of the island, the introduction and spread of virus problems in one place immediately endangers all other plantations. Phytosanitary measures should be extended to all citrus-growing areas of Cyprus for the protection of all existing plantations.
Bibliography
Bové, J.M. 1966. Citrus virus diseases in the Mediterranean area. Report presented at the meeting on Phytiatry and Phytopharmacy, Marseilles (France), 1965, updated for the 4th Conf. IOCV. 44 pp. (mimeo)
Eastop, V.F. & Christophi, S. 1981. Check list of Cyprus aphids. Prepared in the Research Department of Agriculture. 8 pp. (mimeo)
Economides, C.V. 1976. Exocortis in Marsh seedless grapefruit in Cyprus. Plant Dis. Rep., 60: 532-534.
Klotz, L.J. 1973. Color handbook of citrus diseases. Citrus Res. & Agric. Exp. Sta., Riverside, Univ. Calif. 122 pp.
Littlejohn, L. 1939. Annual report of the botanist and plant pathologist for the year 1938. In Rep. Dir. Agric., Cyprus, 1938.
Louca, A. 1981. Annual Report of Department of Agriculture. Cyprus, Ministry of Agriculture and Natural Resources.
Mendel, K. 1956. The threat of tristeza disease in the Mediterranean basin. FAO Plant Prot. Bull., 4: 106- 108.
Papasolomontos, A. 1965. The present status of impietratura, a citrus disease in Cyprus. Plant Dis. Rep., 49: 111 - 113.
Papasolomontos, A. & Economides, C.V. 1967. Effect of rootstock on the incidence of impietratura-diseased grapefruit fruits. Plant Dis. Rep., 51: 684-686.
Papasolomontos, A. & Economides, C.V. 1968. The presence of tristeza virus in certain species of citrus in Cyprus. FAO Plant Prot. Bull., 16: 8-9.
Ruggieri, G. 1955. Le arance impietrate. Rivista Agrumicoltura, I (2): 65-69.
Chapter 10: Egypt
Virus and virus-like diseases
Other observations
Integrated protection programme for citrus improvement
Recommendations
Bibliography
Egypt stands at present among the largest citrus-producing countries in the world. Although some citrus types were grown here about the time of Alexander the Great's conquest (332 BC), it was only at the beginning of this century that extensive commercial orchards were planted in the country, and expansion is still continuing. This development is reflected in strong annual increases in fruit production, which are likely to continue in the near future.
The area under citrus is estimated to be nearly 100 000 ha, with a production target of about two million tonnes, the overwhelming part of it being oranges. In the last decades, Egypt has certainly made the largest increases in citrus production of all Mediterranean countries, with an annual growth rate ranging from 11.4 percent in 1960-1970 to 8.7 percent in 1970-1980. Output of oranges and tangerines was estimated at 266 000 tonnes in 1960/ 61, 710000 tonnes in 1970/71, 971 000 tonnes in 1975/76 and 1 570000 tonnes in the 1980/81 season (Wolff, 1977). Most of the production is early season orange, a type well-suited for Egyptian growing conditions. Exports are increasing and were said to have reached nearly 180 000 tonnes in the 1982/83 season. Improved export performance was favoured by the construction of packing and storage plants, transportation facilities and modern laboratories for quality-control work.
The major citrus-producing countries of the world have highly developed systems of production, harvesting and marketing. Therefore countries trying to break into the world citrus market face major competition from the well-established producing and exporting areas. It is, however, feasible, provided that high-quality fruits are produced and that other factors are sufficiently favourable - for instance, high orchard productivity is necessary, as are low costs of labour, transportation and other needed items. The development effort must also be properly organized and adequately financed. Low productivity of orchards is a serious constraint to development of the citrus industry of most countries.
Fruit production per unit area is fairly low in the Egyptian citrus orchards, the average yield being, according to various estimates, around 15 to 20 tonnes per hectare. A good yield is considered to be around 50 tonnes per hectare.
In Florida, Sao Paulo (Brazil) and a number of other advanced citrus areas, the average yield of adult orchards ranges from 30 to 35 tonnes per hectare, although some orchards are known to produce larger crops, of up to 80 or 90 tonnes per hectare. Individual trees (40 to 70 years old) in exceptionally good health are known to produce up to 1 200 kg of fruit (about 30 boxes of 40 kg) per year. The cost of production obviously decreases with rising productivity.
Virus and virus-like diseases
Virus diseases are known to have been affecting citrus trees in Egypt for more than 50 years. In 1931, Fawcett found unhealthy trees (later proved to be affected by a virus) during a visit to the country's citrus orchards. Various surveys subsequently disclosed the presence of several virus and virus-like diseases causing disorders in commercial plantings and experimental orchards (Childs et al., 1955, 1956; Nour-Eldin and Bishay, 1958; Nour-Eldin, 1959; Knorr, 1961). Only recently, however, have virus diseases started to be recognized as a serious problem in the citrus industry. In spite of a number of attempts to eliminate viruses from new orchards, they continue to be a major constraint to high yields.
Scaly bark psorosis (psorosis A)
Scaly bark psorosis affects citrus trees worldwide and is found in most Mediterranean orchards. It is a slow-acting disease that may take several years to produce visual symptoms. Bark scaling rarely occurs before the tree is six years old and symptoms may be delayed for many years, sometimes 30 or 40. According to Nour-Eldin (1959), more than 90 percent of all grafted trees in Egypt carry psorosis A or concave gum. Knorr (1961) mentioned that some blocks of mature trees had up to 25 percent of trees suffering from typical bark-scaling psorosis. Salibe observed symptoms of psorosis bark scaling and/or concave gum-blind pocket on many Washington navel and Valencia late orange trees, but not on trees of other local varieties. Apparently, these two imported varieties were brought into the country carrying virus and all further propagations were also infected.
Possibly a few trees that escaped infection are free from disease. Inspection of large plantings of nucellar Washington navel orange trees revealed no psorosis symptoms, which practically eliminates the possibility of insect transmission of the virus.
Elimination of psorosis virus from new plantings can only be achieved by the use of budwood from healthy mother trees. Selection of psorosis-free trees to be used started in Egypt in the 1950s (Nour-Eldin, 1959).
Cachexia-xyloporosis
This is a bud-transmissible disease inducing wood pitting and gumming of sweet limes, mandarin-limes, certain varieties of mandarins, tangelos, Citrus macrophylla, and some other citrus types. Symptoms range from the severe in Orlando, Wekiwa and Seminole tangelos, Clementine, Mandalina and Parson's Special mandarins, Murcott and Ellendale tangors, to the undetectable in sweet orange, sour orange, grapefruit and trifoliate orange. The symptoms occur on the trunk of infected trees, above or below bud-union according to the position of the susceptible variety.
Since the cachexia-xyloporosis viroid is perpetuated by the use of infected budwood and no insect vector is known, it can be excluded from new plantings by using only healthy propagative material.
Cachexia-xyloporosis seems to be widespread in Egypt. According to various authors (Nour-Eldin, 1959; Knorr, 1961) it has been found that more than 60 percent of the Balady mandarin trees budded on sour orange rootstock are affected by the disease. Systematic indexing is necessary to reveal the extent of the problem on symptomless scion-rootstock combinations. Salibe observed cachexia-xyloporosis in the trunk above the bud-union (up to 1 m) on trees of Balady (Willowleaf) mandarin in commercial orchards. Some trees of satsuma and Clementine mandarins examined at the Barrage Horticultural Experiment Station also showed severe cachexia-xyloporosis symptoms. These two varieties, however, are not grown in large orchards in the country.
The presence of wood pitting on sour orange rootstock of some Balady mandarin trees affected by cachexia-xyloporosis raises the possibility of the presence of cristacortis virus in combination with the cachexia-xyloporosis pathogen, but further studies are necessary to clarify this point.
Stubborn
Stubborn is a very serious disease found in most countries growing citrus under desert or semi-desert conditions. It has been reported from the Arabian Peninsula, Arizona and California, Egypt, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Israel, Lebanon, Morocco, Peru, the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey and several other countries. Symptoms of stubborn include: tree stunting, an abnormally bushy aspect with small leaves and short internodes, fruits that are small, lopsided and acorn-shaped, with curved columella, inverse or pale coloration and sometimes blue albedo. In seedy varieties, excessive seed abortion occurs frequently. Pinholing of sour orange bark below the bud-union is found in severe cases (Calavan and Carpenter, 1965).
It is believed that many citrus varieties and combinations are susceptible to the stubborn pathogen, the helical mycoplasma Spiroplasma citri. These include, primarily, sweet orange, grapefruit, mandarin and tangelo. Several non-rutaceous hosts are known, including Vinca rosea, Trifolium repens, Trifolium pratense, Vicia faba, Pisum sativum and possibly others. The stubborn organism is transmitted through tissue grafts and through buds, and is also spread by leafhopper vectors. The two main leafhopper vectors Neoaliturus haematoceps and Neoaliturus tenellus - are present in Egypt. In many Mediterranean countries N. haematoceps is more abundant than N. tenellus. In Egypt, however, the reverse is true (Frazier, 1953).
Stubborn disease was discovered in Egypt by Nour-Eldin (1959) in trees of Safargali orange and was initially named Safargali decline. The same author (1967) described plasmodium-like structures and spherical inclusion bodies in hypertrophied cells of tumorous growths of flowers from stubborn (Safargali) trees cultured on potato dextrose agar.
Salibe observed severe symptoms of stubborn on trees of old-line and nucellar Washington navel orange in commercial and experimental plantings. No stubborn was found on trees of Valencia and Shamouti oranges or on other local varieties.
Gummy bark of sweet orange
A disease of sweet orange trees on sour orange rootstock was found by Nour-Eldin (1956, 1959) in Egypt and described as "phloem discoloration of sweet orange". In a further publication, the same author (Childs et al., 1968) showed that the gummy deposits are mainly in the outer layers of bark tissue, and changed the name of the disorder to "gummy bark of sweet orange". Affected orange trees are usually stunted and gum deposits become visible when bark of the trunk above the bud union is scraped off. The symptoms of the disease in the main resemble those of cachexia-xyloporosis on mandarin.
Salibe had previously observed symptoms of gummy bark on trees of sweet orange varieties in Italy and the Philippines. However, no diseased tree was shown to him during his visit to Egypt. Because it is a virus disease for which no vector is known, propagations from healthy trees may completely exclude the problem from new plantings in Egypt.
Tristeza complex
Tristeza is a very destructive disease caused by a virus which affects trees of sweet orange, mandarin and grapefruit on sour orange and certain other intolerant rootstocks. It occurs in most citrus areas of the world - Argentina, Brazil, California, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay, Venezuela, in practically all countries of Southeast Asia, Australia, Spain and most African countries south of the Sahara. Tristeza has killed about 25 million trees in South America and about three million trees in California so far (Bové and Vogel, 1975). The disease represents a tremendous threat to the citrus industry of the Mediterranean basin, one of the last areas free from the virus, and in which intolerant scion-rootstock combinations are widely used. Spain is one of the few Mediterranean countries where extensive spread of tristeza has occurred. In the region of Alcira-Carcagente-Corbera, in the Valencia district, the spread started in 1957. More recently, spread of tristeza was suddenly
observed in Israel, and an identification and suppression programme was immediately launched (Raccah et al., 1976; Bar-Joseph et al. 1980) but has apparently failed.
Apparently, the early cases of tristeza disease found in the citrus areas of the Mediterranean basin can be traced back to introductions of infected budwood from abroad. All countries that have introduced Meyer lemon trees have also introduced tristeza (Bové, 1966), and these include Algeria, Israel, Italy, Morocco and Tunisia. Other varieties imported from Australia, Japan South Africa and the United States of America have also been reported to have introduced tristeza into the Mediterranean countries.
The first report that tristeza virus was present in Egypt was made by Nour-Eldin in 1959. Two bergamot oranges on sour lime rootstock, one Tanarif sweet orange also on sour lime rootstock and one Valencia orange believed to be budded on sour orange were infected. The virus was not found in any commercial orchards, and indications are that, so far, it has not been spread by aphid vectors.
Trees with typical symptoms of tristeza were shown to Salibe by local scientists. Ten trees were involved at the Barrage Horticultural Experiment Station - mainly navel orange on sour orange rootstock and about 20 years old - and one tree at the Horticultural Research Institute in Giza of Balady mandarin on sour orange rootstock.
These trees were indexed for tristeza using the Mexican lime indicator and found positive for the virus, according to information given by local virologists. It is believed that tristeza-infected trees probably do not occur in commercial orchards. However, it is to be feared that spread of tristeza may suddenly occur, as happened in Spain and Israel, and government officers must be aware that a programme for tristeza indexing is needed in Egypt.
Exocortis
Symptoms of exocortis include stunting of trees and bark splitting and scaling of the rootstock portion of the tree. On trees budded on trifoliate or Rangpur lime rootstocks, bark scaling usually appears after four to eight years. Symptoms of exocortis also show up when intolerant varieties used as scions are infected. They include yellowing of the bark of young branches, splitting and limited shelling. Certain selections of Etrog citron develop leaf epinasty and are used as indicators for exocortis.
Symptoms of exocortis disease are uncommon in Egypt. On the basis of evidence obtained in most citrus-growing areas of the world, however, it must be assumed that the viroid responsible for exocortis disease is widely distributed in the country's citrus orchards. It is certainly causing tree debilitation in the so-called symptomless carriers, but the real destructive capacity of the disease will appear only if intolerant rootstocks are used. Salibe observed exocortis-like symptoms in a few trees of Valencia orange budded on sweet lime rootstock in a commercial orchard in the Kalioubiy area. Two trees of old-line Tahiti lime examined at the Horticultural Research Institute showed conspicuous bark symptoms of exocortis disease.
Other virus and virus-like problems
A number of surveys have shown the occurrence of several abnormalities in citrus orchards and experimental plots in Egypt, other than those mentioned above. Nour-Eldin (1959) indicated the presence of the following disorders in the citrus orchards: rusty bark sloughing, bud-union crease, bud-union overgrowth and stem pitting of grapefruit rootstock. Knorr (1961) added a number of other problems to this list, such as autumn leaf drop, bark splitting of Balady lime decline, Balady lime stunt, big-butt, citron stunt, dot-chlorosis, mandarin chlorosis, rugose sour orange, scion trunk swelling, shell bark, sweet orange bud-union swelling and sweet orange gumless pitting. Except for autumn leaf drop, which is widespread and causes losses in fruit production, especially in upper Egypt, all the other disorders are at present of minor importance.
It should be pointed out here that a number of trees exhibit gumless pitting in the sweet orange scion and in the sour orange rootstock. Some of this pitting may result from insect damage, particularly from scale infestation, but indications are that cristacortis virus may be the cause of the problem in many trees. Indexing for cristacortis is recommended. On account of the limited number of orchards inspected during Salibe's visit, it was impossible to obtain a full picture of the extent of the problem. It should be emphasized that nutritional disorders, herbicide toxicity, faulty irrigation, deep planting, insect pests and other horticultural problems are depressing crop yield in the citrus orchards.
A number of virus and virus-like disorders known to be affecting citrus trees in other areas of the world have not been reported in Egypt and were not seen during Salibe's visit. Among diseases apparently not occurring in the citrus orchards of Egypt are: impietratura, rumple, vein enation-woody gall, leaf curl, citrus tatterleaf, leprosis, yellow vein, greening, infectious variegation, citrus blight and citrus decline. Fortunately, citrus canker, a damaging bacterial disease caused by Xanthomonas campestris pv. citri, also apparently does not occur in Egypt. Local plant pathologists should be aware of the symptoms of these and other undesirable diseases so as to be able to recognize them and promptly eradicate any tree suspected of harbouring their agents. Good descriptions of disease problems have been made by Childs et al. (1968), Bové and Vogel (1975) and Wallace (1978) among others.
<section>d</section>
Other observations
Production of nucellar lines
According to information given by Dr Mohamed El Shourbagy, former director of the Citrus Division, the production and selection of nucellar lines was initiated in 1964. First plantings were made in 1975 and 1976 and the work of selection is still going on.
A mother block of nucellar trees of commercial varieties was visited at the Horticultural Research Institute in Giza. Nucellar varieties were Valencia, Washington navel and blood oranges and grapefruit. One of the Washington navel trees in the block, when inspected by Salibe, showed typical symptoms of stubborn disease. Since Washington navel orange is considered to be one of the varieties more susceptible to stubborn disease, insect transmission may have been responsible for the infection of this tree.
A visit was also made to a commercial orchard consisting of a block of about 1 000 trees of nucellar Washington navel orange and nucellar Balady mandarin. Trees were very vigorous and productive but very thorny. Stubborn symptoms were found in a number of the Washington navel orange trees.
Citrus nurseries in Egypt are private and produce a large number of budded plants for replacement and planting of new orchards.
According to available information, there is also a fairly high export of budded plants to neighbouring countries. A visit was made to a few small nurseries and, while young trees were of a fairly high standard, they were said to be produced with budwood taken from unselected mother trees. This means that Egypt is unwittingly exporting virus-infected plants.
Horticultural Research Institute
The Horticultural Research Institute is located in Orman, Giza, on the outskirts of Cairo. It is divided into several research divisions, which deal with citrus, grapes and deciduous fruit, among others. Research work is conducted both at the institute and at six experiment stations in the agricultural areas of the country. According to available information, about 30 researchers work on the various aspects of citrus production in the institute and its experiment stations. The researchers are of an outstandingly high standard, but the laboratories of the institute need new equipment and the library is badly in need of more up-to-date books and other publications.
A fairly large collection of citrus is maintained at the institute, composed of varieties of commercial and potential value, with all trees budded on sour orange rootstock. Mixed in the orchard are trees of nucellar lines and of old clones, a few of which show symptoms indicative of various pathogens.
According to available information, 130 superior trees of commercial varieties plus 11 introductions of nucellar varieties are being tested by the institute as candidates for certification.
Barrage Horticultural Experiment Station
At Barrage the River Nile splits into channels to form the delta. Citrus orchards are concentrated in this area and all over the fertile soil of the delta. The Barrage Horticultural Experiment Station is dedicated to research work with fruits, vegetables, flowers and medicinal plants. Ample and intensive work with citron is being carried out there.
The Station has a large germplasm collection which is about 20 years old, containing local and imported varieties of citrus. Symptoms of psorosis, cachexia-xyloporosis and tristeza were observed in a few trees of this plot. A new collection of citrus varieties, imported as nucellar lines from Florida and California, is being prepared for planting in the field. It will include, in a first phase, 11 varieties budded on rough lemon Citrus jambhiri Lush. and sour orange rootstocks. Indexing of this imported material for tristeza virus has given negative results.
Rootstock experiments and a block of mother trees used to produce seeds of rootstock varieties were also visited at the station. The general impression was that Egypt has an advanced programme of citrus research but that the benefit of acquired knowledge is not reaching growers.
Visit to the Faculty of Agriculture, Al Azhar University
Egypt has 12 universities, of which four are in Cairo, namely, Cairo University, Ein-Shams University, Al Azhar University and Helwan University. A visit was made to the Faculty of Agriculture of Al Azhar University, Nasr City, where a large citrus research programme is being conducted to study the performance of various rootstock varieties under the environmental conditions prevailing in the Nile River delta area. This project is partially supported by USAID funds. The faculty has a modern laboratory for micrografting and tissue culture that can be used for freeing citrus varieties from virus and virus-like pathogens.
Integrated protection programme for citrus improvement
It is evident that virus and virus-like diseases are limiting yields in Egyptian citrus orchards, perhaps by as much as 10 or 20 percent overall, and much more severely in certain orchards. During past decades, the area under citrus has expanded considerably and the trend has been to plant fewer varieties, concentrated in larger areas of more or less continuous orchards. These conditions favour rapid spread of virus and other diseases, particularly when insanitary mass-propagation techniques are used to produce nursery trees. It is clear that the problem, if not contained, will grow steadily worse. There are no known methods for freeing trees in commercial orchards from virus and virus-like pathogens, as viruses are generic parasites for which no remedy has yet been found. The use of disease-free budwood for new plantings and the imposition of stringent regulations to limit movement, sale and use of infected budwood or nursery plants are the principal measures for
controlling these pathogens. The use of virus-free propagative materials also helps to prevent or limit damage from diseases that have insect vectors, provided that natural spread is limited or absent, as in the case of tristeza and stubborn disease in Egypt. Appropriate quarantine, detection and suppression measures for the exclusion of unwanted pathogens and their vectors must be integrated into the protection programme.
Quarantine and eradication measures
Citrus trees are not native to any country of the Mediterranean basin. They were brought into the region from their origins in Southeast Asia and the Malayan archipelago. Many, but not all, major pests and diseases were imported through early plant introductions. For this reason, strict quarantine regulations are vital to prevent further undesirable parasites from entering the citrus-growing areas of Egypt. It is well known that in all important citrus-producing areas of the world there is a constant interest in new and better varieties and stocks of the genus Citrus, and that a more or less continuous flow of plant introductions is occurring everywhere. Government agencies should import new, desirable varieties, using modern laboratory techniques to preclude diseases and pests, before it is done by unskilled people. In the event that any unwanted pest or pathogen is introduced into Egypt, plant pathologists and entomologists should be prepared to identify the problem and
start proper action for immediate eradication before dispersal within the citrus area occurs. Special attention should be given to the exclusion and suppression of the agents of three diseases that can completely wipe out the citrus industry of any country. These are greening, tristeza-seedling yellows and citrus canker. Citrus decline (blight of Florida, declinio of Brazil, marchitamiento repenting of Uruguay and fruta bolita of Argentina), a disease of unknown nature but suspected to be caused by a virus, should also be prevented from entering the country.
The threat of greening disease. Greening is one of the most destructive diseases affecting citrus. It was first reported long ago in mainland China, where it was called yellow-shoot disease (Lin, 1956). Apparently, from there it moved to neighbouring countries and received local names: likubin in Taiwan Province, vein-phloem degeneration in Indonesia, leaf mottling in the Philippines and citrus decline in India. The vector of the causal agent (an intracellular bacterium) was determined to be the psyllid Diaphorina citri in the Southeast Asian countries. The disease also appeared in South Africa where it was named greening disease and where it is spread by another psyllid, Trioza erytreae. Scientists have recently reached the conclusion that the greening bacterium and its two known vectors are moving towards the Mediterranean citrus countries. Pakistan, Saudi Arabia and Thailand have already been invaded by the Asiatic greening bacterium and by the vector D. citri. At the
same time, the South African greening bacterium and its vector, T. erytreae, have spread to eastern Africa, Ethiopia, Madagascar, Mauritius, Reunion, northern Yemen and Zimbabwe, and may eventually reach the citrus orchards of northern Africa. The entire citrus industry of all the Mediterranean countries is now menaced by greening disease.
Citrus canker. Citrus canker was introduced into Australia, Florida and South Africa and was eradicated through great efforts and expense, after it had become well established. This disease should be excluded from Egypt by all available means.
Tristeza. Practically all Egyptian citrus is on sour orange rootstock and this situation makes it extremely vulnerable to destruction by tristeza virus. The situation is very similar to that of most other citrus areas of the Mediterranean basin and the Near East. Only trees of true lemon, Citrus limon (L.) Burm., on sour orange rootstock would survive the invasion of orchards by tristeza virus. In the light of available knowledge, diffusion of tristeza in the orchards of the region would result from:
* The introduction into the region of the very efficient vector, the black aphid, Toxoptera citricida Kirk. The aphids Toxoptera aurantii, Aphis gossypii and Myzus persicae already exist in the citrus orchards and environmental conditions that favour high populations of these insects are possibly the same for the black aphid. T. citricida is spreading and has recently reached Venezuela, where considerable destruction of orchards is occurring.
* The occurrence of mutations or changes within the tristeza virus that would permit rapid spread of new strains by previously inefficient vectors. Severe tristeza-seedling yellows virus is spreading in California, carried by A. gossypii, and it is now clear that the virus has changed, becoming transmissible by this aphid. Similarly, in Israel it was recently shown that A. gossypii was transmitting tristeza at a rate averaging 40 percent (with 100 aphids in each test) when the strain named VT was used, compared with less than 5 percent with two other isolates (Bar-Joseph and Loebenstein, 1973). The high transmission rate was taken to be an intrinsic property of the VT tristeza strain. The possibility of the spread of such a strain into citrus orchards of Egypt must not be ignored.
Stubborn disease. A great effort has already been made to eliminate this disease from Egypt. According to Nour-Eldin (1959), the major source of the mycoplasma, the sweet orange variety Safargali, was prohibited by law from being propagated in the country. Additional efforts to identify infected trees and eradicate them may completely suppress the disease in Egypt. However, the threat remains permanent, since favourable conditions may occur which would allow the buildup of high populations of the leafhopper vectors of the spiroplasma. Studies of the biology of N. tenellus and N. haematoceps, the two major leafhopper vectors of S. citri present in Egypt, should be initiated to obtain better knowledge of transmission and to develop strategies to control the problem. Non-rutaceous hosts of S. citri should be identified as they are most probably the sources of S. citri inoculum on which the leafhoppers become infected with the spiroplasma.
Citrus budwood certification programme
A well-planned citrus budwood certification programme was launched in Egypt in 1981. Nearly 200 candidate trees were selected and placed under test for registration as mother trees. No additional information has been made available regarding the progress of the programme. According to Nour-Eldin (1959), a citrus budwood certification programme was started in Egypt as early as 1955, when budwood was obtained from old seedling trees (Balady sweet orange, Sukkary orange and Balady mandarin) and propagated on sour orange rootstock.
Propagations were also made from a navel nucellar seedling tree. Progenies of these nucellar lines were examined and found to be free from psorosis. From there, "it will be a matter of organizing the distribution of virus-free budwood" (Nour-Eldin, 1959). At the time, no mention was made of trials to compare old-line and nucellar line trees. Nucellars are not necessarily identical to parent trees and may differ among themselves. Certain varieties have a periclinal chimerical nature (such as Thompson and Burgundy grapefruit) and they do not produce nucellars of the new varieties but that of the original variety (Cameron, Soost and Olson, 1964; Olson, Carpenter and Soost, 1966). Virus-free bud-wood of these varieties must be obtained through micrografting.
Recommendations
An integrated protection programme is outlined here as a contribution to the maintenance of the wealth that the citrus industry generates for Egypt. The country has the scientific knowledge and the human resources to develop an intensive programme to protect existing citrus orchards from new diseases and to pursue measures to increase crop yields. It is a matter of coordinating the efforts of Egyptian scientists towards a major aim that will benefit the citrus growers and consequently help to improve the economy of the country.
The recommendations for measures to be taken to integrate the protection programme are as follows:
* Egypt, in association with all Mediterranean countries, should make a great effort to prevent the introduction of new pathogens, particularly that of greening disease, into the region. Massive destruction of all existing citrus orchards by the greening bacterium is a real and immediate threat to the country's flourishing citrus industry.
* Quarantine regulations should be strictly enforced to prevent any unauthorized plant importation into the country. At the same time, a Citrus Quarantine Station should be established to provide safe budwood introduction, based on tissue-culture techniques.
* A nationwide identification and suppression programme should be conducted to eradicate all sources of tristeza virus from the citrus orchards. Such a programme should be complemented by a study to determine the possible insect vectors of tristeza in the country.
* Regarding stubborn, as the causal agent infects not only citrus but also wild plants, removing stubborn-infected citrus trees will not eradicate the disease. Control of stubborn must be through the control of its leafhopper vectors.
* A programme to change the sour orange rootstock in the country should be implemented. Severe tristeza-seedling yellows and its efficient vector, the aphid T. citricida Kirk, are constantly spreading in the citrus plantations of the world and may reach the Mediterranean region in the near future. The use of several different rootstocks that have degrees of tolerance to the virus is a safeguard against tristeza destroying the citrus industry.
* The citrus budwood certification programme should receive all the necessary financial support to achieve its main aim, that is to increase crop yields through the release of superior, virus-free budwood to growers and nursery workers. At the same time, an intensive nursery inspection programme should be conducted to prevent the production of disease-infected plants destined for local plantings and for export.
* The Horticultural Research Institute at Giza should receive the necessary infrastructure and equipment to allow it to conduct research with modern indexing techniques for virus and virus-like pathogens. An essential element in this is the updating of the institute's library, so that researchers can have access to the information that they need to maximize the benefits of their work.
Bibliography
Bar-Joseph, M. & Loebenstein, B. 1973. Effects of strain, source plant and temperature on the transmissibility of citrus tristeza virus by the melon aphid. Phytopathol., 63: 716-720.
Bar-Joseph, M., Garnsey, S.M., Gonsalves, D. & Purcifull, D.E. 1980. Detection of citrus tristeza virus. 1. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and SDS-immunodiffusion methods. In Proc. 8.th Conf IOCV, p. 1-8. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Bové, J.M. 1966. Citrus virus diseases in the Mediterranean area. Report presented at the meeting on Phytiatry and Phytopharmacy, Marseilles (France), 1965, updated for the 4th Conf. IOCV. 44 pp. (mimeo)
Bové, J.M. & Vogel, R. 1975. Description and illustration of virus and virus-like diseases of citrus: an IOCV project. Institut Français de Recherches Fruitières Outre-Mer. Paris, Editions SETCO.
Calavan, E.C. & Carpenter, J.B. 1965. Stubborn disease of citrus trees retards growth, impairs quality and decreases yields. Calif: Citrog, 50(3): 86-87, 96, 98-99.
Cameron, J.W., Soost, R.K. & Olson, E.O. 1964. Chimeral basis for colour in pink and red grapefruit. J. Hered., 55(1): 23-28.
Childs, J.F.L., Nour-Eldin, F., Jacob, K. & El-Hosseiny, N. 1955. A report to the Egyptian Ministry of Agriculture on the survey of citrus diseases in Egypt. Ministry of Agriculture.
Childs, J.F.L., Nour-Eldin, F., Jacob, K. & El-Hosseiny, N. 1956. Observations on Egyptian citrus diseases. Citrus Ind., 47(10): 11-16.
Childs, J.F.L., Bové, J.M., Calavan, E.C., Fraser, L.R., Knorr, L.C., Nour-Eldin, F., Salibe, A.A., Tanaka, S. & Weathers, L.G., eds. 1968. Indexing procedures for 15 virus diseases of citrus trees. Washington, DC, USDA/ARS Agriculture Handbook 333.
Fawcett, H.S. 1931. Observations on citrus conditions in Mediterranean countries. IV. Egypt. Calif. Citrog., 16: 339-340.
Frazier, N.W. 1953. A survey of the Mediterranean region for the beet leafhopper. J. Econ. Entomol., 46: 551-554.
Knorr, L.C. 1961. Virus diseases of citrus. Report to the Government of the United Arab Republic. Report No. 1432. 45 pp.
Lin, K.H. 1956. Observations on yellow shoot of citrus: aetiological studies of yellow shoot of citrus. Acta Phytopathologica Sinica, 2: 1-42.
Nour-Eldin, F. 1956. Phloem discoloration of sweet orange. Phytopathol., 46: 238239.
Nour-Eldin, F. 1959. Citrus virus disease research in Egypt. In J.M. Wallace, ed. Citrus virus diseases, p. 219-227. Berkeley, Div. Agric. Sci., Univ. Calif.
Nour-Eldin, F. 1967. A tumor-inducing agent associated with citrus trees infected with safargali (stubborn) disease in the United Arab Republic. Phytopathol., 57: 108-113.
Nour-Eldin, F. & Bishay, F. 1958. Presence of the tristeza virus disease in Egypt. FAO Plant Prot. Bull., 6(10): 153- 154.
Nour-Eldin, F. & Childs, J.F.L. 1957. Sweet orange bark pitting, an unreliable symptom of tristeza infection. Plant. Dis. Rep., 41(12): 1011-1013.
Olson, E.O., Carpenter, J.W. & Soost, R.K. 1966. The Burgundy sport: further evidence of the chimera! nature of pigmented grapefruits. Hort. Sci., 1(2): 65-67.
Raccah, B., Loebenstein, G., Bar-Joseph, M. & Oren, Y. 1976. Transmission of tristeza by aphids prevalent on citrus, and operation of the tristeza suppression programme in Israel. In Proc. 7th Conf: IOCV, p. 47-49. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Wallace, J.M. 1978. Virus and virus-like diseases. In The citrus industry. vol. IV, p. 67-184. Berkeley, Div. Agric. Sci., Univ. Calif.
Wolff, J. 1977. Medium-term prospects for world citrus production. Proc. Int. Soc. Citricult., 2: 328-332.
Chapter 11: The Islamic Republic of Iran
Introduction of new citrus species and varieties
Incidence of virus and virus-like diseases
Other virus and virus-like diseases
Virus and virus-like diseases: General conclusions
Other important, non-viral diseases
The threat of witches' broom disease of Lime
Bibliography
Citrus has a long history in the Islamic Republic of Iran. Citron was the first citrus fruit to be cultivated in the country, some 2 500 years ago, in the times of the Median empire. Sour orange, lemon and small-fruited lime were spread throughout the Near East and Persia by the Arabs around AD 1000. Sweet orange, called "Portugal" in many Arab countries as well as in Iran, reached the Persian Gulf ports with Portuguese trade vessels during the crusades. Later, around 1500, when Vasco da Gama opened up the direct sea route from India to Portugal around the Cape of Good Hope, many citrus species were undoubtedly introduced from India. In more recent times, the former Union of Soviet Socialist Republics, especially the Black Sea ports (Suchumi, Batumi), were also sources for citrus introductions.
Fortunately, for many centuries, these varieties have been propagated by seed. Since most virus and virus-like diseases are not transmitted by seed from parent to progeny, this method of propagation has kept some of the major virus and virus-like diseases out of Iran for many years. This probably explains why, for instance, tristeza virus and its most efficient vector, Toxoptera citricida Kirk, have not become established in Iran through the propagation of budwood on trees from India while they have in South Africa.
There are three major citrus regions in Iran (see Map 2 on p. 70 and Map 6). The Caspian Sea belt (Mazandaran and Gilan provinces 26 000 ha) extends over 400 km from east to west, and lies between the shore of the Caspian Sea (29 m below sea level) and the first slopes of the Elburz mountain range (150 m see Map 6). Average annual rainfall is I 000 mm, with a dry period in June and July. Winter temperatures every year reach -1°C, and, every four to five years, -7°C with heavy snowfall (I m). Summer temperatures are much lower than in other citrus regions, but high enough for symptom expression of stubborn.
The percentage of the various citrus varieties grown is as follows: seedy local sweet orange seedling trees, 55 percent; seedy local sweet orange trees grafted on sour orange rootstock, 20 percent; Washington navel, Thompson navel and blood oranges, all on sour orange, 5 percent; satsuma, Clementine and local tangerine, all on sour orange, 15 percent; and others, 5 percent.
It should be pointed out that sour orange is the only commercial rootstock used. In particular, satsumas are grafted on sour orange, not on Poncirus trifoliata.
Citrus orchards of the southern inland belt (36 000 ha) are scattered through the low valleys of the southern Zagros mountain range, essentially in the provinces of Khuzestan, Fars and Kerman (see Map 6: citrus areas around Dezful and Ahwaz, Kazerun, Jahrom, Darab, Minab, Jiroft, Bam, Shadad). The main characteristics of these areas are low annual rainfall (100-300 mm) and excessive heat in summer. In Khuzestan (Ahwaz, Dezful), citrus is grown under higher temperatures than in any other commercial citrus-growing area, the maximum daily temperatures ranging from 44° to 48°C between 15 June and 15 August. In the Jiroft area (Kerman province), the average monthly maximum temperature is close to 43°C in June, July and August. The high summer temperatures have been thought to simulate symptoms of stubborn (Cochran and Samadi, 1976).
MAP 6 The principal citrus-growing areas of the Islamic Republic of Iran
The main citrus species and varieties are seedy local sweet orange trees on sour orange, Bakravi or lemon rootstocks, 52.5 percent; small-fruited acid seedling trees, 28.7 percent; seedy local tangerine trees on Bakravi or lemon rootstock, l 1.6 percent; Palestine sweet lime cutting trees, 10.4 percent; and others, 2.X percent.
Bakravi is said to be a local natural hybrid between mandarin (Citrus reticulata Blanco) and small-fruited acid lime (Citrus aurantifolia Christm.).
About 6 000 ha of citrus are spread along the coasts of the Persian Gulf and the Gulf of Oman (southern coastal belt). The climate is tropical with no frost, and well suited to acid lime, sweet lime and lemon. Acid lime represents 90 percent of production. Salinity of water and high pH are the limiting factors.
In conclusion, in the two major citrus areas of Iran, the Caspian Sea belt and the southern inland belt, local sweet orange is predominant; acid lime dominates the coastal belt and is second in the inland belt; satsumas, Clementines and local tangerines are second in the Caspian Sea area.
Until 1918 there was no real "citrus industry" and all citrus varieties were propagated through seed. The heavy losses to footrot prompted growers to use the phytophthora-resistant sour orange rootstock, but seedling sweet orange trees still constitute 70 percent of all orange trees in the Caspian Sea area. Acid lime tolerates a high pH (8.5) and is more resistant to drought than sour orange, and so is often used as rootstock in the southern citrus areas.
Local cultivars still predominate, in spite of the many introductions that have been made since 1933.
Introduction of new citrus species and varieties
As part of the economic development of Iran, new citrus species and varieties were introduced for the first time into the Caspian Sea area (Ramsar) in 1933 from Turkey, Italy, Lebanon and the country then known as Palestine (Ebrahimi, 1975). The varieties imported were Willowleaf, Owari satsuma and Clementine mandarin; Marsh seedless and Duncan grapefruit; Thompson navel, Bouroukain, Jaffa, Shamouti, Italian and Dwarf Chinotto orange; Grosse Sanguine and Moro blood oranges; and variegated sour orange. At that time no attention was paid to the presence or absence of virus diseases.
In 1944, grapefruit budwood was sent from Ramsar to Ahwaz (Khuzestan province) and this was the beginning of a grapefruit industry in southern Iran.
In February 1962, a countrywide frost killed thousands of citrus trees. Minimum temperatures reached - 13°C in Ramsar (Mazandaran province), -6°C in Ahwaz (Khuzestan province), -7.5°C in Bam (Kerman province) and -8°C in Darab and Jahrom (Fars province). To rehabilitate the Iranian citrus industry, 700 000 certified buds were imported in 1963-64 from the Willits and Newcomb nursery in California and distributed among the various citrus experiment stations in the country, in particular the Kotra station in the Caspian Sea region. The imported varieties were Washington navel, Frost navel, Gillette navel and Parent navel orange; Frost Valencia, Olinda Valencia and Campbell Valencia orange; Algerian, Dancy and Frost Dancy tangerine; Fortune mandarin; Shambar, Redblush and Red grapefruit; Orlando and Minneola tangelo; Frost Eureka, Cook Eureka, Allen Eureka and Frost Lisbon lemon.
Additional varieties were introduced into Ramsar (Mazandaran province): in 1969 Emperor tangerine from Australia and Ishikawa and Sugiyama satsumas from Japan, and in 1971 - Salustiana, Hamlin and Marrs early sweet oranges from Willits and New-comb, California, and Wase satsuma and Cadoux Clementine from Morocco. At that time, Morocco could not certify that its citrus was virus-free.
In 1971, a large collection of citrus was established by Chapot at the Jiroft Development Organization (Kerman province) and at the Minab Experiment Station (Hormozgan province). The certified budwood came from Willits and Newcomb nursery in California and comprised 48 varieties, with 50 to 100 buds for each. The varieties were Frost navel, Parent navel, Atwood early, Skaggs bonanza, Marrs early, Salustiana, Hamlin, Pineapple, Parson Brown, Moro blood, Tarocco, Frost Valencia, Olinda Valencia and Campbell Valencia sweet oranges; Robinson, Osceola, Lee, Fortune, Fairchild, Fremont, Kinnow, Wilking, Kara (satsuma x king), Batangas, Honey, Ponkan, Dancy and Murcott mandarins; Temple tangor; Minneola, Orlando and Seminole tangelos; Wekiwa tangelo (tangelo x grapefruit); Frost Marsh, J.B.C. Marsh, Shambar, Redblush and Red grapefruits; Eustio limequats; Bouquet de fleurs sour orange; Nagamim kumquat; and Santarosa, Frost Lisbon, Caver's Lisbon, Limoneira Lisbon, Cascade Eureka,
Frost Eureka and Allen Eureka lemons.
The collection at Jiroft was completed in 1972, when Chapot introduced another group of 28 varieties from the Souheila Experiment Station near Marrakech, Morocco. Budwood of the Moroccan varieties was not certified. The varieties were: Cadoux Clementine; Wase satsuma; Murcott, Ortanique, Carvaihal and Kinnow mandarin; Taroudan and South African sour lime; Lyddengurgh sweet lime; sweet lemon; Thornless common lime; Tunis sweet and Millsweet limetta; Limonette de Marrakech; Tavares limequat; Hairy, No. 103, No. 57 and Pink seedless Shaddock; Burneo lemon; Bergamot; Grasse Bouquetier, Double-flowered Bouquetier, soft-fruited Bouquetier, Granit and large-flowered Bouquetier sour orange; Dalaman navel orange and Cadenera orange.
The Caspian Sea citrus stations also hold the 1971 -72 introductions.
In 1967, a period of bad frost caused severe damage to citrus in the Caspian Sea region. In the Mahdasht area near Sari, an orchard owned by the royal family lost many trees, except the more cold-resistant satsuma trees. Since there were not enough local satsuma trees available, the royal family imported 40 000 trees from Japan in 1968 and 15 000 more in 1970. Tristeza virus being endemic in Japan, it could be predicted that each one of the 55 000 Japanese satsuma trees was infected with tristeza virus.
These trees were grafted on P. trifoliata, a rootstock tolerant of the virus and commonly used in Japan. Hence, the 55 000 Japanese trees have grown well since, but they are responsible for the introduction of tristeza virus into Iran.
In conclusion it can be said that well over 100 citrus species, varieties and cultivars were imported into Iran between 1933 and 1977. Citrus material imported from Egypt, India, Italy, Lebanon, Morocco, Palestine, Turkey and the former USSR was probably infected with one or more virus and virus-like pathogens, since these countries had no facilities for producing budwood certified free of pathogens. Only citrus imported in 1963-64 and 1971-72 from California was certified free of known diseases. It must however be recognized that, at that time, indexing techniques for stubborn disease were not satisfactory. In addition, it is now known that Spiroplasma citri, the agent of stubborn disease, is naturally transmitted by leafhoppers. For these reasons, budwood infected with S. citri could have been introduced from California. There is also a strong possibility that stubborn was already present in Iran prior to these introductions.
Finally, the 55 000 satsuma trees imported from Japan in 1968-70, all of which were probably infected with tristeza virus, are so many swords of Damocles suspended over Iran's citrus industry.
<section>e</section>
Incidence of virus and virus-like diseases
Tristeza
Citrus tristeza virus in satsuma trees from Japan at Mahdasht. CTV was introduced at Mahdasht, near Sari, in the Caspian Sea area (see Map 6) with the importation from Japan of satsuma trees grafted on P. trifoliata. Forty thousand budded trees were imported and planted in the Mahdasht orchard in 1968, and 15 000 more in 1970.
Since tristeza is endemic in Japan, practically all of the 55000 trees were likely to be infected with CTV. Work by Iranian experts has shown that this is indeed so. CTV was detected in the trees by indexing on small-fruited acid lime as well as by ELISA and immunosorbent electron microscopy (Ebrahimi, personal communication; Minassian, 1983a; Minassian and Ghorbani, 1983). In one experiment, over 400 citrus trees from different areas in the Caspian Sea region were indexed by ELISA; in the Mahdasht orchard, 90 to 100 percent of the Japanese satsuma trees showed positive reactions (Minassian, 1983a).
Field inspection of the trees in Mahdasht, as well as ELISA and electron microscopy carried out at Bordeaux to detect CTV in samples collected at Mahdasht, have shown that five categories of satsuma trees can be identified.
Group A comprises old, healthy-looking, vigorous satsuma trees on P. trifoliata rootstock and infected with CTV. These are the budded trees imported from Japan in 1968 and 1970. They show no symptoms of tristeza in spite of their infection as they are grafted on P. trifoliata, a rootstock tolerant of CTV.
Group B consists of old, healthy-looking, vigorous satsuma trees on sour orange rootstock, and free of CTV. These are some of the satsuma trees that were present in the orchard before the trees were imported from Japan.
Group C is made up of small, stunted satsuma trees on sour orange rootstock which show pinholing on the rootstock below the bud-union line (see Fig. 145). They are infected with CTV, probably from the use of CTV-infected buds taken from trees imported from Japan, i.e. trees of Group A. They are stunted because they are susceptible to CTV when grafted on sour orange.
The fourth category, Group D, is that of relatively young, normal, satsuma trees on sour orange rootstock with no pinholing. They are free of CTV, as the buds from which these trees were propagated very probably came from CTV-free trees, such as those of Group B.
None of the above are likely to have been infected through natural transmission of CTV. There is, however, a fifth category of satsuma trees where natural transmission cannot be ruled out.
Group E is composed of large, declining satsuma trees on sour orange rootstock. They show pinholing and are found, by ELISA and electron microscopy (Fig. 31), to be infected with CTV. These trees differ from those in Group C. Whereas those in Group C are small and severely stunted, having probably been infected with CTV throughout their life - which explains why they have never produced good growth - trees of Group E were undoubtedly well developed before they began to decline. This means that they were not infected with tristeza early in their life, but became infected later, probably by natural infection.
Natural spread of CTV in the Mahdasht orchard. CTV is insect-transmitted and it is known that its insect vectors are aphids. The major aphid vector is the black Asian citrus aphid, T. citricida, which is responsible for the spread of CTV in South America, South and West Africa, Australia, India and the Far East. T. citricida is not present in the Mediterranean area or the Near East. It has never been reported in Iran. However, other aphid species can also transmit CTV: Aphis gossypii in California, Florida, India, Israel and Spain; Aphis citricola in Florida, India, Israel and Spain; Toxoptera aurantii in Florida, India and Spain; and Myzus persicae, Aphis craccivora Koch and Dactynotus jaceae L. in India.
These aphid species are generally considered less efficient CTV vectors than T. citricida. However, in Israel, A. gossypii was found to be an efficient vector of one strain of CTV (Bar-Joseph and Loebenstein, 1973). In California, the transmission rate of CTV by A. gossypii was very low in the 1950s, but recently it was found that this aphid has become a very efficient vector of several CTV isolates, probably because the virus has undergone mutations that make it readily transmissible by A. gossypii (Roistacher et al., 1980). In Spain also, one isolate of CTV was transmitted with high efficiency by A. gossypii but with low efficiency by A. citricola and T. aurantii (Hermoso de Mendoza, Ballester-Olmos and Pina Lorca, 1984). M. persicae, Aphis fabae, A. craccivora, Aphis nerii and Hyalopterus pruni failed to transmit CTV. Interestingly enough, CTV could be detected by ELISA not only in the three aphid species that transmitted the virus but also in the five species that did
not. This indicates that different aphid species can acquire CTV, regardless of their ability to transmit the virus to healthy plants (Hermoso de Mendoza, Ballester-Olmos and Pina Lorca, 1984). Finally, CTV strains in Florida (Norman and Grant, 1956) and India (Capoor and Rao, 1967) are also efficiently transmitted by A. gossypii.
To summarize, it appears that in countries where T. citricida is absent, A. gossypii can be an efficient vector of CTV and, more precisely, of certain CTV isolates. A. citricola is a less efficient vector, but is frequently abundant on citrus and may be more important as a vector of CTV than laboratory transmission tests indicate.
The following known aphid vectors of CTV are present in Iran: A. gossypii, A. citricola, T. aurantii, A. craccivora and M. persicae. In the northern province of Mazandaran, where the CTV-infected satsuma trees occur, A. gossypii is present (Ghorbani, 1983), but the two most common aphid species are T. aurantii and A. citricola (Minassian, 1983b). Hence, potential vectors for CTV transmission exist in the Caspian Sea region.
On the basis both of the trees of Group E and of the presence of potential CTV aphid vectors, it has to be concluded that natural transmission of CTV has occurred in Mahdasht.
However, judging from the symptom expression in trees, natural transmission seems to have occurred fairly recently. Also, the rate of transmission still seems to be low, judging by the absence of tristeza symptoms and lack of decline in the many trees on sour orange rootstock in the Mahdasht orchard.
The low level of natural transmission is probably due to the fact that T. aurantii and A. citricola are the predominant aphid species in the Caspian Sea area. These species are inefficient vectors of CTV compared with A. gossypii, which, under certain circumstances, can be an efficient vector. Also, it is not clear how easily aphids other than T. citricida carry CTV from satsuma to satsuma and other citrus species.
In the Izmir region of Turkey, along the Aegean coast, many satsuma trees are grown on P. trifoliata, and some are infected with CTV. In one orchard, ELISA showed 41 of 641 trees (6.4 percent) to be infected (C. Bové, personal communication). However, natural transmission has not yet been reported. In Morocco, eight trees on sour orange rootstock, including five satsuma Owari trees, were infected with CTV in the Marrakech Experiment Station, yet none of the many neighbouring trees became infected in the long period before the trees were pulled out (Cassin, 1963).
Sour orange is the only citrus rootstock used in the Caspian Sea region, and infection of trees on this rootstock with CTV would result in tristeza decline. No decline was observed by Bové during his short survey of the area in November 1985, or by the many citrus experts (Ebrahimi, Habashi, Rahimian and others) in daily contact with citrus in Mazandaran province.
It has, however, been reported that a few trees were found positive for CTV by ELISA (Minassian, 1983a), namely two mandarin trees from orchards in the vicinity of the Mahdasht orchard, as well as three trees in the Khorram-Abad citrus collection. Regarding the trees in the citrus collection in Khorram-Abad, Habashi collected samples from ten satsuma trees on sour orange rootstock. The samples were then analysed by ELISA in Bordeaux. One of the samples gave a weakly positive reaction.
In conclusion, if natural spread of CTV from the heavily CTV-infected Mahdasht orchard has occurred, its intensity still seemed to be very low (November 1985).
Recommendations.
* The Mahdasht orchard, which is so widely contaminated with CTV, must be destroyed and all the trees pulled out. This applies not only to the satsuma trees, but also to trees of sweet orange, Clementine, etc. regardless of whether rootstocks are P. trifoliata or sour orange. As wounded or sectioned citrus roots have the ability to produce shoots, care must be taken to remove all such shoots that could develop from roots left behind after the trees have been pulled out. These drastic measures must be taken for the following reasons:
* Natural spread of CTV seems to have already occurred, but the extent of transmission still seems to be low. The level of natural transmission could increase very quickly under various conditions if the large source of virus inoculum, the Mahdasht orchard, is not removed. Such conditions could be a high aphid population in the spring on young shoots following a severe frost in the winter; mutations of the virus into new strains readily transmissible by the aphids; or occurrence of CTV in citrus other than satsuma, from which spread by aphids would be more efficient.
* The CTV-infected satsuma trees on P. trifoliata are good-looking trees since they are on tolerant rootstocks. Hence, there is always the danger that inexperienced persons will collect budwood on these trees and propagate it, acting, in this way, as true vectors of the disease.
* CTV might eventually infect not only the Caspian Sea citrus area, but also other Iranian citrus regions.
* Prohibit for at least five years the use of P. trifoliata as a citrus rootstock and continue to use sour orange. Indeed, if some spread of CTV has occurred and eventually continues, trees on sour orange that have become infected will decline. They will be easy to spot and can be pulled out. The trees in the neighbourhood of the infected tree can be indexed by ELISA and, if found positive, removed. Hence, a focus of infection can be eradicated. If, however, P. trifoliata is the rootstock, the infected trees cannot be spotted; not only will the infection centres not be removed, but they will increase in size.
* Make frequent surveys to spot any tree on sour orange rootstock that might be showing early symptoms of decline.
* Use ELISA to screen suspect trees for CTV, or to identify trees that are tolerant of tristeza. Trees tolerant of tristeza are, for instance, trees grafted on root-stocks such as P. trifoliata and seedling trees of sweet orange and mandarins. The Caspian Sea province has many local seedling sweet orange trees. Make sure, by using ELISA, that none of these trees carry CTV.
Unfortunately, as of November 1992, the Mahdasht orchard had not been destroyed.
Stubborn
Citrus stubborn disease is caused by the helical mycoplasma S. citri (Saglio et al., 1973) (see Figs 22 to 24). The disease is widespread throughout the Mediterranean citrus areas and the Near East (Cyprus, Egypt, Iraq, Israel, Lebanon, the Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey). It used to be one of the major problems of citrus in California and Arizona.
Stubborn in Iran. The presence of stubborn disease in Iran has been suspected for a long time. Until the 1970s, diagnosis of the disease was based solely on symptomatology, and it is a well-known fact that stubborn diagnosis from visual symptoms is not easy. In Iran, the diagnosis seemed to be even more difficult since excessive summer heat was thought to mimic stubborn symptoms (Cochran and Samadi, 1976). For these reasons, the incidence of the disease in Iran has been reported variously as rare (Wallace, 1973) to nearly universal (Chapot, 1970, 1975). Cochran and Samadi (1976) were probably the first to confirm field diagnosis of stubborn in Iran by graft transmission of the disease agent to indicator seedlings. They transmitted stubborn from a symptomatic Gillette navel sweet orange tree from an orchard in Jiroft (southeastern Iran) to Pineapple sweet orange seedlings under greenhouse conditions.
Since the discovery and characterization of S. citri in the 1970s, stubborn can be diagnosed by detection techniques such as culture of the spiroplasma (Bové, Whitcomb and McCoy, 1983) and ELISA (Saillard and Bové, 1983).
The first S. citri isolate from Iran was cultured in Bordeaux from a sample collected in Iran by Newcomb in 1974. Since then, Rahimian, in Iran, was able to culture S. citri from citrus trees in many areas of southern and southeastern Iran (Table 30). He isolated S. citri from grapefruit and sweet orange trees, and also from Cleopatra mandarin and rough lemon trees (Rahimian, 1983).
Fruit samples were collected by Bové during his survey and taken to Bordeaux for S. citri screening by culture. Table 31 shows that S. citri could be cultured from sweet oranges collected at the Kotra, Khorram Abad and Ramsar experiment stations in the Caspian Sea area. These results prove the presence of stubborn disease in Mazandaran province. S. citri could also be detected in sweet oranges from Jiroft as well as in sweet oranges and grapefruits from the Khafr area (Fars province).
In conclusion, stubborn disease is present in practically all citrus-growing areas of Iran (see Map 2 on p. 70).
Symptoms of stubborn in Iran. As shown in Table 31, stubborn-affected sweet orange trees in Iran are characterized by poor crops, bushy growth, stunting, fruits of various sizes and ages, small spoon-shaped leaves, seed abortion, off-season blooming, closure of navel, etc. Symptoms were more severe in the hot Jiroft and Khafr areas than in the cool Caspian Sea areas, probably because stubborn expression is poor in cool climates.
Stubborn-affected trees in the Caspian Sea area (Kotra, Ramsar, Khorram Abad stations) drew attention because of their poor yield.
The most severe symptoms of stubborn were observed in the Khafr area on local sweet orange trees (Fig. 147) and on grapefruit trees of unknown origin or possibly from Jiroft. The grapefruit trees in one orchard (Resvan orchard at Bab Anar) were severely stunted, with very small fruit showing strong blue albedo (Fig. 169). DNA-DNA hybridization confirmed these trees to be infected with S. citri.
TABLE 30 Occurrence of citrus stubborn disease in Iran
Province Location (town or area) Stubborn diagnosis by:
Symptoms Culture of S. citri
Mazandaran (north) Sari Ebrahimi^1
Kotra Ebrahimi Bové, 1985
Khorram Abad Bové, 1985
Ramsar Ebrahimi Bové, 1985
Fars (south) Kazerun Izadpanah 
Cochran^2 
Nurabad Izadpanah 
Khafr Izadpanah Bové, 1985
Jahrom Izadpanah 
Busheir (south) Dalaki Izadpanah 
Hormozgan (southeast) Hajiabad Rahimian, 19833
Minab Bové, 1985
Kerman (southeast) Orzu'iyeh Rahimian, 1983
Shadad Rahimian, 1983
Jiroft Rahimian, 1983
Bové, 1985
Bam Rahimian, 1983
Baravat Rahimian, 1983
Narmashir Rahimian, 1983
Sistan-va-Baluchestan
(southeast) Iranshar Rahimian, 1983
Chah Bahar Rahimian, 1983 
Notes:
^1 Personal communication.
^2 Cochran and Samadi, 1976.
Conditions of excessive heat change the normal morphology of citrus leaves. Lateral veins tend to run parallel to leaf margins, yielding so-called "palmate" leaves (see Fig. 159). Midribs of leaves are sometimes shortened, giving cordate leaves or leaves with blunt ends. Leaf distortion may produce boat-shaped leaves. In all these cases, the leaf blades remain uniformly green (see Fig. 159), except for sunburns. These leaf modifications have been described in Iran by Cochran and Samadi (1976) and Reuther, Nauer and Roistacher (1979). The latter also reproduced the symptoms using healthy citrus material in growth chambers, showing that the symptoms are physiological rather than pathological in origin, and hence not due to stubborn. Work by Bové in Iraq (see Chapter 12) has clearly shown that stubborn-affected trees under high-temperature conditions tend to produce sucker-like shoots characterized by leaves with pinched-in, yellow tips (see Fig. 160); and often also with
yellow edges. Hence, such leaves are not uniformly green (see Figs 160 and 161). Some of these leaves may show heat effects (see Fig. 160), but stubborn infection is revealed by the yellow tips or edges, not by palmate or cordate leaf morphology. In the Jiroft area and in the Khafr region where citrus grows under high temperatures in the summer, leaves showing only heat effects could be clearly distinguished from those affected by stubborn. It must be added that leaves with normal morphology, but with yellow tips and edges due to stubborn, can sometimes occur in the absence of excessive heat.
TABLE 31 Stubborn in sweet orange trees in certain regions of Iran in November 1985 as diagnosed by visual symptoms and/or Spiroplasma citri
S. citri strains imported from California and Morocco. S. citri is naturally transmitted in California by at least three leafhopper species, the most important being Neoaliturus tenellus (Caravan and Bové, 1989). It is highly probable that some of the many budwood sticks imported from California in 1963-64 and 1971 -72 were infected with S. citri, even though they were certified free of known diseases. This is understandable in view of the natural spread of the disease in California and the difficulty of indexing for stubborn disease. Evidence for the presence of S. citri in some of the citrus cultivars imported from California can be seen in Table 31. For instance, Salustiana sweet orange imported in 1971 is infected with S. citri not only in Khorram Abad and Ramsar stations but also at Minab and Jiroft. Similarly, the Valencia late sweet orange imported in 1963-64 and the Hamlin sweet orange imported in 1971 are infected at both Kotra and Ramsar experiment stations. Skaggs
Bonanza navel orange imported in 1971 is infected at both Minab and Jiroft stations.
It is also very probable that some of the species imported from Morocco in 1972 were similarly infected with S. citri, as stubborn is known to be a major problem in Morocco. Budwood imported from other Mediterranean countries could also have been infected.
Natural transmission of S. citri in Iran. The main evidence for natural transmission of S. citri in Iran comes from the fact that local sweet orange cultivars, i.e. cultivars not imported from California or Mediterranean countries, have been found to be infected with S. citri, for instance in the Khafr area and at Jiroft (Table 31). Further evidence is provided by the fact that a nucellar line of Hamlin sweet orange was found to be infected with S. citri at the Ramsar experiment station (Table 31). This nucellar line was developed in Iran from seeds collected in the foundation grove in Orlando (Florida). Since stubborn has never been described in Florida and since S. citri is not transmitted through seed, the Hamlin nucellar trees must have become infected in Iran.
If natural transmission of S. citri occurs in Iran, it is quite possible that some of the citrus species imported from California in 1963-64 and 1971-72 were initially healthy, but became infected with S. citri in Iran.
Distribution of the two major vectors of S. citri in the citrus-growing areas of Iran. N. tenellus (see Fig. 35) is the major leafhopper vector of S. citri in California and Arizona (Caravan and Bové, 1989). In the Mediterranean area and the Near East, N. haematoceps (see Fig. 34) has recently been identified as an efficient vector of S. citri (Fos et al., 1986; Calavan and Bové, 1989). N. tenellus is also present in the Mediterranean area but, in view of its paucity, it probably does not play a major role. N. haematoceps seems to be the main vector.
In Iran, both N. tenellus and N. haematoceps occur, the latter being, however, the most abundant of the two. Their distribution is fairly well established as they are known to be vectors of curly top virus of sugar beets. Tables 32 and 33 list some of the locations where they have been found, showing that the leafhoppers occur in all citrus-growing areas. From a comparison of Tables 32 and 33, it is clear that N. tenellus is less widespread than N. haematoceps. Map 2 on p. 70 gives the major citrus-growing areas, the occurrence of stubborn and the distribution of N. haematoceps and N. tenellus in Iran. It shows a close relationship between their occurrence and the presence of stubborn in the citrus-growing areas.
Occurrence of major host plants of N. haematoceps and N. tenellus. The distribution of N. haematoceps and N. tenellus reflects the distribution of their host plants. Table 34 lists host plants of N. tenellus in California-Arizona and of N. haematoceps in the Mediterranean area. Three wild host plants seem to be of major importance: Salsola kali L. (syn. S. pestifer, S. iberica), Alhagi camelorum (syn. A. persarum) and Matthiola spp. (stock).
S. kali subsp. tragus (see Figs 36, 170 to 174, and Map 3 on p. 71) is very widespread (Freitag, personal communication). Its natural distribution area covers the Mediterranean zone and most of the Irano-Turanian regions. It has spread over all arid and semi-arid areas in the warm temperature zones. In Cyprus, Iran, Iraq, Morocco and the Syrian Arab Republic the subspecies is extremely common -particularly on disturbed habitats (ruderal sites in towns, villages, on road sides, etc.), on arable lands (irrigated and non-irrigated) and on the seashore - from the hot lowlands up to altitudes of more than 2 000 m, with the highest densities in the hot and arid to semi-arid lowlands (see also Chapters 7, 9, 12, 15 and 21). In southern Iran, Pakistan and India, S. kali is replaced by an allied species. Other closely related species and subspecies are found in Azerbaijan, in the lowlands from northeastern Iran to central Asia. These taxa, systematically close to S. kali subsp.
tragus, are probably able to nourish the same leafhoppers as S. kali.
Another wild host plant of N. haematoceps known to be widespread throughout Iran is A. camelorum. In Syria and Corsica, ornamental (Matthiola incana L.) and wild (Matthiola sinuata R.Br.) stock plants are also good hosts for N. haematoceps.
Both N. tenellus and N. haematoceps are often called "sugar beet leafhoppers" as they are common on that crop and are vectors of sugar beet curly top virus. Sugar beet is grown widely in the Shiraz region, and N. haematoceps has been found equally widely.
Thus there are many plants in Iran, both wild and cultivated, able to support the development of the two leafhopper vectors of S. citri. It is believed that naturally infected, non-rutaceous plants are the main sources of inoculum on which the leafhoppers become infected with S. citri, hence the importance of these plant species. Matthiola spp., or stock, found to be a good host of N. haematoceps in Syria and Corsica, can be infected with S. citri by both N. tenellus and N. haematoceps. Hence, it could be a good candidate for the source of inoculum.
TABLE 32 Occurrence of Neoaliturus haematoceps in Iran
Number on Map 2 Nearby town Location and vegetation
I Caspian Sea area
1 Dasht National park 650 m, oak forest
National park, eastern part, 1 000 m. Woody steppe with Juniperus trees
2 Minudasht Humid grassy area
3 Al Abad River shore with tamarisk trees
4 Abbas Abad On Caspian Sea coast. Saline shore vegetation
5 Assalem On Caspian Sea coast
II - Azerbaijan
6 Tabriz
7 Sufian Between Marand and Tabriz, watered gardens
8 Marand 21 km east of Marand, saline swamps with halophile vegetation at rim of fields
9 Marand 23 km south of Marand, steppe at river banks
10 Marand Undergrowth of deciduous bushes and tamarisk
11 Zonuschay river 66 km west of Marand, dry fields and semi-desert with Alhagi
12 Maku Semi-desert
13 Orumiyeh Lake shores
III- Elburz Mountains
14 Evin 1000 m northern Teheran suburb
15 Gholhak 1700 m near Teheran
16 Varamin 1000 m
17a Damavand 3000 to 5000 m, mountainous steppe, with astragalus
17b Lajran 2400 m, mountainous steppe
18 Gazanak 1400 m, banks of river Haraz Chay, steppes and fields
19 Rudbarak 1350 m, moor
20a Kandavan pass 3000 m, mountain steppe
20b Kandavan 2545 m, valley north of Tunnel, mountain vegetation
21 Tochal 3000 to 4000 m, mountainous steppes, at snow-line
IV - Southern Elburz
22 Qazvin Semi-desert with Alhagi
23 Abyek Steppe with Artemisia
24 Karaj
V - Central Iran
25 Organ Near Isfahan, 2 000 m along the banks of Zayandehrud river.
VI - Zagros Mountains
26 Ahwaz
27 Minu island
28 Kazerun 10 km north of town, oak woods
29a Shiraz North of town, semi-desert with Alhagi
29b Shiraz West of town, salty brook
30 Marvdasht
31 Al Abad 1) Wadi Shurt
2) Sandy, muddy river banks
32 Fasa Watered gardens
33 Bakhtegan 30 km east of Sahlabad, shores of salty lake
34 Estahbanat Semi desert
VlI - Southeast
35 Rafsanjan
36 Kerman
37 Shadad
38 Jiroft Cotton field
Source: Ergebnisse der entomologischen Expeditionen nach dem Iran, Homoptera. Acta Entomologica Musei Nalionalis Pragae, 40, 1981, p. 251-252.
TABLE 33 Occurence of Neoaliturus tenellus in Iran
Location
(town or area) Observations
I North: Minudasht
Tochal Mountain in Elburz range, 3 000-3 400 m
Evin Teheran suburb
II Shiraz area Marvdasht
III West. Malavi 
IV Southeast: Jiroft On cotton
Source: Ergebnisse der entomologischen Expeditionen nach dem Iran, Homoptera. Acta Entomologica Musei Nalionalis Pragae, 40, 1981, p. 253.
Stubborn in Iran: conclusion. The fact that local sweet orange varieties as well as a nucellar line are infected with 5. citri shows that natural transmission of S. citri occurs in the country. This is not surprising since the two major leafhopper vectors are present in, or close to, the major citrus areas of Iran. The distribution of the leafhopper vectors reflects the distribution of their major host plants. Some of these, such as S. kali and A. camelorum, are extremely common in Iran.
Up to now, natural transmission of S. citri in Iran was probably obscured by the fact that some citrus cultivars imported from California, and perhaps Morocco, were infected with S. citri. Hence, it was believed that the presence of stubborn in Iran was the result of budwood importation. It is, however, extremely likely that citrus stubborn disease existed in Iran prior to these introductions. Also, it is quite possible that S. citri-infected plants other than citrus have been present in Iran for many years, and perhaps even before citrus was cultured on a large scale. From now on, programmes to control stubborn (see Chapter 7) must take into account natural transmission of the disease.
Other virus and virus-like diseases
Cachexia -xyloporosis
Cachexia (see Figs 38 to 59) was seen on many satsuma trees in the Mahdasht orchard (Mazandaran province). Some of these trees carry a double infection: cachexia and tristeza. In the Ramsar Experiment Station, 60-year-old satsuma trees on sour orange rootstock showed mild cachexia symptoms (gum in the bark).
TABLE 34 Host plants of Neoaliturus haematoceps and M tenellus
N. haematoceps and N. tenellus Mediterranean zone, Near East^1
N. tenellus USA^2
Alhagi mannifera Desv Leguminosae Atriplex bracteosa Wats. Chenopodiaceae
Alhagi camelorum Fisch " Atriplex expanse (D&H) S. Wats "
Alyssum sp. Cruciferae Beta vulgaris L. "
Artemisia sp. Compositae Brassica tournefortii Gouan. Cruciferae
A triplex sp. Chenopodiaceae Cheirinia repanda Link "
Beta vulgaris L. " Erodium circutarium (L.) L' Her Geraniaceae
Cistus sp. Cistaceae Lepidium latipes Hook. Cruciferae
Erodium sp. Geraniaceae Lepidium nitidum Nutt 
Euphorbia sp. Euphorbiaceae Malcomia africana (L.) R.Br. 
Malcomia sp. Cruciferae Plantago erecta Morris Plantaginaceae
Marrubium sp. Labiatae Plantago fastigiata Morris "
Matthiola incana (L.) R Br. Cruciferae Plantago insularis East W. 
Matthiola sinuata (L) R Br. " Plantago ovate Forssk "
Micromeria sp. Labiatae Salsola pestifer (S.kali) A. Nels. Chenopodiaceae
Plantago sp. Plantaginaceae Sisymbrium altissimum L. Cruciferae
Polygonum sp. Polygonaceae Sisymbrium irio L "
Portulaca oleracea L Portulaceae Sisymbrium longipedicellata O.K. "
Prosopis sp. Leguminosae Sisymbrium sophia L "
Rosmarinus officinalis L. Labiatae 
Salicornia sp. Chenopodiaceae 
Salsola kali(S. pestifer) L " 
Thymus sp. Labiatae 
Notes:
^1 From the following references Calavan and Bové, 1989: Fos et al, 1986; Frazier, 1953; Freitag, Frazier and Huffaker, 1955; Huffaker e, al, 1954: Nielson, 1975.
^2 From: Calavan and Bové, 1989: Huffaker et al, 1954; Nielson, 1975.
Cachexia has been reported previously in the Caspian Sea area, near Sari-Ouaem Shar and Tonekabon (Habashi, personal communication; Ebrahimi, 1985). Cachexia was also seen at the Isin Citrus Station, Hormozgan province, on "Bami" local mandarin trees.
It is not surprising to find cachexia in Iran. The disease is present worldwide and many old-line cultivars of mandarin, Clementine, satsuma and tangelo carry the disease. Importations of old lines from Egypt, Israel, Italy, Japan, Lebanon, Morocco, Turkey and the former USSR have probably introduced the disease into Iran. The pathogen is also present in many old-line cultivars of sweet orange, grapefruit and lemon, but these species are tolerant of cachexia, and only indexing on indicator plants such as Parson's Special mandarin (see Figs 58 and 59) or detection of the viroid RNA by sPAGE (see Chapter 7) will confirm the presence of the pathogen in these species.
The cachexia viroid is mechanically transmissible, but is not spread by vectors other than humans and can be readily eliminated from citrus by shoot-tip grafting.
Ring pattern disease
This disease is characterized by spectacular leaf patterns, including ringspots, chlorotic spots and line patterns, as shown in Figs 123 and 124. Sunken lines and ring patterns are conspicuous on fruits (see Fig. 124). The disease is concentrated in the area around Chalus-Now Shar in the Caspian Sea region, although symptoms were also seen on satsuma fruits in the Mahdasht orchard near Sari. The disease mainly affects satsuma, Clementine and local sweet orange trees, and also Palestine sweet lime. No symptoms have been seen on lemon and shaddock trees. Habashi, from the Virus Diseases and Pests Laboratory at Tonekabon, has graft-transmitted the disease to citrus seedlings including local sweet orange (Fig. 124). Shang she tangerine has been found to be a good indicator plant (Ebrahimi, Anvari and Shakholleslami, 1988).
The disease does not seem to be naturally transmitted. The presence of ring pattern symptoms on 50-year-old local sweet orange seedling trees is explained by Iranian workers by the occurrence of root grafts between healthy and affected trees as a result of root cuts following soil ploughing. No symptoms of bark scaling are associated with ring pattern disease in Iran. The disease may be similar to syndromes described in California (Wallace and Drake, 1968), Sicily (Catara and Grasso, 1968), Spain (Planes and Marti, 1972), Greece (Keramidas, 1975) and Corsica (Vogel and Bové, 1980), where no bark symptoms accompany those on fruit and leaves. It differs from those in Florida and Texas (Timmer and Garnsey, 1980) and Argentina (Pujol and Benatena, 1965), where the disease seems to spread naturally and is associated with bark lesions. Mechanical transmission of ring pattern in Iran has not yet been carried out.
Ringspot virus can be easily eliminated by shoot-tip grafting (Arroyo, 1984) and the same should be true for the ring pattern agent.
Woody gall-vein enation
At the Minab Experiment Station (Hormozgan province) and at the Jiroft Development Organization (Kerman province), large collections of citrus have been planted on small-fruited acid lime rootstocks. Typical woody gall symptoms were observed by Bové on the lime rootstocks of Campbell, Frost (Fig. 130) and Olinda Valencia late sweet orange trees, as well as on Kinnow and Batangas mandarin trees. The trees did not seem to be greatly affected by the disease. The three orange and two mandarin cultivars were introduced in 1971-72 from the Willits and Newcomb nurseries in California and were supposed to be certified free of known virus and virus-like diseases of citrus.
It is surprising to find woody gall on these trees. It is known that the pathogen is naturally transmitted in a persistent manner (see Chapter 3) by the aphids T. citricida, M. persicae and A. gossypii, the latter two being present in Iran. It is unlikely, however, that natural transmission is responsible for the presence of woody gall in the trees, as the orchard is planted as single rows of each cultivar, and the disease is only seen on certain rows, i.e. on certain cultivars but not on others. This pattern of disease distribution does not fit insect transmission.
At Jiroft, woody gall was seen on Moro sweet orange trees, again imported from Willits and Newcomb. Finally, woody gall was seen on the Bakravi rootstock of a local mandarin tree in an orchard near Jiroft (Fig. 131). Interestingly, Bakravi is supposed to be a hybrid between mandarin and small-fruited acid lime. The lime parent is probably responsible for Bakravi being susceptible to woody gall.
Woody gall disease is accompanied by vein enation leaf symptoms on certain citrus species such as small-fruited acid lime and sour orange. Seedlings of these species can be used for indexing purposes. Enations begin to appear five to eight weeks after graft inoculation of bark from infected candidate trees. Galls also develop on lime seedlings but they appear several weeks after the enations. They develop more extensively on rough lemon and Citrus volkameriana seedlings. It would be interesting to index some of the woody gall-infected trees in Iran for vein enation development on lime seedlings.
In conclusion, the use of an unorthodox, woody gall-sensitive rootstock - namely small-fruited acid lime - has revealed infection with the woody gall virus in certain cultivars.
Exocortis
Exocortis, a viroid disease characterized by bark scaling in various rootstocks (P. trifoliata, citranges, Rangpur lime - see Table 7, p. 25), has been reported by Iranian workers in citrus orchards of the Caspian Sea region. At the Kotra Experiment Station, Ebrahimi showed Bové severe cases of exocortis on Sanguinella sweet orange trees grafted on P. trifoliata rootstock (Fig. 83). The Sanguinella sweet orange was imported in 1934 from Italy. The disease was similarly observed on the P. trifoliata rootstock of a Clementine tree, also of Mediterranean origin. In addition to bark scaling of the rootstock, these trees were severely stunted.
Worldwide, many old-line cultivars are known to be infected with the exocortis agent. Sweet orange, mandarin, grapefruit and lemon being tolerant, infected cultivars of these species will induce exocortis symptoms only when grafted on susceptible rootstocks (see Table 7). On sour orange, a tolerant root stock, no symptoms will develop. Hence, the distribution of exocortis in Iran might be much wider than revealed by trees grafted on P. trifoliata. Indexing for exocortis on Etrog citron (selections 60-13, 861-S1) (see Fig. 90) is easy and fast, and will reveal infection of tolerant scion-rootstock combinations.
Finally, it must be remembered that the exocortis viroids are mechanically transmissible with knives, scissors, pruning tools, etc. which can carry the disease agent from infected trees to healthy ones. Therefore, the presence of infected nursery or orchard trees alongside healthy trees is a hazard and must be avoided, unless careful disinfection of tools with bleach (5 percent sodium hypochlorite solution) is carried out. The same is true for the cachexia viroids.
Impietratura
The impietratura pathogen induces gum pockets (see Figs 116 and 117) in the albedo of many commercial citrus species (see Table 7). On ripening fruits, affected areas remain green longer (see Fig. 116). On mature fruits, they are often sunken. Impietratura, a widespread Mediterranean disease, has been reported by Iranian workers at various locations of the Caspian Sea region. Bové was shown the disease at the Kotra Experiment Station on fruit from 19-year-old Washington navel trees introduced from Willits and New-comb in 1963-64. The imported citrus plant material being certified free of virus and virus-like diseases, the presence of impietratura on these trees is surprising.
The symptoms of impietratura were first recorded in 1930 in Israel, but they were thought to be due to a physiological disorder (Reichert and Hellinger, 1930), and the infectious nature of the disease was only established in 1961 (Ruggieri, 1961). In addition, indexing for impietratura is not easy when fruit symptoms are to be obtained. Only in 1970 was it reported that impietratura-infected trees also show flecking on young leaves (Bar-Joseph and Loebenstein, 1970), similar to that known as "psorosis young leaf symptoms". It is possible, therefore, that the citrus material imported from California in 1963-64 had not yet been specifically indexed for impietratura. Another possibility is that the seedlings used as rootstocks for the 1963-64 California citrus material were already infected with the impietratura agent by previous grafting with infected buds that did not take, but did transmit the impietratura agent.
Concave gum
Concave gum disease is characterized by broad, conspicuous concavities (see Figs 102 to 106) on trunk and limbs of susceptible species such as sweet orange, mandarin and tangelo (see Table 7). Gum accumulates between wood and bark, and oozes out through cracks in the bark, especially in species such as Washington navel sweet orange and Orlando tangelo. Gum-filled wood layers may alternate with normal layers and result in gum-stained rings, as seen on cross-sections of branches and limbs. In addition, so-called psorosis young leaf symptoms are characteristic of infected trees.
Concave gum disease was observed by Bové at the Kotra Experiment Station on Washington navel sweet orange trees introduced from Willits and Newcomb in 1963-64. The trees showed gum accumulation between bark and wood, and gum pockets in the wood.
As in the case of impietratura, the presence of concave gum symptoms on citrus imported from California is surprising. Concave gum is an old, well-known disease, and it is easy to index on the basis of psorosis young leaf symptoms. Here again, the most plausible explanation is the use of infected rootstock seedlings.
Scaly bark psorosis
Scaly bark psorosis (Psorosis A) affects sweet orange, grapefruit, mandarin and tangelo (see Table 7). It has been reported from the Caspian Sea area. Bové was shown a case on a 60-year-old "du Bey" sweet orange tree on sour orange rootstock at the Ramsar Experiment Station.
Cristacortis
Cristacortis results in stem pitting (see Figs 109 to 115) of sweet orange, sour orange, mandarin, etc. (see Table 7). It has been found by Rahimian in the Babol and Sari areas of the Caspian Sea region on blood orange and satsuma trees grafted on sour orange rootstock. Stem pitting was seen not only on the scion, in particular on young branches, but also on the sour orange rootstock, a characteristic symptom of the disease. The affected trees showed psorosis young leaf symptoms, which are also typical of cristacortis. Graft transmissions of psorosis young leaf symptoms have been obtained, but it was too early to see stem pitting on the graft-infected seedlings.
<section>f</section>
Virus and virus-like diseases: General conclusions
In addition to tristeza and stubborn, eight other virus and virus-like diseases are present in Iran: cachexia, ring pattern (ringspot), woody gall, exocortis, impietratura, concave gum, scaly bark psorosis and cristacortis.
All of these diseases have been seen on citrus cultivars imported into Iran from abroad: tristeza on satsuma trees from Japan; stubborn, woody gall, impietratura and concave gum on many sweet orange varieties from California and probably Morocco; exocortis on sweet orange from Italy; and, on cultivars of Mediterranean origin, cristacortis on blood orange, cachexia on satsuma and ring pattern on Clementine.
Some of the diseases have also been seen on local citrus cultivars, including stubborn and ring pattern on local sweet orange, and cachexia and woody gall on local mandarin. However, in general, local cultivars - especially sweet oranges - seem to be little infected, probably for two reasons. First, prior to the introduction of "modern" citrus cultivars from abroad, citrus in Iran was propagated by seed, and hence was free of infectious diseases, since these diseases are not transmitted through seed. Second, most infectious diseases of citrus present in Iran are not naturally transmitted by insect vectors.
The diseases present in Iran for which natural transmission can occur are tristeza, stubborn and woody gall. Some natural transmission of tristeza virus has probably occurred recently in the Mahdasht orchard, where 55000 infected satsuma trees have been growing since 1968-70. The eradication of this orchard for phytosanitary reasons is most urgent.
There is clear-cut evidence that natural transmission of S. citri, the causal agent of stubborn disease, is occurring in Iran. The two major leafhopper vectors of S. citri, N. haematoceps and N. tenellus, have been reported in, or close to, the major citrus-growing areas, the former leafhopper being more widely distributed and more abundant than the latter. Some of the host plants of these leafhoppers, such as S. kali or A. camelorum, are extremely common in Iran.
There is little doubt that stubborn was brought into Iran from California and Morocco, though it was probably present in the country before this. The disease may have remained unnoticed because some of the local varieties may be less susceptible to stubborn than the imported varieties, such as navel oranges. There are, however, local sweet orange varieties in the Khafr region (Fars province) which express typical stubborn symptoms.
The pathogen of woody gall is transmitted by the same aphid species as those that propagate tristeza virus. In the Minab area at least, woody gall does not seem to be naturally transmitted.
The exocortis and cachexia viroids have no insect vectors, but humans can mechanically pass the agents from infected trees to healthy ones.
The presence of the pathogens of woody gall, impietratura and concave gum in certified citrus material introduced from California in 1963-64 and 1971 is surprising, as already discussed. Impietratura and concave gum affect Washington navel sweet orange trees from the 1963-64 introductions. Both diseases induce psorosis young leaf symptoms and could hardly have been missed when the Washington navel lines were indexed in California. Woody gall is present in at least three Valencia late sweet orange selections, Campbell, Frost and Olinda, and in two mandarins, Kinnow and Batangas. All five cultivars were introduced in 1971. While it cannot be excluded that indexing missed certain diseases in certain cultivars, as stated above, the possibility remains that some of the rootstock seedlings used for the propagation of the imported budwood were already infected by previous budding of infected buds that did not take, but were alive long enough to transmit their disease agent(s).
Iran decided to modernize its citrus industry in 1934. At that time the importance of virus and virus-like diseases was not known and the cultivars that were imported, essentially from Mediterranean countries, were probably infected by a number of infectious diseases. The first international meeting on virus diseases of citrus was held in 1957, in California, and stressed the importance of using citrus budwood material certified free of virus diseases. Iranian citrus scientists were well aware of these developments, and in 1963-64 they imported budwood from California because only California at that time was able to offer certified budwood. In 1971, more certified cultivars were introduced from California into Minab and Jiroft, and the Caspian Sea region. Today, the fact is that some of these cultivars turn out to be not only infected with naturally transmissible diseases such as stubborn, but also with diseases that are not naturally spread, such as impietratura and concave
gum. This situation casts doubt on all the imported budwood.
However, the work carried out in Iran since 1963 remains very useful. It has been possible at the Kotra, Khorram Abad and Ramsar stations to evaluate the behaviour of the 1963-64 and 1971-72 citrus introductions with regard to their adaptation to the Caspian Sea conditions. Similar observations have been made at the Minab and Jiroft collections in the southern citrus belt. Efforts should be concentrated on those species, varieties or cultivars that have been shown to perform best in the various citrus-growing regions of the country. These cultivars could form the basis for renewed progress in citrus development in Iran. For total security, they could be submitted to shoot-tip grafting followed by indexing, and then used for foundation groves and mother tree orchards. At the present time, the citrus collections at Minab and Jiroft are so large that they do not receive the required attention. The new citrus programme should be conducted on a smaller scale, but with high
standards, following the recommendations that have been made in order to eradicate tristeza and to keep stubborn disease at a reasonable level.
Other important, non-viral diseases
Phytophthora gummosis
Several cases of gummosis were encountered during the survey. The usual causes of gummosis are poor horticultural practices, in particular: the tendency to plant trees too deep, with the bud-union line too close to the soil or even buried; low budding; or use of phytophthora-sensitive rootstocks such as acid lime or the Bakravi hybrid. With appropriate cultural methods, gummosis should not be a problem.
According to Banihashemi (1983), it appears that Phytophthora nicotianae var. parasitica (PNP) is predominant in hot areas and Phytophthora citrophthora (PC) in temperate regions. PC was isolated from soil collected in Darab, Jahrom, Kazerun, Shiraz, Khafr (Fars province), and also in Jiroft (Kerman province), the latter by Mansoori. PNP was isolated from samples collected in Hormozgan province and in Jiroft.
Salt injury
In the southern citrus belt, irrigation water carries high levels of salts, and the soil pH can be as high as 8.5. Severe leaf symptoms of boron excess (see Figs 255 to 257) and lithium excess were observed at the Isin Citrus Station (Hormozgan province) - where all citrus is on sour orange rootstock - and of chloride excess at the Minab Station (Hormozgan province), where many trees are on acid lime rootstock. Lime tolerates soils with high pH and has the reputation of being more drought-resistant than sour orange. However, Cleopatra mandarin is more salt-tolerant than acid lime.
Reuther (1976) has also pointed out that, at the Minab Experiment Station, all varieties showed salt toxicity symptoms. Water for this station comes from several deep wells which have a high salt content (electrical conductivity x 106 ranging from 1 320 to 3 250) with 43-57 percent sodium. The least-saline well is marginal and the others too saline for economic citrus production.
Autumn blast
Autumn blast refers to twigs that suddenly die and dry up in situ (Figs 252 to 254), with gum material conspicuous on parts of the stem (Fig. 253). The dry leaves do not fall off. There is a clear-cut margin between the upper, brownish, dead bark of the stem of the dried-up twig and the lower bark that is green and alive. This twig dieback appears on the uppermost part of the canopy, though in severe cases lower branches show dead twigs too. The symptoms start around mid-October. Mandarin and Clementine trees are most susceptible, followed by sweet orange and grapefruit trees. Lemon trees are much less affected and sour orange trees never. Bové observed a similar affliction in the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya in 1974 and in Iraq in October 1985. In Florida, "firing" resembles autumn blast. Obviously, the disorder is less of a problem in more temperate climates.
The cause of autumn blast is not known. It is probably not due to parasitic microorganisms or pests, but seems rather to reflect the failure of the terminal twigs to secure sufficient moisture and water. Factors that could be responsible for insufficient water supply in the autumn in Iran are the wide temperature difference between day and night, or the relatively low soil temperatures that contrast with high air temperatures in the day. These temperature differences might induce twig dieback, especially if the root system is inadequate because of poor cultivation, root injury, attack by fungi such as Phytophthora spp., unbalanced water supply, etc.
The threat of witches' broom disease of Lime
Witches' broom disease is a new MLO disease which has already killed a large proportion of the lime trees in Oman, where 22 percent of all lime trees are affected. The disease is spreading and had reached the United Arab Emirates in 1989. It represents a very serious threat for the lime orchards in the southern parts of Iran. Quarantine measures must be strictly reinforced so as to keep the disease out of Iran (see also Chapter 16).
Bibliography
Arroyo, L.E. 1984. Elimination of citrus ringspot virus by shoot-tip grafting. In Proc. 9th Conf: IOCV, p. 177-179. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Banihashemi, Z. 1983. Detection and isolation of Phytophthora spp. in citrus soil and their distribution in citrus-growing areas of southern Iran. In Proc. 7th Plant Prot. Congress of Iran, p. 97-99. Karaj, Iran, College of Agric., Univ. Teheran.
Bar-Joseph, M. & Loebenstein, G. 1970. Leaf flecking on indicator seedlings with citrus in Israel. Plant Dis. Rep., 54: 643646.
Bar-Joseph, M. & Loebenstein, G. 1973. Effects of strain, source plant and temperature on transmissibility of citrus tristeza virus by the melon aphid. Phytopathol., 63: 716-720.
Bové, J.M., Whitcomb, R.F. & McCoy, R.E. 1983. Culture techniques for spiroplasmas from plants. In Methods in mycoplasmology, vol. II, p. 225-234. New York, Academic Press.
Calavan, E.C. & Bové, J.M. 1989. Ecology of Spiroplasma citri. In R. F. Whitcomb & J.G. Tully, eds. The mycoplasmas, p. 425485. New York, Academic Press.
Capoor, S.P. & Rao, D.G. 1967. Tristeza virus infection of citrus in India. In Proc. Int. Symp. Sub-trop. & Trop. Hort., p. 723-736.
Cassin, J. 1963. Découverte de huit cas de tristeza parmi un lot de plants agés de citrus introduits au Maroc. Al-Awamia [Rabat], 9: 53-57.
Catara, A. & Grasso, S. 1968. Una nuova virosi degli agrumi per l'Italia: "La maculatura anulare" ("Ring spot"). Riv. Pat. Veg., Ser. IV, 4: 261-266.
Chapot, H. 1970. Citrus production problems in the Near East and North Africa. UNDP/FAO Report No. 2810. Rome, FAO.
Chapot, H. 1975. Citrus production problems in the Near and Middle East. Span, 17(1).
Cochran, L.C. 1976. Occurrence of greening disease in Pakistan. In Proc. 7th Conf IOCV, p. 21. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Cochran, L.C. & Samadi, M. 1976. Distribution of stubborn disease in Iran. In Proc. 7th Conf: IOCV, p. 10-12. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Dehyar, K. & Habashi, M. 1974. Citrus ring pattern virus in the Caspian Sea area of Iran. Iranian J. Plant Path., 10: 17-20.
Ebrahimi, Y. 1975. Citrus varieties in Iran. Dezful Citrus Meeting, SAFIABAD.
Ebrahimi, Y. 1985. Citrus production, maintenance and distribution of virus-free planting material in Islamic Republic of Iran. Consultation meeting, Rome, Sept. 1985.
Ebrahimi, Y., Anvari, F. & Shakholleslami, K. 1988. Evaluation of eleven different citrus cultivars as ring pattern virus disease indicator plants in northern Iran. In Proc. 10th Conf: IOCV, p. 365-366. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Fos, A., Bové, J.M., Lallemand, J., Saillard, C., Vignault, J.C., Ali, Y., Brun, P. & Vogel, R. 1986. La cicadelle Neoaliturus haematoceps (Mulsant et Rey) est vecteur de Spiroplasma citri en Méditerranée. Ann. Inst. Pasteur/Microbiol., 137 A: 97-107.
Frazier, N.W. 1953. A survey of the Mediterranean region for the beet leafhopper. J. Econ. Entomol., 46: 551-554.
Freitag, J.H., Frazier, N.W. & Huffaker, C.B. 1955. Crossbreeding beet leafhoppers from California and French Morocco. J. Econ. Entomol., 48(3): 341342.
Ghorbani, S. 1983. Detection of citrus tristeza virus in its aphid vectors in northern Iran by immunosorbent electron microscopy. In Proc. 7th Plant Prot. Cong of Iran, p. 8. Karaj, Iran, College of Agric., Univ. Teheran.
Gumpf, D.J. & Calavan, E.C. 1981. Stubborn disease of citrus. In K. Maramorosch & S.P. Raychaudhuri, eds. Mycoplasma diseases of trees and shrubs, p. 97-134. New York, Academic Press.
Hermoso de Mendoza, A., Ballester-Olmos, J.F. & Pina Lorca, J.A. 1984. Transmission of citrus tristeza virus by aphids (Homoptera, Aphididae) in Spain. In Proc. 9th Conf. IOCV, p. 23-27. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Huffacker, C.B., Holloway, J.K., Doutt, R.L. & Finney, G.L. 1954. Introduction of egg parasites of the beet leafhopper. J. Econ. Entomol., 47: 785-789.
Keramidas, C.Z. 1975. Ringspot, encore une virose pour notre agrumiculture. Geoponika, 26-29.
Minassian, V. 1983a. A survey of citrus tristeza virus (CTV) in Mazandaran using ELISA method. In Proc. 7th Plant Prot. Cong of Iran, p. 78. Karaj, Iran, College of Agric., Univ. Teheran.
Minassian, V. 1983b. Use of enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) for detection of citrus tristeza virus (CTV) in aphids from the north of Iran. In Proc. 7th Plant Prot. Cong. of Iran, p. 82. Karaj, Iran, College of Agric., Univ. Teheran.
Minassian, V. & Ghorbani, S. 1983. Further studies on citrus tristeza virus (CTV) in the Caspian region in Iran. In Proc. 7th Plant Prot. Cong. of Iran, p. 77. Karaj, Iran, College of Agric., Univ. Teheran.
Nielson, M.W. 1975. The leafhopper vectors of phytopathogenic viruses (Homoptera, Cicadellidae): taxonomy, biology and virus transmission. USDA/ ARS Tech. Bull. No. 1382 AC.
Norman, P.A. & Grant, T.J. 1956. Transmission of tristeza virus by aphids in Florida. Proc. Fla. Hort. Soc., 38-42.
Planes, S. & Marti, F. 1972. Leaf variegation with ringspots. In Proc. 5th Conf. IOCV, p. 194-196. Gainesville, Univ. Fla. Press.
Pujol, A.R. & Beñateña, H.N. 1965. Study of psorosis in Concordia, Argentina. In Proc. 3rd Conf. IOCV, p. 170-174. Gainesville, Univ. Fla. Press.
Rahimian, H. 1983. Distribution and symptoms of citrus stubborn disease in the southeast of Iran. In Proc. 7th Plant Prot. Cong of Iran, p. 74. Karaj, Iran, College of Agric., Univ. Teheran.
Reichert, I. & Hellinger, E. 1930. Internal decline: physiological disease of citrus fruits new to Palestine. Hadar, 3: 220224.
Reuther, W. 1976. Observations on citrus production and research in Bandar-Abbas province. Rome, FAO.
Reuther, W., Nauer, E.M. & Roistacher, C.N. 1979. Some high temperature effects on citrus growth. J. Am. Soc. Hort. Sci., 104(4): 353-356.
Roistacher, C.N., Nauer, E.M., Kishaba, A. & Calavan, E.C. 1980. Transmission of citrus tristeza virus by Aphis gossypii reflecting changes in virus transmissibility in California. In Proc. 8th Conf: IOCV p. 76-82. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Ruggieri, G. 1961. Observations and research on impietratura. In Proc. 2nd Conf: IOCV, p. 182-186. Gainesville, Univ. Fla. Press.
Saglio, P., Lhospital, M., Laflèche, D., Dupont, G., Bové, J.M., Tully, J.G. & Freundt, E.A. 1973. Spiroplasma citri gen. and sp.n.: a mycoplasma-like organism associated with "stubborn" disease of citrus. Int. J. Syst. Bacteriol., 23: 191-204.
Saillard, C. & Bové, J.M. 1983. Application of ELISA to spiroplasma detection and classification. In S. Razin & J.G. Tully, eds. Methods in mycoplasmology, p. 471-476. New York, Academic Press.
Timmer, L.W. & Garnsey, S.M. 1980. Natural spread of citrus ringspot virus in Texas and its association with psorosis-like diseases in Florida and Texas. In Proc. 8th Conf: IOCV, p. 167-173. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Vogel, R. & Bové, J.M. 1980. Citrus ringspot in Corsica. In Proc. 8th Conf: IOCV, p. 180-182. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Wallace, J.M. 1973. Report of short-term study on citrus with special reference to virus and virus-like diseases in the Dez River project of southern Iran. (mimeo: no imprint)
Wallace, J.M. & Drake, R.J. 1968. Citrange stunt and ringspot, two previously undescribed virus diseases of citrus. In Proc. 4th Conf: IOCV, p. 177-182. Gainesville, Univ. Fla. Press.
Chapter 12: Iraq
Virus and virus-like diseases in Iraq
Obsolete horticultural practices and phytophthora gummosis
Stubborn
Diseases of unknown cause
Genetic problems
Conclusions
Bibliography
Citrus in Iraq is grown almost entirely under date-palms (Fig. 156), whose shade is intended to protect against high temperatures and solar radiation in the summer. Protection against frost in the winter is provided by the retention of warm air. Indeed, the climate in central Iraq where citrus is grown is continental and arid, characterized by extreme heat in summer, the threat of frost in winter (normal monthly temperatures: 35°C in July and 10°C in January, with mean monthly maxima of 43°C and 4°C in July and January respectively) and low rainfall (150 mm per year).
Citrus is grown in alluvial soil and located mainly in central Iraq, north and south of Baghdad, along the banks of the River Tigris and its tributary, the River Diyala, as well as along the River Euphrates, north and south of Kerbala.
There are about 2.5 million trees in production, of which 90 percent are sweet orange. Practically all sweet oranges are the local Mahali (common) variety, a seedy, midseason fruit. In the 1960s, the Zafarania Experiment Station imported cultivars of the better-known citrus varieties, such as Washington navel and Valencia late sweet oranges, Eureka and Lisbon lemons, mandarins, Clementines, etc. Yields of the Mahali sweet orange trees are generally extremely low because of obsolete cultural practices, phytophthora gummosis and competition from date-palms and other interspersed fruit trees.
Within the framework of an Agricultural Development Project (the Khalis project), the French Institute for Research on Citrus and Tropical Fruits (IRFA) was asked to take over citrus development in Iraq. This assignment lasted from 1979 to 1982. During that period, many citrus cultivars from Corsica (free from virus and virus-like diseases) were introduced and propagated in the nursery. For reasons other than technical ones, this project was forced to come to a standstill, and the new cultivars have not yet been made available to growers.
Virus and virus-like diseases in Iraq
Cachexia-xyloporosis
Cachexia-xyloporosis, which is caused by a viroid, is by far the most noticeable of all virus and virus-like diseases of citrus in Iraq. It was seen on many more trees than any other virus-like disease and was found in every one of the areas surveyed. In the orchards the disease was seen on mandarin and Clementine trees. These are susceptible varieties and they show the typical symptoms of the disease: gum in the bark and stem pitting in the wood with corresponding pegs on the inner face of the bark.
Cachexia-xyloporosis has also been identified in the experimental plots at the Zafarania Experiment Station, on trees of local (Indian) mandarin, Clementine and tangelo.
Cachexia could be identified in so many of Iraq's orchards because the mandarin and Clementine trees that are grown everywhere are susceptible varieties on which the symptoms can be observed. Sweet lime and Rangpur lime, two rootstock species, are also susceptible.
In contrast, orange and lemon trees, which come first and second in importance in Iraq, are species that are tolerant of cachexia: they show no symptoms of the disease, even when they carry the pathogen. Visual observation of such species will not reveal the presence of the agent; only indexing on indicator plants (Parson's Special mandarin: see Figs 58 and 59) or using sPAGE (see Table 13, p. 47) will provide confirmation.
Mild and severe strains of the cachexia agent are known, and the severe strains can be destructive. A severe strain was detected in the Fahama area on a declining local mandarin tree, where the cachexia-induced stem pitting on the trunk could still be seen at a height of 50 cm above the bud-union.
Gummy bark
The symptoms of gummy bark are very similar to those of cachexia, but the two diseases are unrelated. In the case of cachexia, the susceptible varieties are mandarin, Clementine, tangelo, satsuma, sweet lime and Rangpur lime. Gummy bark affects none of these species, but does affect sweet orange and rough lemon, which are cachexia-tolerant (see Table 7, p. 25). Gummy bark symptoms were observed on sweet orange in the Dorah and Mansourya areas.
The indicator plant for indexing gummy bark is sweet orange on sour orange or rough lemon rootstock.
Cristacortis
Cristacortis affects sweet orange, tangelo, mandarin, Clementine, grapefruit and sour orange. It is one of the very few diseases which show up on sour orange trunks, branches or shoots. Typical symptoms were observed at Zafarania on a Clementine tree grafted on sour orange rootstock. The tree was also affected by cachexia.
Concave gum-blind pocket
Mild symptoms of this disease were seen on local mandarin trees observed at Zafarania and in the Fahama area. Old Clementine trees in the Mansourya area also showed mild deformations possibly due to the disease. Indexing should be carried out to confirm the presence of the agent. One must also look for psorosis young leaf symptoms on young leaves produced during cool seasons - early spring or late autumn.
Scaly bark psorosis (psorosis A)
Severe bark scaling was observed at Zafarania on grapefruit trees. Psorosis A bark scaling affects the outer part of the bark - under the scales, bark remains alive (whereas with phytophthora gummosis, bark is killed) and appears green when scratched with a knife. As in the case of concave gum and cristacortis, psorosis young leaf symptoms should be looked for in early spring or late autumn.
Exocortis
Clear-cut symptoms of exocortis, a viroid disease, were observed at Zafarania on various species.
Local (Abaichy) citron (Figs 88 and 89). Other nearby citrons did not show symptoms of the disease. Therefore, the possibility exists that the affected citron was mechanically contaminated from nearby old-line Eureka lemon trees showing pronounced symptoms of shell bark (a non-transmissible genetic problem see the section on genetic problems below). Indeed, it is known that almost all old-line Eureka lemon trees carry the exocortis viroid but show no symptoms because they are tolerant. However, shell bark seems to be enhanced by the exocortis viroid.
Lisbon lemon on Rangpur lime rootstock (Fig. 85). Bark scaling affects only the Rangpur lime rootstock - there are no symptoms on the tolerant lemon scion. It was, however, the lemon bud that carried the viroid and contaminated the rootstock on which it was grafted. The viroid is now present in the whole tree, but symptoms appear only on the susceptible part, in this case the rootstock. This tree also had phytophthora gummosis.
Troyer citrange on Cleopatra mandarin rootstock, top-worked with Duncan grapefruit (Fig. 86). The Troyer citrange trunk is present as a "sandwich" between the Cleopatra mandarin roots and the grapefruit top. Exocortis was very probably introduced with the grapefruit bud and has induced symptoms on the Troyer citrange, the only susceptible species of the three component parts of the tree.
Some years ago, Troyer citrange was officially recommended as a rootstock in government nurseries. Results have been very poor, which is not surprising. Troyer citrange is an exocortis-susceptible rootstock and therefore can only be used with exocortis-free budwood. Such budwood was not available in Iraq at the time. Also, unfortunately, nurseries give no consideration to the use of virus-free budwood. While the use of infected budwood is probably one of the main reasons for the poor results given by Troyer citrange, other reasons, such as alkalinity and salinity, could also be involved.
From the above examples, it should be clear that exocortis symptoms can only be seen on susceptible species or varieties which are mainly used as rootstocks. In their absence, exocortis cannot be detected by visual observation.
Since commercial citrus orchards in Iraq are mainly grafted on the exocortis-tolerant sour orange rootstock or not grafted at all, symptoms of exocortis cannot be seen in Iraq plantings, except in those rare cases where a susceptible stock is used. One such case was seen in the Fahama area - a grapefruit tree probably grafted on citron, as the consultant was informed. Citron is a mono-embryonic species. All citron seedlings are hybrids since they result from the development of a sexual embryo. The various citron hybrids have different degrees of susceptibility to exocortis, but many express symptoms. This was the case here, where typical exocortis symptoms (bark scaling and cracks) affected the rootstock (probably citron) of the grapefruit tree.
Obsolete horticultural practices and phytophthora gummosis
Trees planted too deep
On removing the soil around the trunk of declining trees it was found that many of them were planted much too deep. On certain farms, the crown was I m below soil level. Often, with budded trees, the bud-union line was well below soil level. In one orchard all the declining or dead trees were planted too deep, with the bud-union below soil level.
Trees planted too deep decline for two main reasons. First, being too far from the soil surface, the roots do not receive enough oxygen, and this lack is aggravated by excess humidity. Lack of oxygen and high humidity adversely affect the functioning of the roots, and the effect is physiological rather than pathological. Second, lack of oxygen and high humidity favour invasion by Phytophthora spp., which may cause feeder root decay and rot. This is a pathological effect.
Inadequate irrigation systems
The traditional one-furrow irrigation system, as it is practiced on Iraqi citrus farms, is certainly one of the main reasons for the abnormally poor yields obtained (20 kg per tree). Trees are planted on both sides of the furrow, or on one side only. The furrow meanders through the orchard, turning it into a labyrinth. Mechanical maintenance is impossible. Water is unevenly supplied as there is too much water on the furrow side of the tree, inducing root asphyxiation, and too little water on the other side. Water stress increases the "June" drop of young fruits. Trees often end up halfway down the side of the furrow; then, to "protect" the trees from water, soil is put around the trunk. All these factors favour phytophthora gummosis. The farmland between adjacent furrows is useless and wasted as it is not watered and no fertilizer can be applied.
Phytophthora gummosis
During the surveys, phytophthora gummosis was seen everywhere and every day. It is the most severe and destructive disease on traditional Iraqi citrus farms, and is primarily due to poor horticultural practices.
Where trees that are very susceptible to phytophthora are not grafted, but propagated from cuttings, as is the case with sweet and acid lemons, planting the susceptible lemon cuttings directly in the soil will provide an excellent host for the soil-borne fungi - hence phytophthora root rot, decay of fibrous roots, and foot and crown root rot. High humidity and lack of oxygen favour the decay. Where cuttings of phytophthora-susceptible varieties, such as sweet or sour lemon, are used as root-stocks, the situation is the same as above.
Many trees are, however, grafted on phytophthora-resistant rootstocks, such as sour orange, but the protective effect of the resistant rootstock is lost because the trees are planted too deep, with the bud-union line below soil level (Fig. 228); or soil is put around the trunk, when the irrigation furrows are cleaned (Fig. 226) or to "protect" the trunk from flood irrigation; or the sour orange seedling is budded too low, thus producing a tree with a bud-union line too close to the soil.
With virus, viroid and mycoplasma diseases, protection lies in using clean budwood and controlling the insect vectors. With phytophthora, protection lies essentially in the choice of resistant rootstocks and in adequate horticultural practices, both in the nursery and the orchard, in order to preserve the benefit obtained from these rootstocks.
Competition from date-palms
The palm trees on traditional Iraqi citrus farms are intended to protect against heat in the summer and frost in the winter, to form windbreaks and to maintain some humidity in the air in summer. However, the palm trees interfere with mechanical maintenance, compete for food and deprive the citrus trees of light. There are a few successful "open" orchards without date-palms. During the 1985 survey, an open sweet orange orchard at the Citrus Experiment Station at Rachidiya was visited. The orchard had several rows of Shamouti sweet orange trees which were being compared with Mahali local sweet orange trees. The local trees had far fewer sunburn marks on leaves and fruits than the Shamouti trees, where sunburn lesions were severe. This indicates that there are differences between varieties regarding heat tolerance, and it should therefore be possible to breed for the characteristic.
Stubborn
Citrus stubborn disease is one of the major problems in modern citriculture, since most commercial varieties can be affected. A considerable amount of work has been devoted to the disease in Iraq by the Bordeaux group.
Proof of the disease in Iraq: early work
During his first survey of the country's citrus orchards for virus and virus-like diseases in June-July 1978, Bové suspected that stubborn disease was present in Iraq. However, as the survey was carried out in early summer, no suitable fruit was available to be used for the isolation and culture of Spiroplasma citri, the causal mycoplasma of the disease. Fruit material to assess the presence of stubborn in Iraq was necessary as some of the more typical symptoms, as known elsewhere, were rare For instance, the small cupped leaves, so characteristic of stubborn-infected trees, were rarely seen.
The first Mahali sweet orange fruit samples from Iraq to be analysed in Bordeaux were those collected by Al-Beldawi in early March 1979. S. citri was cultured from the samples. This result was the first unquestionable proof of the presence of stubborn disease in Iraq.
The consultant visited Iraq for the second time in February 1980, a period of the year when fruit was still available. In the Kerbala area, he again surveyed an orchard where stubborn disease had been suspected in the 1978 survey. Severe fruit symptoms could now be observed on sweet orange, namely small-sized fruits with many aborted seeds (Fig. 168). Abnormal shoots could also be seen on these trees. A few shoots had the typical small, cupped leaves. Many more shoots, from the previous autumn flush of growth, were characterized by peculiar leaves with some of the following symptoms: pinched-in tips, pale green to yellow tips and/or margins, ovoid leaves with short midribs, and lateral veins running parallel to midrib (palmate leaves).
Fruit was collected from these sweet orange trees and analysed for S. citri infection in Bordeaux. At the same time, fruit collected in the Abou Dali, Beled and Tarmia areas was also taken to Bordeaux for analysis. S. citri infection was assessed by culture of the causal mycoplasma and by ELISA carried out on the seeds and the fruit axes (columella). Out of a total of 20 fruit samples, 17 were positive for S. citri infection by culture and/or ELISA. S. citri cultures were obtained with fruit from the Beled, Kerbala and Tarmia areas, and the two samples from Abou Dali were positive by ELISA. Hence, the results from the February 1980 analyses amply confirmed the presence of stubborn disease in Iraq.
Finally, on a visit to Iraq in April 1981, Bové visited the Aboud El Neimi orchard in the Rachidiya area. Several Mahali sweet orange trees were abnormal (Fig. 157). Fruits on these trees were small in size, often lopsided, and contained many aborted seeds. Fruit samples from three trees were taken to Bordeaux for S. citri culture. A fourth sample of small lopsided sweet oranges was taken from boxes of picked fruit. All samples were positive for S. citri.
With these results, there was no doubt by 1981 that stubborn disease was present in Iraq and that certain orchards, in the Kerbala area for instance, contained a high percentage of infected trees.
January 1982 survey
Diagnosis of stubborn in the orchard. Fifteen orchards were surveyed for the presence of stubborn-infected trees in the Fahama, Rachidiya, Abou Dali and Houwesh areas, along the left bank of the Tigris, north of Baghdad.
The diagnosis of stubborn on the basis of symptoms is a difficult task, and this is particularly true in Iraq where the situation is complicated by the fact that the bunchy type of growth and the small, cupped leaves, so typical of stubborn trees in open orchards, were only rarely seen. However, three other types of symptoms helped to diagnose stubborn in Mahali sweet orange trees in the date-palm-shaded orchards of Iraq in the winter period. The constant isolation of S. citri from trees with these symptoms shows their value for stubborn diagnosis in Iraq in winter.
As mentioned above, the first symptom concerns the fruits. Stubbon-affected trees stand out from normal trees because of the small size of much of their fruit, which is often lopsided and contains many aborted seeds (Fig. 168). Acorn-shaped fruits can also be seen (see Fig. 165).
The second useful symptom is the presence of a few abnormal shoots on trees that have been identified on the basis of their small fruits. These shoots stick out from the top of the tree, or sometimes from the sides, in a somewhat sucker-like fashion. They bear various types of rather small, pale green leaves: ovoid with short midrib, palmate, with pinched-in tips and yellow tips and margins (Figs 160 to 163). The abnormal shoots sometimes, but not always, have short internodes (Fig. 163).
The third symptom is leaf mottle (Fig. 158). It affects relatively well-developed, mature leaves. Trees with such leaves are of a pale green colour (Fig. 157). Some trees have all three types of symptoms, but some have only fruit symptoms without the abnormal shoots and leaf mottle.
Detection of S. citri. Fruit samples were taken from 27 trees showing one or more of the above symptoms. For each fruit sample, two tissues were used, the seeds and the columellae. Two assay methods (culture and ELISA) were applied to both the seeds and the columellae. Hence, four assays were performed on each fruit sample. A total of 27 stubborn-infected trees and seven trees with dubious symptoms were analysed.
All 27 trees showing Iraqi stubborn symptoms gave positive assays. Nineteen (70 percent) had all four assays positive, while six (22 percent) had three positive assays. These results show that the majority of trees (90 percent) give either three or four positive assays. Seeds were somewhat superior to columellae for the culture assay since 28 S. citri cultures were obtained from the seeds and 22 from the columellae. The two fruit tissues were equally good for ELISA.
Among the seven dubious trees, four were negative by both the culture assay and ELISA. However, one was positive by culture and ELISA (tree 7) and two by culture only (trees 12 and 29). This brings the total number of S. citri-infected trees to 27+3=30.
Stubborn in the Fahama, Rachidiya, Abou Dali and Houwesh areas. On the basis of these results, it was found that every one of the 15 Mahali sweet orange orchards that were surveyed in January 1982 contained one or several trees that were infected by S. citri. Hence, stubborn disease is spread throughout the areas surveyed.
However, the majority of orchards (ten) had only a few stubborn-infected trees scattered among many normal trees. Five orchards had a higher percentage of stubborn-infected trees, four of these are located in the Rachidiya area and one in the Abou Dali area. One orchard in the Rachidiya area had up to 50 percent infected trees.
October 1985 survey
The 1985 survey made it possible to distinguish clearly between leaf symptoms due to excessive heat and those due to stubborn. As shown by Reuther, Nauer and Roistacher (1979), the effect of high temperatures (38°C by day and 28°C by night) on citrus in growth chambers resulted in reduced leaf size, blunting of the leaf tip, and even more striking modifications in shape such as leaves with lateral veins almost parallel to a much reduced midrib (cordate or palmate leaf). Reuther observed a high frequency of such leaves on certain shoots in almost all commercial orchards in the hottest citrus region of Iran.
On a visit to Iran in November 1985, Bové frequently noted such heat-affected leaves. Similar leaves were also present on sweet orange trees in Iraq, but more often in open than in shaded orchards. However, two types of shoots with palmate leaves could be distinguished in Iraq as well as in Iran: shoots with uniformly green leaves with or without short internodes (Figs 160 to 162) and shoots bearing leaves with yellow tips or margins (see Fig. 155), the tips often being pinched in (Figs 160 to 162). Internodes can be short (Fig. 163) or normal.
A search for S. citri in trees with these shoots showed that the trees with only uniformly green leaves were free of S. citri, but that trees with yellow-tipped leaves were infected with S. citri. These results clearly indicate that stubborn alone is not responsible for the leaf modification that results in cordate-shaped, palmate leaves, but that such leaves, when infected with S. citri, acquire yellow tips and margins, with the yellow portion sometimes extending over half of the leaf.
As stated above, the palmate leaves with yellow tips or margins are often carried by sucker-like shoots sticking out from the top or the side of the trees and such trees are often characterized by small fruits with aborted seeds. In the shaded Mahali sweet orange orchards in Iraq, small fruits with aborted seeds and shoots with yellow-tipped leaves, with or without short internodes, are diagnostic of stubborn.
The situation
The surveys of June-July 1978, January 1982 and October 1985, and the extended fruit analyses carried out in March 1979, February 1980, April 1981, January-February 1982 and October 1985, prove that citrus stubborn disease is present in Iraq in the following areas: Kerbala, El Dorah, Fahama, Rachidiya, Abou Dali, Houwesh, Beled and Tarmia. Other areas have not been investigated.
The majority of stubborn-affected sweet orange trees are of the local Mahali variety. In the general absence of other varieties, it is very probable that stubborn disease in Iraq was not introduced from abroad with the importation of foreign cultivars. Here we are undoubtedly faced with genuine "old world" stubborn.
This is in contrast with countries such as Iran, Morocco, the Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey, where at least some of the stubborn-affected trees result from the propagation of infected budwood introduced from places such as California.
Vectors of S. citri in Iraq
In October 1986, two members of the Bordeaux group, Fos and Vignault, carried out a survey for the presence of the leafhopper Neoaliturus haematoceps in the following citrus-growing areas of central Iraq: Baghdad, Baquba, Dorah, Kerbala and Tarmia. The leafhopper was found in the Baghdad, Kerbala and Dorah areas. In most cases, the insect was collected on Salsola kali, a wild Chenopodiacea, known to be a favoured host of N. haematoceps as well as of Neoaliturus tenellus. Wherever S. kali was sampled, N. haematoceps was found. Other host plants on which the insect was detected are Alhagi persarum and Atriplex spp. S. citri could be cultured from two N. haematoceps samples collected in the Baghdad area on S. kali plants growing along a paved road. N. tenellus was not encountered even though S. kali, a favoured host, was abundant in the areas examined. The leafhopper has however been reported in Iraq (Aziz and Al-Ali, 1977). As in most other countries surveyed, it seems that N.
haematoceps is more common than N. tenellus.
These results demonstrate that N. haematoceps, the major vector of S. citri in the Mediterranean area and the Near East, (Fos et a/., 1986) as well as S kali, the major host plant of the leafhopper, occur in central Iraq. S. citri could be cultured from field-collected N. haematoceps samples, showing that the leafhopper can be naturally infected with the spiroplasma.
The effect of date-palms on natural transmission of S. citri in citrus orchards is not known. Even though stubborn-infected trees can be found in many shaded orchards, their proportion is generally low. This would indicate that the palm trees somehow provide protection against natural transmission of S. citri. It is to be feared that the incidence of transmission could be higher in open, unshaded orchards, especially when the trees are young. Although there is little doubt that modern citriculture in Iraq should turn to open orchards, natural transmission of S. citri by leafhoppers must not be overlooked, and measures to prevent it must be taken.
<section>g</section>
Diseases of unknown cause
Bud-union crease
Several cases of bud-union crease were noticed: at Zafarania, on a Palestine sweet lime grafted on Troyer citrange, and at Fahama, on grafted mandarin trees.
Autumn blast
Autumn blast refers to twigs that suddenly die and dry up in situ (see Figs 252 to 254). Gummy material is conspicuous on parts of the stem, but the dried leaves do not fall off. There is a clear-cut margin between the upper, brownish, dead bark of the stem of the dried-up twig and the lower bark that is green and still alive. The twig dieback appears on the uppermost part of the canopy but, in severe cases, lower branches also show dead twigs.
In Iraq the symptoms start around mid-October. Mandarin and Clementine trees are most susceptible, followed by sweet orange and grapefruit trees. Lemon trees are much less affected and sour orange trees never. A similar syndrome was observed in the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya in 1974 and in the Islamic Republic of Iran in November 1985. In Florida, "firing" resembles autumn blast. The problem is taken very seriously in Iraq.
The cause of autumn blast is not known, although it is probably not due to parasitic micro-organisms or pests. It seems to reflect the failure of the terminal twigs to secure sufficient water. Two factors that could be responsible for insufficient water supply in the autumn in Iraq are the large temperature difference between day and night, and the relatively low soil temperatures which contrast with high air temperatures in the day. These temperature differences might induce twig dieback, especially if the root system is inadequate because of poor cultivation, root injury, attack by fungi such as Phytophthora spp., or unbalanced water supply, with overwatering on one side of the tree and poor supply of water on the other, due to the one-furrow irrigation system.
Obviously, twig dieback is more of a problem under severe climatic conditions than in more temperate climates. It is, therefore, important to maintain adequate moisture in the soil by proper irrigation.
Genetic problems
Shell bark was seen at Zafarania on old-line Eureka lemon trees (see Fig. 258). Young lines of lemon, free of exocortis, also develop shell bark but much later than exocortis-infected old lines. Lemon is very susceptible to phytophthora gummosis as shell bark favours Phytophthora attack through the many cracks in the bark, especially when the bud-union line is too low and close to the soil level.
Conclusions
Relative importance of the various diseases present in Iraq
Phytophthora gummosis and possibly phytophthora root rot and decay are probably the most destructive diseases of citrus in Iraq. By using resistant rootstocks and improving horticultural practices in the nursery and in the orchard, it should be possible to control these diseases.
Virus, viroid and mycoplasma diseases, once present, cannot be controlled. Protection against these diseases is preventive and requires the use of disease-free budwood and control of natural transmission when insect vectors are involved.
Cachexia seems to be the only important graft-transmissible disease in Iraq, affecting many mandarin and Clementine trees, on which severe symptoms of the disease can be seen. Tolerant varieties, such as sweet orange and lemon, may also carry the cachexia viroid but, being tolerant, they show no symptoms.
Cachexia has probably been spread throughout Iraq with budwood from Zafarania.
Exocortis was discovered at Zafarania on susceptible rootstocks. Very few cases of the disease were seen in the citrus farms, because the scion varieties used in Iraq are tolerant, and because no susceptible rootstocks are used.
It is, however, possible that many such trees are symptomless carriers of the exocortis viroid. This possibility is indicated by the fact that the exocortis-susceptible Troyer citrange, officially recommended in Iraq as a rootstock for several years, has given poor results.
There was surprisingly little scaly bark psorosis and concave gum-blind pocket in the sweet orange orchards that were surveyed. This is a sharp contrast to the situation in North Africa. Similarly, cristacortis and gummy bark do not seem to be much of a problem.
The majority of citrus orchards in Iraq are of the local Mahali cultivar. This cultivar has been grown for very many years and seems to be well suited to the climate. It also seems to be essentially free of the major virus and virus-like diseases which are so often seen on old-line sweet orange trees in the Mediterranean area: namely, scaly bark psorosis, concave gum-blind pocket, impietratura and cristacortis. Regarding exocortis and cachexia, nothing can be said since sweet orange, being tolerant of these diseases, does not express the symptoms. The only disease which is present in almost every orchard is stubborn. Its wide distribution is not surprising since the leafhopper vectors of S. citri, the causal agent of stubborn, are widespread in Iraq. The percentage of affected trees is relatively low, except in some orchards. There may be a higher proportion of affected trees in open orchards.
Three types of symptoms can be used to detect stubborn in Iraq:
* small, lopsided or non-lopsided fruit with aborted seeds;
* sucker-like shoots with abnormal leaves, which are palmate and cordate-shaped with pinched-in yellow tips and margins; and
* leaf mottle.
Note that uniformly green palmate leaves are the result of excessive heat, not stubborn. In the absence of tristeza and greening, stubborn is the disease of most concern, especially if modern citriculture is to be developed.
Decline due to poor horticultural practices Many more trees decline because of bad horticultural practices than because of disease. Phytophthora disease is a direct consequence of these practices. The remedy is simple: trees should be grafted on phytophthora-resistant rootstocks; budded at the correct height (25 to 30 cm from soil level); planted in the field at the correct depth and properly irrigated - the archaic single furrow technique should be abandoned in favour of open, regular orchards. In Iran, orchards are always of the open type even in areas where the climate is as extreme as in Iraq.
Autumn blast is probably related to marked temperature differences between roots in the soil and twigs in the air. However, poor cultural practices may favour twig dieback. Indeed, trees with inadequate irrigation and poor root systems are more susceptible. Even though autumn blast occurs in open orchards in Iran and Iraq (Al-Beldawi, personal communication), the one-furrow irrigation system used in Iraq is certainly not the most appropriate method for ensuring an adequate water supply. Again, changing to open orchards with irrigation systems controlled by tensiometer readings is probably the answer to autumn blast.
Bibliography
Aziz, S. & Al-Ali, M.S. 1977. Phytophagous and entomophagous insects and mites of Iraq. In A. D. Niazi, M.S. Abdul-Rassoul & M. Shamsuddin, eds. Nat. Hist. Res. Cent. Publ. No. 33. Baghdad, Al-Zahra Press. 142 pp.
Bové, J.M., Saillard, C., Vignault, J.C. & Fos, A. 1984. Citrus stubborn disease in Iraq and Syria: correlation between symptom expression and detection of Spiroplasma citri by culture and ELISA. In Proc. 9th Conf: IOCV, p. 145-152. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Fos, A., Bové, J.M., Lallemand, J., Saillard, C., Vignault, J.C., Ali, Y., Brun, P. & Vogel, R. 1986. La cicadelle Neoaliturus haematoceps (Mulsant et Rey) est vecteur de Spiroplasma citri en Méditerranée. Ann. Inst. Pasteur/Microbiol., 137 A: 97-107.
Reuther, W., Nauer, E.M. & Roistacher, C.N. 1979. Some high temperature effects on citrus growth. J. Am. Soc. Hort. Sci., 104(4): 353-356.
Chapter 13: Jordan
Virus and virus-like diseases in Jordan
Recommendations
Bibliography
Citrus plantings in Jordan have no parallel. Citrus is primarily cultivated in the Jordan Valley, an area ranging from 300 to 400 m below sea level and enjoying a special climate with mild wet winters and extremely hot dry summers. Soil is heavy and calcareous and the water used for irrigation is salty. Trees grow very fast and vigorously, and fruits are of excellent quality.
At present there is rapid development in Jordan in all sectors of social and economic life. Citrus production is no exception, and extensive new orchards confirm the increase in the area dedicated to this crop - which is currently estimated at about 4 000 ha. Each year some citrus is exported, but importation is necessary outside the picking season, to meet local demand. The government is particularly interested in the growth and improvement of the citrus industry and a well-founded research programme has recently been initiated. Crop protection is also receiving close attention, as in the state campaign for the control of pests (scales and mites) in the South Jordan Valley.
Superior, healthy budwood of major commercial citrus varieties has been introduced in recent years. The aim of these introductions was to provide clean propagative material to growers. Seeds of new' potentially better rootstocks were also imported. The performance of all these imported clean stocks is being tested under the particular conditions prevailing in the Jordan Valley. Several rootstock experiments were recently established in agricultural experiment stations in the area.
Virus and virus-like diseases significantly limit fruit productivity in the orchards of the Jordan Valley. Diseases such as psorosis and cachexia-xyloporosis are debilitating many of the older orchards. Certainly, the use of virus-free budwood will be an important factor in the improvement of production in the new orchards. Moreover, citrus growers in Jordan are very concerned about the possible introduction into the country of two particularly damaging diseases - namely tristeza and greening - which are constantly spreading. Tristeza is caused by an insect-transmitted virus, and greening by a sieve-tube restricted bacterium, also insect-transmitted.
Virus and virus-like diseases in Jordan
Field survey
As virus and virus-like pathogens produce visible symptoms in susceptible hosts, they can be detected by careful inspection of orchard trees during field surveys conducted by trained virologists. More common symptoms of virus and virus-like diseases include tree stunting, malformation of branches, trunk and branch bark scaling, trunk and stem pitting of various kinds, gum pockets, gum impregnation and exudation, leaf deformation, leaf chlorosis of several types, vein clearings, ringspots and fleckings and fruit abnormalities. Field surveys are very useful to determine the incidence of various kinds of such disorders in the orchards.
However, some scion-rootstock combinations can harbour viruses without exhibiting specific symptoms, thus acting as symptomless carriers. Detection of viruses and other internal pathogens in these cases requires appropriate indexing procedures.
During Salibe's visit to Jordan, a number of orchards were inspected in the Jordan Valley and the presence of symptoms of virus and virus-like diseases was recorded.
Cachexia-xyloporosis. This is a bud-transmissible disease inducing wood pitting and gumming in mandarins, tangelos, satsumas, sweet limes, mandarin limes, Citrus macrophylla and some other citrus types. Symptoms range from the severe in Orlando, Wekiwa and Seminole tangelos, Clementine,
Mandalina and Parson's Special mandarins, Murcott and Ellendale tangors, to the undetectable in sweet orange, sour orange, grapefruit and trifoliate orange.
Xyloporosis was first described (Reichert and Perlberger, 1934) as a disease affecting Shamouti orange trees on sweet lime rootstock in the country then known as Palestine. In 1950, a disease with symptoms resembling xyloporosis, but affecting Orlando tangelo, was described under the name of cachexia in Florida (Childs, 1950) and shown to have an infectious nature. Cachexia and xyloporosis were considered to be synonymous and the disorder was frequently referred to as cachexia-xyloporosis. This view has recently been challenged (Roistacher, 1988).
Cachexia-xyloporosis appears to be wide spread in the citrus orchards of the Jordan Valley. Most Clementine and Mandalina mandarin trees inspected showed typical trunk symptoms above the bud-union (gum streaks in the bark and wood pitting). However, a number of old trees of these varieties were found to be free from symptoms, indicating that both healthy and cachexia-xyloporosis-infected clones are being propagated by nursery workers and growers. Symptoms of the disease were also found in a few trees of satsuma mandarin at the Baqura Station.
An indexing survey is necessary to determine the incidence of cachexia-xyloporosis in trees of lemon, orange and grapefruit budded on sour orange rootstock, the combinations most extensively grown in the Jordan Valley. Since the cachexia-xyloporosis viroid is perpetuated by the use of budwood from infected trees, it can be excluded from new orchards by the use of virus-free propagative material.
Stubborn disease. Stubborn is a very serious disease found in most countries growing citrus under desert or semi-desert conditions. It has been reported from the Arabian Peninsula, Arizona and California, Egypt, Israel, Lebanon, Morocco, Peru, the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey and several other countries. Symptoms of stubborn include tree stunting, an abnormally bushy aspect, small leaves and short internodes, small, lopsided and acorn-shaped fruits, with curved columella and inverse or pale coloration and sometimes blue albedo. In seedy varieties, excessive seed abortion frequently occurs. Pinholing of sour orange bark below the bud-union is found in severe cases (Caravan and Carpenter, 1965).
It is considered that practically all citrus varieties and combinations are susceptible to the stubborn pathogen, the helical mycoplasma Spiroplasma citri. These include essentially navels and other sweet oranges, grapefruits, mandarins, tangelos, sour oranges and others. Several non-rutaceous hosts are known, including Catharanthus roseus (periwinkle), Trifolium repens, Trifolium pratense, Vicia faba and Pisum sativum. The stubborn organism is transmitted through tissue grafts and buds, and is also spread by leafhoppers.
Stubborn is present in many citrus orchards in Jordan, but only in scattered trees. Affected trees found during the survey were mainly of imported varieties such as Valencia and Abu Surra (Washington navel) oranges and Marsh seedless grapefruit. Stubborn was also found in a few Mandalina mandarin trees in one orchard, and in the South Jordan Valley. There, the more affected Mandalina mandarin trees showed advanced decline and typical crease at the bud-union with the sour orange rootstock, indicative of an extremely severe form of the disease.
Stubborn-like symptoms were also observed in five trees of Balady orange on sour orange rootstock at the Wadi El Yabi Experiment Station and in two trees of shaddock at the Wadi Shuaib Station. See also the section below on the influence of high soil pH on stubborn.
No stubborn was found in commercial orchards with Shamouti orange and Clementine mandarin as scion. Several trees of Demble and French acidless oranges were examined and also found free from stubborn symptoms.
Scaly bark psorosis and concave gum-blind pocket. Typical bark scaling symptoms of psorosis were rare and only seen in a few trees of Shamouti orange. Blind pocket psorosis was encountered in one tree of the same variety. Branch flattening and bark splitting were common in trees of Shamouti orange, but it was not possible to determine the relationship of these abnormalities to the psorosis agent.
Tristeza. Tristeza is a very destructive disease caused by a virus that affects trees of sweet orange, grapefruit and mandarin budded on sour orange and certain other rootstocks. The virus and its efficient vector, the aphid Toxoptera citricida Kirk, are spreading all over the world and have now been reported from Argentina, Australia, Brazil, Paraguay, Peru, South Africa, Uruguay, Venezuela and most countries of Southeast Asia. Spread of tristeza is also occurring in areas where T. citricida is not present but where other aphids are abundant, such as California, Florida, Israel and Spain. The disease represents a tremendous threat to the citrus industries of all Mediterranean and neighbouring countries that use the sour orange rootstock extensively.
Symptoms of tristeza disease on susceptible scion-rootstock combinations vary from sudden wilting (defoliation and death of the entire tree within a few months after infection -the so-called "quick decline" type) to a slow dieback during which trees develop an overgrowth of the scion-trunk bud-union and starch depletion in the rootstock portion of the tree and die within two or three years. An additional symptom of tristeza in the slow decline type is pinholing or honeycombing of the sour orange trunk just below the bud-union (see Fig. 129). This symptom is also shown by stubborn-affected trees on sour orange rootstock.
The recent spread of tristeza virus in Israel makes it possible that tristeza may invade the orchards of the Jordan Valley in the near future. A programme for tristeza indexing, aimed at rapid identification of the virus and subsequent elimination of all infected trees, is urgently needed in Jordan.
Symptoms resembling tristeza, including tree dieback and trunk overgrowth and honeycombing, were found in certain orchards of the South Jordan Valley. The number of trees with tristeza-like symptoms was small in each orchard, which may indicate a very inefficient insect transmission. Scions were Valencia and Shamouti oranges and Marsh seedless grapefruit on sour orange rootstock. Indexing of declining trees with the use of appropriate indicator plants or by ELISA will conclusively demonstrate whether or not tristeza is present in the Jordan Valley.
Exocortis. Exocortis has been reported from practically all citrus-growing areas of the world. The disease complex affects Poncirus trifoliata and most of its hybrids, Rangpur lime, Palestine sweet lime and a number of other citrus varieties. It is carried symptom-lessly in other varieties, such as sweet and sour oranges, grapefruits, mandarins and rough lemon and, therefore, its effects are only manifested when budwood taken from symptomless carriers is used for propagation on intolerant rootstocks. Exocortis is caused by one or several viroids. No insect vector is known, but the viroid is sap-transmissible to citrus and non-citrus herbaceous hosts and is quite resistant to heat, drying and some chemicals (Garnsey and Weathers, 1972). Decontaminating budding knives and other tools with household bleach or other solutions (5 25 percent sodium hypochlorite) is recommended to prevent the spread of exocortis in nurseries and commercial orchards.
Symptoms of exocortis include stunting of trees, bark splitting and scaling of the rootstock portion of the tree. On trees budded on trifoliate or Rangpur lime rootstocks, bark scaling usually appears after four to eight years. Symptoms of exocortis also show up when intolerant varieties used as scions are infected, and these include yellowing of the bark of young branches, splitting and limited shelling. Certain selections of Etrog citron develop leaf epinasty and are used as indicators for exocortis.
No symptoms indicative of the presence of exocortis viroid were observed in the commercial orchards visited by Salibe. Some old Shamouti orange trees budded on sweet limes were examined and found healthy. Typical exocortis symptoms were encountered in a few citron trees in the citrus collection at the Wadi El Yabis Experiment Station in the form of scion bark yellowing and splitting. Exocortis viroid causes a certain degree of debilitation in the so-called tolerant scion-rootstock combinations and future indexing for the viroid is recommended, especially if rootstock diversification in the country becomes necessary.
An apparently new disease: stubborn as influenced by high soil pH. An abnormality of apparently unknown nature was found affecting orange and mandarin trees in various experiments at the Deir Alla Experiment Station in the Jordan Valley. Affected trees showed the following symptoms: slight to severe stunting; bushy aspect; and yellowish leaves with intense vein clearing, cupping and in abnormally upright positions. The trunk showed abnormal thickening just above the bud-union, with severe wood pitting and also bark honeycombing and gum impregnation. Fruits were smaller than normal. Most affected trees were from five to 11 years old.
Scion-rootstock combinations affected by the disorder included: Washington navel and Shamouti oranges budded on Volkamer lemon, Cleopatra mandarin, Troyer citrange and Citrus macrophylla; Washington navel on sour orange rootstock; Valencia orange on Cleopatra mandarin; and Clementine mandarin on Cleopatra mandarin rootstock. Affected declining trees were in between apparently healthy trees of the same stionic combinations. Marsh seedless grapefruit, Eureka lemon and Mandalina mandarin trees in the same orchard were apparently not affected by the problem.
It may be that the disorder was caused by an infectious agent that spread from the Washington navel orange trees into neighbouring trees of other varieties. The origin of the budwood of the Washington navel orange was said to be unknown. It was suggested by local research workers that the problem could be named Deir Alla disease.
The abnormality has many symptoms resembling those of stubborn and greening diseases. However, the general vein clearing of all leaves on all affected trees is not common to these diseases. The disorder should therefore be regarded as a new problem until proper research demonstrates its true nature. If it should spread, it would represent a serious threat to the citrus industry of Jordan. Therefore it must be considered a serious problem that deserves immediate attention from scientific authorities.
At Salibe's request, Bové was asked to visit the Deir Alla Experiment Station in December 1983.
As pointed out by Salibe, most if not all trees had yellowish leaves (Figs 164 and 295), irrespective of the varieties involved. These symptoms are very probably due to the high pH of the soil (8.5) which the Deir Alla scientists are trying to lower by applying acidifying nitrogenous fertilizers such as ammonium sulphate. Also, the available calcium content of the soil is high, explaining why all trees on Troyer citrange rootstock are severely stunted.
In addition to leaf yellowing, Salibe noted that the trees had a bushy aspect, with cupped leaves in an abnormally upright position. These symptoms are typical of stubborn and indeed S. citri, the causal agent of stubborn, was cultured from plant samples collected at the Deir Alla Station on symptomatic trees and carried immediately to Bordeaux. These included fruit axes from a Valencia late sweet orange tree on Cleopatra mandarin rootstock (Fig. 2951, mottled leaves from a second Valencia late orange tree on Cleopatra mandarin rootstock, and fruit axes from a Thompson pink grapefruit tree on Cleopatra mandarin rootstock (Fig. 164).
On the basis of these observations and results, it is clear that the symptoms observed by Salibe at the Deir Alla Station are due, at least in part, to the combined effects of high pH and infection by the stubborn pathogen. No evidence for greening and its psyllid vectors could be seen.
Salibe also observed wood pitting, bark honeycombing (pinholing) and gum impregnation of the bark above the bud-union of affected trees. These symptoms are those of cachexia-xyloporosis on mandarin scions (Fig. 296) or gummy bark on sweet orange scions. In fairly severe cases of stubborn-affected trees on sour orange, pinholing is seen below the bud-union on the sour orange bark. Several Washington navel sweet orange trees on sour orange rootstock at the Deir Alla Station showed this stubborn-related pinholing.
Finally, one severely stunted Washington navel tree on sour orange rootstock (Fig. 297) showed pinholing below and above the bud-union line, but in addition there was a bud-union crease so severe that, when a piece of bark was removed, it broke at the bud-union line (Fig. 298). Bud-union crease is not a symptom of stubborn and S. citri could not be cultured from leaf samples of the tree. Tristeza-affected trees on sour orange may show bark pinholing on the sour orange rootstock, but the tree indexed negative for tristeza virus by ELISA. The above bud-union crease, whatever the cause, could be partly responsible for the yellow foliage of the tree.
Other virus and virus-like disorders. A number of minor isolated problems were observed during the field survey. Trees on Shamouti orange were found showing small pimply eruptions in the trunk and larger limbs, suggesting popcorn psorosis. Others had longitudinal splitting with some scaling in the margins and still others had flat branches. No definite cause was found for these abnormalities, which could result from some form of psorosis virus or be determined by local environmental conditions.
Bud-union crease, characterized by an intermittent or continuous depression in the wood at the bud-union, with corresponding projection from the inner face of bark, was found in a few diseased trees. Scion-rootstock combinations with bud-union crease were Abu Surra (Washington navel) orange and Mandalina mandarin on sour orange rootstock, in commercial orchards. A similar type of bud-union crease was observed on Shamouti orange trees of about five years old budded on Volkamer lemon, Troyer citrange and Cleopatra mandarin rootstocks at Deir Alla Experiment Station. This was thought to be a result of genetic incompatibility.
Shell bark and some abnormal flat branches were seen on a number of lemon trees in commercial orchards.
It should be emphasized that nutritional disorders, especially iron deficiency due to high pH, are such major problems in the citrus orchards of the Jordan Valley that they overwhelm all other existing factors that constrain production.
None of the following virus and virus-like diseases was observed during the visit to citrus orchards: impietratura, gum pocket, gummy bark, vein enation-woody gall, satsuma dwarf, leaf curl, citrus tatterleaf, infectious variegation, leprosis, rumple, yellow vein, citrus blight and citrus decline. Local plant pathologists should make themselves familiar with the symptoms of these and other unwanted diseases in order to be able to recognize them and promptly eradicate any tree suspected of harbouring their pathogenic agents. Good descriptions of disease problems are available (Childs et al., 1968; Bové and Vogel, 1975; Wallace, 1978).
Other observations
The Wadi Shuaib Station. The Wadi Shuaib Station is a small government farm located in the Shuaib Valley. It maintains a very valuable bank of healthy germplasm of citrus and produces superior nursery trees of virus-free material. The mother block is composed of trees produced with nucellar budwood imported from California in 1977, including Washington navel and Valencia oranges, Willow-leaf (Balady) mandarin and Redblush and Marsh seedless grapefruits.
A careful inspection made by Salibe and accompanying plant pathologists revealed the presence of malformed, lopsided fruits, with inverse colouring in a few trees of Marsh seedless grapefruit and Willowleaf mandarin, suggesting stubborn disease. Indexing of these trees and eradication of those found positive for the stubborn pathogen is recommended.
Among old-line citrus varieties maintained at the station were trees of Clementine mandarin, French sweet orange, shaddock and lemon. The general appearance of most trees was excellent and the nursery was well managed.
The Deir Alla Experiment Station. Located in the Jordan Valley, the Deir Alla Experiment Station is part of a chain of research centres and stations established in this fertile region of Jordan. Several trials have been planted at this station to study the performance of trees of commercial citrus varieties budded on various rootstocks. Salibe visited the trials of Shamouti and Washington navel oranges, Mandalina mandarin and Eureka and Lisbon lemon scions. Rootstocks under test included Brazilian sour orange, Kenya sour orange, Palestine sour orange, Cleopatra mandarin, Volkamer lemon and C. macrophylla. Two kinds of disorder were observed to affect trees in experimental orchards: stubborn disease, mainly on Washington navel orange trees, and bud-union crease symptoms on various scion-rootstock combinations (not reported before in the literature). All these problems deserve attention from local plant pathologists.
The Wadi El Yabi Agricultural Research Station. Several citrus experiments are being carried out at this modern research farm in the Jordan Valley. A large experiment to study the behaviour of four rootstocks with several scion varieties was established in 1979. The rootstocks were sour orange, Volkamer lemon, Cleopatra mandarin and C. macrophylla. Scions included Valencia, Salustiana, Hamlin, Shamouti, Marsh, Washington navel, Tarocco and Pineapple oranges, kumquat, Fairchild mandarin and others.
A large collection of citrus varieties, imported mainly from the United States of America, was also planted in the station. Among outstanding varieties observed by Salibe were Pixie, Freemont, Bowen, Ponkan and Frost Dancy mandarins. The great value of this citrus collection is emphasized by the small number of varieties currently grown commercially in Jordan. Careful studies on fruit quality and time of ripening may reveal new varieties of potential value to the country's citrus industry.
Twelve-year-old mother seedling trees of rootstock varieties in the station included Volkamer lemon, Cleopatra mandarin and sour orange.
In the citrus collection, symptoms typical of stubborn disease were observed on Washington navel orange trees: namely, bushy aspect, off-season bloom, small-sized leaves in abnormally upright positions, small malformed and lopsided fruits, columella, etc. Similar, but less evident, symptoms of stubborn were also found on a few Balady orange trees. Exocortis was seen on citron, Citrus medica L.
Baqura Station. Baqura Station is a government farm, mainly dedicated to producing nursery plants of citrus and to date propagation. A small collection of citrus trees of about 16 years of age was examined for symptoms of virus diseases. Those of satsuma mandarin and shaddock were found to be apparently healthy, while the Clementine mandarin showed severe cachexia-xyloporosis. Lemon trees showed trunk scaling typical of shell bark.
Virus indexing facilities. The Research Department of the Ministry of Agriculture does not have the facilities to conduct the virus indexing that is urgently needed for a citrus health and improvement programme. There is a pressing need to provide laboratory and greenhouse facilities to this department to enable personnel to conduct virus indexing by serology and tissue-grafting methods. Further training on virus and virus-like disease identification and on indexing procedures would help local plant pathologists in the establishment and implementation of a phytosanitation project.
The Department of Plant Pathology of the University of Jordan is well equipped, with a modern virus laboratory and greenhouse facilities. However, the work there is concentrated on virus diseases affecting vegetable crops.
Varieties and rootstocks. The citrus industry of Jordan is based on a very small number of varieties. Commercial orchards consist mainly of seven varieties, Clementine mandarin, Mandalina mandarin, Abu Surra (Washington navel) orange, Shamouti orange, Valencia orange, Marsh seedless grapefruit and Eureka lemon.
Clementine mandarin is an early ripening mandarin variety, generally seedless, and the trees are heavy bearers. Most trees carry the xyloporosis viroid that causes a certain degree of stunting, and reduces yield and fruit size. Mandalina mandarin is a mid-season to late ripening variety, closely resembling Ladu mandarin from the Philippines and Ladoo mandarin from India. It also has some characteristics of the Dancy tangerine largely grown in Florida. A large majority of the Mandalina mandarin trees examined in the Jordan Valley were found to bear only light crops. Cachexia-xyloporosis is also widespread on trees of this variety.
The Valencia orange orchards visited had heavy yields, but those of Shamouti and Washington navel oranges were consistently light bearers. There are selections of Washington navel orange, such as Baianinha orange from Brazil, that give higher yields than the old parent variety. Shamouti orange is also known to be a light bearer. This variety has many characteristics resembling those of Verna and Verna Peret oranges from Spain, Lamb Summer orange of Florida and Pera orange of Brazil. Performance experiments among these varieties and selections (both old-line and nucellar clones) of Shamouti may disclose superior clones with higher returns in Jordan.
Sour orange is practically the only rootstock variety used in the citrus orchards, with only a few small plots budded on Palestine sweet lime. Since there are several selections of sour orange (at least ones considered to have some tolerance of the tristeza virus), they should also be tested in competition experiments under Jordanian environmental conditions.
Recommendations
* A citrus budwood certification programme should be designed and implemented to make superior propagative materials (free from virus and virus-like pathogens) available to growers and nursery workers.
* The Research Department of the Ministry of Agriculture should receive the necessary equipment and facilities to conduct the virus-indexing programme. The facilities should include two greenhouses (250 m² each) with a controlled temperature unit.
* A tristeza detection and eradication programme must be established in Jordan to protect the flourishing citrus industry from this destructive virus disease.
* A research project should be initiated to confirm N. haematoceps as the leafhopper vector of stubborn disease in the citrus orchards of Jordan.
* A reference library containing the most important books and journals dealing with citrus production and protection must be made available to Jordanian scientists. Participation at international citrus congresses and meetings to keep local research workers abreast of citrus problems worldwide is highly desirable and recommended.
* The excellent work concerning varieties and rootstocks under way at the experiment stations in the Jordan Valley should be continued and expanded. Special attention should be given to potential varieties having tristeza tolerance to allow rootstock diversification.
* Stringent quarantine controls must be implemented to avoid movement of infected plant materials into the country. This measure is particularly important to prevent the introduction of the destructive greening disease and its insect vectors into Jordan.
* Two or more plant pathologists should be appointed to the Research Department to conduct the indexing programme. Further training in citrus virus and virus-like diseases and their control should be given to these researchers, preferably in countries with modern citrus industries such as Brazil, France, Italy, Spain or the United States of America.
Bibliography
Bové, J.M. 1966. Citrus virus diseases in the Mediterranean area. Report presented at the meeting on Phytiatry and Phytopharmacy, Marseilles (France), 1965, updated for the 4th Conf. IOCV. 44 pp. (mimeo)
Bové, J.M. & Vogel, R. 1975. Description and illustration of virus and virus-like diseases of citrus. an IOCV project. Institut Français de Recherches Fruitières Outre-Mer. Paris, Editions SETCO.
Calavan, E.C. & Carpenter, J.B. 1965. Stubborn disease of citrus trees retards growth, impairs quality and decreases yields. Calif. Citrog., 50(3): 86-87, 96, 98-99.
Childs, J.F.L. 1950. The cachexia disease of Orlando tangelo. Plant Dis. Rep., 34: 295298.
Childs, J.F.L., Bové, J.M., Calavan, E.C., Fraser, L.R., Knorr, L.C., Nour-Eldin, F., Salibe, A.A., Tanaka, S. & Weathers, L.G. eds. 1968. Indexing procedures for 15 virus diseases of citrus trees. Washington DC, USDA/ARS Agriculture Handbook 333.
Garnsey, S.M. & Weathers, L.G. 1972. Factors affecting mechanical spread of exocortis virus. In Proc. 5th Conf, IOCV,p. 105-111. Gainesville, Univ. Fla. Press.
Reichert, J. & Perlberger, J. 1934. Xyloporosis, the new citrus disease. J. Agency for Palestine Agric. Exp. Sta. (Rehovot) Bull., 12: 1 -50.
Roistacher, C.N. 1988. The cachexia and xyloporosis diseases of citrus - a review. In Proc. 10th Conf. IOCV, p. 116-124. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Wallace, J.M. 1978. Virus and virus-like diseases. In The citrus industry. vol. IV, p. 67-184. Berkeley, Div. Agric. Sci., Univ. Calif.
Chapter 14: The Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
Citrus growing in the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
Virus and virus-like diseases
Other observations
Bibliography
Citrus growing in the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
Citrus growing in the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya is concentrated mainly around the coastal areas of the Mediterranean Sea where the climate is mild and rainfall abundant. The main citrus area extends from Surman (40 km west of Tripoli) to Gharabulli 1120 km east of Tripoli) and into the interior (40 km south to Azizia). Some orchards are also planted in the Benghazi area (I 050 km east of Tripoli) and around Fueihat (15 km south of Benghazi).
The total citrus area is currently estimated to be more than 7 000 ha, as compared with about 3 500 ha in 1974-75. Statistics available for 1980 on the number of trees and on fruit production for the more important citrus species are shown in Table 35.
The major varieties of sweet orange that are cultivated in Libya are Demi blood (similar to Maltaise orange), Moro, Sukkari, Tarocco, Shamouti, Abu Surra (local name for Washington navel orange), Balady and Valencia.
Among mandarins, the most widely grown variety is Kinya, a selection of Youssef Effendi or Willowleaf mandarin. Clementine mandarin is also grown in limited quantities and a few trees of Mandalina mandarin were also observed.
Lemons are represented mainly by Femminello from Sicily and Lunario, a less popular variety. Limes, Citrus aurantifolia Swingle (Mexican lime type), and Citrus latifolia Tanaka (Tahiti lime) are practically unknown in the country. Grapefruit is not popular and the few existing trees are budded on Naring sour orange.
Citrus fruit is of a high quality thanks to a combination of favourable factors, mainly related to soil and climate. Soils are mostly sandy, neutral or slightly alkaline. The climate in the citrus belt is mild, with temperatures never low enough to cause frost damage, but with a day-night fluctuation high enough to secure very good fruit quality.
All citrus produced is consumed locally, with no exports. On the other hand, no citrus is imported. The citrus season usually lasts from November until March. An industry to process oranges and lemons for juice and marmalade production has been established.
The main problems affecting citrus production are: Mediterranean fruit-fly (Ceratitis capitata) and a few other insect pests, virus diseases, dieback of twigs, autumn leaf drop, deficiency of trace elements' gummosis, water quality and salinity.
<section>h</section>
Virus and virus-like diseases
Citrus orchards in Libya are known to have been affected by virus and virus-like diseases for nearly 20 years. The incidence of various forms of psorosis, cachexia, gummy bark of sweet orange, woody gall, impietratura and exocortis, and of a few trees with tristeza virus has been reported by Chapot (1975), Nour-Eldin and Fudl-Allah (1976) and Fudl-Allah (1977). Most of these disorders are widespread in many Mediterranean countries (Bové, 1966). Since most citrus cultivars currently used in Libya were probably imported from Italy, the country formerly known as Palestine, Spain and neighbouring countries, it must be expected that many intracellular pathogens were inadvertently also introduced at the same time.
TABLE 35 Statistics for major citrus species in the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya in 1980
Species No. of frees Production (t)
Orange 1790415 51740
Mandarin 109521 3380
Lemon 149662 4870
Scaly bark psorosis (psorosis A) and concave gum-blind pocket
Scaly bark psorosis has a worldwide distribution and is found in most Mediterranean orchards. The disease has a long incubation period, i.e. it is slow acting, requiring several years to produce visible bark scaling symptoms. Bark scaling rarely occurs before a tree is six years old.
Concave gum-blind pocket is generally less destructive. Affected trees show concavities of various forms in large limbs and trunks.
Psorosis A is one of the major factors preventing crops from achieving high yields in the older orchards of Libya. Many trees exhibit typical trunk symptoms of psorosis A bark scaling and concave gum-blind pocket.
Bark scaling is more frequent in orange trees. Concave gum-blind pocket has been found in trees of Sukkari, Abu Surra, Shamouti and Jaffa oranges as well as on trees of Kinya mandarin. Psorosis young leaf symptoms (oak-leaf patterns) were observed in many orchards of Shamouti orange. In older orchards, trees exhibiting concave gum and blind pocket were as numerous as those with psorosis bark scaling.
Exclusion of psorosis can easily be achieved by using budwood from healthy mother trees in the production of nursery plants. Nucellar clones of some varieties, but not of all commercial citrus, are already available in the country. Attention should be paid to seed transmission of the psorosis virus, which has been found to occur in certain rootstock types such as Poncirus trifoliata and some of its hybrids.
Cachexia-xyloporosis
Cachexia-xyloporosis is widespread in the mandarin orchards of the Mediterranean basin, and the plantations of the Libyan citrus belt are no exception. Typical symptoms of the disease were observed on the trunk, above the bud-union, of Kinya and Clementine mandarin trees. However, the number of diseased trees was not very high, and in most orchards inspected trees with and without cachexia-xyloporosis symptoms coexist, indicating that more than one clone of those varieties was used in the formation of the nurseries. The incidence of this disease in orange and lemon orchards requires indexing on sensitive varieties, since they are symptom-less carriers.
No insect transmission of cachexia is known to occur. Therefore, the use of cachexia-free budwood is the recommended method of preventing the introduction of this disease into new orchards.
Stubborn
Trees with some abnormalities resembling those caused by stubborn were observed, but no trees were seen with all symptoms of the disease. However, previous reports indicate stubborn disease to be widespread in the orchards of Libya. Nour-Eldin showed typical stubborn-affected trees to Bové in 1975.
Exocortis
Since no exocortis-susceptible rootstocks are used in Libya, no symptoms were expected to be found in commercial orchards. However, on the basis of evidence obtained in most citrus-growing areas of the world, exocortis viroid is the most widely distributed intracellular pathogen of citrus and is probably infecting many trees in Libya.
The real destructive capacity of exocortis would become apparent only if susceptible rootstocks, such as Poncirus trifoliata, Troyer citrange and other trifoliate hybrids, and Rangpur lime, come into use. Indexing for exocortis is necessary to determine the distribution of the viroid in plantations and to select healthy mother trees.
Tristeza
Apparently, the early cases of tristeza disease found in the citrus areas of the Mediterranean basin can be traced back to the introduction of infected budwood from abroad. All countries that have introduced Meyer lemon trees have also introduced tristeza, and these include Algeria, Israel, Italy, Morocco and Tunisia (Bové, 1966). Other varieties imported from Australia, Japan, South Africa and the United States of America have also been reported to have introduced tristeza into Mediterranean countries.
In 1976, Nour-Eldin and Fudl-Allah reported the occurrence of tristeza in a number of trees in Libya. They found 30 sweet orange trees grafted on sour orange rootstock that were stunted and exhibited characteristic bark pitting and honeycombing of the rootstock bark. Indexing of these trees on Mexican lime seedlings revealed vein clearing but no stem pitting.
However, Salibe found no indication that tristeza virus was present in Libya. Inspection of many field seedlings of small-fruited acid lime (Balady) in the germplasm collection at the Agricultural Research Centre (ARC) revealed no symptoms of tristeza. However, the virus represents a permanent threat to the entire citrus industry of Libya, and the problem requires constant attention.
Other virus and virus-like diseases
Rumple. This disease of lemons was observed on a few fruits of a Femminello-type lemon tree that had been top-worked on a previous orange tree in the Zawia area. Rumple is suspected to be of a virus nature, but no definite proof has been obtained as yet. It is recommended that no budwood for propagation be taken from diseased trees.
Impietratura. This virus problem affects citrus fruits in many areas of the Mediterranean basin, and is also present in Libya. A few fruits of a blood orange variety showed gum pockets in the albedo, characteristic of impietratura disease. Indexing should be carried out in order to avoid possible confusion between impietratura symptoms and those induced by boron deficiency.
Gummy bark of sweet orange. Nour-Eldin and Fudl-Allah (1976) found that about 30 percent of sweet orange trees were affected by this disease. Symptoms in sweet orange are similar to those induced by cachexia-xyloporosis in mandarin. Scraping some moderately stunted orange trees above the bud-union revealed the presence of gummy bark symptoms, but the incidence of the problem in the various commercial citrus varieties has stir] to be determined.
Woody gall of sweet orange. This disorder has been observed to affect many orange trees in Libya. According to Nour-Eldin (1975), the disease was confined to a local blood orange variety named Demi-sweet orange. However, it seems that other varieties are also affected by woody galls. Round galls were found to affect trunks and main branches of orange trees, rarely going down to the sour orange rootstock. In one orange orchard, of about 20 years old, in the Swami area, 8 percent of the trees had galls. Many of the diseased trees showed severe psorosis leaf symptoms. Further work will have to be done to determine the cause of the galls. It seems that they are not caused by the vein enation-woody gall virus (Nour-Eldin and Fudl-Allah, 1976).
Virus and virus-like diseases that were not observed by Salibe in his survey were cristacortis, greening, vein enation-woody gall, satsuma dwarf, leaf curl, yellow vein, multiple sprouting, citrus tatterleaf, citrange stunt, bud-union crease and gum pocket. Local specialists must make themselves familiar with the symptoms of these and other foreign diseases in order to eradicate them promptly should they appear in the country.
Other disease problems
Autumn leaf drop. This is considered by growers and research workers to be one of the most important problems affecting citrus trees in Libya. Abnormal leaf drop appears during the autumn and winter months, and affects trees of various ages and of old and new clones. The problem was observed in most orchards visited. Initial symptoms may appear as mesophyll collapse or resemble blade discoloration, as if the leaf had been treated with hot water (it looks cooked). The disease mainly affects branches at the top of the tree. The affected leaves wilt and drop, leaving the petiole attached to the twig for some time. The petioles drop later and severe dieback of the twigs takes place (Fudl-Allah, 1978). High populations of spider mites were observed in trees of many orchards affected by autumn leaf drop, in association with mesophyll collapse. Natural spread of the problem has been indicated by some authors (Nour-Eldin and Fudl-Allah, 1976).
Autumn leaf drop is probably a physiological disorder resulting from cold morning temperatures (7-8°C). The problem may be enhanced by a number of factors, among which are: mite damage to leaves, late fertilization inducing potash deficiency, deep ploughing weakening the trees, use of cold-sensitive varieties, and incorrect irrigation. Autumn leaf drop also occurs in other countries and was observed in Morocco and Tunisia.
Fungal and bacterial diseases. Phytophthora bark rot and penicillium fruit rot were other disease problems observed during visits to various orchards. Black pit induced by Pseudomonas syringae, reported to occur in the country by Chapot (1975), was not encountered by Salibe.
Other observations
The ARC germplasm collection
The ARC maintains a fairly large bank of citrus germplasm in Tripoli. Varieties were collected within the country and many were imported from abroad several years ago. They are practically all old-line cultivars around 15 years of age, budded on sour orange rootstock, except for a few that are budded on Palestine sweet lime.
Several varieties of sweet orange are represented in the collection, including Shamouti (Jaffa), Abu Surra (Washington navel), Valencia and local blood and non-blood oranges, a few mandarin varieties including Clementine and Kinya (identical to Youssef Effendi, Avana and Willowleaf), some lemons, grapefruits and shaddocks.
Rootstock varieties represented in the collection include sour orange, Cleopatra mandarin, Troyer citrange and rough lemon. There is also a line of seedlings of Balady (Mexican) lime.
Inspection of many of the trees in this orchard revealed a number of abnormalities indicative of virus and virus-like pathogens. A few orange trees of Spanish varieties showed psorosis A bark scaling on the trunk. Others exhibited exocortis-like scaling on the rootstock, which are probably Palestine sweet lime. Trees of Shamouti orange displayed trunk overgrowth above the bud-union, flat branches and trunk "bumps" or galls with some gum exudation.
General observation of the trees indicated the presence of autumn leaf drop and twig dieback, high mite infestation (red spider), leaf chlorosis, zinc and manganese deficiency (soil pH around 8), deep planting of many trees, and cracks in fruit indicating irregular irrigation.
Fruit-fly control is very efficiently carried out in the orchard by applying full tree sprays instead of a bait spray as is the usual practice elsewhere. Some scale problems were observed on certain trees, especially on lemon trees. Productivity of the trees was extremely low, sometimes only 5 to 10 kg of fruit per tree.
It is recommended that all citrus varieties represented in this germplasm collection should be indexed and cleansed of possible intracellular pathogens by micrografting. A new gene bank of healthy citrus germplasm, including these and other varieties of potential value, should be established by the ARC to provide superior propagative material to nurseries and citrus growers.
Experiment station of the Faculty of Agriculture
Trees of a small collection were inspected, and most of the Kinya and Clementine mandarin trees were found to show severe cachexia-xyloporosis symptoms. Some diseased trees had double tops, with branches of orange and mandarin, indicating top-working.
An outstanding young orchard of nucellar lines of several varieties budded on Rangpur lime rootstock was visited. Unfortunately, trees were severely pruned and the tops removed. Since nucellar lines show juvenile characteristics and ageing is directly related to the amount of cell division, the top of the tree is the best source of budwood for propagation.
A large rootstock trial with two orange scions of nucellar origin has been established at the Faculty of Agriculture and the trees are outstanding. Autumn leaf drop was seen in the tops of most of them. Rootstocks tested in this trial include Troyer and Uvalde citranges, Swingle citrumelo, Orlando tangelo, Citrus volkameriana and Citrus macrophylla.
Tajoura Agricultural Experiment Station
A visit was made to the Tajoura Agricultural Experiment Station of the ARC and four citrus orchards were examined for symptoms of virus and virus-like diseases. Trees were well cared for, vigorous and productive. Balady orange trees were superior in vigour and fruit production to those of Washington navel. Varieties grown in the plots visited included various orange varieties, Kinya mandarin and some lemons of Italian origin, of which one named Camary showed continuous blooming.
Some old trees of Kinya mandarin showed trunk depressions characteristic of concave gum-blind pocket, but they were producing a fairly good crop. Stubborn was suspected to be present in some orange trees, on the basis of leaf symptoms.
Other observations included heavy infestations of the fruit-fly, C. capitata, which was causing high fruit losses, and severe autumn leaf drop and dieback on orange, mandarin and lemon trees.
Cultural practices
Poor management of citrus orchards rather than the presence of infectious diseases is responsible for low productivity. Excessive pruning, deep ploughing periodically destroying a large proportion of the root system, imbalanced fertilization, incorrect timing and application of fertilizers and inadequate pest control programmes were typical of the poor practices noted. Leaf and fruit burning was observed in some orchards, caused by excessive and uneven spraying.
A strong and well-planned extension service to aid citrus growers is urgently needed, as a first step to increasing productivity in existing orchards. Bulletins explaining the various aspects of citrus growing, such as that of Abu-Daba and Abu-Ziada (1978), should be brought to the attention of growers.
Bibliography
Abu-Daba, N.M. & Abu-Ziada, l. 1978. Citrus in Libya [in Arabic]. Tripoli, Extension Service, Ministry of Agriculture. 108 pp.
Bové, J.M. 1966. Citrus virus diseases in the Mediterranean area. Report presented at the meeting on Phytiatry and Phytopharmacy, Marseilles (France), 1965, updated for the 4th Conf. IOCV. 44 pp. (mimeo) Chapot, H. 1975. A study of research requirements in citriculture. Consultant Series Bull., No. 4. Libya, ARC.
Fudl-Allah, A.E.-S.A. 1977. Present status of stubborn disease of citrus. Libyan J. Agric., 6(2): 55-65.
Fudl-Allah, A.E.-S.A. 1978. Observations on citrus autumn leaf drop in the Libyan Jamahiriya. Libyan J. Agric., 7: 125- 127. Nour-Eldin, F. 1975. Woody gall of sweet orange. Libyan J. Agric., 4: 101 - I 10.
Nour-Eldin, F. & Fudl-Allah, A.E.-S.A. 1976. Citrus virus and virus-like diseases in Libya. Libyan J. Agric., 5: 101-110.
Chapter 15: Morocco
Citrus growing in Morocco
Virus and virus-like diseases
Control of virus and virus-like diseases
Other observations
Recommendations
Bibliography
Morocco is among the ten largest producers and exporters of citrus in the world. During the last decade production of citrus fruits has ranged from 500 000 to 1 070 000 tonnes per year and the volume of exports between 460 000 and 720 000 tonnes. Exports represent around 70 percent of production and place Morocco third among Mediterranean citrus-exporting countries. In fact, citrus exports constitute the third largest source of foreign revenue in Morocco, after phosphates and manual labourers working abroad. Citrus orchards cover an estimated area of about 70 000 ha of fertile soil and constitute one of the most important sectors of national agriculture. They ensure work for more than 50 000 labourers in 8 000 orchards, packing stations (stations de conditionnement), ports and other related workplaces.
Citrus fruits have been grown in Morocco for centuries and some believe they were introduced into the country by the Romans. It appears that it was in Morocco, on the banks of the River Qued Lukus, that the famous Garden of the Hesperides was situated. For centuries, however, citrus was grown in the country as scattered trees for local consumption.
At the beginning of this century the total number of citrus trees was estimated at around 250 000. Production was insufficient to meet local demand and some imports were made to satisfy requirements. Extensive commercial orchards were first planted around 1930 and by 1933/34 production had risen to about 14 000 tonnes, of which 1300 tonnes were exported. The availability of water for irrigation from new dams (barrages) constructed at that time was a major factor in the expansion of citrus culture in the country. The growth in production allowed an increase in the volume of citrus exported, mainly to western Europe. In the last decade Morocco also started to export citrus to the Near East, mainly to the Islamic Republic of Iran, Kuwait and Saudi Arabia.
Citrus growers in Morocco are grouped in the Association de Producteurs d'Agrumes au Maroc (ASPAM), which comprises 12 sections, each representing a producing region. The association has an excellent extension service and, together with the Office de Commercialisation et d'Exportation (OCE), sponsored the creation of the Société Agricole de Services au Maroc (SASMA), an organization devoted to advising growers and exporters on recent advances and techniques for better orchard and packing station management.
In this way the most important aspects of technological advancement have been incorporated into the routine cultural practices of citrus orchards. However, fruit production per unit area is relatively low, since it is said to be between 12 and 15 tonnes per hectare. The future of the citrus industry in Morocco is essentially dependent upon revenues obtained by the growers.
Citrus growing in Morocco
Citrus in Morocco is grown mainly in the coastal areas of the Mediterranean Sea and Atlantic Ocean, where the climate is mild and rainfall abundant. The citrus orchards cover about 70 000 ha, which represents only I percent of the total agricultural area of the country and 16 percent of the area dedicated to fruit crops. Major citrus-producing regions and their areas and relative percentages according to a survey made in 1977 are shown in Table 36 (see also Map 4 in Chapter 7).
Total production during 1976/77 was 769 633 tonnes, of which 76.8 percent, or 590 787 tonnes, was exported. Available data indicate production ranging from 900 000 to one million tonnes, with exports for the 1982 and 1983 seasons of 601 226 tonnes and 521 873 tonnes respectively. There are 75 packing stations in the country and five juice factories which annually process about 150 000 to 200 000 tonnes.
Commercially grown varieties are: early ripening types - Clementine mandarin and navel orange (mainly Washington and Navelina); mid-season types - these include Salustiana orange, Washington-Sanguine orange and blood oranges; and late ripening types - Valencia late orange, locally named "Maroc late", and Vernia orange. Lemons are also grown, mainly for local consumption. Growers are advised to plant only five of the better varieties for export, namely Clementine mandarin, navel, Salustiana, Washington-Sanguine and Maroc late oranges. Production and export, by varieties, in the 1976/77 season are shown in Table 37.
Wilking mandarin was widely grown until 1973, with production estimated at 40000 tonnes per year. However, since this variety was planted near Clementine mandarin trees and induced, by pollination, the appearance of seeds which thus affected the export quality of the Clementines, all Wilking mandarin trees have been eliminated, by order Dahir portant loi No. 1-73-172 du 8 Moharam 1393 [22 February 1973], which required the destruction or top-working of all Wilking mandarin trees.
Sour orange, Citrus aurantium L., is practically the only rootstock used in the country. Some Troyer citrange was used but it does not produce a high performance tree in calcareous soils and is being abandoned.
Trees below ten years of age at present constitute 35.57 percent, those from ten to 29 years 51.23 percent, and older trees (30 or more years of age) 13.40 percent of all citrus trees in the country. Many of these trees will need replacement before long.
About four million nursery trees are produced every year in 416 nurseries spread over the country. Citrus account for 9 percent of all nursery trees produced and about 80 percent of these come from only four nurseries those of the Société de Développement Agricole (SODEA), SASMA, Domaine Royal and Institut National de Recherche Agricole (INRA). In 1989, SODEA produced one million certified citrus trees in the Agadir nursery.
These data clearly indicate that Morocco has the capacity to increase its citrus output rapidly provided that export prices are maintained at a favourable level and that water is available for the further increase of the growing area.
TABLE 36 Production of major citrus areas in Morocco
Region Area (ha) (%) Production
('000 t)
Gharb 20 768 67 30 7 254
Souss (Agadir) 16 439.77 24.3 265
Beni-Mellal 8 908.36 13 2 100
Oriental 8 002.67 118 36.5
Marrakech 4 935.35 7 3 38.7
Meknes/Fez/Taza 4 468.82 6.6 35.5
Nord 2 086 73 3.1 25.7
Casablanca 988 72 1.5 86
Rabat 929.98 1.4 7.2
Total 67 52907 1000 771.2
Source: Squalli, 1978.
Virus and virus-like diseases
Virus and mycoplasm diseases are known to have been affecting the efficiency of citrus trees in Morocco for more than 30 years (Wyss-Dumont, 1951; Perret, 1953; Chapot, 1956a, 1959; Chapot and Cassin, 1961; Cassin, 1962, 1963a, 1964). A number of attempts have been made to eliminate these pathogens from new orchards. However, they continue to be propagated through the use of infected plants and are a major factor restricting high yield.
Virus and virus-like diseases reported to occur in citrus trees in Morocco include psorosis A bark scaling, concave gum-blind pocket, cachexia-xyloporosis, exocortis, tristeza, impietratura, cristacortis, infectious variegation, gummy bark, stubborn, infectious variegation and orange pitting.
Scaly bark psorosis (psorosis A) and concave gum-blind pocket
Psorosis A and concave gum-blind pocket have a worldwide distribution and are found in practically all citrus-growing areas of the Mediterranean and the Near East.
In Morocco they have been reported in orange and mandarin trees (Cassin, 1962; Chapot and De Lucchi, 1964; Nhami and Kissi, 1978; Nhami and Bourge, 1979; Nhami and Zidane, 1984). Varieties found in the orchards showing symptoms of psorosis A bark scaling, according to the reports of these authors, include navel, Navelina, Salustiana, Hamlin, Cadenera, Jaffa (Shamouti), Valencia (Maroc late), Vernia, Grosse Sanguine, Sanguinelli and Tarocco oranges. Symptoms of concave gum and/or blind pocket were observed in trees of most of these orange varieties and also in common, Wilking and Clementine mandarins. Infectious variegation was encountered in trees of navel orange, lemon and sour orange.
Salibe visited a very limited number of citrus orchards owing to shortage of time. However, in one orchard of Maroc late orange in Larache, about 35 years of age, typical symptoms of psorosis A bark scaling, blind pocket and concave gum were observed. The number of diseased trees was small considering that most of them were probably carrying the psorosis virus. No psorosis A bark scaling was encountered in any of the Clementine mandarin orchards inspected. It must be emphasized that the presence of the pathogen, even when symptoms are not evident, has a debilitating effect on the citrus trees. The use of virus-free budwood is the recommended method of excluding the disease from new orchards.
TABLE 37 Production and export figures for 1976/77
Variety Production (t) Exported (t)
Clementine mandarins 193 268 5 147 677 8
Navels 159 6451 125 595.9
Salustianas 25 9961 19 182.1
Sanguines 65 893.3 49 319 0
Maroc lates and Vernias 324 860.3 249 012 0
Total 769 663.3 590 7868
Source: Squalli, 1978.
Cachexia-xyloporosis
Cachexia-xyloporosis is frequently found in mandarin orchards in most Mediterranean countries. In Morocco the disease was reported to be affecting mandarin trees by Chapot and Cassin (1961) and Cassin (1964). They reported that symptoms were sometimes severe, with pinholing in addition to the typical conoid wood pitting. More recently, Nhami and Kissi (1978) reported cachexia-xyloporosis in trees of Clementine and common (Youssef Effendi) mandarin, sweet lime, M'Guergueb and Rhobs El Arsa citron (cedratier) and in Rangpur lime.
Exocortis
Exocortis-susceptible rootstocks are not widely used in Morocco, but the viroid seems widespread nevertheless, according to various reports (Bové, 1966; Nhami and Kissi, 1978; Nhami and Bourge, 1979; Nhami and Zidane, 1984). These authors observed exocortis symptoms in trees budded on trifoliate orange, Rangpur lime and on M'Guergueb and Rhobs El Arsa citron.
Stubborn
Symptoms of stubborn were first described in Morocco by Wyss-Dumont (1951) and Perret (1953), and the presence of the disease was confirmed by several other specialists (Chapot, 1956a, 1956b, 1959; Schneider, 1966; Bové, 1978; Nhami and Kissi, 1978; Nhami and Bourge, 1979). The disease is present in all the country's citrus-growing regions, but it is especially severe in the Tadla and Souss areas. In the Tadla area, the number of badly affected trees was so high that whole orchards had to be removed. Spiroplasma citri, the stubborn agent, has been cultured from many trees in Morocco, and the reference strain R8A2 was obtained in 1970 from a tree in a severely affected orchard (Gontard) in the Tadla region (Saglio et al., 1973). Natural transmission of S. citri to periwinkle (Catharanthus roseus) plants has been demonstrated, and the leafhopper Neoaliturus haematoceps has been found to be infected with S. citri.
Recently (October 1990) the Bordeaux group (Bové, Fos, Saillard and Vignault) and the SODEA group (Nhami, Alaoui Ismaïli, Belaadel, Jabri, Karmoun Lamarti and Zidane) carried out a survey for Salsola kali, N. haematoceps and S. citri-infected plants. This survey was a continuation of the work carried out in 1978-80 (see the section on Morocco in Chapter 7, p. 95). The 1990 survey yielded new results. In particular S. kali, the preferred host plant of N. haematoceps and N. tenellus, the two leafhopper vectors of S. citri, was found at many sites along the coast from Agadir in the south to Mehdiya in the north (see Map 4 in Chapter 7). The Neo-aliturus spp. leafhoppers collected on S. kali varied with the geographical locations. Only N. tenellus was collected on the sandy beaches north and south of Agadir. On the beaches near El Jadida, 100 km south of Casablanca, both N. tenellus and N. haematoceps were found. At Rabat and north of Rabat only N. haematoceps was captured. N.
tenellus had been reported to be present in Agadir by Frazier in 1953. By focusing on the preferred host plant, S. kali, the 1990 survey obtained, for the first time, high numbers of N. tenellus. Exceptionally high numbers of N. haematoceps were found in Rabat on S. kali plants growing along the River Bouregreg (Fig. 322). This site is close to where a S. citri-infected periwinkle plant was discovered in 1978 (Bové et al., 1978, 1979). Three additional S. citri-infected periwinkle plants were found in the same area during the October 1990 survey.
Tristeza
The number of citrus trees at present existing worldwide is around 500-600 million, and more than half carry the tristeza virus. Of the healthy trees, over 100 million are susceptible to tristeza because they are grafted on sour orange rootstock. Tristeza represents a permanent threat to all these trees.
All known cases of tristeza in Morocco are related to the introduction of infected budwood from abroad. Cassin (1963a) reported tristeza in Meyer lemon and in eight other trees - five Owari satsuma, two Valencia orange and one Washington navel orange.
Meyer lemon was propagated in some areas of Morocco, mainly in Marrakech, where homogeneous plantations existed until 1967. At that time, an official regulation made the eradication of all Meyer lemon trees in the country obligatory. However, it is said that a number of trees of Meyer lemon, doubtless harbouring tristeza virus, still exist in the country (Nhami and Kissi, 1978; Bové, 1978). This is an extremely dangerous situation as it is now known that the tristeza virus is capable of mutating, and possibly becoming more easily carried by aphids. Furthermore, the proximity of Morocco to Spain, where tristeza virus is spreading, makes the threat of this virus to the flourishing Moroccan citrus industry now more than ever a matter for concern. Recently, a large-scale tristeza indexing programme based on ELISA has been started in Morocco. Several tristeza virus infected trees have been detected.
Impietratura
Impietratura was reported to be affecting citrus fruits in Morocco as early as 1934. According to Nhami and Kissi (1978), impietratura was found by the Plant Protection Service in Casablanca orchards. Chapot (1961) also found impietratura in Morocco. Since then, symptoms of impietratura have been observed in several orchards in navel, Navelina, Hamlin, Salustiana, Vernia and Valencia late orange, and also grapefruit. During 1977, considerable amounts of diseased fruits occurred in orchards in the area of Larache. Nhami and Kissi (1978) reported, in one orchard of Washington navel oranges in that area, that 20 percent of trees were producing fruits with impietratura.
It has been suggested that the high incidence of trees with such fruits in the Larache area and in the lower Sebou valley results from insect transmission or some other means of diffusion (Devaux, 1978). Whether or not this is so remains to be established.
Varieties producing fruits with impietratura in Morocco are: navel, Navelina, Salustiana, Hamlin, Cadenera, Maroc late and Vernia sweet oranges, and grapefruit (Nhami and Kissi, 1978). The problem is serious and requires urgent attention. Budwood for propagation should not be taken from diseased orchards.
Other virus and virus-like diseases
A number of other abnormalities caused by virus or virus-like pathogens have been observed in Morocco in a very limited number of trees (Nhami and Kissi, 1978; Bourge and Nhami, 1979). The following problems deserve mention.
Cristacortis. This was found in four trees, one Tarocco orange in Marrakech, another Tarocco orange in Gharb, one Valencia late orange in Beni-Mellal and a Sanguine Double-Fine orange at Berkane. It is worth mentioning that the Tarocco sweet orange trees on which cristacortis was first observed by Vogel and Bové in 1963 in Corsica were from Morocco.
Gummy bark. Symptoms were found in only one tree of Valencia late orange, of about 35 years of age.
Infectious variegation-crinkly leaf. This was found in some Washington navel orange trees in Rabat in 1963 (Cassin, 1963b) and symptoms were later observed in lemon, sour orange and navels in the areas of Rabat and Larache.
Orange pitting (Nhami disease). This apparently previously unreported abnormality was found in Valencia orange trees in Beni-Mellal in 1969 and in Agadir in 1975. The disorder was also observed in one tree of Sanguine orange at the Souihla Experiment Station in 1977. Transmission experiments have so far proved negative.
Rusk citrange stem pitting. A disorder of unknown origin was shown to Salibe in the El Menzeh Citrus Experiment Station. Symptoms on old trees and young seedlings of Rusk citrange very much resemble those induced by tristeza virus. The problem is apparently seed-transmitted at a rate of 3 to 6 percent.
Rootstock trunk shelling. Salibe visited an orchard in the Larache area where a disorder of unknown nature is affecting trees of Valencia orange. Symptoms resemble those of lemon dry bark rot, affecting only the sour orange portion of the trunk. The problem deserves careful attention.
Control of virus and virus-like diseases
Production of nucellar clones
The programme of production and selection of nucellar clones of commercial citrus varieties in Morocco started in 1964 at the El Menzeh Citrus Experiment Station. According to available information (Nadori, Quammou and Quaicha, 1984; Nadori, Nhami and Tourkmani, 1984), nucellar clones of 31 varieties have been produced including orange, mandarin, grapefruit and lemon. At present 1 600 nucellar trees are being studied for their performance and fruit quality. Among varieties of major importance are Valencia late orange (50 trees), Washington navel orange (28 trees), Washington-Sanguine orange (12 trees), Salustiana orange (four trees), Maltaise ovale orange (four trees) and Murcott tangor (one tree).
Large amounts of budwood of nucellar clones of Valencia orange are being released to nursery workers.
Selection of virus-free trees by indexing
Indexing for intracellular pathogens of citrus trees is currently under way in Morocco for the following diseases: tristeza, using Mexican lime as indicator; psorosis, using Hamlin orange; cachexia-xyloporosis, using Parson's Special mandarin; exocortis, using Etrog citron 60-13; and stubborn, using Madame Vinous orange (Nhami and Bourge, 1979; Nhami and Zidane, 1984; Nadori, Nhami and Tourkmani, 1984). Indexing has been carried out for more than 1 000 trees selected in the commercial orchards for their superior performance and apparent freedom from disease symptoms. Trees of nucellar clones were also selected for the indexing programme. Results already available indicate that 32 trees were positive for psorosis out of 121 tested (26 percent), eight trees were positive for cachexia out of 21 (38 percent), 74 trees were positive for exocortis out of 257 (29 percent) and 48 trees were positive for stubborn out of 236 tested (20 percent). The presence of one or more pathogens
varied from 40 percent for Clementine mandarin trees to 100 percent for Navelina, Salustiana and Washington-Sanguine oranges. All nucellar trees tested were found to be free from virus and mycoplasmas at this point.
No tristeza was found in any tree tested.
Shoot-tip grafting
Shoot-tip grafting was introduced into the improvement programme of citrus varieties in Morocco in 1983 (Nhami and Zidane, 1984). Propagations already made by this method include eight clones of Clementine mandarin, one clone of Ortanique tangor and various clones of Navelina, navel, Navelate, Washington-Sanguine and Salustiana orange. At present, 14 clones are being indexed for verification of freedom from viruses after passing through the shoot-tip grafting process.
Release of virus-free budwood
Superior virus-free budwood from selected commercial varieties is being propagated in the nurseries of SODEA. Over one million certified trees were produced in the Agadir nursery in 1989.
The large nurseries of SASMA are using the nucellar clones produced and selected at the El Menzeh Citrus Experiment Station for their propagations.
According to present regulations, certified nursery plants will be available only from those agencies having all indexing facilities, as is the case for SODEA. All other nurseries will have to use selected material from the Citrus Experiment Station or will continue to propagate virus-infected budwood. According to information available, only SASMA uses nucellar clones for their propagations. All the rest (more than 400 nurseries of all sizes) use budwood of unknown origin.
The nurseries of SODEA and SASMA are propagating basic material under controlled conditions (plastic tunnels) and then using budwood from these young trees. This method is questionable, since it may allow massive propagation of undesirable mutations. However, for the time being, it is acceptable since no large volume of healthy budwood is available elsewhere for propagation.
The present regulations for the production of certified nursery plants of citrus have been established by a number of official resolutions, basically:
* Dahir No. 1-69-169 du 10 Joumada I, 1389 [25 July 1969], which established regulations for the production and commercialization of seeds and plants, and
* Dahir portant loi No. 1-76-472 du Chaoual 1397 [19 September 1977], which modified and complemented the first law
Other complementary recommendations and discussions of the programme were made by Nadori, Nhami and Tourkmani (1984). However, it is the author's opinion that the benefits of the certification programme should be extended to all citrus nursery workers and growers in the country.
Other observations
Visit to the El Menzeh Citrus Experiment Station
This research station was created in 1960 to work on the problems faced by the citrus growers of the country. The original area of 10 ha in 1960 was extended to 52 ha in 1963. It is situated 9 km north of Kenitra and 12 km from the Atlantic Ocean, in an area with an altitude ranging from 30 to 50 m above sea level.
The soil of the station is sandy loam, with a pH neutral to slightly acid. Average rainfall is 560 mm (350 to 750 mm), and orchards require some irrigation, mainly during the dry summer (April to October). Temperatures range from a minimum of -5°C to a maximum of 45°C.
A large number of the problems faced by the citrus growers are being studied there. Major attention has been given to the production of nucellar clones, the search for new rootstocks -concentrating on tolerance to tristeza and resistance to drought and footrot, the selection of superior clones of Clementine mandarin and other studies. Mention should be made of the fine research work carried out to solve the problem of alternate bearing and low productivity in Clementine mandarin trees, which led to the development of bending (Merle and Nadori, 1978).
The station produced excellent work for a time, but was then partially abandoned.
Recently it has received a new, dynamic management team and a group of young, outstanding research workers.
Salibe visited the laboratories of virology, which are equipped to conduct shoot-tip grafting and ELISA testing for tristeza. He also inspected the greenhouses with controlled temperature for the indexing of viral and mycoplasmal diseases, and the plastic tunnels for the multiplication of basic material to be released to growers and nursery workers. Further financial support is required, with adequate salaries for the research workers, so that the full potential for research may be realized.
Visit to SODEA
SODEA was established by royal decree on 30 October 1972 to manage the farms previously owned by Europeans. It is presided over by the prime minister. The board of directors includes eight ministers and the director general of OCE. The organization is a major producer of citrus, grapes and various other fruits and annual crops, has large nurseries, exports products (about 30 percent of all citrus fruits exported by the country) and carries out a number of other activities in the fields of agriculture, industrialization and exports. During the four-year period from 1976 to 1980, the nurseries of SODEA produced over 12 million plants, of which 217 000 were citrus.
SODEA decided to produce certified citrus plants and, with this aim, established a laboratory for indexing purposes plus greenhouses and nurseries in Temara, near Rabat. These facilities were visited by Salibe who considered them a model for many other citrus-growing areas in the world. The construction in 1980 of this outstanding centre was the result of Bové's report of his 1978 survey, in which he emphasized the need for rehabilitating the old, virus-infected citrus orchards of Morocco(Bové, 1978).
Salibe visited SODEA nurseries in the Rabat and Agadir regions and the germplasm collection - field gene bank - established in Ouled Taima. All nursery trees are produced in pots under plastic tunnels. The use of containers and microbudding techniques, plus the controlled environment in the tunnels, has allowed them to obtain plants that are ready to deliver in a period of 12 to 18 months instead of the 30 to 36 months of the traditional system used in the country.
The germplasm collection of healthy mother trees established by SODEA holds clones of Maroc late orange; navel orange (shoot-tip grafted, nucellar and old-line clones); Clementine mandarin (four clones); Salustiana orange (nucellar); Maltaise ovale orange; Eureka lemon; and Lisbon lemon. Each of the 12 clones is represented by 24 trees budded on four rootstocks (minimum two rootstocks per variety).
The rootstock block is composed of seedling trees (planted in June 1984) of Cleopatra mandarin; Troyer citrange; Carrizo citrange; Rangpur lime; Citrumela Swingle (4475); Volkamer lemon; Citrus macrophylla; common sour orange; and bitter-sweet orange.
SODEA maintains 2 000 ha in the Agadir region of which 1 200 ha are citrus orchards. They are vegetatively excellent orchards, but iron chlorosis is a general problem.
Visit to SASMA
SASMA was created under the auspices of ASPAM and OCE and is devoted to advising growers and exporters on the production and export aspects of citriculture.
Salibe visited the society's excellent laboratories in Casablanca and the nurseries in Agadir and Kenitra, and was highly impressed with the work of the organization. In Casablanca there were laboratories for soil and leaf analysis and water and fertilizer analysis among other activities. Annually, about 5 000 analyses are made of soil samples, another 5 000 of leaf samples and about 2 000 analyses of water and fertilizers used in citrus and vegetable crops. A biochemistry laboratory performs analyses on chemical residues in fruits, and conducts studies on post-harvest, export and fruit quality problems.
The SASMA nursery in the Plain of Souss (43 km south of Agadir) produces about 50 000 to 60 000 budded citrus plants every year. Another of SASMA's nurseries in the Plain of Gharb produced 130 000 budded citrus plants in 1983 and planned to produce 200 000 in 1984. Nurseries run by the society are outstanding - all trees are produced in containers under plastic tunnels using nucellar budwood provided by INRA. All nursery plants produced by SASMA are sold at cost price to growers of ASPAM.
Other visits
Salibe visited several laboratories of INRA in Rabat and of the Institut Agronomique et Vétérinaire (IAV) Hassan II in Rabat and Agadir. In total, Morocco has at present three laboratories for shoot-tip grafting (SODEA, El Menzeh Citrus Experiment Station and IAV Hassan II) and six laboratories equipped for ELISA testing for tristeza virus (two DPVC, two INRA and two IAV Hassan II at Rabat and Agadir). This represents obvious progress in the control of virus and virus-like diseases of citrus paralleled in only a few other developed countries in the world.
<section>i</section>
Recommendations
The citrus industry is an important part of Morocco's agricultural sector and export of citrus fruit makes the third largest contribution to national export income. To improve and protect the country's citrus industry, a number of measures must be implemented by government authorities. The use of only healthy propagation material, free from debilitating pathogens, in the formation of new orchards will result in more vigorous and productive trees. Appropriate sanitary measures must be taken at the same time to prevent the invasion of mechanically or insect-transmitted viral or other pathogens into existing orchards. Recommendations are made below for actions which are of paramount importance to the prosperity of the sector.
* A national citrus budwood certification programme should be established in Morocco to benefit all nursery workers and growers. A bank of healthy germ-plasm under government control should be established in each important citrus area of the country to provide superior propagation material. Nucellar clones and healthy old-line clones should be integrated into the programme separately and with a clear indication of their nature and origin. An interinstitutional permanent committee should be set up to supervise continually the execution of this programme.
* Germplasm of new citrus varieties of potential commercial value to Morocco should be introduced under strict quarantine control for experimental studies.
* The Citrus Experiment Station of El Menzeh should receive appropriate financial support to enable it to develop an intensive research programme directed mainly towards higher yields in citrus crops and the improvement of citrus varieties of economic importance to the country.
* A citrus quarantine station should be established to provide safe budwood introduction, based on micrografting procedures. At the same time, quarantine regulations should be strictly enforced to prevent any unauthorized plant introductions into the country.
* A programme for diversification of citrus rootstocks should be considered, to provide locally tested alternatives to the use of sour orange, Citrus aurantium L. Severe tristeza-seedling yellows virus complex and its efficient vector are constantly spreading through the citrus orchards of the world and may reach Morocco in the future. The use of several tristeza-tolerant rootstocks is a safeguard against disaster - the viral destruction of the orchards.
* A nationwide identification and eradication programme should be conducted to eliminate all sources of tristeza from citrus orchards. Further work should be conducted to determine the dynamics of insect transmission of the pathogen(s) in orchards.
* Young phytopathologists should be given opportunities to participate in international congresses and to receive further training abroad in methods of detecting and controlling factors that limit citrus production.
* Morocco, in association with all countries of the Mediterranean basin and the Near East, should make a great effort to prevent the introduction of new pathogens into the citrus areas, namely those pathogens responsible for the diseases of greening, tristeza-seedling yellows and citrus canker. The spread of tristeza virus in Spain and Israel should be carefully monitored by all countries.
Bibliography
Bourge, J.J. & Nhami, A. 1979. Etat d'avancement des travaux sur la nouvelle maladie de l'orange Valencia late. Al-Awamia [Rabat], 57: 21-27.
Bové, J.M. 1966. Citrus virus diseases in the Mediterranean area. Report presented at the Meeting on Phytiatry and Phytopharmacy, Marseilles (France), 1965, updated for the 4th Conf. IOCV. 44 pp. (mimeo)
Bové, J.M. 1978. Le verger agrumicole Marocain est vieux et fortement contaminé par les viroses. Maroc Fruits, 521: 1,4-6, 8.
Bové, J.M., Vignault, J.-C., Garnier, M., Saillard, C., Garcia-Jurado, O., Bové, C. & Nhami, A. 1978. Mise en évidence de Spiroplasma citri, I'agent causal de la maladie du "stubborn" des agrumes, dans les Pervenches (Vinca rosea L.) ornementales de la ville de Rabat, Maroc. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris, 286 D: 57-60.
Bové, J.M., Nhami, A., Saillard, C., Vignault, J.-C., Mouches, C., Garnier, M., Moutous, G., Fos, A., Bonfils, J., Abassi,
M., Kabbage, K., Hafidi, B. & Viennot-Bourgin, G. 1979. Présence au Maroc de Spiroplasma citri, I'agent causal de la maladie du "stubborn" des agrumes, dans les Pervenches (Vinca rosea L.) implantées en bordure d'orangeraies malades, et contamination probable du Chiendent (Cynodon daclylon L. Pers.) par le spiroplasme. C. R. Acad. Sci. Paris, 288 D: 399-402.
Cassin, J. 1962. Découverte du "concave gum" sur mandarinier commun au Maroc. Al-Awamia [Rabat], 5: 169- 172.
Cassin, J. 1963a. Découverte de huit cas de tristeza parmi un lot de plants agés de citrus introduits au Maroc. Al-Awamia [Rabat], 9: 53-57.
Cassin, J. 1963b. Découverte de l'"infectious variegation crinkly-leaf" des citrus au Maroc. Al-Awamia [Rabat], 8: 63-75.
Cassin, J. 1964. La xyloporose (cachexiafavea) du Clémentinier au Maroc. Al-Awamia [Rabat], 10: 33-53.
Chapot, H. 1956a. Une nouvelle maladie des agrumes dans le Moyen Orient. C. R. Soc. Sci. Nat. Phys. Maroc, 22(6): 99-105.
Chapot, H. 1956b. Une nouvelle maladie à virus des agrumes dans le Moyen-Orient. Soc. Sci. Nat. et Phys. Maroc. Compt. Rend..Seances Mensuelles, 22(6): 99- 105.
Chapot, H. 1959. First studies on stubborn disease of citrus in some Mediterranean countries. In J.M. Wallace, ed. Citrus virus diseases, p. 109- 112. Berkeley, Div. Agric. Sci., Univ. Calif.
Chapot, H. 1961. Impietratura in Mediterranean countries. In Proc. 2nd Conf: IOCV, p. 177-181. Gainesville, Univ. Fla. Press.
Chapot, H. & Cassin, J. 1961. Maladies et troubles divers affectant les citrus au Maroc. Al-Awamia [Rabat], 1: 107- 129.
Chapot, H. & De Lucchi, V.L. 1964. Maladies, troubles et ravageurs des agrumes au Maroc. Rabat, INRA.
Devaux, R. 1978. Que peut-on faire contre les virus ou mycoplasmes dans une plantation? Maroc Fruits, 259: 2, 7.
Frazier, N.W. 1953. A survey of the Mediterranean region for the beet leafhopper. J. Econ. Ent., 46: 551-554.
Freitag, J.H., Frazier, N.W. & Huffaker, C.B. 1955. Crossbreeding beet leafhoppers from California and French Morocco. J. Econ. Ent., 48 (3): 341-342.
Merle, L. & Nadori, E.B. 1978. Essais de mise à fruits du Clémentier par la taille, l'incision annulaire et l'arcure. Al-Awamia [Rabat], 56: 105-126.
Nadori, E.B., Nhami, A. & Tourkmani, M. 1984. Programme d'amélioration sanitaire et de certification des agrumes au Maroc. 1st Cong. Int. Soc. of Citrus Nurserymen. Valencia, Spain.
Nadori, E.B., Quammou, M. & Quaicha, R. 1984. Etat d'avancement de la sélection nucellaire des agrumes. Journées d'étude sur les agrumes, 13- 15 mars 1984, Rabat.
Nhami, A. & Bourge, J.J. 1979. Sélection sanitaire en agrumiculture au Maroc. Al-Awamia [Rabat], 57: 29-39.
Nhami, A. & Kissi, A. 1978. Inventaires des viroses et des maladies similaires affectant le verger agrumicole marocain. Maroc Fruits, 529: 5, 12.
Nhami, A. & Zidane, A. 1984. Une contribution de la SO.DE.A.; 'amélioration sanitaire des agrumes. Maroc Fruits, 616: 2-3; 617:3.
Nhami, A., Bové, J.M., Bové, C., Monsion, M., Garnier, M., Saillard, C., Moutous, G. & Fos, A. 1980. A natural transmission of Spiroplasma citri to periwinkles in Morocco. In Proc. 8th Conf: IOCV, p. 153-162. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Perret, J. 1953. Quelques renseignements sur les maladies à virus des agrumes existant actuellement au Maroc. Fruits et Primeurs, 23(251): 399-400.
Saglio, P., Lhospital, M., Laflèche, D., Dupont, G., Bové, J.M., Tully, J.G. & Freundt, E.A. 1973. Spiroplasma citri gen. and sp.n.: a mycoplasma-like organism associated with "stubborn" disease of citrus. Int. J. Syst. Bacteriol., 23: 191-204.
Schneider, H. 1966. South Africa's greening disease and Morocco's stubborn disease. Calif Citrog., 51(7): 299-305.
Squalli, A.H. 1978. L'agrumiculture marocaine. Bull. SASMA [Casablanca]. 23 pp.
Vogel, R. & Bové, J.M. 1964. Stem pitting sur bigaradier et sur oranger Tarocco en Corse: une maladie à virus. Fruits, 19: 264-274.
Wyss-Dumont, E. 1951. Mutation ou dégénérescence des Washington navel? Rev. Fr. Oranger, 21 (231): 392-393.
Chapter 16: Oman
Witches' broom disease of lime nomenclature
S. citri in ornamental periwinkle in Nizwa
Virus and virus-like diseases
Defoliation and dieback of lemon and sweet lime trees at Nizwa
Horticultural practices and phytophthora Gummosis
Miscellaneous disorders, injuries and inadvisable practices
Citrus canker
Conclusions and summary
Bibliography
The main citrus species grown in Oman is the small-fruited acid lime (Citrus aurantifolia) which in this chapter will simply be called lime. It is to be distinguished from the sweet (Palestine) lime (Citrus limettioides), which is also found in Oman.
Limes have been grown in Oman, and especially the northern coastal plain (Al Batinah, see Map 7), for many generations. As an export crop, having been second only to dates for a long time, by the early 1970s limes had become the most important export commodity apart from oil.
Bové carried out two surveys in Oman, one in April 1986 and the second in April 1987. Both were focused on a lethal disease, Witches' broom disease of lime (WBDL), which strikes lime trees in northern Batinah. This review also takes into account the results of a large survey undertaken, following the April 1986 survey, by the Agricultural Department of Oman to determine the extent of the disease. One of the major results of the 1986 survey was the demonstration that the agent of the disease is a mycoplasma-like organism (MLO).
In addition to WBDL in the Batinah, lime trees near Ibri and Salalah were found to be affected by another very dangerous and serious disease - citrus canker. The causal bacterium, Xanthomonas campestris pv. citri, was cultured and identified. Citrus canker was probably imported into Oman from India directly, or via the countries of the Persian Gulf.
Citrus other than lime was seen mainly at experiment stations and farms of the Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries. Many sweet orange trees were affected by gummy bark, a disease first reported in Egypt, and many mandarin trees by cachexia-xyloporosis. Evidence of other virus and virus-like diseases, such as impietratura and exocortis, has also been found. These diseases and their agents have been introduced into Oman with budwood or trees from unreliable sources.
Witches' broom disease of lime nomenclature
The major and most characteristic symptom of the disease is the development of witches' brooms on affected lime trees, hence, the name given to the disorder in Oman. That MLOs are agents of the disease is also relevant, for it is well known that MLO-infected plants, and especially woody plants, develop witches' brooms. Hence, on the basis of symptomatology and aetiology, the name "Witches' broom disease of lime" (WBDL) has been applied. WBDL is probably one of the diseases in which the witches' brooms are most typical and well developed.
MAP 7 Oman
Distribution
Oman. In April 1986, the disease was restricted to northern Batinah and extended from Al Murayr, immediately south of the border with the United Arab Emirates, to the area around Saham. Within these limits, the most severely affected areas were those of Liwa and Shinas, Al Murayr being third. According to the Omani survey of 1986, the orchards in the whole area affected had a total of 29 232 trees of which 6 291 (21.5 percent) showed symptoms of WBDL. A very similar percentage was found for individual areas of Al Murayr (21.6 percent), Shinas (22.7 percent) and Liwa (21.1 percent). The Liwa area had the highest number of affected trees (4 274) and there were approximately 185 orchards with at least one infected tree per orchard. Of these 185 orchards, 95 (51.3 percent) had I to 10 percent affected trees, 31 (16.7 percent) had 10 to 20 percent affected trees, and 15 (8.1 percent) had 90 to 100 percent affected trees. The percentage of orchards with more than 90 percent
affected trees was 7 percent in both the Liwa and Shinas areas.
No affected trees were noted in the Sohar area in April 1986, but in April 1987 several orchards had trees showing symptoms of the disease. This indicates that the disease is spreading to hitherto unaffected zones in the general affected area. Until 1986; the Sohar-Saham area was the southern limit of the affected region, but by April 1987 the disease had progressed south of this border area. Witches' brooms on lime trees were seen not only in the Barka area (southern Batinah), but also inland in the Rustaq and Dhank areas. As noted above, in April 1986, the Liwa area had severely affected orchards, and in some orchards practically all trees were affected. This was the case in the orchard of Mohamed Bin Ali Al Ageeli (the Roufeli orchard) (Figs 137 to 139). The adjacent orchard belonging to Abdullah Bin Ahmed Seif Al Salami totals 100 trees, of which only five had one or two witches' brooms in April 1986. One year later, many more trees were affected, and showed
well-developed witches' brooms, in spite of the fact that the farmer had already removed many witches' brooms. This indicates that when an orchard has begun to show symptoms on a few trees, progress of the disease is generally fast, a fact well known and often stated by the farmers.
In conclusion, between April 1986 and April 1987, the disease had clearly progressed within the Al Murayr-Saham area and, for the first time, trees with witches' brooms were detected outside this area at Barka, Rustaq and Dhank.
Outside Oman. The surveys carried out by the author in April 1987 indicated that WBDL was still restricted to Oman. In particular, no evidence of the disease could be found in the United Arab Emirates, at Khor Kalba, Kalba and Fujairah, immediately north of the border with Oman.
However, in 1990, clear-cut symptoms of the disease were seen in the United Arab Emirates at Hatta and Fujairah. Samples collected in the country by Taher (FAO Plant Protection Service) were found positive in Bordeaux by electron microscopy and immuno-fluorescence. These results indicate that WBDL has now reached the United Arab Emirates. In view of the rapid spread of the disease in Oman, this was to be expected.
Symptomatology
General aspect of affected trees and progress of the disease. As already noted, affected trees are easily identified by the presence of witches' brooms (Figs 137 to 139), which are characterized by their compactness and their very small, pale green leaves (Fig. 140). These witches' brooms contrast strongly with the normal foliage of the tree (Fig. 137).
In the early stages of the disease, trees show only a small number of witches' brooms (Fig. 136), otherwise remaining totally symptomless. But the early witches' brooms are soon followed by many others in various parts of the tree (Fig. 137).
In the advanced stage of the disease, the leaves of the older witches' brooms die, but for some time the dry leaves remain attached (Figs 138 and 140). Eventually, the dead leaves fall off, leaving dead twigs and shoots as the only proof of former witches' brooms.
In the final stage of the disease, the trees have many dead twigs, shoots and branches, with only a few witches' brooms left (Fig. 139). At this stage, the trees are almost dead, and farmers are forced to eradicate them and plant banana trees instead. The progress of the disease from the first witches' broom to the last stage takes no more than four to five years.
Development of witches' brooms. A witches' broom results from the development of axillary buds that normally stay dormant. These sprout but, instead of growing into the long, normal shoots that form with normal apical growth inhibiting the development of axillary buds, they produce many secondary shoots, from which in turn other axillary buds grow. In this way, extensive ramification and internode shortening occurs. The leaves that grow on the first shoots of a future witches' broom are almost normal in size, but new leaves become progressively smaller, and new shoots become thinner as ramification continues. The thin shoots are sometimes pale green or whitish.
Hence, a well-developed witches' broom is characterized at its periphery by densely packed, thin, fragile, excessively ramified shoots with small internodes, carrying many minute leaves whose colour tends to become more and more yellow before they die and dry up.
The first witches' brooms to appear on a tree seem to develop more or less on the top or sides of the tree, but some also occur at soil level. Later, they cover the whole tree, with no clear-cut pattern of spread.
Flowers and fruits. Practically no flowers or fruits are produced on witches' brooms. Hence, fruit production falls as the number of witches' brooms increases. Bunches of flowers and fruits produced on certain shoots are much reduced in size, and quickly die. No flower virescence was observed except on periwinkles affected by WBDL (see below).
Leaves. As already noted, the many leaves at the periphery of witches' brooms are small to very small. They tend to become uniformly pale green and yellow before they eventually die and dry up. Portions of trees without witches' brooms bear normal leaves. No obvious leaf mottling seems to be associated with the disease.
Trunk branches and shoots. No particular symptoms have been observed on trunks or branches but, as already indicated above, the shoots that compose a witches' broom are excessively ramified, have short internodes and are thin and fragile. Their distal end is pale green to whitish.
The bark of shoots on witches' brooms tends to show cracks but, as the author has seen similar cracks on lime shoots in Saudi Arabia near Jeddah, in the absence of WBDL, these cracks cannot be said to be typical of WBDL.
Age of affected lime trees
Practically all the badly affected trees that the author saw were adult trees. The following observations were made in the Liwa area. In the El Ganahi orchard, the trees were 25 years old and all 140 trees were badly affected as of April 1986 - hence, the disease probably started in 1981 -82 on trees that were about 20 years old. In the El Castawi orchard, 20 affected trees were 35 years old. In another orchard, the oldest affected tree was 50 years old at the time of eradication. In the El Sotli orchard only two of about 100 trees were beginning to show symptoms of WBDL and they were 15 years old. In the Roufeli orchard, the first symptoms of WBDL also appeared in 1981 -82 on ten-year-old trees. However, in that orchard, a large witches' broom was seen on a three-year-old tree and this witches' broom had been noticed when the tree was only one year old. Electron microscopy has shown it to be infected with MLOs. In the Marhoun Dehem Al Maas orchard, three-year-old trees also
showed WBDL and were pulled out.
From these observations, it seems that the disease can occur on trees of any age, although today the majority of affected trees appear to be over ten to 15 years of age. According to farmers, the disease began to strike heavily around the early 1980s. If this is the case, it must have struck trees indiscriminately, regardless of age, thus explaining why in 1986-87, four to five years later, the ages of affected trees ranged from five to 50 years. The fact that the disease shows up on young trees indicates that it does not have an incubation period of several years. Hence, the ten-, 15-, 25-, 35- or 50-year-old trees that began to show symptoms of the disease in 1981-82 were probably healthy when they were young and became infected only later. This observation supports the theory of insect vector transmission of the disease.
The WBDL MLO was graft-transmitted to one-year-old lime seedlings in Bordeaux. Symptoms appeared at 32°C within six months after inoculation, thus demonstrating that the disease can affect very young lime seedlings.
Host range of WBDL
In the field, WBDL is so far restricted to lime trees. In the Roufeli orchard, where the acid lime trees are so badly affected, sweet lime trees adjacent to badly affected acid lime trees were symptomless and no MLOs could be detected in the sweet lime tissues. In the affected areas (Al Murayr, Shinas, Liwa), no citrus species other than acid lime and sweet lime are grown. However, recent graft-inoculation experiments in the greenhouse in Bordeaux (Garnier, Zreik and Bové, 1991) have shown that Troyer citrange can be infected and is susceptible (see Fig. 141). Other citrus cultivars that have reacted are Poncirus trifoliata, Eureka lemon and rough lemon. In the United Arab Emirates, the following citrus cultivars are also affected: Palestine sweet lime, sweet limetta and citron (Gassouma, personal communication).
Identification, detection and transmission of the WBDL agent
Search for MLOs by electron microscopy. Eight samples, essentially pieces of leaf midrib, I to 2 mm long, were taken from four witches' brooms (see Table 38: samples El, E2, E4 and E7) and fixed the same day (6 April 1986) in 2 percent glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M cacody-late buffer at pH 7.4. They remained in the fixation solution until they were worked on in the laboratory at Bordeaux. Leaf samples were also taken from a multiple-sprouting formation on a lime tree (Table 38: E3), from young leaves of a sweet lime tree growing next to an acid lime tree badly affected with WBDL (Table 38: E5) and from shoots with mottled leaves on an otherwise symptomless lime tree (Table 38: E6).
Five witches' brooms (E20, E21, E22, E23 and E24) and one normal shoot from an affected tree (E25) were collected in April 1986 and carried to Bordeaux in plastic bags. Leaf samples were taken and fixed as described above. After fixation, all 17 samples were post-fixed with osmium tetroxyde, dehydrated, thin-sectioned and observed in the electron microscope. Shoots from the witches' broom were graft-inoculated on young lime seedlings.
As shown in Table 38, all witches' brooms typical of WBDL (E1, E2, E7, E21, E22, E23, E24) contained many micro-organisms in their sieve tubes (Figs 25 to 28). These organisms were surrounded by a single cell membrane, had no cell wall and were identical in all respects to the MLOs seen in other diseases of plants. There is no doubt that these organisms are mycoplasma-like. MLOs were often extremely numerous in midrib samples taken on very small leaves (5 to 20 mm in length), indeed some of the sieve tubes of such samples were literally packed with MLOs (Fig. 25). With other MLO diseases of fruit trees, such as apple proliferation, the number of MLOs is usually very low and the MLOs are not easy to find, whatever leaf material is used. In larger leaves from witches' brooms, the MLOs were less numerous and sometimes not detected at all (Table 38:E2-1, E2-2), even though smaller leaves of the same witches' brooms contained high numbers of the organisms (Table 38: E2-3,E2-4).
In one witches' broom with many large leaves, MLOs were not detected in the 4-5 cm-long leaves (see Table 38: E4).
Finally, no MLOs were detected in the leaves of normal shoots from an affected tree (Table 38: E25), in the bark and small leaves of the multiple-sprouting formation found on a WBDL-affected tree (Table 38: E3-1, E3-2), in mottle-affected leaves (Table 38: E6) or in small, young leaves of a sweet lime tree growing next to a WBDL-affected acid lime tree (Table 38: E5).
These results clearly show that MLOs are associated with WBDL and that the severity of the symptoms is related to the number of MLOs in the sieve tubes - the higher the number, the smaller the leaves. It has been shown that MLOs in deciduous fruit trees overwinter in the roots and reinvade the new leaves the next spring. Thus, in spite of leaf shedding, the tree remains infected. Citrus is a non-deciduous tree, so the MLOs need not move to the roots, they are not lost by leaf shedding, and their concentration can increase continuously until they jam the sieve tubes. This is perhaps why WBDL is much more severe than MLO diseases of deciduous fruit trees, e.g. apple proliferation.
TABLE 38 Witches' broom disease of small-fruited acid lime trees in Oman: search for MLOs by electron microscopy
Nature of witches" broom Nature of plant material taken on
witches' broom Sample
number Detection (+)^1 or no detection (-) of MLOs in sieve tube Figure number
Designation Type
E1^2 Large, with small, but also normal, leaves from 3-year-old tree Tip ends of shoots with small leaves E1-1 + 26
Midribs of leaves 0.5-2cm long E1-2 2+ 28
E2 From tree in advanced stage of decline (Fig. 138) Midribs of leaves 3 4 cm long E2-1 -
Midribs of leaves 1 2 cm long E2-2 -
Midribs of leaves 0 5-1 cm long E2-3 4+ 25
Midribs of leaves less than 0.5 cm long E2-4 5+
E4 With mainly large normal leaves Midrib of leaves 4 5 cm long E4 -
E7 With relatively large leaves Midribs of relatively large leaves E7 +
E20 Well developed with leaves Midribs of leaves 2 cm long about 2 cm long E20 3+
E21³ Same as E20 Midribs of leaves 1 2 cm long E21 3+
E22 Same as E21 Midribs of leaves about 2 cm long E22 +
E23 Same as E21 E23 +
E24 Same as E20 Midribs of leaves about 2 cm long E24 +
E25 Normal shoot from affected Midribs of leaves about 4-5 cm tree long E25 -
E3 Multiple sprouting on lime tree Midribs of leaves less than 1 cm long E3-1 -
E5 Shoots of sweet lime tree adjacent to affected acid lime tree Midribs of young leaves 1 to 3 cm long E5 -
E6 Shoots of lime tree with mottled leaves mottle Midribs of leaves showing leaf E6 -
Notes:
^1 + to 5+: a few MLOs in sieve tubes (+) to sieve tubes crammed with MLOs (5+).
^2 Samples El to E7 were fixed in Oman.
^3 Samples E21 in E25 were fixed in Bordeaux
Colour test for MLOs of WBDL. A simple but non-specific cytochemical technique has been described for the detection of MLOs in the sieve tubes. It uses a special stain (DAPI) that combines specifically with DNA (Russel, Newman and Williamson, 1975). The stain (DAPI: 4.6 diamidino-2-phenylindole 2 HCl) is available commercially from Germany. This technique was thought to be particularly applicable in the case of WBDL, since so many MLOs (and hence DNA) are present in the sieve tubes of leaves from witches' brooms.
Leaf samples were collected from the witches' brooms taken to Bordeaux (E20 to E24). Leaf midribs were fixed for two hours in 5 percent glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M phosphate buffer at pH 7.4. Sections of 30 µm thickness were obtained with a freezing microtome. The sections were immediately transferred to the DAPI solution (1 µg/ml) for ten minutes, mounted on a microscope slide and sealed with wax or varnish. They were observed in a fluorescence microscope equipped with a high-pressure mercury lamp, 365 µm excitation filter and 450 µm emission filter.
The samples from witches' brooms showed a high DAPI fluorescence in the sieve tubes, while no fluorescence was seen in sieve tubes from healthy lime leaves. These results show that DAPI coloration can be useful in work with WBDL.
Attempts to culture the MLO associated with WBDL. Some of samples E20 to E24 were used to try to culture the MLO associated with WBDL. The technique was that used with Spiroplasma citri-infected citrus material (Bové, Whitcomb and McCoy, 1983).
Two of the best media were used: MIA and SP4 (Whitcomb, 1983), but the MLO of WBDL could not be cultured, although several attempts were made to do so. This result is not surprising since, at the present time, no MLO has been obtained in culture. The only culturable phytopathogenic mycoplasmas are the helical spiroplasmas.
Transmission of the WBDL MLO. The WBDL MLO was graft-transmitted to young lime seedlings. Symptoms on inoculated plants are identical to those seen in the field, and require high temperature conditions (32°C rather than 25°C) for expression. Graft transmission to
Troyer citrange (see Fig. 141), Eureka lemon, rough lemon and P. trifoliata was also achieved. In addition, the MLO was transmitted from symptomatic lime seedlings to periwinkle (Catharanthus roseus) plants by dodder (Cuscuta campestris) (see Figs 29 and 30). Symptoms on periwinkle plants are similar to those on lime - witches' brooms with very small leaves (see Fig. 142). Flowers are small and show virescence. Back transmission from periwinkle to lime has also been achieved.
Monoclonal antibodies and DNA probes for detection of the WBDL MLO WBDL MLO-infected periwinkle leaves have been used to prepare monoclonal antibodies (MAs) and DNA probes against the WBDL MLO. Eighteen such MAs and five DNA probes have been obtained.
These reagents make it easy to detect the MLO in plant material (see Fig. 143) and putative insect vectors (Garnier, Zreik and Bové, 1991). The use of the DNA probes has shown that the WBDL MLO shares DNA sequences with the MLO of sesamum phyllody.
WBDL as an MLO disease. As already indicated, MLOs are clearly involved in WBDL. They are very probably the causal agent of the disease, but absolute proof of this must await fulfilment of Koch's postulates. As long as the MLOs are not available in culture, these postulates cannot be fulfilled and, to be exact, the MLOs can only be said to be associated with the disease, not its causal agent. It is with these restrictions in mind that the expression "MLO disease" can be used.
Spread of WBDL
From discussions with Mohamed El Sheshtawi, Rashwan Mohamed Rashwan and several farmers, it appears that the disease was first noticed around 1975, but that the major damage has occurred since the early 1980s. The Roufeli orchard, so badly affected in 1986 (Figs 137 to 139) was still in good shape in 1981-82. In the El Ganahi orchard, which has 100 percent affected trees at the time of writing, the disease followed a similar evolution. The progression of the disease from April 1986 to April 1987 was dramatic in certain orchards. Areas free of WBDL in 1986 showed symptoms of the disease in 1987, trees that were symptomless in 1986 had symptoms in April 1987. The urgent question now is - do these observations mean that WBDL is spreading from tree to tree, from orchard to orchard, from northern Batinah to southern Batinah, from Oman to the United Arab Emirates? If so, is it caused by propagation of infected plant material, or natural transmission by insect vectors, or both?
Marcottage is the main propagation technique for lime trees in Oman. Farmers do not use seedling trees, cuttings or budlings. It is, however, very difficult to obtain reliable information from the farmers as to where and from whom they obtained the planting material of the old lime orchards which are affected by WBDL today. They do not keep records, and are not aware of their importance. Hence, it is not known whether badly affected orchards were propagated from healthy or infected trees and so the role of infected planting material in the spread of the disease cannot at present be assessed.
However, for the following reasons, the use of infected plant material does not seem to be the major cause of the explosive way the disease appears to have spread since 1981 -82. As indicated above, trees of all ages show the disease. The fact that young trees are affected shows that the incubation period - the period it takes for an infected tree to show symptoms -is short, not longer than several years. This is confirmed by the graft-transmission experiments mentioned above which show that young, one-year-old lime seedlings show symptoms within six months of graft inoculation. Hence, the ten-, 15-, 25-, 35- or 50-year-old trees that began to show symptoms around 1981-82 had become infected only a relatively short time before - they were not infected in their early years, or they would have shown symptoms long ago. This logically means that they must have become infected through vector transmission of the disease agent, a conclusion in keeping with the MLO nature of WBDL.
It is well known that MLO diseases of plants are naturally transmitted by insect vectors, essentially leafhoppers, but also psyllas (in the case of pear decline, for instance), so it would not be surprising if WBDL were also transmitted in this way. the many witches' brooms, with their numerous small leaves so rich in MLOs, would be efficient sources of inoculum for the vectors, but infected plants other than lime should a]so be considered as potential sources of contamination. Natural transmission of WBDL and identification of the vector are priority research projects. The recently developed reagents to detect the WBDL MLO (MAs and DNA probes) should make it possible to identify the vector(s) quickly. Table 39 lists leafhoppers that have been reported in Oman.
Regarding natural transmission of WBDL, the fact that badly affected orchards (Roufeli, El Ganahi) exist alongside orchards with only very few affected trees suggests tree-to-tree propagation.
TABLE 39 Leafhoppers identified in Oman
Common name Scientific name Locality Host
Leafhopper Amrasca devastans Northern Oman Alfalfa
Leafhopper Austroagallia caboverdensis Tagah/Salalah Alfalfa
Balclutha pauxilla Tagah/Salalah Alfalfa
Balclutha sp. Tagah/Salalah Alfalfa
Exitianus taeniaticeps Tagah/Salalah Alfalfa
Deltocephalus schmidtgeni Tagah/Salalah Alfalfa
Jassids Orosius sp. Alfalfa
Jassids Zanchius sp. Brinjal
Cotton jassids Amrasca devastans Brinjal/okra
During a May 1991 survey in Oman for potential leafhopper vectors of the WBDL MLO, the Bordeaux group in collaboration with Omani colleagues, and especially A.M. Mjeni, found the leafhopper Hishimonus phycitis to be consistently associated with lime trees, both healthy and affected. This was the first time this leafhopper was reported in Oman and the Arabian Peninsula. In a February 1993 survey, the same leafhopper was also found on lime trees in the United Arab Emirates (Al Shareqi, Gassouma, Garnier and Bové, unpublished). H. phycitis is well known in India and Pakistan where it is recognized as the vector of the MLO of little leaf disease of eggplant. Experiments are under way to assess the role of H. phycitis in the transmission of the WBDL MLO.
Finally, the spread of WBDL to the United Arab Emirates has now occurred, as noted above. The disease was seen for the first time in 1989. Acid lime samples collected by Taher (FAO Plant Protection Service) and analysed in Bordeaux were found to contain the
WBDL MLO when examined by electron microscopy and immunofluorescence. Leaf samples of citron, Palestine sweet lime and sweet limetta from the United Arab Emirates sent to Bordeaux by Gassouma were found positive by some techniques.
Origin of WBDL
The origin of WBDL is unknown. No information was obtained in talks with farmers or extension officers. WBDL is a new disease, described for the first time in Oman. Because of its severity, if it had occurred elsewhere, it would probably have been noticed. This is precisely what has happened in the United Arab Emirates where the disease was suspected for the first time in 1989. No symptoms of WBDL could be seen in the Islamic Republic of Iran in 1985, in Pakistan in 1987, or in India in 1988 and 1990. In India citrus is affected by another MLO disease- rubbery wood (Alhawat and Chenulu, 1985). The symptoms and host range of WBDL and rubbery wood are clearly different, and the two diseases do not seem to be related. In the light of the fact that S. citri, the agent of stubborn disease of citrus, can infect many plants other than citrus (for instance, S. citri-infected periwinkles were discovered at Nizwa), it is not unlikely, but in no way proved, that the MLO of WBDL could
come from a plant other than citrus with the involvement of an insect vector. In this respect, sapotilla trees affected by fasciation have been hypothetically related to WBDL. However, the cause of fasciation is not known; it could be varietal. Sapotilla trees with fasciation occur at the Rumais Research Centre and in the Salalah region.
Attempts to control WBDL
Farmers have cut off witches' brooms in the hope of eliminating the disease, but in all cases they have reappeared. This observation is in total agreement with the infectious, MLO nature of the disease. It also shows that MLOs are present, not only in the witches' brooms, but also in asymptomatic parts of the trees, such as large branches. When such branches produce shoots, the MLOs are able to invade the developing shoots and produce a witches' broom. Thus, MLOs infect WBDL-affected trees in a systemic way. Making marcotts from symptomless shoots of affected trees will undoubtedly result in MLO-infected progeny trees. Therefore, WBDL-affected trees, and even symptomless trees in WBDL-affected orchards, should not be used as parent trees for propagation purposes.
Some attempts to control WBDL by tetracycline injections into affected trees have been made at the orchard of Salem Hamdan Al Amri at Shinas. However, these injections were not carried out in a proper way and so gave no results. In addition, the multiple "trunks" characteristic of so many lime trees in the Batinah make efficient injections difficult. Such trees require at least as many injections as there are "trunks" while, in the case of trees with single trunks, two injections per tree would probably be enough.
Finally, because of the severity and destructive nature of WBDL, farmers have begun to pull out whole orchards and replace citrus with other crops such as banana.
Recommendations
Orchards with a high percentage (50 percent or more) of badly affected trees (for instance, Salem Hamdan Al Amri orchard in the Shinas area; Roufeli orchard and Al Salami orchards in the Liwa area) should be totally uprooted and burnt, indeed, farmers have already begun to do this. It does not pay to keep a few symptomless trees when most trees in the orchard are affected and have to be pulled out. In less severely affected orchards, all trees showing symptoms should be uprooted and burnt. By removing the infected trees, one removes the source of inoculum on which the probable insect vectors become contaminated, thus slowing the spread of the disease. Serious consideration should be given to taking even more drastic measures and destroying all affected orchards - in other words, working towards the complete eradication of the disease.
Three orchards, each with at least 100 trees' should be preserved for experimentation purposes: one badly affected orchard (75 percent affected trees or more), one less affected orchard (25 percent affected trees) and one mildly affected orchard (10 percent affected trees). These orchards should be used to investigate: the distribution of MLOs in a ten-year-old lime tree showing only one single witches' broom; whether seedling lime trees and seedlings of other citrus species become infected, and how quickly, when exposed to natural contamination within one of the three orchards, among affected or symptomless trees; and whether seedling trees are protected from infection if placed in an insect-proof cage. The MAs and DNA probes now available are indispensable for this work
Apparently healthy orchards in which affected trees have been pulled out will have to be surveyed at least twice a year to determine if symptoms have reappeared. Trees on which symptoms do appear must be marked, so as to follow the eventual progress of the disease in the orchard.
Movement of citrus material out of the Al Murayr-AI Khaburah area must be strictly prohibited, in order to prevent the contamination of areas still free of WBDL. It would be a very bad mistake to take young trees from the affected area into areas as yet free of the disease. These regions should be regularly surveyed to assess absence of WBDL.
As stated above, lime trees should not be propagated from trees - symptomless or otherwise - in infected orchards, as lack of symptoms is no guarantee that the trees are not infected. Nursery workers should be instructed accordingly. The production of lime trees from seed rather than marcotts should be considered. Citrus nurseries in the affected areas must be carefully surveyed for WBDL.
The existence and spread of WBDL should be notified and not kept more or less secret. On the contrary, citrus growers and extension officers should receive full information about the disease and the severe threat that it represents for the lime industry, not only in Oman but also in other countries. Public meetings and television broadcasts could be used to good effect to increase awareness of the problem.
Quarantine measures should be reinforced in order to prevent illegal importation of citrus material from countries such as Pakistan and India where tristeza, greening and citrus canker exist. Citrus material should only be introduced from sources such as France, Spain or the United States of America which can certify that their citrus plant material is free of infectious agents.
The facilities required for, and the financial implications of, the research programme are outside the scope of this review. Yet, a large insect-proof screenhouse is a prerequisite for transmission studies. For safety reasons, these studies should be carried out within, or close to, the affected Shinas-Liwa area, not at Rumais.
Conclusion
WBDL, limited to Oman until 1989, but now also present in the United Arab Emirates, is a new infectious MLO disease of citrus, very probably transmitted by insect vectors. the danger of WBDL, not only for Oman, but also for other countries, cannot be overemphasized. It is one of the most severe diseases of citrus, very much more severe than, for instance, stubborn disease, another mycoplasma disease of citrus. The destructive potential of WBDL will be even greater if it turns out that the disease can affect citrus species other than acid lime. It has already been shown that Troyer citrange is susceptible.
The disease seems to have appeared in the late 1970s, and it began to spread rapidly in the early 1980s. It affects trees of any age. It is not known how and why the WBDL started.
Was infected plant material imported from abroad into Oman, with or without a vector? Was infectious plant material present in Oman but without a vector and the vector, possibly H. phycitis, introduced only recently? These questions and others are important not only for academic reasons but also for disease control. Only research will provide the answers.
Recommendations have been made concerning limitation of the spread of WBDL. It would even be advisable to try to achieve total eradication of the disease, if this is in any way feasible, though now that the disease appears to have spread to the United Arab Emirates this will be extremely difficult.
All those involved in the citrus industry in Oman must be made aware of the seriousness of the situation created by WBDL, and of the threat that the disease represents, not only for Oman but also for other citrus-growing countries. All efforts should be made to study and control the disease.
<section>j</section>
S. citri in ornamental periwinkle in Nizwa
S. citri, the helical mycoplasmal agent of citrus stubborn disease, is naturally transmitted by leafhoppers. In the Mediterranean area and the Near East, the leafhopper Neoaliturus haematoceps is the main vector. In the Near East, Neoaliturus tenellus (the vector in California and Arizona) may also play a role.
Leafhoppers are responsible for S. citri infection of citrus as well as of many non-citrus plants including periwinkle. Ornamental periwinkles with symptoms of S. citri infection were detected at the Nizwa Hotel and samples of them were collected. Electron microscopic examination revealed the spiroplasma cells in the sieve tubes of an affected periwinkle, and S. citri was also cultured from the Omani periwinkle samples. These results show unambiguously that S. citri-infected leafhoppers exist that are able to transmit the spiroplasma to periwinkle, and very probably to other plants as well.
In the Rumais Research Centre, Washington navel trees of Egyptian origin showed symptoms of stubborn. Stubborn and S. citri should not be overlooked if Oman decides to extend sweet orange orchards.
Virus and virus-like diseases
Gummy bark
Gummy bark disease of sweet orange (see Figs 60 to 79) was detected on Valencia late sweet orange trees, not only at the Rumais Research Centre (Fig. 60) but also at the Qairun Hairati farm in the Salalah region. It is probably the same line of Valencia late sweet orange that shows the disease whether it is grown in Rumais or Qairun Hairati. Gummy bark was also seen at the Tanuf farm on a sweet orange line of Egyptian origin. At Qairun Hairati a sweet orange line of unknown variety showed gummy bark in addition to what appears to be scaly bark psorosis (psorosis A). Most of the cases of gummy bark observed are severe and the trees are stunted.
The only way to control gummy bark is to use disease-free citrus material. The pathogen is not transmitted by vectors, therefore trees free of gummy bark remain so. The presence of the disease in Oman is a result of haphazard introductions of budwood or trees from countries, such as Egypt, which at present cannot supply citrus material certified free of virus and virus-like diseases.
Cachexia-xyloporosis on mandarin
Willowleaf mandarin trees, severely affected by cachexia-xyloporosis, were detected at the Tanuf farm. Willowleaf mandarin trees showing symptoms of the disease at Rumais Research Centre were probably of the same line. A severe case of the disease was seen on mandarin trees in the farm of Abdulhafiz Bin Salem Bin Rajeb near Salalah.
Sweet lime is also susceptible to cachexia-xyloporosis. A mild form of the disease was seen on sweet lime at the Tanuf farm on a tree also affected by exocortis. The disease is controlled by using disease-free budwood. There is no transmission of the disease by vectors. Mechanical transmission is possible. Once again, citrus material for propagation should only be imported from reliable sources.
Impietratura on grapefruit
Impietratura fruit symptoms were seen on grapefruit at the Qairun Hairati farm. In addition, when this grapefruit line was taken to France and propagated, the young grapefruit leaves that developed showed very severe psorosis young leaf symptoms. These symptoms (see Figs 91 to 96) are not specific to impietratura, but are common to the following diseases: scaly bark psorosis (psorosis A), concave gum-blind pocket, cristacortis, crinkly leaf-infectious variegation and impietratura.
The psorosis young leaf symptoms require relatively low temperatures (about 18-22°C) for expression. In cool climates, the symptoms can easily be seen each year on the newly produced young leaves in the orchard. In Oman, temperatures are too high for young leaf symptoms to occur in the orchard though they can be obtained in temperature controlled greenhouses. Once again, control lies in using only disease-free planting material.
Scaly bark psorosis (psorosis A) on sweet orange
At the Qairun Hairati farm, a sweet orange tree showed symptoms similar to scaly bark psorosis (psorosis A) in addition to gummy bark. The only control is avoidance, by using disease-free planting material.
Concave gum on sweet orange
At the Rumais Research Centre, Washington navel sweet orange trees of Egyptian origin showed concave depressions typical of concave gum disease. Some of the trees were also thought to have stubborn disease. Once again the only control is avoidance, by using only disease-free planting material.
Exocortis on sweet lime
The exocortis viroid induces bark scaling on susceptible species such as Poncirus trifoliata (see Fig. 83), the citranges (hybrids of P. trifoliata x sweet orange), Rangpur lime, etc. mainly used as rootstocks. On sweet lime, the viroid induces vertical splits resembling growth cracks, as seen on a sweet lime tree at the Tanuf farm.
The exocortis viroid is mechanically transmissible by pruning knives, scissors, etc. Control of the disease is again by use of disease-free planting material but, in addition, pruning tools and budding knives must be disinfected with bleach solution (household bleach diluted to give a 5 percent solution of sodium hypochlorite), to prevent mechanical transmission from an infected tree to a healthy one.
Tristeza
Tristeza is the most serious virus disease affecting lime trees. The author was therefore horrified to see clear-cut symptoms (vein clearing: see Fig. 128) of the disease at a nursery in Sohar on many young lime trees just imported from an unknown source in India. Tristeza is widespread in India and it is not surprising that lime trees from there carry the disease.
In addition to lime trees, grapefruit and mandarin trees were also imported from India with the same shipment. The grapefruit trees were also infected with tristeza virus and gave a highly positive ELISA reaction when analysed in Bordeaux. Young grapefruit trees do not show tristeza symptoms and so detection of the virus relies on the immunological ELISA reaction.
The consequences of releasing these tristeza-infected lime and grapefruit trees to the farmers would have been incalculable. The author requested that these trees be destroyed and burnt at once.
In addition to tristeza, the lime trees carried citrus canker - the most serious bacterial disease that can affect lime trees.
The author was told that the trees imported from India went through quarantine at the airport and so does not understand why lime trees with such obvious symptoms of tristeza and citrus canker were not stopped at the time of quarantine inspection. the affected trees from India were spotted by chance. It is impossible to say how many other nursery or farm owners have imported trees from this source.
In conclusion, without the destruction of the trees from India, the Sohar area and the whole Batinah would soon have become famous not only for witches' broom disease but also for tristeza and canker.
Virus and virus-like diseases: conclusions and recommendations
Of all virus and virus-like diseases, the two most widely seen in Oman are gummy bark on sweet orange and cachexia-xyloporosis on mandarin.
Identification of virus and virus-like diseases by visual symptoms is, however, insufficient as a means of assessing the true health status of citrus. For instance, it is impossible to determine from visual symptoms if sweet orange is infected by cachexia-xyloporosis and exocortis, or mandarin by gummy bark and exocortis, because sweet orange is tolerant to cachexia-xyloporosis and exocortis, and mandarin to gummy bark and exocortis. Therefore, initial diagnosis by visual symptoms must be completed by indexing on sensitive indicator plants or with laboratory techniques. However, at this stage of citrus development in Oman, this seems unnecessary because the citrus lines introduced already contain so many diseases that it would be meaningless to show that they have a few more.
The following straightforward recommendations can be made:
* Never introduce citrus material from countries which cannot supply citrus material certified free of diseases. As stated above, at the present time certified plant material can be supplied by France, Spain and the United States of America.
* None of the citrus trees growing in Oman should be used as reliable sources of budwood.
* The citrus trees on the various experimental farms (Rumais Research Centre and farms Tanuf and Qairun Hairati) are of very poor quality and should not be used for experimentation. It would be best to pull them out and replant with healthy, certified trees. This is especially true of the old Washington navel and mandarin trees (Block D) at the Rumais Research Centre.
Defoliation and dieback of lemon and sweet lime trees at Nizwa
Mal secco is a dangerous disease caused by the fungus Deuterophoma tracheiphila (see Figs 232 to 235). It primarily affects lemon trees in many Mediterranean countries including Greece, Italy, the Syrian Arab Republic and Turkey. It is not yet known to be present in Iran, Iraq or Saudi Arabia.
Suspicious symptoms (defoliation, dieback) were seen on a few lemon and lime trees in the Nizwa region. Affected sweet lime shoots were analysed in Bordeaux. The wood of the shoots showed a brownish red, more or less localized staining. Small pieces of stained wood were surface-disinfected with calcium hypochlorite solution and placed in 15 percent agar malt medium. In 80 percent of cases, mycelial colonies were obtained which emitted a brownish pigment into the medium. The colonies carried asexual reproductive organs typical of the genus Phoma. The fungus was not further characterized.
At the Tanuf farm. sour orange seedling trees are growing next to affected lemon and lime trees. They showed no signs of the disease. As sour orange is very susceptible to mal secco, they would probably have been affected if D. tracheiphila was involved. For this reason, it is unlikely that mal secco occurs in the Nizwa area, but a careful watch should be kept.
Horticultural practices and phytophthora Gummosis
Several cases of phytophthora gummosis were observed, mainly due to improper irrigation and planting conditions. Trees are often planted too deep, with bud-union lines too close to the soil. They end up in cuvettes and are flooded instead of being irrigated, with the consequent danger of infection by the soil-borne pathogens of phytophthora gummosis.
In the Batinah and elsewhere, the lime "trees" are conducted on several branch-like trunks instead of having one, single, good trunk.
Miscellaneous disorders, injuries and inadvisable practices
At the Rumais Research Centre (Block D), old Washington navel sweet orange trees showed abundant gumming, the cause of which was not determined. Termites were also a problem. Some trees were being top-grafted, which is inadvisable when the viral status of the grafted partners is unknown.
Symptoms resembling autumn blast were seen on a few sweet orange trees. Autumn blast refers to twigs that suddenly die and dry up in situ (see Figs 252 to 254). Gummy material is conspicuous on parts of the stem, but the dried leaves do not fall off. There is a clear-cut margin between the upper, brownish, dead bark of the stem of the dried-up twig and the lower bark that is green and still alive. This twig dieback appears on the uppermost part of the canopy. In severe cases, lower branches also show dead twigs. A similar disorder was observed in the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya in 1974, in Iraq in 1978 (see Fig. 253), in Yemen in 1983 (see Fig. 254) and in the Islamic Republic of Iran in November 1985 (see Fig. 252). In Iraq, the symptoms start around mid-October. Mandarin and Clementine trees are most susceptible, followed by sweet orange and grapefruit trees. Lemon trees are much less affected and sour orange trees never.
The cause of autumn blast is not known, although it is probably not due to parasitic micro-organisms or pests. It seems to reflect the failure of the terminal twigs to secure sufficient water. Factors that could be responsible for insufficient water supply in autumn in Iraq are the significant temperature difference between day and night, and relatively low soil temperatures contrasting with high air temperatures during the day. These temperature differences might induce twig dieback, especially if the root system is inadequate because of poor cultivation, root injury, attack by fungi such as Phytophthora spp., unbalanced water supply or overwatering on one side of the tree and poor supply of water on the other, due to the one-furrow irrigation system.
Obviously, twig dieback is more of a problem under extreme climatic conditions than in temperate climates. It is therefore important to maintain adequate moisture in the soil by proper irrigation.
Citrus canker
Last, but not least, citrus canker was seen in Oman in two locations in 1986: the orchard of Said Ben Rachid Kilbani (including nearby courtyard trees) at Homania near Ibri (Figs 248, 249 and 251) and the orchard of Said
Bin Salem Al Wahebi in Salalah (Fig. 250). In both cases, typical canker symptoms were observed on both lime and grapefruit. In 1987 the disease was seen in the Sohar region on young acid lime seedling trees just imported from India. Immediate destruction of these seedlings was strongly recommended. Whether these recommendations were followed or not, citrus canker appeared in the Sohar region in 1990. It was observed by the author in November 1992 in Sohar.
Isolation and characterization of the citrus canker pathogen
During the 1986 survey, five citrus canker samples were taken for culture and identification of the causal agent, the bacterium Xanthomonas campestris pv. citri. The samples were lime leaves and twigs from Homania region lime leaves and twigs from Salalah region, and grapefruit leaves from Salalah region.
After surface sterilization with 95 percent ethanol, canker lesions from a given sample were collected and placed in a sterile Petri dish. They were macerated in 5 ml sterile distilled water with a lanceolate needle. After 15 minutes of incubation at room temperature, the homogenate was streaked on solid LPGA medium in a Petri dish (20 µl of homogenate per dish) and incubated at 28°C for 72 hours. LPGA medium contains, per litre, 7 g bactopeptone (DIFCO), 7 g yeast extract (DIFCO), 15 g agar (DIFCO), 50 ppm cycloheximide, and is at pH 7.2.
On solid LPGA medium, Xanthomonas sp. yields characteristic yellow colonies. All five samples from Oman gave such colonies. Colonies from each sample were further sub-cultured on solid medium in a tube. The subcultured isolates can be kept in tubes on LPGA medium and passaged every four days at 28°C, or every seven days at 16°C. They can be resuspended in sterile water and kept at -30~C.
Representative isolates from each Omani sample were further characterized as indicated in Table 40. All isolates were identified as Xanthomonas campestris.
X. campestris has several pathovars, according to the affected host. The Omani isolates come from citrus (acid lime and grapefruit), and hence they are almost certainly X. campestris pv. citri.
There are three major pathotypes of X. campestris pv. citri: A, B and C. Pathotype A is the most common and is endemic throughout Pakistan, India, Southeast Asia and Indonesia. It affects species of the genus Citrus, including small-fruited acid lime, grapefruit, sweet orange and Poncirus trifoliata, as well as wild rutaceous species. Pathotype B occurs mainly in Argentina, is less severe than A and does not affect sweet orange or grapefruit. Pathotype C has been reported from Brazil as a very severe type on acid lime, which also affects sour orange but no other citrus. On the basis of host range, the pathotype present in Oman is A, since the agent was not only found on acid lime but also on grapefruit. The pathotypes can be identified more precisely by their sensitivity or resistance to infection by various bacteriophages. These analyses have shown that the pathotype involved is definitely not B. The lack of one phage made it impossible to distinguish between A and C but,
on the basis of all other data, A is very probably the pathotype present in Oman.
In conclusion, X. campestris pv. citri, very probably pathotype A, has been isolated and cultured from acid lime and grapefruit samples collected in Homania and Salalah. This demonstrates the presence of the causal agent of citrus canker in Oman.
Distribution
Citrus canker is a very serious disease of oriental origin. It is present in India, Japan, Southeast Asia, the Philippines, Indonesia, etc. Because of its severity, the disease has been eradicated in Florida, South Africa, Australia and New Zealand. In Florida, between 1914 and 1931, over 250 000 adult citrus trees and three million nursery trees were eradicated and destroyed.
The disease appeared in 1982 in the coastal plain (Tihama) of northern Yemen, very probably as a result of citrus introductions from India. An eradication programme is now under way. In 1983, Aubert and Bové discovered canker-affected trees in Saudi Arabia, north of Jizan. Eradication was immediately recommended.
Reports have recently appeared concerning the presence of canker in the Persian Gulf area. In the United Arab Emirates, the disease is present. It has not been eradicated but is apparently controlled by copper sprays. The author did not see canker in Iran in December 1985.
In the Ibri region of Oman, the disease seemed to be limited to one orchard and a few nearby trees, amounting altogether to less than 60 trees. These trees have been removed and burnt. The young acid lime seedlings with canker seen in 1987 in the Sohar nursery have also been burnt, according to the nursery manager. Nevertheless, as stated above, citrus canker is now (November 1992) present in the Sohar area and will probably spread to the entire region.
TABLE 40 Characterization of Xanthomonas campestris in Oman
Characters tested Samples from Oman Xanthomonas campestris control
Gram stain - -
Polar flagellum + +
Fluorescence - -
Nitrate reduction to nitrites - -
Cytochrome C oxydase - -
Hypersensibility on tobacco + +
Esculin hydrolysis + +
Gelatin hydrolysis + +
H[2]S production + +
Urease - -
Starch hydrolysis + +
Carbohydrate utilization:
Glucose + +
Galactose + +
Cellobiose + +
Sorbitol - -
Inositol - -
In the Salalah region the trees in the affected orchard have unfortunately not been destroyed. As citrus canker was reported in Salalah as early as 1984, the disease may now have spread. For this reason, it is now imperative that a careful survey for affected trees and orchards be carried out. All affected trees and orchards must be burnt and destroyed in situ. The following recommendations, given as early as 1987 to the authorities of Oman and based on experience in Florida in the eradication and containment of citrus canker, should be followed.
Recommendations
* Spray the infected trees in situ with a mixture of kerosene and petroleum oil and burn them.
* Defoliate, using Diquat, the eight trees immediately surrounding each infected tree.
* Survey, tree by tree, for 90 m in every direction. Then, if more infected trees are found, adjust accordingly.
* Inspectors must use disposable shoe coverings and gloves while inspecting an infected tree or group of trees. Clothes must be changed and plastic gloves and shoes destroyed before moving on to the next owner's grove.
* The infested area should be mapped precisely, indicating the location of all trees, whether they were infected, destroyed, defoliated or healthy. Regulate 250 ha or more if operational requirements warrant it. All equipment used in this operation should be disinfected immediately after use.
* The infested area should be reinspected every month, or more frequently if possible, for one year. For the next year, reinspect each major flush.
* If a citrus nursery is found to have X. campestris pv. citri, the whole nursery must be destroyed by burning and not be replanted for two years at least, and preferably not for five years.
* No citrus trees should be planted in eradicated areas for a minimum of two years, and preferably not for five years, unless research shows justification for changing this time-frame.
It is clear that citrus canker has been introduced into Oman from abroad, in spite of quarantine procedures. According to El Sheshtawi, about 4 000 citrus trees from India were destroyed in 1985 and 1986 at the Seeb International Airport because of canker. However, quarantine at the airport is not fully effective since, as recounted above, in 1987 the author detected tristeza and citrus canker on hundreds of acid lime seedling trees, as well as tristeza on grapefruit trees just imported from India.
Importation of any citrus material from India should be totally and strictly prohibited, as three major diseases of citrus are widespread in the country: citrus canker (a bacterial disease), citrus greening (an intracellular bacterial disease) and citrus tristeza (a virus disease). All three diseases can be introduced through budwood or trees and canker can also be introduced through fruit. Pakistan, where greening was reported in 1976 and confirmed in 1987, should be subject to the same restrictions as India. The same applies to Saudi Arabia, northern Yemen and the United Arab Emirates. The only good decision that Oman can make is to prohibit all importation of citrus budwood or trees by unauthorized persons. Only countries where no canker is present should be considered as sources of fruit importation for consumption.
Conclusions and summary
The survey undertaken in Oman and the analyses carried out in France have revealed the following salient points regarding the country's citrus industry.
* Witches' broom disease of lime (WBDL) is a very serious, new disease of citrus. In April 1986 it was still limited to the northern Batinah. The most severely affected areas were those of Shinas and Liwa. Clear-cut evidence for progression of WBDL between April 1986 and April 1987 has been obtained. The major affected area extends from Al Murayr in the north to Saham in the south. Within this area the disease is now present in more than 200 orchards with almost 30 000 trees, of which more than 6 000 are affected (20 percent). In 40 percent of orchards more than 50 percent of trees are affected and in 14 of these orchards all trees are affected. WBDL may already have spread from northern Batinah, as affected trees have been seen at Dhank, Rustaq and Barka. The disease was seen for the first time in the United Arab Emirates in 1989. An MLO is associated with the disease which makes WBDL the first reported MLO disease of citrus. An insect vector, leafhopper or psylla, is
very probably involved. The leafhopper H. phycitis has been found on every lime tree tested, and could be a possible vector. In India this leafhopper is vector of eggplant little leaf disease. WBDL is so far restricted in Oman to acid lime trees in the field, but Troyer citrange, P. trifoliata, Eureka lemon and rough lemon have been shown to be susceptible by graft inoculation in the greenhouse. Transmission to periwinkle has been achieved and infected periwinkle leaves have been used to prepare MAs and DNA probes. The seriousness of WBDL should not be underestimated. The disease has spread since 1989 to the United Arab Emirates (see Chapter 24).
* Two foci of citrus canker were seen in Oman in 1986, one near Ibri at Homania, the other at Salalah. The causal bacterium, X. campestris pv. citri, has been identified and cultured from leaf and twig samples of acid lime and grapefruit. The pathotype involved is probably "A". Citrus canker is still present in Salalah and no eradication programme has been initiated. Canker was also found in April 1987 in a nursery in Sohar on lime trees imported from India. The trees were reported to have been burnt. However, canker appeared in the Sohar region in 1990 and was still present in November 1992.
* The lime trees from India in the Sohar nursery were also infected with citrus tristeza virus. Grapefruit trees imported from India at the same time were similarly infected with the virus.
* Importation of any citrus material from India should be totally prohibited and the ban strictly enforced. Citrus certified free of virus and virus-like diseases can be obtained from France, Spain and the United States of America.
* Apparently, quarantine inspections are not strict enough since hundreds of lime trees showing clear-cut symptoms of tristeza and citrus canker escaped detection.
* Many sweet orange trees, mainly of Egyptian origin, are affected by gummy bark disease, a well-known virus-like disorder of citrus, first described in Egypt. Many mandarin trees, also of Egyptian origin, are affected by cachexia-xyloporosis, another virus-like disease of citrus. Evidence of scaly bark psorosis (psorosis A), concave gum, impietratura and exocortis has also been found. The presence of these virus-like diseases in Oman is the result of ill-considered importations of citrus budwood or trees from countries where the available citrus propagative material is not virus-free.
* S. citri, the helical mycoplasmal agent of citrus stubborn disease, was cultured from a symptomatic periwinkle plant in Nizwa. Infection of such a periwinkle plant means that natural transmission of S. citri occurs, at least in the Nizwa area. The leafhopper vectors of S. citri, N. haematoceps and N. tenellus should be searched for.
* Poor horticultural practices are favouring the development of diseases such as phytophthora gummosis.
* Symptoms somewhat similar to mal secco, a fungal disease caused by D. tracheiphila, have been seen in the Nizwa area on lemon and sweet lime trees. It is, however, believed that mal secco per se is not involved, since nearby sour orange was not affected. The progress of the symptoms should be monitored.
* The cultivars of sweet orange, mandarin, grapefruit, etc. present in Oman today are not virus-free and should not be used for propagation purposes. The introduction of new cultivars should only be allowed from reliable sources that can supply material certified free of virus and virus-like diseases.
* Quarantine measures within Oman should be reinforced. Movement of citrus trees or budwood from northern Batinah to other parts of Oman or to foreign countries should be prohibited because of the danger of spreading WBDL. Similarly, movement of citrus trees or budwood from Salalah to other parts of Oman or to foreign countries should be prohibited because of the danger of spreading citrus canker. Citrus canker can also be spread by fruit, so affected orchards should not be allowed to ship fruit to other parts of Oman or to foreign countries. The sooner citrus canker-affected trees are burnt, the sooner these domestic quarantine restrictions can be relaxed.
* Quarantine measures to prevent the illegal entry into Oman of citrus trees or budwood must be reinforced. Importation of citrus budwood or trees should only be through official institutions. Importation of citrus fruit, trees or budwood from countries where major diseases such as tristeza, greening or citrus canker are known to be present must be prohibited.
Bibliography
Ahlawat, Y.S. & Chenulu, V.V. 1985. Rubbery wood - a hitherto unrecorded disease of citrus. Curr. Sci., 54: 580-581.
Bové, J.M. 1986. Witches' broom disease of lime. FAO Plant Prot. Pull., 34: 217-218.
Bové, J.M., Whitcomb, R.F. & McCoy, R.E. 1983. Culture techniques for spiroplasmas from plants. In S. Razin & J.G. Tully, eds. Methods in mycoplasmology, vol. 11, p. 225-234. New York, Academic Press.
Bové, J.M., Garnier, M., Mjeni, A.M. & Khayrallah, A. 1988. Witches' broom disease of small-fruited acid lime trees in Oman: first MLO disease of citrus. In Proc. 10th Conf: IOCV, p. 307-309. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Garnier, M., Zreik, L. & Bové, J.M. 1991. Witches' broom disease of lime trees in the Sultanate of Oman: first MLO disease of citrus. Plant Disease, 75(6): 546-551.
Russel, W.C., Newman, C. & Williamson, D.H. 1975. A simple technique for demonstration of DNA in cells infected with mycoplasmas and viruses. Nature, 253: 461.
Whitcomb, R.F. 1983. Culture media for spiroplasmas. In S. Razin & J. G. Tully, eds. Methods in mycoplasmology, vol. 11, p. 147-159. New York, Academic Press.
Chapter 17: Pakistan
Citrus in Pakistan
Background information on citrus diseases in Pakistan
Citrus diseases in India
Decline of citrus trees in Pakistan
Tristeza
Exocortis
Gummy bark of sweet orange and cachexia of Mandarin
Bud-union crease of sweet orange trees on rough lemon rootstock
Leaf yellow vein clearing - An unidentified disorder of lemon trees
Sour orange bark pegging and gumming
Witches' brooms of calamondin trees
Citrus canker
Horticultural practices
Conclusions
Bibliography
Citrus in Pakistan
The major citrus-growing province of Pakistan is the Punjab, with the following cities, from north to south: Islamabad-Rawalpindi, Sargodha, Faisalabad, Lahore, Sahiwal, Multan and Bahawalpur (see Map 8). Some citrus orchards are also found in Peshawar in the North-West Frontier Province (NWFP), and in Hyderabad in the province of Sind. Little citrus is grown in Baluchistan Province. From 1975 to 1985, the area covered by citrus increased from 62 800 ha (Punjab: 58 400 ha) to 144 200 ha (Punjab: 136 400 ha); production rose from 671 100 tonnes (Punjab: 625 700 tonnes) to 1 373 000 tonnes (Punjab: 1 307 800 tonnes). The overall yield is, however, low and represents only 9.5 tonnes per hectare.
The major citrus varieties grown in the Punjab are mandarins, with the two varieties Kinnow and Feutrell representing 80 percent of all citrus. They were imported to Pakistan in 1940 - Kinnow from California and Feutrell from Australia. Kinnow mandarin is a hybrid resulting from a cross between King mandarin and Willowleaf (Mediterranean common) mandarin made in 1915 by Frost in California and released in 1935. Feutrell (the correct spelling is Fewtrell) is an old variety from New South Wales in Australia. It may be a natural tangor (mandarin x sweet orange), with Willowleaf as the mandarin parent. It is an early variety (Fewtrell's early), while Kinnow is mid-season in maturity. Both Feutrell and Kinnow mandarins have a fairly strong tendency to alternate and they have numerous seeds.
Besides these two mandarins, there are only two other major commercial citrus varieties grown in Pakistan: Bloodred (Blood Red Malta) and Musambi (Mosambi, Mozambique) sweet oranges. Bloodred is probably of Mediterranean origin. It is a seedy, light blood orange, widely grown in the Punjab. The development of blood coloration is best in the cool, submontane districts of the NWFP. Musambi may be of East African origin (Mozambique). Early in maturity, very low in acidity and moderately seedy, it is a highly popular variety in India and Pakistan.
The rootstock on which citrus is grown in the Punjab is rough lemon (Citrus jambhiri Lush.) also called Jamberi or Jatti Khatti. In India, another lemon-like rootstock, Citrus karna Raf., is extensively used, second only to rough lemon (locally known as Kharna Khatta, Karna nimbu or Khatta nimbu). In the Peshawar district, sour orange (Citrus aurantium L.) is the only rootstock and is know locally as Khatta Taru Jabba, Seville Kimb and Sylhet lime.
MAP 8 The major citrus-growing region of Pakistan
Pakistan is subject to the summer monsoon system, and the main rainy season occurs in July, August and September. Annual rainfall in the Punjab ranges from 350 to 500 mm. During the dry season from October to January there are only occasional rains and showers. A second rainy season covers February and March, to be followed by the dry and hot "summer" season of April, May and June, when irrigation of citrus (by submersion or flooding) is required.
Background information on citrus diseases in Pakistan
Prior to the author's survey, information on the situation regarding diseases of citrus in Pakistan was available from several sources. Chapot surveyed Pakistan in March 1970. He found no evidence of the presence of citrus tristeza virus (CTV), but insisted on the wide occurrence of citrus stubborn disease. At the time of his survey he did not know of the work that was going on in Bordeaux (France) and Riverside (United States of America) on stubborn and also in Bordeaux on greening. This work (Igwegbe and Calavan, 1970; Laflèche and Bové, 1970a, b) showed that stubborn and greening were two different diseases. Chapot was of the opinion that the two diseases were "very close, if not identical". He noticed the presence in Pakistan of Diaphorina citri, the Asian psyllid vector of greening, but he was so "stubborn-oriented" that he suggested looking for a relationship between the presence of this psyllid and the frequency of stubborn in Pakistan, and failed to mention the
possibility that greening disease might be present in the country. It is well known today that D. citri is not a vector of Spiroplasma citri, the causal mycoplasmal agent of stubborn disease.
The first indication of greening in Pakistan came from Cochran (1976) who observed symptoms of the disease in the citrus collection of the Agricultural Experiment Station in Peshawar and was worried that the disease could become established in the Islamic Republic of Iran, and move from there, via Iraq and Jordan, to the Mediterranean.
The likelihood that greening was present in Pakistan could also be deduced from the situation known to exist in neighbouring India, where greening was observed for the first time in 1960 (Capoor, Rao and Viswanath, 1974). The excellent work carried out by Capoor in Poona, east of Bombay, demonstrated in 1967 that the psyllid, D. citri, was the vector of the greening pathogen (Capoor, Rao and Viswanath, 1967). More recently, Ahlawat and Raychaudhuri (1988) have reported greening to be present in all citrus-growing regions of India. In particular, greening occurs in provinces that border Pakistan, namely, Jammu and Kashmir, Punjab and Rajasthan. These provinces are also infected with CTV (Ahlawat and Raychaudhuri, 1988). It is therefore to be expected that not only greening, but also tristeza, occur in Pakistan. In view of the importance of virus and virus-like diseases of citrus in India, information on these diseases is presented in Tables 41 and 42. Table 41 lists the
diseases and supplies the main bibliographical references. Table 42 gives the geographical distribution of the diseases for the various provinces of India. In view of the similarities between the decline problems in Pakistan and India, it seems appropriate to review greening and citrus decline in India before exploring the situation in Pakistan.
Citrus diseases in India
TABLE 41 Virus and virus like diseases of citrus in India
TABLE 41 Virus and virus like diseases of citrus in India - continued
TABLE 42 Geographical distribution of virus and virus-like diseases of citrus in India
TABLE 42 Geographical distribution of virus and virus-like diseases of citrus in India - continued
History of citrus decline in India
Citrus decline or dieback disease is reported to have been present in India as early as the eighteenth century (Capoor, 1963). It has taken on alarming proportions since the 1940s. By the 1960s it was recorded in all citrus-growing areas of the country.
As pointed out by Raychaudhuri, Nariani and Ahlawat (1977): "The once flourishing citrus industry in India is, unfortunately, being slowly wiped out by dieback disease. In recent years, dieback has assumed alarming proportions in several States".
In the early 1960s, it was generally accepted that the problem involved CTV, zinc deficiency and some fungal parasites of twigs such as Colletotrichum gloeosporoides, Curvalaria tuberculata, Diplodia natalensis and Fusarium spp. (Capoor, 1963; Reddy, 1965). However, as stated by Fraser and Singh (1968), "none of the above conditions can adequately explain the disease or its spread. Tristeza is widespread in Indian citrus, but is not universal, and is not invariably present in dieback-affected trees. Moreover, many of the species affected in India are tolerant of tristeza in other countries. Deficiencies of zinc and other minor elements have been implicated on a symptom basis, but application of zinc with or without other minor elements failed to cure the condition, although sometimes slight or temporary improvement resulted. The fungi associated with dying-back branches are well known as invaders of moribund or weakened tissues".
In 1966 a study was made of citrus dieback disease in all major citrus areas of India. As a result of the observations made, it was concluded that dieback was caused by "the virus" responsible for greening disease because dieback in India greatly resembled greening in South Africa (Fraser and Singh, 1966, 1968; Fraser et al., 1966).
At the time the above survey was carried out the so-called greening "virus" had not yet been identified. This was achieved in 1970-71 when Bové and co-workers discovered that the agent of South African greening was not a virus but a micro-organism restricted to the sieve tubes of affected plants (Laflèche and Bové, 1970a, b; Saglio et al., 1971a, b). Furthermore, these workers were able to show that the micro-organism seen in the sieve tubes of South African greening was also present in the phloem of a Musambi sweet orange seedling infected with a Poona (Maharashtra) strain of Indian citrus decline or dieback (Saglio et al., 1971a, b; Bové and Saglio, 1974). This result confirmed the conclusion of Fraser et al. (1966) that Indian citrus dieback was indeed caused by an agent similar to that of greening disease. It has since been shown by the Bordeaux group that the agent of greening is a bacterium with a cell wall of the Gram-negative type (Garnier, Danel and Bové, 1984a, b).
This bacterium has not yet been cultured in cell-free medium; it is therefore referred to as a "bacterium-like organism" or BLO.
The work showing that the greening agent was a BLO and not a mycoplasma-like organism (MLO) was carried out with plants infected with different strains of the greening agent (including an Indian strain, the Poona strain)as early as 1971 (Saglio et al., 1971a,b; Bové and Saglio, 1974). Similar results were later obtained by Naidu and Govindu (1981) when they confirmed that a BLO was associated with citrus greening in India.
Psyllid vector of greening in India
In southern Africa, the greening BLO is naturally transmitted by the African citrus psyllid, Trioza erytreae Del Guercio (McClean and Oberholzer, 1965). In India, the greening BLO also has a psyllid vector, the Asian citrus psyllid, D. citri Kuwayama, as reported for the first time by Capoor and co-workers in 1967 (Capoor, Rao and Viswanath, 1967, 1974).
In Asia, including China and Southeast Asia, the greening BLO is also transmitted by D. citri (Celino, Salibe and Cortez, 1966; Martinez and Wallace, 1967; Anonymous, 1977a, b; Ke, Chen and Lin, 1980; Xu, Li and Liao, 1985).
However, it has been shown that T. erytreae, the African psyllid, is able to transmit the Asian form of the greening BLO and that, vice versa, D. citri, the Asian psyllid can also transmit the African form of the greening BLO (Massonie, Garnier and Bové, 1976; Lallemand, Fos and Bové, 1986).
Greening or citrus dieback in India
A brief summary of the major facts related to citrus dieback in India is given here, based on the observations of Fraser and Singh (1968), Capoor, Rao and Viswanath (1967), Bové and Saglio (1974) and Ahlawat and Raychaudhuri (1988).
Citrus dieback or decline in India is caused by the Asian form of the greening BLO, and the vector is the Asian citrus psyllid, D. citri. Until 1966, the true cause of citrus dieback, i.e. greening, was overlooked, and the disease was erroneously thought to involve CTV, zinc deficiency and some fungal parasites of twigs.
Citrus dieback, i.e. greening, and D. citri are present in all citrus-growing districts in India, including provinces that border on or are close to Pakistan: Jammu, Himachal Pradesh, Punjab, Haryana, Rajasthan and Gujarat (see Table 42).
All sweet orange varieties grown are highly susceptible to the disease, and no rootstock exerts a worthwhile ameliorative effect where sweet orange is concerned. Mandarins vary in reaction according to strain, locality and rootstock, while grapefruit appears almost as susceptible as sweet orange. Tangelo varieties are also extremely susceptible.
Citrus hystrix, Meyer lemon, citron, sour orange and Poncirus trifoliata are moderately susceptible species. Lemon, Rangpur lime, sweet lime and Citrus karna are species with some tolerance.
Regarding rough lemon, there are many strains of this species in India, most of which appear fairly tolerant but, in Assam, the Sohmyndong strain is quite susceptible. The strains in use as rootstocks at Coorg (Karnataka) and Nagpur (Maharashtra) show a useful degree of tolerance in that they prolong the productive life of the Coorg and Nagpur mandarins compared with seedling trees of these mandarins.
Young commercial blocks of sweet orange varieties propagated from infected sources usually grow well for four to five years. Major development of symptoms occurs after the first crop of fruit, appearing first in only a few trees and, in the early stages, often in only one part of the tree. However, by the time the block is seven to eight years old, most or all of the trees show severe dieback.
A good percentage of transmission is obtained by bark or leaf-patch grafting. No transmission occurs by mechanical means or through seeds.
<section>k</section>
Decline of citrus trees in Pakistan
Extent of the decline
In his 1970 FAO report, Chapot mentioned that a relatively large number of trees were declining and showed dieback. In 1987, Bové encountered the same problem in all the citrus areas visited, on mandarin (Fig. 215) as well as on sweet orange trees (Fig. 216). Thus it appears that the decline affecting citrus is not new, even though it may appear so when it affects young trees that grew well at first, and that begin to show symptoms only after three or four years. This is the case in the Sahiwal Horticultural Research Station (SHRS). Four-year-old Bloodred (Figs 216 and 217) and Musambi sweet orange trees, planted in the field in 1982-83, began to show decline after the winter of 1985-86.
Symptoms of decline included: overall pale green-yellowish colour of foliage; mature leaf drop and replacement of normal-sized leaves by small ones; a high proportion of small leaves, at least at some periods of the year (compare left and right halves of the tree in Figure 217); upright position of small leaves along shoots; zinc-deficiency symptoms on the small leaves but without green islands on an overall yellow blade; mild leaf mottle on old leaves; dieback; and stunting. The above trees were four years old at the time of examination. Older trees at SHRS showed the same decline. The disease is in no way restricted to local varieties such as Bloodred and Musambi sweet oranges, as symptoms were observed, for instance, on Sanguinelli trees introduced from California to SHRS in 1977.
Cases of decline with similar symptoms, i.e. greening-like symptoms, were also observed in commercial orchards in the Sahiwal-Okara district. In one orchard, Pineapple sweet orange trees on rough lemon planted in 1979 presented the typical decline syndrome: leaf drop resulting in many small, but few normal-sized, leaves. In this orchard, Catara noticed greening-like trees in January 1987 and was able to detect, by electron microscopy, greening organisms in the fruit axis of a Maltese (Vaniglia) sweet orange (Grimaldi and Catara, personal communication).
Severe decline was also noticed in the Renala Kurd district on ten-year-old Valencia late sweet orange trees on rough lemon rootstock. Trees with many small leaves were again seen. The declining trees in this orchard looked, more than anywhere else, like greening-affected trees, even though leaf mottle was not much more pronounced than elsewhere. However, one of the declining trees showed severe inverse stem pitting and bark pinholing. In this orchard, there were many empty spaces indicating that several trees had died. From the age of the remaining normal or declining trees it was evident that the trees had reached a fair development before they became affected.
Many cases of declining sweet orange trees have been observed at the Tarnab Agricultural Research Institute near Peshawar, NWFP. It was in this experiment station that, in 1976, Cochran noticed symptoms of greening in the variety collection. He also found many nursery trees infected. In the meantime, in 1981, a new collection of 25 sweet orange varieties on sour orange rootstock was planted with material from SHRS. Most of the trees are stunted and in a severe state of decline. As these trees are on sour orange, CTV may be involved in the decline. Indeed, CTV was detected by electron microscopy in samples of a Vaniglia sweet orange tree. The greening organism was not detected in this tree, but was positively identified by electron microscopy in two sour orange seedlings. These results clearly indicate that greening is present in the Peshawar area, as is D. citri, the psyllid vector of the greening bacterium (Fig. 210). Cochran (1976) had also noticed that D. citri was
abundant in the variety orchard, in the nursery and on ornamental sour orange hedges.
Not only sweet orange, but also mandarin trees are affected by the decline problem. At the Tarnab Agricultural Research Institute, both Kinnow and Feutrell's early mandarin trees were affected. The symptoms are similar to those on sweet orange trees: leaf drop, small-sized leaves, some zinc deficiency and leaf mottle, and dieback. Similar declining Kinnow mandarin trees were seen at the Faisalabad Agricultural Research Station. Too much irrigation by flooding and excessive ploughing for clean cultivation could be part of the decline problem, but greening is most likely to be the principal cause. Indeed, Catara was able to detect the greening organism at the Faisalabad Research Station in samples of rough lemon leaves with yellow midveins (Grimaldi and Catara, personal communication). The seriousness of the decline problem on mandarin trees is best illustrated by Figure 215, showing a commercial Kinnow mandarin orchard near Lahore with many declining, dieback-affected,
greening-like trees.
Finally, there were declining grapefruit trees on rough lemon rootstock, which were planted in 1977, at SHRS. They began to show symptoms of decline in 1984, two years before the sweet orange trees. The symptoms were stubborn-, or greening-like: small, cupped leaves, with some mottle and small fruit with aborted seeds. One tree (Marsh JBC 430, sample 19) was found to be infected with CTV.
Cause of decline (dieback) in Pakistan
Arguments for greening as the cause of citrus decline in Pakistan.
Arguments based on symptomatology and symptom development. Both the symptoms of decline and their development in sweet orange and mandarin trees in Pakistan are similar to those of citrus greening disease, i.e. dieback, in India. In 1976, Cochran diagnosed greening on the basis of the following symptoms and facts:
* Leaf drop of mature leaves followed by growth of upright twigs with small leaves.
* Sparse foliage, especially at the top of the tree.
* Zinc-deficiency patterns, some leaf mottle.
* Dieback.
* Fruits with aborted, dark-coloured seeds.
* Stunting and reduction of growth.
* Young trees in sweet orange blocks grow well for a few years and start showing symptoms only after three to five years. Symptoms appear first in only a few trees and, in early stages of the disease, are restricted to one part of the tree (Fig. 217).
* Citrus decline in Pakistan is not a new disease. Similarly, greening has been present in India for many years. Chapot (1970) reported the dieback problem as early as 1970, although he attributed the disease to such causes as lack of drainage, iron chlorosis or salt damage. In the Peshawar district, the author was told that citrus trees have suffered from stunting and dieback since 1960.
* The greening BLO has been detected in Pakistan in mottled leaves from sour orange seedlings in the Peshawar district. It was also found by Grimaldi and Catara (personal communication) in the fruit axis of a Maltese (Vaniglia) sweet orange fruit from the Okara district, as well as in the leaf midvein of a rough lemon tree from the Faisalabad Research Station. The greening BLO has therefore been found in NWFP and the Punjab.
D. citri, the psyllid vector of the greening BLO, is present in Pakistan throughout the citrus-growing areas of the NWFP and the Punjab. The psyllid population peaks in March and April after the spring flush of growth, with a second peak in the autumn.
The sour orange leaves in which the greening BLO was detected by electron microscopy came from seedling plants. Since the greening BLO is not transmitted through seeds, infection of these sour orange seedlings must have been by the psyllid vector. Numerous D. citri psyllids were seen feeding on citrus and sour orange leaves when the leaves were collected for electron microscopy.
The greening BLO and its vector D. citri are both present in the Indian provinces bordering Pakistan, so it is not surprising that they are present in the latter country. Greening is very widespread in India (see Table 42), and the citrus psyllid is very common in almost all parts of the country, becoming a serious pest of citrus during spring and early summer in western and central India and some parts of the north. Populations decline with the onset of the hot season and the monsoon, but reappear during autumn flushes. Populations are low during winter months in northern India (Raychaudhuri, Nariani and Ahlawat, 1977).
Arguments against greening being the cause of citrus decline.
Leaf symptoms. The consultant did not see strong, typical symptoms of leaf mottle, though this may have been on account of the time of year when the survey was carried out (April). Leaf mottle is often seen on mature leaves and, as mentioned several times above, at the time of the survey affected trees had few mature leaves as these had fallen off.
Even though leaves of affected trees showed zinc-deficiency symptoms, the type of symptom related to zinc deficiency - dark green spots on a yellow leaf - was rare.
Difficulty in detecting the greening BLO. The greening BLO could only be detected in sour orange leaves in the Peshawar district. Many other leaf samples from NWFP and the Punjab were examined by electron microscopy, but no greening organisms could be seen, in spite of the large number of sections scanned. Similarly, Grimaldi and Catara (personal communication) also state that "the number of affected samples was rather low and only one or two adjacent phloematic sieve tubes appeared infected".
The difficulty in detecting the greening BLO could be due to the lack of adequate plant material at the time of the survey. As stated above, leaves with typical mottle or with green spots on yellow leaf blades were rare and these are the leaves in which the greening BLO is best detected by electron microscopy. Also, in April most of the fruit had already been picked. Fruit axes, which are very good samples for detection of the greening BLO, were therefore unavailable.
Conclusion. The greening BLO is present in Pakistan, and decline of citrus in Pakistan is probably due to the greening BLO.
The results of this survey, as well as those of Grimaldi and Catara (personal communication), prove that citrus greening disease is present in Pakistan, as is the psyllid vector, D. citri. Does this mean that greening is responsible for the general decline of citrus in Pakistan? The answer to this question would be an unambiguous "yes", if the greening BLO had been detected more frequently in samples from affected trees. Since this is not the case, the answer, at this time, can only be "probably yes". In other words, it is very likely that the decline of citrus in Pakistan is essentially due to greening. The arguments in favour of this conclusion have more weight in the author's opinion than those against. However, additional work must be done to show more consistently the presence of the greening BLO in decline-affected trees.
Additional causes of decline. Even if greening is probably the major cause of citrus decline in Pakistan, other causes can also result in decline and dieback of citrus.
* CTV infection results in the decline of citrus (sweet orange, grapefruit, mandarin, etc.) grafted on sour orange rootstock. This seems to be the case at the Tarnab Agricultural Research Institute where the trees in the sweet orange collection are grafted on sour orange. Most of these trees are in a severe state of decline. Here, CTV is probably involved since one of the declining trees (Vaniglia sweet orange) was found to be infected with CTV.
CTV infection is however not the cause of decline in the case of sweet orange trees grafted on rough lemon, since this rootstock is tolerant of CTV. In such cases, and in spite of CTV infection, greening is the most probable reason for decline. This situation is similar to that in India, where tristeza is widespread and was once wrongly thought to cause decline.
* Exocortis viroid infection causes severe stunting of trees grafted on susceptible rootstocks such as P. trifoliata, citrange or Rangpur lime. Cases of severe stunting due to exocortis were seen at the Tarnab Agricultural Research Institute on Bloodred sweet orange trees on Troyer citrange rootstock (Fig. 87) and at the Sagodha Horticultural Research Substation on Valencia late sweet orange on Carrizo citrange rootstock. At the SHRS, Valencia late sweet orange trees on rootstock of various citranges were also affected by exocortis.
* Phytophthora gummosis resulting from poor horticultural practices can also result in decline and dieback.
* Bud-union crease is seen quite often, but not always, with sweet orange trees on rough lemon rootstock. Such trees show various degrees of decline. Several cases of bud-union crease were encountered during the survey (Fig. 133) with Blood-red, Musambi, Valencia late and Pineapple sweet orange trees. In India, a similar situation exists, but it is apparently restricted to Bloodred and Musambi sweet orange trees (Bhutan), Bakhshi and Knorr, 1972).
* Over-irrigation, poor drainage, excess salt and/or heavy ploughing for clean cultivation, can sometimes result in dieback.
* Fungi associated with shoots dying back are well known as invaders of moribund or weakened tissues. Most often these fungi are not the direct cause of decline, but they accelerate it. In India such fungi have been isolated from dieback-affected citrus trees (Raychaudhari, Nariani and Ahlawat, 1977) but their role has probably been overemphasized, since greening in itself is enough to induce decline and dieback.
Tristeza
The extent of tristeza virus infection
CTV was detected at several sites in Pakistan.
Sahiwal Horticultural Research Station (SHRS). Typical symptoms of vein clearing (Fig. 128) were seen on leaves of a large, small-fruited acid (Kagzi) lime tree on rough lemon rootstock. Vein clearing of lime leaves is specific to CTV infection and, indeed, the presence of the virus in this tree was confirmed by ELISA and electron microscopy. The tree had been propagated by grafting a bud from a lime seedling on a rough lemon rootstock seedling. As CTV is not transmitted through seeds, infection must be the result of insect transmission of the virus. Indeed, aphid vectors of CTV are known to be present in Pakistan (see below). If so, other trees, including mandarin, sweet orange and grapefruit, at SHRS must also be infected, though if they are grafted on CTV-tolerant rootstocks (rough lemon, citranges, etc.) their infection can only be detected by indexing on Kagzi lime indicator plants, by ELISA or by electron microscopy. Bundles of CTV virions were indeed seen by electron
microscopy in leaves of a Marsh JBC 430 grapefruit tree. This tree showed no stem pitting, suggesting that the strain of CTV involved is one of those milder strains that do not induce stem pitting symptoms on grapefruit.
Similarly, the above CTV-infected lime tree showed no stem pitting. The lack of this symptom, as well as the large size of the tree, suggests that infection with CTV is either relatively recent or that the strain of CTV involved is mild.
Okara district (northeast of Sahiwal - Mian Muhammad Shafi citrus orchards, Burj Jiwe Khan). A declining, greening-like Bloodred sweet orange tree, examined by electron microscopy for the presence of the greening BLO, was found to be infected with CTV.
Similarly, in the same orchard, Grimaldi and Catara (personal communication) observed CTV virions in a fruit axis from a declining Pineapple sweet orange tree on rough lemon rootstock. In spite of their infection with CTV, these trees do not decline because of CTV since sweet orange trees on rough lemon rootstock are tolerant to CTV. Greening is probably the cause of the decline. Many more trees in this orchard may be infected with CTV.
Peshawar district (Tarnab Agricultural Research Institute). Many of the trees in the sweet orange collection, which are grafted on sour orange rootstock and were planted in 1981, are stunted. A stunted Vaniglia sweet orange tree was chosen as a representative tree and electron microscopy showed it to be infected with CTV. Since sour orange is a CTV-susceptible rootstock, infection by CTV of the Vaniglia sweet orange tree, and probably of other trees in the collection, explains the stunted condition of these trees. The trees in the collection were propagated with plant material from SHRS. Since CTV is now known to be present at SHRS, CTV-infection of the above Vaniglia tree (and probably of other sweet orange trees) could be due to the use of CTV-infected buds from Sahiwal.
However, there is also the possibility that the tree(s) in the Tarnab collection became infected by insect transmission of CTV. Indeed, another tree was found to be infected with CTV, namely a sour orange tree growing along a roadside. This tree is probably an ungrafted seedling tree and, if so, infection of the tree with CTV must have been through insect transmission.
At the time of writing, tristeza is not known to be present in the Peshawar district, where sour orange is the only rootstock used. It is urgent that the CTV-susceptible sour orange rootstock be replaced by CTV-tolerant stocks, such as rough lemon.
Insect vectors of CTV in Pakistan
Toxoptera citricida, the black tropical citrus aphid and the most efficient vector of CTV, is not present in the NWFP or the Punjab. However other aphid vectors of CTV are present. Aphis gossypii, the cotton aphid, is an efficient vector of several strains of CTV, but is usually not abundant on citrus. Toxoptera aurantii, also present in Pakistan and abundant on citrus, is able to transmit CTV under experimental conditions, but is probably not a significant vector. Myzus persicae occurs as well, and is a vector in India.
CTV and its vectors in India
Table 42 shows that CTV is widespread in almost all the citrus-growing areas of India. In several provinces severe strains of CTV are present. These strains are defined by Ahlawat and Raychaudhuri (1988) as those which induce vein clearing as well as stem pitting in Kagzi (Mexican) lime indicator seedlings. Mild strains cause only vein clearing. Some strains produce stunting and chlorosis in seedlings of sour orange, acid lemon or grapefruit.
This reaction, called seedling yellows, is used experimentally to detect severe isolates of the virus. As shown in Table 42, certain citrus regions of India possess CTV strains that cause seedling yellows (Ahlawat and Ray-chaudhuri, 1988).
The presence of severe strains of CTV as well as of strains producing seedling yellows is related to the presence of T. citricida (see Table 42).
Ahlawat and Raychaudhuri (1988) have shown that severe strains of CTV and seedling yellows strains are restricted to places where T. citricida occurs. Elsewhere, A. gossypii, Aphis craccivora, M. persicae and Dactynotus jaceae are the vectors, but they are less efficient.
As shown in Table 42, the Indian provinces that border Pakistan are free of T. citricida, as well as of seedling yellows and severe strains of CTV.
The same situation seems to be true in Pakistan, where T. citricida does not occur and where no stem pitting was seen on CTV-infected Kagzi lime and grapefruit trees, suggesting that the CTV strains involved in these cases were mild. However, more work must be done to identify the type of CTV strains present in Pakistan.
Conclusion
CTV is present in NWFP and the Punjab. From the absence of T. citricida, it can be deduced that probably only relatively mild strains of CTV occur and the absence of stem pitting on CTV-infected Kagzi lime and grapefruit trees supports this conclusion. The mild strains present in Pakistan are, however, capable of inducing decline of citrus trees (except lemon) when grafted on sour orange rootstock, as shown by the stunted, CTV-infected, Vaniglia sweet orange tree and probably many other trees in the collection block of the Tarnab Agricultural Research Institute. Therefore, sour orange must be replaced by CTV-tolerant rootstocks such as rough lemon.
During his survey, the author examined many Kagzi (Mexican) lime trees for symptoms of CTV infection (vein clearing and stem pitting). Vein clearing was seen on only one occasion -at SHRS (see Fig. 128). This suggests that aphid vector transmission of CTV is still rare. The results of the survey have shown that CTV was discovered in three of 20 trees that were examined, not because tristeza was suspected but because greening was thought to be involved. This is quite a high percentage (15 percent) of infection. More randomly selected trees must be analysed to determine more precisely the percentage of CTV infection. In any case, the number of CTV-infected trees appears higher than first thought. The origin of the infection probably derives from the propagation of CTV-infected buds, rather than active aphid transmission (see above).
Exocortis
The commercial citrus species (sweet orange, mandarin, grapefruit and lemon) do not show symptoms of exocortis. They are symptomless carriers of the exacortis agent, a complex of various viroids. Hence, when grafted on exocortis-susceptible rootstocks such as P. trifoliata, citranges, Rangpur lime, sweet lime or citron, they infect these rootstocks which, after a period of time, show symptoms of exocortis, namely, bark scaling (see Figs 83 to 87) and/or stunting.
Sour orange and rough lemon are also symptomless carriers of the exacortis viroids, so, contrary to the above susceptible rootstocks, do not show symptoms of the disease. Therefore, exocortis infection cannot be detected by visual examination of scion-rootstock combinations such as sweet orange, mandarin or grapefruit on sour orange or rough lemon rootstock. Indexing is required to diagnose exocortis in these symptomless trees. The indicator plant for exocortis indexing is Etrog citron selection 861-51 (see Fig. 90).
In Pakistan, sour orange in the NWFP and rough lemon in the Punjab are the major rootstocks - hence no symptoms of exocortis could be seen in commercial orchards. It is, however, highly probable that many sweet orange, mandarin, grapefruit and lemon cultivars carry the exocortis agent. Indeed, in citrus experiment stations where exocortis-susceptible rootstocks have been tried, exacortis disease is frequently observed in rootstock experiments in which scion varieties of unknown health status have been used.
This is precisely the case in three of the four research stations visited. At the Tarnab Agricultural Research Institute (Peshawar district) the seven-year-old Bloodred sweet orange trees on Troyer citrange in the high density block are very small for their age and show severe symptoms of exocortis (bark scaling) on the citrange rootstock (Fig. 87). At the Sargodha Horticultural Research Substation, severe symptoms of exocortis were seen on the rootstock of Valencia late sweet orange trees on Carrizo citrange in the rootstock block. It is probably the same Valencia late sweet orange variety that has induced exocortis symptoms on Troyer, Carrizo and Yuma citranges in the block of Valencia late sweet orange trees on various rootstocks at SHRS. These results show that the Bloodred and Valencia late sweet orange scions used in these experiments were infected with the exocortis viroid(s) and probably with other pathogens too.
Rootstock and other experiments must only be carried out with budwood that has been shown by indexing to be free of viruses, viroids and virus-like agents. As stated above, visual examination of a candidate tree selected for budwood collection is totally inadequate as a means of establishing health status - good-looking, symptomless trees may be symptomless carriers of several infectious agents such as exocortis, cachexia, tristeza, etc.
The importance of these considerations is related to the problem of CTV. Control of tristeza implies, in particular, the replacement of the sour orange rootstock by CTV-tolerant rootstocks such as rough lemon, P. trifoliata, citranges, citrumellos, Rangpur lime and sweet orange. As indicated above, some of these are susceptible to exocortis (and/or cachexia). To reiterate, it is therefore imperative that citrus cultivars to be budded on these rootstocks be free of the agents of exocortis, cachexia and, preferably, all other citrus diseases. They must be indexed to determine their true health status.
Gummy bark of sweet orange and cachexia of Mandarin
The symptoms of gummy bark are seen on sweet orange and consist of gummy deposits in the bark. When the bark is scraped, circumferential reddish-brown, gum-impregnated streaks are visible (see Figs 60, 61 and 63). These symptoms are similar to those induced by the cachexia viroid in mandarin. In mild cases or early stages of gummy bark, the discoloration is near the bud-union. In severe cases or later stages, it can extend upwards for a metre or more. In addition to gum impregnation of the bark, the sweet orange wood can show some stem pitting (see Fig. 64) with corresponding pegs (see Fig. 65) on the cambial face of the bark.
Gummy bark-infected sweet orange trees on rough lemon rootstock develop bud-union constriction or crease. There are, however, cases of bud-union crease on rough lemon which are not due to the gummy bark agent.
The author has seen severe cases of gummy bark in the Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Oman, Saudi Arabia, the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey and southern Yemen. In Yemen, gummy bark-affected sweet orange trees on rough lemon rootstock showed not only sweet orange bark gumming and bud-union crease, but also, sometimes, severe stem pitting and bark pegging on the rootstock.
Two mild but clear-cut cases of gummy bark were found in Pakistan. At the Tarnab Agricultural Research Institute, gummy bark was seen on two sweet orange varieties, Akay Sekeri and Trablus, both of Turkish origin. Similarly, at SHRS, gummy bark affected two sweet orange varieties of Turkish origin, Kozan and, again, Trablus.
The cambial side of a piece of bark removed across the bud-union of a declining Kinnow mandarin tree (Sargodha district) showed mild pegging on the mandarin bark, and severe pegging on the rootstock bark. The tree indexed negatively for CTV. The rootstock is probably rough lemon (rough lemon sprouts occurred on neighbouring trees). The pegging on the rootstock bark is similar to that observed in Yemen on rough lemon rootstocks of gummy bark-affected sweet orange trees. Whether or not this pegging is due to the gummy bark agent should be further investigated by graft-transmission experiments. The mild pegging on the mandarin bark (see Fig. 55) suggests cachexia. Similar symptoms were noticed on several other Kinnow mandarin trees in the same orchard (Sargodha district, village 26 Nb, Nasar Ullah Khan Orchard), as well as on a Feutrell's early mandarin tree at the Faisalabad Research Station. In all of these cases, there were no gum deposits in the mandarin bark. The absence
of such bark gumming makes it difficult to conclude unequivocally that the mild bark pegging (and the corresponding stem pitting) is due to cachexia. Graft-transmission experiments to Parson's Special mandarin, a variety highly susceptible to the cachexia viroid, or analysis using sPAGE (see Table 13, p. 47) are required to confirm the presence of cachexia.
At SHRS the cambial face of a piece of bark removed across the bud-union of a Palestine sweet lime tree on rough lemon rootstock showed conoid pegs on the sweet lime bark, with corresponding pits in the scion stem. These symptoms correspond to those first described by Reichert and Perlberger (1934) under the name xyloporosis on sweet lime used as rootstock or as unbudded seedling. It now appears that cachexia and xyloporosis are not synonymous and that the disease in sweet lime (xyloporosis) is probably not caused by the cachexia viroid (Roistacher, 1988).
In conclusion, gummy bark of sweet orange is of only minor importance in Pakistan. Interestingly, no typical symptoms of cachexia were seen on the many Kinnow and Feutrell's early mandarins examined. As can be seen from Table 41, cachexia does not seem to have been reported from India.
Sweet orange, grapefruit or lemon trees on sour orange or rough lemon rootstock are symptomless carriers of the cachexia pathogen. It is more than likely that old-line cultivars of these varieties are infected with the cachexia viroid. Indeed, at SHRS, in the Musambi sweet orange block on various rootstocks, trees on Sylhet mandarin showed cachexia-like symptoms on the rootstock. Mandarins are susceptible to the cachexia viroid. Indexing on Parson's Special mandarin is required to confirm the presence of the cachexia agent in the Musambi sweet orange cultivar.
Only cachexia viroid-free cultivars should be propagated, especially if cachexia viroid-susceptible rootstocks such as Rangpur lime or tangelos are to be used.
Bud-union crease of sweet orange trees on rough lemon rootstock
Several cases of bud-union crease were noticed on Bloodred, Musambi, Valencia late and Pineapple sweet orange trees on rough lemon rootstock. In the case of Bloodred and Musambi sweet oranges the symptoms correspond to those described by Nour-Eldin (1959) for Blood orange on rough lemon in Egypt, and by Bhutani, Bakhshi and Knorr (1972) for Bloodred and Musambi sweet oranges in India in old trees. The bud-union shows a pronounced bulge or protrusion with a rough, uneven surface, forming a prominent collar or fissure of eruptive bark encircling the trunk(Fig. 133).
With Valencia late and Pineapple sweet oranges, an irregular and almost continuous ring of gum-impregnated projections is present on the cambial face of the bark at the bud-union line, which fits in the crease in the wood. Bark breaks easily at the constricted bud-union line, revealing gum deposits at the union (Fig. 133).
According to McClean (1974), the symptoms shown by Bloodred and Musambi sweet oranges correspond to a severe form of the disease, while those seen on the other two sweet oranges represent a milder form. This author has provided evidence that the bud-union crease of sweet orange trees on rough lemon rootstock is caused by a graft-transmissible pathogen. The disease is controlled by using new-line sweet orange on rough lemon where old lines are found to make abnormal unions.
Leaf yellow vein clearing - An unidentified disorder of lemon trees
Figures 119 to 122 illustrate the symptoms of yellow vein clearing of lemon leaves in Pakistan. These are best seen with transmitted light. Under such conditions, parts of the lateral veins let the light pass through and appear as translucent yellow flecks or lines of varying length, though generally not involving the entire vein. The yellow flecks may extend laterally into the tissue adjacent to the veins. The midveins show little clearing even on leaves with severely affected lateral veins (Figs 120 and 121). These symptoms are markedly different from those of citrus yellow vein disease as described in California (Weathers, 1960, 1961), where the first symptom to appear is a bright yellowing of main veins and yellowing is usually continuous along the petiole, midrib and main lateral veins. Lemon develops much less severe California yellow vein symptoms than does West Indian lime -symptoms are generally restricted to an occasional young leaf. For these reasons, yellow vein
clearing in Pakistan seems to be different from citrus yellow vein in California.
Symptoms of yellow vein clearing on lemon leaves somewhat resemble CTV-induced vein-clearing of acid lime leaves, but the vein clearing symptoms on lemon are yellow and much more pronounced than those due to CTV on lime (compare Figs 120 and 128). However, lemon is tolerant to CTV and, inversely, yellow vein clearing has never been seen on acid lime. The two diseases thus appear to be different.
Citrus ringspot, as described by Wallace and Drake (1968) and Desjardins, Drake and French (1969), on lemon, grapefruit, sour orange, etc. is characterized by strong symptoms of ringspot, with the ring effect sometimes extending along the veins. At times the first symptom to appear (especially on sour orange) is a distinct tristeza-type vein clearing which, however, later disappears or develops into rings or blotches. Ringspots have not been observed by the author in the case of yellow vein clearing.
Sometimes lemon leaves with yellow vein clearing are crinkled (Fig. 122). In the Peshawar district, many sour orange seedlings, planted closely together in a row to form a hedge, showed yellow vein clearing and, in addition, many leaves were crinkled, warped and bumpy with wavy edges. Citrus crinkly leaf virus (Fawcett and Klotz, 1939; Fraser, 1961) also induces leaf warping, pocketing, blistering and crinkling on lemon. Irregular, small, narrow leaves with chlorotic, variegated areas varying in degree of chlorosis are additional symptoms of the more severe infectious variegation strain. A virus resembling citrus crinkly leaf virus has been reported in India (Ahlawat and Sardar, 1976a; see also Tables 41 and 42). However, the infectious variegation-crinkly leaf virus does not seem to be involved in yellow vein clearing of lemon in Pakistan, as serum against the former virus did not react in ELISA with yellow vein clearing-affected lemon leaves (Catara, personal
communication).
Yellow vein clearing seems to be widespread in Pakistan. The disorder was observed on sour orange near the Tarnab Agricultural Research Institute; in Sihala on lemon of an unidentified variety; in the Faisalabad Research Station and Renala Kurd on Eureka lemon; and on the following lemon varieties or selections at SHRS: Allen, Cascade and Cook Eureka; Frost Eureka; Frost Lisbon; and Foothill and Limoneira 8A Lisbon. This list is not exhaustive. The following additional lemon varieties have shown yellow vein clearing in Islamabad at the National Agricultural Research Centre (NARC): Corona Eureka; Caver's old line, Caver's new line, Monachello new line and Molla Mehmet (Catara, personal communication).
Catara further notes that lemon seedlings grown from seeds of a tree showing yellow vein clearing are symptomless. This observation indicates that yellow vein clearing is not a genetic disorder, but probably an infectious disease that is not seed-transmitted. In Islamabad (NARC), only one of three trees of the following lemon varieties showed symptoms: Frost Eureka, Caver's new line, Lisbon and Monachello new line; only one of two Molla Mehmet lemon trees had symptoms. Since the symptomatic and the symptomless trees grow side by side, yellow vein clearing cannot be the result of some special soil or environmental condition. This conclusion is strengthened by the fact that recently introduced nucellar varieties of lemon growing close to affected trees are symptomless. More generally, it seems quite reasonable to assume that all the Lisbon, Eureka and other lemon varieties and selections mentioned above, introduced from California to Pakistan, were free of yellow vein clearing
when they arrived in Pakistan. Indeed, yellow vein clearing has never been seen in California lemon orchards, nor probably in other parts of the world. It thus seems that the lemon trees of Californian origin became infected in Pakistan. How this happened (by mechanical or insect transmission), the source of the initial inoculum, etc. remain to be discovered.
Host range studies have not yet been made. At present, only lemon and sour orange are known to be susceptible. Rough lemon is probably not, as rough lemon rootstock suckers from affected lemon trees are symptomless.
Near the Tarnab Agricultural Research Institute at Peshawar, along the roadside, there is a hedge of more than 100 sour orange seedlings, 30 of which are affected. These seedlings are not uniformly distributed along the hedge. Twenty affected seedlings are adjacent to each other (one group of 20); in addition, there are three groups of two, and one group of three affected seedlings; only one affected seedling was single. This pattern of distribution suggests plant-to-plant transmission. Mechanical transmission during pruning of the hedge would account for such a pattern. The high percentage of affected lemon trees in commercial orchards could also be explained partly, at least, by mechanical transmission during pruning operations, usually more severe with lemon than with other citrus species. However, propagation of the disorder by buds from infected trees is most probably the major means of dissemination in the nursery. Finally, the absence of symptoms on sweet orange and
mandarin trees growing in blocks next to symptomatic blocks of lemon trees might indicate that these varieties are tolerant or immune. In any case, the nature of the disorder, whether graft-transmissible or not' the susceptibility' tolerance or immunity of citrus species to the putative pathogen' the host range of the eventual pathogen, its transmission by mechanical means or by insects, remain to be experimentally studied.
Sour orange bark pegging and gumming
At SHRS there is a block of Musambi sweet orange trees on various rootstocks, planted in 1982-83. Some trees on sour orange (Seville Kimb.) are severely stunted in comparison with trees on rough lemon. This suggests involvement of CTV. However, when one stunted tree was analysed for the presence of CTV by ELISA, no CTV was detected. When a piece of bark from this tree was removed from the trunk across the bud-union, the following symptoms were found: conspicuous stem pitting on the sour orange rootstock with brownish, gum-like material in some pits (Fig. 260); the scion stem was smooth and normal. The cambial face of the removed piece of bark showed pegging, pinholing and staining with gum-like material (Fig. 261) only on the rootstock bark. Two other stunted Musambi sweet orange trees on sour orange rootstock showed the same symptoms. Three normal-sized trees were also examined. Two had no symptoms, but one presented stem pitting and bark pegging on the rootstock similar to
that of the stunted trees.
Stunting of the Musambi sweet orange tree on sour orange rootstock is probably related to the symptoms shown by the rootstock, even though one tree with such symptoms is not (yet) stunted. However, the cause of these symptoms is unclear. It is not CTV, for two reasons: ELISA for CTV was negative and the symptoms shown by the rootstock are not those of CTV on sour orange. In severe cases of CTV, the sour orange rootstock shows, below the bud-union, inverse stem pitting with corresponding bark pinholing, but no stem pitting, bark pegging or bark gumming. In fact, such symptoms have never been described on sour orange. The only agent known to induce stem pitting on sour orange is that of cristacortis. However, cristacortis stem pitting on sour orange is very different from the type shown in Figure 52. Therefore, if the symptomatic rootstock is sour orange, the agent responsible for the symptoms appears to be new. There is another possibility however, namely that mislabelling
has occurred and the rootstock used is not sour orange. From symptoms shown, a cachexia-susceptible rootstock might be involved.
Witches' brooms of calamondin trees
Typical witches' brooms were seen on several calamondin trees in Lahore.
A serious disease known as witches' broom disease of lime trees has recently been described in Oman (Bové et al., 19X8; and above). Mycoplasma-like organisms (MLOs) are involved. The disease kills the affected trees in a few years and the causal agent is apparently transmitted by insect vectors. It was therefore important to examine leaves from the calamondin witches' broom by electron microscopy for the presence of MLOs. Fortunately, no MLOs were seen.
Witches' brooms are also formed on galls owing to infection by the fungus Sphaeropsis tumefaciens Pledges. However, no obvious galls or knots were seen on the above calamondin trees. Witches' brooms have also been described in the southern parts of Africa in relation to multiple sprouting disease (Schwarz, 1970). Finally, witches' brooms may be due to genetic factors. Experiments are needed to determine if the calamondin disorder is graft-transmissible.
Citrus canker
The survey undertaken did not include citrus canker. However, as expected, the disease was found throughout the districts visited: on acid lime at Sargodha, Faisalabad and Sahiwal; on sweet orange at Tarnab, Faisalabad and Okara; and on grapefruit at Faisalabad.
Exportation of citrus from a country where citrus canker is present to citrus-growing countries free of citrus canker is prohibited.
Horticultural practices
As in many other countries, trees are often budded too low and they are planted too deep, with the bud-union line too close to the soil, if not buried. These inadequate practices favour the development of phytophthora gummosis or footrot.
In Pakistan, the practice of growing winter fodder such as Egyptian clover (Trifolium alexandrium) in citrus orchards and the subsequent irrigation required by such crops also favour phytophthora gummosis. Even in the absence of such crops, citrus seems to be over-irrigated.
In addition, clean cultivation is often presented as the ne plus ultra technique of soil management, and is often obtained by heavy discing. Such operations destroy the surface roots and result in compaction of the soil in the zone below the cultivated area. For these reasons, intensive cultivation is, in general, a destructive practice. It could be a contributory factor in the greening-induced decline of citrus.
<section>l</section>
Conclusions
Table 43 lists the various diseases observed during the survey. It is technically easy today to produce citrus plant material free of all known virus and virus-like diseases by the technique of shoot-tip grafting. Hence modern citrus orchards should be free of all virus and virus-like pathogens that are not spread by insect vectors (the agents of gummy bark, cachexia, scaly bark psorosis, concave gum-blind pocket, cristacortis, impietratura, exocortis, etc.). These diseases should never be seen again in newly planted citrus orchards if certified, healthy budwood is used.
TABLE 43 Summary of citrus diseases observed during survey in Pakistan (NWFP and Punjab)
Location 
Disease
DE
GR
TV
EX
GB
CA
BU
YV
SB
WB
PG
CK
Tarnab Agric. Res. Inst. + + + + + + +
Khanpur Hayad Khan orchard + +
Sihala Perwaiz Khan orchard + +
Sargodha Hod. Res. Substation + + +
Sargodha Nasar Ullah Khan orchard + ? + + +
Faisalabad Agric. Res. Station + + ? + +
Sahiwal Hort. Res. Station + + + + ? + + + + +
Okara M. M. Shafi orchard + + + + +
Renala Khurd Mitchell's fruit farm + +
Lahore Naizbeg Thooker +
Lahore Fort +
Key:
DE=Decline; GR=Greening BLO; TV=Tristeza virus; EX=Exocortis; GB=Gummy bark; CA=Cachexia; BU=Bud-union crease of sweet orange on rough lemon; YV=Yellow vein clearing; SB=Sour orange bark pegging and gumming; WB=Witches' broom of calamondin; PG=Phytophthora gummosis; CK=Canker.
The exocortis viroid is mechanically transmissible and household bleach should be used, diluted to give a 5 percent sodium hypochlorite solution, to disinfect pruning tools and prevent transmission.
There is, however, a second category of citrus pathogens: those that are transmitted by insect vectors. This second category includes tristeza, greening, stubborn, vein enation-woody gall and any BLO or MLO diseases. A tree initially free from these pathogens can become infected in the nursery or the orchard if the agent and its insect vector are both present in the area. Two such pathogens are present in Pakistan: the BLO of citrus greening, transmitted by the citrus psyllid, D. citri, an insect present throughout the citrus areas of Pakistan, and CTV, transmitted by several aphid species present in Pakistan.
The greening organism is probably the cause of citrus decline in Pakistan. In India it is now well established that decline and greening are one and the same disease. Greening is a very serious disease and will continue to affect citrus orchards severely if not controlled. Most commercial citrus cultivars are susceptible to greening irrespective of rootstock. Because of this, greening should be of much greater concern to Pakistan than tristeza disease, although the survey has clearly proved the presence of CTV in Pakistan. Fortunately, T. citricida, the most efficient aphid vector of CTV, is not present in NWFP and Punjab, and most citrus orchards are grafted on rough lemon, a CTV-tolerant rootstock. One exception is in the Peshawar districts where trees grafted on sour orange are susceptible to CTV. The sour orange should therefore be replaced by a CTV-tolerant rootstock such as rough lemon. Kagzi lime trees are susceptible to CTV irrespective of rootstock. The CTV strains
present in Pakistan are probably mild in comparison with some of the Asian strains of the virus. However, they may be more severe than Mediterranean strains. In any case, the distribution and the severity of the CTV strains present in Pakistan must be established.
Table 43 shows that agricultural and horticultural research stations are often good places to find evidence of virus and virus-like diseases. This is so because these stations have rich collections of citrus material obtained not only from local sources but also from foreign introductions. They have the duty to carry out rootstock experiments and they have plant pathologists on site. It has been found all over the world that rootstock experiments become "virus" experiments when old-line, non-certified citrus material is used on these rootstocks. This is the case for the sweet orange lines found to be infected with exocortis at the Sarnab, Sargodha and Sahiwal stations. Citrus cultivars of unknown health status should never be used for experimentation.
In 1975, a great number of certified virus-free varieties of sweet orange (26), grapefruit (8), mandarin (11), tangerine (5), tangelo (4) and lemon (18), as well as rootstocks (22), were imported from California to Sahiwal. Since the viroids of exocortis and cachexia are mechanically transmissible by pruning tools (scissors, knives) it is important to check that the plant material from California has not subsequently become accidentally infected.
It is not advisable to keep certified and non-certified citrus plant material side by side or close to each other. This must be kept in mind when citrus blocks or experiments are laid out in the future. Finally, a few well-kept experiments with a limited number of scion and rootstock cultivars are more fruitful than over-ambitious and unmanageable projects.
Bibliography
The numbers before each reference are the keys to the sources used for Table 41.
1 Ahlawat, Y.S. 1975. Leathery leaf - a new virus disease isolated from greening affected mandarin trees. Indian Phytopathol., 28: 146. (abstract)
2 Ahlawat, Y.S. 1987. Association of mycoplasma-like bodies with citrus rubberywood disease. In 3rd Regional Workshop on Mycopl., p. 12.
3 Ahlawat, Y.S. & Chenulu, V.V. 1985. Rubberywood: a hitherto unrecorded disease of citrus. Curr. Sci., 54: 580-581.
4 Ahlawat, Y.S., Chenulu, V.V., Chakraborty, N.K. & Viswanath, S.M. 1984. Occurrence of impietratura disease of citrus in India. Curr. Sci., 53: 384-385.
5 Ahlawat, Y.S., Chenulu, V.V., Gumpf, D.J. & Pandey, P.K. 1986. Some newly discovered virus and mycoplasma diseases of citrus in India. In Proc. 10th Conf: IOCV, Riverside, Univ. Calif. (abstract)
6 Ahlawat, Y.S., Chenulu, V.V., Viswanath, S.M. & Pandey, P.K. 1985. Studies on a mosaic disease of citrus in India. Curr. Sci., 54: 873-874.
7 Ahlawat, Y.S., Chenulu, V.V., Viswanath, S.M., Pandey, P.K. & Bhagabati, K.N. 1985. Mosaic disease of citrus in India. Curr. Sci., 54: 873-874.
8 Ahlawat, Y.S. & Raychaudhuri, S.P. 1988. Status of citrus tristeza and dieback diseases in India and their detection. In Citriculture. Proc. 6th Int. Citrus Cong., p. 871-879. Tel Aviv, Israel, 6-11 March 1988, Rehovot, Balaban.
9 Ahlawat, Y.S. & Sardar, K.K. 1976a. A note on the lemon crinkly leaf virus in India. Indian J. Hort., 33: 168-171.
10 Ahlawat, Y.S. & Sardar, K.K.1976b. Distribution of greening and tristeza diseases in various blocks of Darjeeling district. Sci. & Cult., 42: 275-277.
11 Anonymous. 1977a. Preliminary report on transmission of citrus huanglungbin by psylla. Guangdong Agric. Sci., 6: 50-5 1.
12 Anonymous. 1977b. Citrus psylla and citrus huanglungbin. Ganju Keji Tungxun, 3-4: 23-24.
13 Balaraman, K. & Ramakrishnan, K. 1977. Studies on strains and strain interaction in citrus tristeza virus. USA Tech. Univ. Agric. Sciences [Bangalore], 19: 62.
14 Balaraman, K. & Ramakrishnan, K. 1980. Strain variation and cross protection in citrus tristeza virus on acid lime. In Proc. 8th Conf: IOCV, p. 60-68. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
15 Bhutani, V.P., Bakhshi, J.C. & Knorr, L.C. 1972. Biochemical changes in healthy and decline sweet orange trees associated with bud-union crease. In Proc. 5th Conf: IOCV, p. 229-233. Gainesville, Univ. Fla. Press.
16 Bové, J.M., Calavan, E.C., Capoor, S.P., Cortez, R.E. & Schwarz, R.E. 1974. Influence of temperature on symptoms of California stubborn, South Africa greening, India citrus decline and Philippine leaf mottling disease. In Proc. 6th Conf. IOCV, p. 12- 15. Berkeley, Div. Agric. Sci., Univ. Calif.
17 Bové, J.M., Garnier, M., Mjeni, A.M. & Khayrallah, A. 1988. Witches' broom disease of small-fruited acid lime trees in Oman: first MLO disease of citrus. In Proc. 10th Conf: IOCV, p. 307-309. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
18 Bové, J.M. & Saglio, P. 1974. Stubborn and greening: a review, 1969- 1972. In Proc. 6th Conf. IOCV, p. 1-11. Berkeley, Div. Agric. Sci., Univ. Calif.
19 Capoor, S.P. 1963. Decline of citrus trees in India. Bull. Nat. Inst. Sci. India, 24: 48-64.
20 Capoor, S.P. 1965. Presence of seedling yellows complex in the citrus of south India. In Proc. 3rd Conf. IOCV, p. 30-35. Gainesville, Univ. Fla. Press.
21 Capoor, S.P., Rao, D.G. & Viswanath, S.M. 1967. Diaphorina citri Kuwayama, a vector of the greening disease of citrus in India. Indian J. Agric. Sci., 37: 572576.
22 Capoor, S.P., Rao, D.G. & Viswanath, S.M. 1974. Greening disease of citrus in the Deccan Trap country and its relationship with the vector, Diaphorina citri Kuwayama. In Proc. 6th Conf: IOCV, p. 43-49. Berkeley, Div. Agric. Sci', Univ. Calif.
23 Celino, C.S., Salibe, A.A. & Cortez, R.E. 1966. Diaphorina citri Kuway., the insect vector for the leaf mottle virus of citrus in the Philippines. Manila, Bureau of Plant Industry.
24 Chapot, H. 1970. Les problémes de la production des agrumes au Proche-Orient et en Afrique du Nord. UNDP/ FAO Report AT 2870. Rome, FAO.
25 Cochran, L.C. 1976. The occurrence of greening disease in Pakistan. In Proc. 7th Conf. IOCV, p. 21. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
26 Dakshinamurty, V. & Reddy, G.S. 1975. Mosaic - a transmissible disorder of sweet oranges. Indian Phytopathol., 28: 398-399.
27 Desjardins, P.R., Drake, R.J. & French, J.Y. 1969. Transmission of citrus ringspot virus to citrus and non-citrus hosts by dodder (Cuscuta subinclusa Dur. & Hilg.). Plant Dis. Rep., 53: 947-948.
28 Fawcett, H.S. & Klotz, L.J. 1939. Infectious variegation of citrus. Phytopathol., 29: 911-912.
29 Fraser, L.R. 1961. Lemon crinkly leaf virus. In Proc. 2nd Conf: IOCV, p. 205210. Gainesville, Univ. Fla. Press.
30 Fraser, L.R. & Singh, D. 1966. Greening virus, a threat to citrus industry. Indian Hort., 10: 21 -22.
31 Fraser, L.R. & Singh, D. 1968. Citrus dieback in India - the contribution of greening virus. In Proc. 4th Conf: IOCV, p. 141-144. Gainesville, Univ. Fla. Press.
32 Fraser, L.R., Singh, D., Capoor, S.P. & Nariani, T.K. 1966. Greening virus the likely cause of citrus dieback in India. FAO Plant Prot. Bull., 14: 127- 130.
33 Garnier, M., Danel, N. & Bové, J.M. 1984a. Aetiology of citrus greening disease. Ann. Inst. Pasteur/Microbiol., 135A: 169-179.
34 Garnier, M., Danel, N. & Bové, J.M. 1984b. The greening organism is a Gram-negative bacterium. In Proc. 9th Conf IOCV, p. 115-125. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
35 Gupta, O.P., Nauriyal, J.P. & Knorr, L.C. 1972. Citrus greening in the Indian Punjab. In Proc. 5th Conf: IOCV, p. 14-18. Gainesville, Univ. Fla. Press.
36 Igwegbe, E.C.K. & Calavan, E.C. 1970. Occurrence of mycoplasma-like bodies in phloem of stubborn-infected citrus seedlings. Phytopathol., 60: 1525-1526.
37 Ke, C., Chen, H. & Lin, S.C. 1980. Study on transmission of rickettsia-like organism associated with citrus yellow shoot by psylla. Fulian Agric. Sci. Tech., 10: 10-11.
38 Laflèche, D. & Bové, J.M. 1970a. Structures de type mycoplasme dans les feuilles d'orangers atteints de la maladie du greening. C.R. Acad. Sci., Ser. D, 270: 1915-1917.
39 Laflèche, D. & Bové, J.M. 1970b. Mycoplasmes dans les agrumes atteints de "Greening", de "Stubborn" ou de maladies similaires. Fruits, 25: 455-465.
40 Lallemand, J., Fos, A. & Bové, J.M. 1986. Transmission de la bactèrie associée à la forme africaine de la maladie du "Greening" par le psylle asiatique Diaphorina citri Kuwayama. Fruits, 41: 341 -343.
41 Mali, V.R., Chaudhuri, K.G. & Rama, S.D. 1975. Vein enation and woody gall diseases of citrus. FAO Plant Prot. Bull., 23: 190-191.
42 Mali, V.R., Chaudhuri, K.G. & Rama, S.D. 1976. Leaf curl virus disease of citrus in India. Sci. & Cult., 42: 525-527.
43 Martinez, A.L. & Wallace, J.M. 1967. Citrus leaf-mottle yellows disease in the Philippines and transmission of the causal virus by a psyllid: Diaphorina citri. Plant Dis. Rep., 51: 692-695.
44 Massonie, G., Garnier, M. & Bové, J.M. 1976. Transmission of India citrus decline by Trioza erytreae (Del Guercio), the vector of South Africa greening. In Proc. 7th Conf: IOCV, p. 18-20. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
45 McClean, A.P.D. 1974. Abnormal bud union between some sweet oranges and rough lemon rootstock: evidence of cause by a transmissible pathogen. In Proc. 6th Conf: IOCV, p. 203-210. Berkeley, Div. Agric. Sci., Univ. Calif.
46 McClean, A.P.D. & Oberholzer, P.C.J. 1965. Citrus psylla, a vector of the greening disease of sweet orange. S. Afr. J. Agric. Sci., 8: 297-298.
47 Nagpal, R.L. 1959. Tristeza found in Bombay state. Calif: Citrog., 44: 392, 402-405.
48 Naidu, R. & Govindu, H.C. 1981. Association of bacterium-like organism with citrus greening in India. Curr. Sci., 50: 242-244.
49 Nariani, T.K. & Raychaudhuri, S.P. 1968. Occurrence of tristeza and greening viruses in Bihar, West Bengal and Sikkim. Indian Phytopathol., 21: 343344.
50 Nariani, T.K., Raychaudhuri, S.P. & Bhalla, R.B. 1966. Citrus tristeza virus in northern and central India. Indian Phytopathol., 19: 397-399.
51 Nariani, T.K., Raychaudhuri, S.P. & Bhalla, R.B. 1967. Greening virus of citrus in India. Indian Phytopathol., 20: 146150.
52 Nariani, T.K., Raychaudhuri, S.P. & Sharma, B.C. 1960. Citrus viruses in Assam and Orissa. Indian Phytopathol., 23: 141-143.
53 Nariani, T.K., Raychaudhuri, S.P. & Sharma, B.C. 1968. Exocortis in citrus in India. Plant Dis. Rep., 52: 834.
54 Nariani, T.K., Sahambi, H.S. & Chona, B.L. 1965. Occurrence of tristeza virus in citrus in northern India. Indian Phytopathol., 18: 220.
55 Nariani, T.K., Viswanath, S.M. & Menon, M.R. 1970. Occurrence of tristeza and greening diseases of citrus in Kerala. Agric. Res. J. Kerala, 8: 123-124.
56 Nour-Eldin, F. 1959. Citrus virus disease research in Egypt. In J.M. Wallace, ed. Citrus virus diseases, p. 219-227. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
57 Oberholzer, P.C.J. 1959. Host reactions of citrus to tristeza virus in South Africa. In J.M. Wallace, ed. Citrus virus diseases, p. 35-43. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
58 Patil, B.P. & Warke, D.C. 1968. A note on existence of exocortis virus in India. Curr. Sci., 37: 469-470.
59 Raychaudhuri, S.P., Nariani, T.K. & Ahlawat, Y.S. 1977. Dieback of citrus in India. Proc. Int. Soc. Citricult., 3: 914918.
60 Raychaudburi, S.P., Nariani, T.K., Lele, V.C. & Singh, G.R. 1972. Greening and citrus decline in India. In Proc. 5th Conf: IOCV, p. 35-37. Gainesville, Univ. Fla. Press.
61 Reddy, G.S. 1965. Citrus decline in south India. In Proc. 3rd Conf: IOCV, p. 225. Gainesville, Univ. Fla. Press.
62 Reddy, G.S. & Govinda Rao, P. 1961. Is there tristeza in Andhra Pradesh, India? In Proc. 2nd Conf: IOCV, p. 132-135. Gainesville, Univ. Fla. Press.
63 Reichert, I. & Perlberger, J. 1934. Xyloporosis, the new citrus disease. Agric. Exp. Sta., Rehoboth, Palestine, Bull., 12: 49.
64 Roistacher, C.N. 1988. The cachexia and xyloporosis diseases of citrus - a review. In Proc. 10th Conf: IOCV, p. 116-124. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
65 Saglio, P., Laflèche, D., Bonissol, C. & Bové, J.M. 1971 a. Isolement et culture in vitro des mycoplasmes associés au "stubborn" des agrumes et leur observation au microscope électronique. C.R. Acad. Sci. Paris, 272: 1387-1390.
66 Saglio, P., Laflèche, D., Bonissol, C. & Bové, J.M. 1971b. Isolement, culture et observation au microscope électronique des structures de type mycoplasme associées à la maladie du stubborn des agrumes et leur comparaison avec des structures observées dans le cas de la maladie du greening des agrumes. Physiol. Veg, 9: 569-582.
67 Schwarz, R.E. 1970. A multiple sprouting disease of citrus. Plant Dis. Rep., 54: 1003-1007.
68 Varma, P.M., Rao, D.G. & Capoor, S.P. 1965. Transmission of tristeza virus by Aphis craccivora (Koch) and Dactynotus jaceae L. Indian J. Entomol., 27: 67-71.
69 Varma, P.M., Rao, D.G. & Vasudeva, R.S. 1960. Additional vector of tristeza disease of citrus in India. Curr. Sci., 29: 359.
70 Vasudeva, R.S. & Capoor, S.P. 1958. Citrus decline in Bombay State. FAO Plant Prot. Bull., 6: 91-92.
71 Vasudeva, R.S., Varma, P.M. & Rao, D.G. 1959. Transmission of citrus decline virus by Toxoptera citricida (Kirk) in India. Curr. Sci., 28: 418-419.
72 Wallace, J.M. & Drake, R.J. 1968. Citrange stunt and ringspot, two previously undescribed virus diseases of citrus. In Proc. 4th Conf: IOCV, p. 177-183. Gainesville, Univ. Fla. Press.
73 Weathers, L.C. 1960. Yellow-vein disease of citrus and studies of interactions between yellow-vein and other viruses of citrus. Virology, I 1: 753-764.
74 Weathers, L.G. 1961. Responses of citrus to concurrent infection with two or more unrelated viruses. In Proc. 2nd Conf: IOCV, p. 187- 196. Gainesville, Univ. Fla. Press.
75 Xu, C.F., Li, K.B. & Liao, J.Z. 1985. On the transmission of citrus yellow shoot by psylla and observation with electron microscopy. Acta Phytopathologica Sinica, 15(4): 241-245.
76 Yora, K.Y., Doi, Y., Raychaudhuri, S.P. & Ahlawat, Y.S. 1977. Infectious variegation in India. Calif: Citrog., 62: 342.
Chapter 18: Saudi Arabia
Greening disease and its psyllid vectors
Other virus and virus-like diseases
Phytophthora gummosisa-fungal-disease
Bacterial disease: Citrus canker
Bibliography
Traditionally, agriculture in Saudi Arabia has been centred around oases and wadi channels scattered throughout the Kingdom where springs and shallowground water are available, or where rainfall alone is sufficient for the cultivation of crops such as wheat, barley, millet and some vegetables and fruit (for example, in the Asir region where the annual rainfall exceeds 300 mm).
Citrus is grown essentially in the highland oases of the Asir, from Taif to Najran, and in the Buraidah-Unaizah region (see Map 9).
Mandarin and sweet orange trees, mainly on sour orange rootstock, used to grow well in the Asir oases but, in the 1970s, they began to decline, and by the early 1980s they had been wiped out. The major result of the survey for virus and virus-like diseases in Saudi Arabia has been the discovery that citrus greening disease was the cause of this decline.
Today the less susceptible small-fruited acid lime (Citrus aurantifolia) is the only cultivar still grown. The distribution of the disease as well as of its insect vector, the psyllid Diaphorina citri, was determined by three surveys between November 1981 and December l 983. Greening and its psyllid vector were not encountered in the Buraidah-Unaizah region surveyed in 1981.
In the past, citrus has been introduced into Saudi Arabia from several countries, including Egypt, Jordan, Lebanon and Yemen. These introductions were not certified free of diseases, hence, it was to be expected that the graft-transmissible diseases affecting citrus in these countries would be present in Saudi Arabia. The survey has indeed shown this to be the case. Greening, however, was not introduced from the Mediterranean countries, which are still free of it.
No records are kept by farmers as to the origin of the trees, the nature of the rootstocks, or the scion varieties. This has often made it difficult to identify the diseases accurately. Sometimes, ironically, the type of symptoms present on rootstocks has led to identification of the rootstocks.
Greening disease and its psyllid vectors
Diagnosis
Diagnosis of greening was based on symptom expression and electron microscopical detection of the greening organism in the sieve tubes of leaves and/or fruits.
Leaves and fruits were kept in plastic bags for a few hours until they could be further processed. The leaf midrib was cut out with a razor blade and chopped into pieces 2 to 4 mm long. About five such pieces were fixed by immersion in a 5 ml screwcap tube filled with 2 percent glutaraldehyde in 0.1 M phosphate buffer at pH 7.4. For a given tree, midrib pieces from five to ten leaves were used and placed in the same tube.
The peduncular end of the fruit axis is rich in phloem tissue and represents choice material for the detection of the greening organism. The columella tissue was dissected from the fruit with a razor blade, chopped into 2 to 4 mm-long fragments and fixed in the same way as the leaf pieces.
MAP 9 Saudi Arabia
The samples remained in the 2 percent glutaraldehyde solution for two to four weeks until they reached the Bordeaux laboratory, where they were post-fixed in I percent osmium tetroxide in the same phosphate buffer. After dehydration in ethanol, specimens were embedded in Epon and thin-sectioned. The ultra-thin sections were examined in a Siemens Elmiscope 101 electron microscope (Bové and Garnier, 1984).
Areas where the Asian form of greening and the Asian psyllid vector, Diaphorina citri, are present: Asir
Clear-cut symptoms of greening disease (Figs 196 to 214) were observed in the highland oases of the Asir (see Map 9 and Table 44), where the Asian vector of the disease, D. citri, was also present. The greening organism was detected by electron microscopy in affected citrus material (Figs 7 to 18). These studies prove that the symptoms observed are indeed those of greening.
The areas concerned are:
* Jeddah-Mecca-Taif area (see Map 10 -showing the itinerary of the 1983 survey): Zaimah, Wadi Nahman, Taif and its environs (Figs 7 and 8).
* Turabah (Figs 9 to 11), Khurmah and Bishah (Figs 12 to 15) oases (see Map 10).
* Boua area (see Map 10): small-fruited acid lime trees along the main road near Boua showed severe greening symptoms and were found positive by electron microscopy (Fig. 16). Even though D. citri was not seen in this small orchard (see Table 44), Boua is part of the region where D. citri is present.
In these three areas, practically the only citrus species now grown is the small-fruited acid lime. According to citrus growers, sweet orange and mandarin trees used to do well, but have been wiped out within the last 15 years. Greening disease is very probably responsible for their destruction. Indeed, severe symptoms of greening were observed on moribund sweet orange (Fig. 197) and mandarin trees (Figs 196, 199 to 206) and electron microscopy showed the presence of the greening organism in these trees.
Lime has proved to be less susceptible to greening than sweet orange and mandarin. In affected areas, lime trees display greening symptoms (leaf mottle) (Fig. 214) but, although electron microscopy shows them to be infected by the greening organism, they achieve a respectable size (Fig. 206). An additional reason for relatively good growth is the fact that limes are not affected by citrus tristeza disease. This is a remarkable situation since, in Africa and Asia, greening is generally accompanied by tristeza, and acid lime is highly susceptible to this virus. Hence, in areas where both tristeza and greening are present, the lime trees decline not so much because of greening, but because of tristeza.
While in some areas only a few small lime orchards exist, in other areas, such as Turabah, Khurmah and Bishah, lime orchards cover many hectares and total thousands of relatively well-developed trees. In fact, the only adult, ten- to 15-year-old trees that can be seen in commercial orchards are lime.
MAP 10 Area covered by the 1983 survey for greening and its vectors in Saudi Arabia
TABLE 44 Greening. psyllids and psyllid parasites and citrus canker in Saudi Arabia as of 1983
In the above-mentioned areas, a high percentage of trees are affected. The reason for this high incidence of infection is the presence of the Asian vector of greening, D. citri (Figs 37 and 210).
This psylla was first observed in 1971 on citrus in the Jeddah, Wadi Khulais, Mecca and Haddat Ash Sham areas (FAO, 1972; Wooler, Badgham and Arafat, 1973). Although it has been known since 1966 that D. citri is a vector of greening (Capoor, Rao and Viswanath, 1967; Celino, Salibe and Cortez, 1966), no thought was given until 1981 to the possibility that the disease transmitted by this insect vector might be present in the areas where the vector occurred in Saudi Arabia.
In November 1981, Bové was struck by the magnitude of D. citri populations (Fig. 211). On lime trees the psyllas were so numerous in the areas visited (Taif and Turabah) and the damage so great (Figs 211 to 213), that it was almost impossible to realize that one was looking at lime trees.
The Agricultural Services had been aware of the problems since 1972 and had tried to control the psyllas with the use of various insecticides. From the situation as seen by Bové in 1981, it seems that these treatments were totally unsuccessful.
The primary eulophid hymenopterous parasite (ectoparasite) of D. citri is Tetrastichus radiatus Waterston. An ectoparasite identical to T. radiatus was collected in December 1983 by Aubert and Bové from parasitized nymphs of D. citri at Wadi Nahman and Turabah. Parasitized nymphs of D. citri were seen at Zaimah, but no T. radiatus individuals were obtained in the emergence boxes. It is, however, most probable that the ectoparasite is present. More sampling is needed. The Bishah area probably also harbours T. radiatus.
The strain of the Tetrastichus sp. ectoparasite obtained from parasitized nymphs of D. citri in Saudi Arabia was found by Panis (Valborne, France) to be morphologically indistinguishable from the species T. radiatus. However, Prinsloo (Pretoria, South Africa) found the Saudi Tetrastichus to be somewhat different from the strain of T. radiatus introduced from India (Bathinda area, Punjab) into Reunion, where it was used successfully to control D. citri. Further work is required to characterize the Saudi T. radiatus ectoparasite fully.
For the following reasons the form of greening present in the above areas is most probably the Asian form.
* The vector is the Asian psylla, D. citri. The disease has probably been introduced with D. citri from an Asian country - pilgrims may have played a role in this introduction.
* Even at the altitude of Taif (1 634 m), the daily summer temperatures are well above 32°C (see Table 45). Probably only Asian greening can express symptoms under such hot conditions.
* Judging by the scale of the destruction of sweet orange and mandarin trees over the last years, the disease must have been of the more severe Asian form.
Areas where greening and the psyllid vectors, D. citri and Trioza erytreae, are present: Brehim Khaibar
In the oasis of Brehim Khaibar in the Abha-Khamis Mushait area (see Map 10), the two psyllid vectors of greening, D. citri and Trioza erytreae, both occur in the same orchards. Detection of T. erytreae was based on the presence of galls produced on the leaves by nesting nymphs (Fig. 207). These galls are very typical and bear witness to the presence of T. erytreae. Only empty galls were seen, indicating a normal emergence of adults, quickly followed by the shedding of the moult.
When psyllid parasites are present, punctured mummies remain attached inside the galls for ten months or more. Hence, the absence of punctured mummies may indicate that in the affected area T. erytreae is not parasitized, or at least not to a great extent. Obviously, more observations must be made over a longer period.
On the other hand, D. citri nymphs were parasitized and T. radiatus was obtained in the emergence box. Severe greening symptoms were observed on the only two moribund mandarin trees present and on the many acid lime trees (Fig. 206). The presence of the greening organism was confirmed by electron microscopy (Figs 17 and 18). The form of greening involved is probably the Asian form even though the African form may also have been introduced with T. erytreae.
TABLE 45 Monthly mean temperatures (T) in °C, relative humidity (RH) and saturation deficit (SD) in millibars, at midday for six stations in Saudi Arabia
Areas where the African form of greening and the African psyllid vector, T. erytreae, are present: Fayfa
Many T. erytreae-induced galls were seen on sweet orange leaves in the mountainous Fayfa area (altitude I 200 to 1 800 m) near the border with the northern part of Yemen, east of Jizan (see Map 10). Only one punctured mummy was seen in a gall, suggesting a low level of parasitism. D. citri was not observed.
Symptoms of zinc deficiency were severe on many trees (Figs 208 and 209), but the trees had not yet developed the typical "greening" aspect. However, the greening organism was detected by electron microscopy in sweet orange tissues, even though in very low numbers. In the absence of D. citri, it is highly likely that the form of greening involved is the African, and that the disease is in its early stages.
Areas where the African psyllid vector, T. erytreae, occurs, apparently in the absence of greening: Najran
While no evidence for the presence of T. erytreae was found during the November 1981 and December 1983 surveys in the Najran area (see Map 10), such evidence was obtained in January 1984 by the National Centre for Horticultural Research and Development in Najran. T. erytreae galls were observed in three different orchards on acid lime, lemon and mandarin leaves. The galls contained punctured mummies indicating parasitism. However, no symptoms of greening were observed.
Even though T. erytreae has definitely been found in Wadi Najran, the psylla populations seemed to be low and in a state of decline - at least in the period January to March 1984. The climatic conditions might not be favourable enough for high populations of T. erytreae to become established.
Eggs and young nymphs die when the temperature exceeds 32°C for several hours a day, especially when the relative humidity is low. Green and Catling (1971) have combined the mean daily maximum temperature and the mean minimum vapour pressure to characterize a "lethal day" for T. erytreae by the saturation deficit (SD) in millibars, given by the equation
SD = VP[t°max](100 - RH[min])/100
where VP[t°max] is the saturation vapour pressure corresponding to the maximum temperature recorded during the day, and RH[min] is the minimum relative humidity.
On a lethal day, the SD exceeds 35 mbar and causes 70 percent mortality of eggs and first instar nymphs. Mortality is 100 percent when the SD is higher than 48 mbar. These conditions occur in Najran from April to September, as shown in Table 45. The same is true for Bishah and Medina. However, at Khamis Mushait, no such conditions occur and this explains why nearby, at Brehim Khaibar, T. erytreae is present. Even at Taif, conditions might support the development of T. erytreae.
Areas where the Asian psyllid, D. citri, occurs, apparently in the absence of greening
Besides the areas mentioned above, D. citri is also present north of Jeddah and was seen at Haddat Ash Sham, Usfan and Khulais (see Map 11). The presence of the ectoparasite T. radiatus var. saudi and parasitized D. citri nymphs was also established in these areas (see Table 44). Furthermore, the encyrtid hyperparasite Cheiloneurus cyanonotus Waterston was obtained in the emergence box containing the leaf samples of a lime from Khulais.
This hyperparasite was the only one that was obtained during the December 1983 survey. This does not mean that hyperparasites are absent from other areas. More observations over longer periods are required.
No clear-cut symptoms of greening were seen in the area north of Jeddah and the greening organism was not detected by electron microscopy in the samples studied. The areas concerned are at low altitudes, 150-200 m, and it is possible that the very high temperatures that prevail in these areas in the summer are detrimental to the organism. Further study is required to confirm that greening is really absent in these coastal areas.
Areas tree of greening and psyllid vectors
Citrus in the following areas was found to be free of greening and psyllid vectors in 1983 (see Maps 9 and 10):
* areas along the coastal highway between Jeddah and Jizan: Al Lith, Al Ugdah, Muraibah, Ad Darb, Sabia and Jizan, including the FAO-operated project at Wadi Jizan;
* the Medina region: Abiar Al Mashy and Al Khelil; and
* the Kassim region: Unaizah and Buraydah.
Summary and conclusions
* The most important disease problem in citrus in Saudi Arabia is greening.
* Since the 1970s, farmers have witnessed the decline and disappearance of practically all sweet orange and mandarin trees in the southwestern part of Saudi Arabia, from Jeddah to Abha. Greening disease transmitted by the Asian psylla, D. citri, is very probably responsible for the destruction of these trees.
* The problem started in the early 1970s with the spread of the vector, D. citri.
* In the affected areas, only small-fruited acid lime trees are left, sometimes in quite large orchards. These lime trees are relatively tolerant of greening. This means that they are infected and show symptoms, but they do not suffer unduly from the disease. Their relative tolerance and the absence of tristeza virus explain why the lime trees have grown into relatively well-developed, adult trees, in spite of greening.
* The many infected lime trees are major sources of inoculum.
* Lime is one of the favoured hosts of the vector, D. citri, and this psylla has become a real pest on lime.
* All conditions for an efficient spread of greening disease are therefore present: a large population of psyllid vectors feeding on an abundant host - lime trees that harbour a vast amount of inoculum that will infect the psyllis for life.
* Saudi Arabia harbours the two vectors of citrus greening disease: D. citri, the Asian psylla, and T. erytreae, the African psylla.
* The greening disease in its Asian form, and probably also African greening, are present in Saudi Arabia.
* D. citri and Asian greening extend from Jeddah to Abha. This is the area where the disease has been most destructive.
* The spread of D. citri and Asian greening in the affected areas has most probably occurred through the transportation of citrus plants from one oasis to another. Indeed, most of the citrus trees grow in oases separated by desert regions. D. citri is not an active flying insect and, in most cases, could not have covered the distance between oases unaided.
* The decline and disappearance of sweet orange and mandarin trees that started in the 1970s was not a clearly perceived phenomenon and, even if it had been, its cause was not realized. Hence, nurseries continued to operate and distribute citrus plants, and have probably been the main factor in the spread of the disease and its vector.
* T. erytreae very probably entered Saudi Arabia from the northern part of Yemen. It is moving northwards and has already reached the Abha area. It will probably continue to move further north if nothing is done to stop its progress.
* The Abha area harbours the two psyllid vectors in the same orchards. This is the zone where D. citri, moving south, has encountered T. erytreae moving north. After the islands of Reunion and Mauritius, the Abha area of Saudi Arabia is the third region where the two psyllid vectors occur concomitantly.
* If nothing is done to stop it, D. citri will most probably continue to spread south and might eventually reach Najran and the northern part of Yemen.
* So far, only T. erytreae has been found at Fayfa and Najran, south of Abha.
* At the time of writing, greening in Fayfa (very probably the African form) was in an early stage of development.
* The Najran area may still be free of greening.
* Even though T. erytreae has definitely been found in Wadi Najran, the psylla populations seemed to be low and in a state of decline, at least in January to March 1984. The climatic conditions might not be favourable to the establishment of high populations of T. erytreae.
* In its northbound movement beyond Abha, T. erytreae will find areas such as those between 1 000 and 2 000 m above sea-level, where weather conditions will be suitable for its development.
* While the Najran area is fairly unfavourable for T. erytreae, it offers good conditions for the development of D. citri, since the weather regime suitable for high breeding potential of the Asian psylla is the opposite of that for T. erytreae.
* Parasites of D. citri nymphs are present in Saudi Arabia, as is evident from the many punctured mummies and the capture of the ectoparasite T. radiatus. This natural parasitism is, however, insufficient to keep the population of D. citri at a low level, probably because of hyperparasites.
* The psyllid hyperparasite C. cyanonotus was captured in the Khulais area. Hyperparasites were not obtained in other areas, probably because of insufficient sampling or because it was an unsuitable period for sampling. The feasibility of biological control of the psyllid vector should be studied.
* Parasitism of T. erytreae (punctured mummies) was seen in Najran in March 1984 but was not observed at Brehim Khaibar. Only one punctured mummy was found at Fayfa.
* Greening poses a potential threat to citri-culture in Wadi Najran. This area is well suited to citrus and projects for citrus development are under way. Even though evidence for the presence of T. erytreae has been obtained, the psyllid population was very low and greening is probably still absent. However, D. citri and Asian greening are fast approaching Wadi Najran, since they are already in the Abha area. The arrival of D. citri and Asian greening would ruin the citrus project in Wadi Najran.
* Citriculture in the Unaizah-Buraidah area is also under threat from greening. This area, also well suited to citrus, is still free of greening and psyllid vectors. Introduction of the vector and the disease would be most detrimental to both old and new citrus.
* Asian greening also threatens the northern part of Yemen, which harbours T. erytreae and African greening in areas above 1 000 m. However, the disease and its vector are absent from the Tihama and Mareb-Hareb regions, most probably because the weather conditions are unsuitable for T. erytreae. D. citri and Asian greening could, however, become established if introduced from Saudi Arabia. Their introduction would ruin several important citrus projects that are being developed in the Tihama at Jarouba, Wadi Sardut and Al Garaba.
* The Mediterranean basin is free of greening and citrus psyllas. It is very probable that T. erytreae and especially D. citri would be able to multiply if introduced into the Mediterranean regions. It is also highly likely that greening disease would be introduced with the vector.
<section>m</section>
Other virus and virus-like diseases
Diseases transmitted by insect vectors
Besides greening disease, two other important diseases are vector-transmitted: tristeza (a virus disease) and stubborn (a disease due to the helical mycoplasma Spiroplasma citri).
Tristeza. No evidence for the presence of tristeza was seen in Saudi Arabia in 1981, 1982 or 1983. None of the many small-fruited acid lime trees observed showed leaf vein clearing or stem pitting, two symptoms specific to tristeza on lime trees. Furthermore, budwood samples were taken from several suspect trees, especially in the Najran area, and analysed for tristeza in Bordeaux using ELISA. They were all negative.
Tristeza virus is transmitted by various aphids. The tropical black aphid (Toxoptera citricida), a very efficient vector (Chapter 3, see drawing on p. 36), is not present in the Arabian Peninsula, but other aphid vectors, such as Aphis gossypii and Myzus persicae, are present in Saudi Arabia and could transmit various strains of the virus.
Stubborn disease. Typical symptoms of stub born disease were seen in 1981 in the Kassim area in one orchard (Saleh Abbad orchard, Unaizah area). Fruit samples from the affected Balady sweet orange trees were taken to Bordeaux. S. citri, the causal mycoplasmal agent of stubborn, was cultured from the fruit samples, confirming the presence of the stubborn disease pathogen in Saudi Arabia.
In California, S. citri is transmitted by the sugar beet leafhopper Neoaliturus (ex. Circulifer) tenellus. The major vector in the Mediterranean area is Neoaliturus haematoceps, also a sugar beet leafhopper. These two leafhoppers are present in Saudi Arabia in many areas (see Table 46 and Maps 9, 11 and 12) (Wittmer and Buttiker, 19791981). Salsola kali (Chenopodiaceae) is the preferred host plant of these two leafhoppers. The distribution of S. kali in Saudi Arabia is still to be determined.
Diseases not transmitted by insect vectors
Many cases of the following diseases have been observed in Saudi Arabia: psorosis young leaf symptoms, scaly bark psorosis, concave gum-blind pocket, gummy bark, impietratura and cachexia. These diseases are not transmitted by insect vectors, but they are spread by humans when taking budwood for propagation from affected trees. In addition, the cachexia viroid is mechanically transmissible.
Cachexia is widespread and has been observed in the following orchards on Willow-leaf mandarin scions (see Map 9): Saud Alabdali (Wadi Nahman, Mecca district); Maid Wazen (Turabah); Hedjera (Khurmah); Bakhit Addaussari (Figs 50 and 51) and Ben Kadassa (Figs 38 and 39) (Bishah); Ali Aboussak, Khaled Al Sudeyri (Figs 44 and 45), Mohamed Wabrane and Ali Abdel Jalil (Najran); in this last orchard, cachexia was also seen on sweet lime rootstock. Cachexia-affected mandarin trees were also present in the Brehim Khaibar area (Fig. 206).
MAP 11 Sites where Neoaliturus haematocepsand Neoaliturus tenellus have been found in the Riyadh area, Saudi Arabia (see Table 46)
TABLE 46 Sampling sites where Neoaliturus haematoceps and Neoaliturus tenellus have been found in Saudi Arabia
Region Number on Map 11 Neoaliturus haematoceps Neoaliturus tenellus
Riyadh district 
Riyadh + 
Hieth 23 + +
Wadi Shaib Luha 31 +
Wadi Mizbil 18 +
Wadi Durmah 11 +
Wadi Al Ammariyah 22 + +
Wadi Khumra 12 + +
Wadi Tumair 13 + 
Afif 
Jeddah district +
Bahara 
Mecca +
Southwestern region (Map 12) 
Wadi Ad Dilla +
Village Qaraah +
Khamis Mushait +
Eastern region (Map 9) 
Hofuf + +
Dammam +
Medina district (Map 9) 
Al Hunayy +
Vein flecking and oak-leaf pattern (psorosis) young leaf symptoms were seen in the Najran area (Figs 91 to 93 and 95) and north of Medina (Al Khelil district).
Psorosis-like scaly bark occurred on sweet orange scions in the Unaizah Agricultural Research Station (Figs 99 and 100). Concave gum depressions were seen in the Najran area in the Khaled Al Sudeyri orchard on sweet orange, and in the Ali Abdel Jalil orchard on mandarin.
Gummy bark of sweet orange was also noted quite frequently in the Turabah area (Narser Ben Sehmi orchard) near Bishah (Bakhit Addaussari and Ben Kadassa orchards) and near Najran (Khaled Al Sudeyri orchard). Clear-cut symptoms of impietratura were seen on sweet orange (Fig. 117) in the Emir Nasser Ben Sehmi orchard at Turabah.
It can be assumed that practically all the grafted old-line trees in Saudi Arabia are contaminated by one or more of these diseases. However, as no records have been kept of the origin of the planted trees and the nature (species) of their rootstocks, it is often difficult to correlate observed symptoms, such as stem pitting on the rootstock, with a given disease.
MAP 12 The southwestern region of Saudi Arabia
This situation is especially true in the Najran area.
For instance, in the Mohamed Wabrane orchard (Najran area) Willowleaf mandarin trees are grafted on unknown rootstocks. Some trees show typical and severe symptoms of cachexia (stem pitting, bark pegging and gumming) on the mandarin scion, but no symptoms on the rootstock (Figs 263 and 265). Other trees show stem pitting (without bark gumming) on the rootstock and no symptoms on the mandarin scion (Figs 264 and 265). A third category of trees show severe symptoms of cachexia on the mandarin scion and some stem pitting on the rootstock (Fig. 266). While the symptoms on the mandarin scion are those of cachexia, the stem pitting on the rootstock cannot be traced to a given disease because the rootstock is undetermined. Similarly, in several orchards in the Najran area the unrecorded rootstocks of stunted sweet orange trees (Fig. 267) show bark cracking (Figs 268 and 269) and severe stem pitting (Figs 269 and 270), while the scion is symptomless. Symptoms on the rootstock occur
on young trees (Fig. 270). Again identification of rootstock is required for diagnosis. If the rootstocks were sweet lime, the stem pitting could be due to the cachexia agent and the bark cracking to the exocortis agent. In the Mohamed Wabrane orchard, sweet orange trees on unrecorded rootstock show bark scaling and cracking and mild stem pitting below the bud-union. Again, the cause of these symptoms cannot be determined.
In the Emir Meteb orchard (Buraidah region) severely stunted sweet orange trees (Fig. 271) show bud-union crease and wood staining below bud-union (Fig. 272). Once again, the rootstock is unfortunately unknown. Other trees on sweet lime rootstock show gum-impregnated bud-union lines (Fig. 132). However, bud-union crease is difficult to interpret when the rootstock of the affected tree is unrecorded (Fig. 135).
Finally, certain commercial citrus species or varieties are known to be tolerant of certain virus and virus-like diseases. This means that they show no symptoms of the disease even though the causal agent is present in the tree. For instance, sweet orange or lemon trees on sour orange rootstock can be fully infected by the viroid(s) of exocortis without showing any symptoms. Only indexing on sensitive indicator plants or other techniques will detect these agents.
For all these reasons, in Saudi Arabia, budwood for citrus propagation should not be taken from old-line trees. Only budwood from well-known and reliable sources, certified free of known diseases, should be propagated.
Phytophthora gummosis - a fungal disease
Many cases of phytophthora gummosis have been observed throughout Saudi Arabia, most of which could have been avoided by adequate horticultural practices. The following points are important. Only sufficiently large rootstocks should be grafted, so that the buds can be inserted on the rootstock seedlings more than 20 cm above soil level. Trees should not be planted too deep in order to keep the bud-union line well above soil level. They should not be planted in a hole but rather on a heap of soil. The worst situation occurs when trees are planted at the intersections of perpendicular irrigation furrows (Fig. 227).
Bacterial disease: Citrus canker
Citrus canker, a very important disease caused by the bacterium Xanthomonas campestris pv. citri, has been detected near Sabia, north of Jizan (see Map 10) on lime trees in an orchard of the Al Hagyriyh village, and in an orchard along the Wadi Damad road. Immediate burning and destruction of the trees in the affected orchards was strongly recommended the next day to the Ministry of Agriculture.
The trees with canker symptoms might have been brought from the northern part of Yemen. This is very likely, since an outbreak of citrus canker occurred in 1982 in the Tihama at the Al Garaba station, where the disease and the causal bacterium were very probably imported into this part of Yemen with citrus plants from India.
Bibliography
Bové, J.M. & Garnier, M. 1984. Citrus greening and psylla vectors of the disease in the Arabian Peninsula. In Proc. 9th Conf: IOCV, p. 109-114. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Capoor, S.P., Rao, D.G. & Viswanath, S.M. 1967. Diaphorina citri Kuway., a vector of the greening disease of citrus in India. Indian J. Agric. Sci., 37: 572-576.
Celino, C.S., Salibe, A.A. & Cortez, R.E. 1966. Diaphorina citri Kuway., the insect vector for the leaf mottle virus of citrus in the Philippines. Manila, Bureau of Plant Industry.
FAO. 1972. Report to the Government of Saudi Arabia on Research in Plant Protection. Doc. No. AGP:TA/207. Rome.
Green, G.C. & Catling, H.S. 1971. Weather-induced mortality of the citrus psylla Trioza erytreae (Del Guercio) a vector of greening virus in some citrus-producing areas of Southern Africa. Agric. Meteorol., 8: 305-307.
Wittmer, W. & Buttiker, W. 1979-1981. Fauna of Saudi Arabia. 3 vols. Basle, Switzerland, Pro Entomologica, Nat. Hist. Mus.
Wooler, A., Badgham, D. & Arafat, A. 1973. Diaphorina citri on citrus in Saudi Arabia. FAO Plant Prot. Bull., 22: 93-94.
Chapter 19: Somalia
Mogadishu region: Citrus cultivars and climatic data
Fungal diseases of citrus in the Mogadishu region
Virus and virus-like diseases in the Mogadishu region
Exocortis
Important diseases probably not present in the Mogadishu region
Diseases of citrus in the Mogadishu region: A summary
Hargeisa region: General information and climatic data
Greening
Tristeza in the Hargeisa region
Other virus and virus-like diseases
Fungal diseases
Salt toxicity
Insect pests
Conclusions and recommendations
Bibliography
A survey of virus and virus-like diseases of citrus was conducted in two regions of Somalia (see Map 13): the area around Mogadishu from Giohar to Goluin (see Map 14), along the River Scebeli; and the area around Hargeisa (see Maps 15 and 16) in the northwestern part of the country.
Mogadishu region: Citrus cultivars and climatic data
Grapefruit is the major citrus variety grown in the Mogadishu region. The oldest trees are 20 to 30 years old and were planted by Italian citrus growers. These trees are all grafted on sour orange rootstock, and the scions represent old-line cultivars.
In the 1970s, new plantations of grapefruit trees were established. The cultivars used comprised not only old varieties but also new ones such as Marsh seedless, Ruby, Redblush, etc. The rootstock was mainly sour orange, but rough lemon also began to be used. The grapefruit trees cover approximately 1 000 ha. The best orchards have a yield of 20 tonnes per hectare, but many produce less. Normally, under good management, grapefruit orchards should give at least 50 tonnes per hectare.
Since 1980, the Genale nursery has distributed about 150 000 grapefruit trees. This number should be sufficient to plant about 500 ha of new citrus orchards. This brings the total area of production of grapefruit trees to about 1 500 ha.
Besides grapefruit, small-fruited acid lime is the second most important citrus variety grown in the Mogadishu region. Lime trees cover approximately 500 ha, but receive very little care.
The mean monthly maximum temperatures at Genale (latitude 1°50' North, altitude 69 m), fluctuated in 1965 between 33.5°C and 28.6°C, the mean monthly minimum temperature between 23.6°C and 21°C, and the mean monthly temperature between 28.3°C (April) and 24.9°C (July). The absolute maximum temperatures per month were between 39°C in March-April and 34°C in July, the absolute minimum temperatures between 20°C in April and 13°C in January. These data indicate that the Mogadishu region has a uniformly warm climate. Relative humidity is always high and varies from 74 percent to 82 percent. Rainfall is relatively low and reached 471 mm in 1965. There are two rainy and two dry seasons. Gigal is the major dry season and lasts from December to March inclusive, with a total of 32 mm of rain in 1965. Gigal is followed by Gu, the major rainy season, with 230 mm of rainfall from April to June inclusive. Hagal is the second dry season (100 mm for July and August) and Der the second rainy
season with 107 mm of rain in September, October and November.
Citrus trees flower during the first rainy season (Gu) from April to June, with fruiting reaching maturity from December to February (20 percent of annual crop). The major blossom period occurs during the second rainy season (Der) from September to November with fruits ripening from May to September (80 percent of annual crop).
MAP 13 Somalia
During Gigal, the dry season from December to March, the Scebeli River is low, irrigation water is pumped from wells and salinity can be high. From April to November, irrigation water comes from the river.
The wind regime follows two monsoons. From April to October, winds (3.2 km/see and above) come from the southwest and south. From November to March, they blow from the northeast and east (less than 2.4 km/see).
Field research on citrus is carried out at the Central Agricultural Research Station (CARS) at Afgoi on approximately 6 ha of land. Several citrus varieties were introduced at CARS in the period 1966 to 1969. The introductions were from California and Sicily as well as from Somalia. Some of these cultivars and especially those from Italy and Somalia were probably not free of virus and virus-like diseases since, for instance, concave gum symptoms were observed on Avana mandarin from Palermo.
These introductions have been used in various trials, including variety screening and rootstock trials. In view of the very poor condition of the trees in these trials, it is doubtful whether much information can be gained from the experiments.
New budwood introductions (Ruby and Reed grapefruits; Carter, CRC and Frost navel sweet oranges) were made in 1978 and used for rootstock trials planted in 1979, comprising Brazilian sour orange, rough lemon, Citrus macrophylla, Rangpur lime, Carrizo citrange, citrumello 4475, Citrus taiwanica and Citrus amblycarpa. Impietratura-like symptoms and severe symptoms of stubborn have been seen on Frost navel sweet orange. All sweet orange trees on Carrizo citrange rootstock have died.
In 1981-82 the Genale nursery introduced seven grapefruit cultivars from the French Citrus Experiment Station in San Giuliano, Corsica. These cultivars, certified free of known virus and virus-like diseases, included white flesh varieties: Marsh seedless, David seedless and Little River; a pink variety: Thompson; and red varieties: Redblush, Ruby, Shambar.
Fungal diseases of citrus in the Mogadishu region
Rio Grande gummosis
The most important of all diseases of citrus in the Mogadishu region is Rio Grande gummosis. The disease has been seen in practically all grapefruit orchards. On grapefruit and orange trees, the symptoms -profuse gum production - appear high up on the trunk and out on the larger branches (Figs 237 to 239). The gum oozes out of vertical cracks in the bark (see Fig. 244) and runs down along the trunk or hangs down from the branches in stalactite manner (Figs 236, 239 and 240). At the time of initial gumming there is no scaling of the bark at the sites where the bark is split. However, the first stage in the healing-over process is the sloughing of thin scales of dead outer bark. Then follows the development of scar tissue generated by the bark. Repair is only temporary and healed-over lesions may again start gumming and enlarging (Figs 241 and 242). In this way, lesions may pass through repeated cycles of recovery and relapse, in the course of which they progressively enlarge
and expose more and more wood. In old, inactive lesions the wood is exposed (Fig. 240). The gum pockets may be located deep in the wood (see Fig. 245) and the gum travels a considerable distance in and along the wood, so that gum pockets may exist far removed from the nearest active, gum-producing lesion.
MAP 14 The Mogadishu region, Somalia
The bark scaling associated with the healing-over process and the sloughing of scales of dead outer bark can be pronounced (Fig. 243) but should not be confused with that of scaly bark psorosis (see Figs 98 to 100), "popcorn" (Fig. 101) or phytophthora gummosis.
In Somalia, Rio Grande gummosis is widespread throughout the Mogadishu region from Giohar to Goluin. It mainly affects grapefruit trees. The first symptoms appear on seven- to eight-year-old trees. Older trees can be very severely affected, with dieback and leaf drop in addition to gumming. Rio Grande gummosis-affected trees seem to be more susceptible to attack by the larvae of the borer Macrotoma palmata (Coleoptera, Cerambycidae).
There seems to be a correlation between the appearance of the first symptoms of Rio Grande gummosis and the year when the grapefruit trees are pruned for the first time indeed, it has been pointed out by several citrus growers that the disease shows up soon after the trees have been first pruned. In general, trees are pruned at the age of six to seven years, and Rio Grande gummosis appears when the trees are seven to eight years old. These observations tally with the results obtained in California, where it was found that the causal fungal agent enters the tree through pruning wounds. If so, only very few signs of the disease should be present in orchards where trees are only slightly pruned, or not pruned at all. This is precisely the case in one of the orchards visited. Even though this gummosis-free, unpruned, grapefruit orchard is only nine years old, many other orchards of the same age show severe gummosis, and in all these orchards pruning is carried out.
Once infection invades the trunk, it is practically impossible to eliminate the disease by surgery. Control has to be by prevention. Pruning should therefore be reduced to a minimum and only small branches with a diameter of less than 25 mm should be cut. Pruning cuts should be disinfected and, when dry, covered with wound dressing or asphalt. In California, carbolineum with 2 percent phenols has been recommended as a disinfectant for pruning wounds and, for final coating on the disinfected wood, low melting-point asphalt mixed with an equal quantity of carbolineum.
Heat- and frost-injured areas are also points of entry for the Rio Grande gummosis agent. Obviously, only heat injuries must be considered in Somalia. Whitewashing of trunks and branches that might become exposed to sunlight (after heavy pruning) should be carried out with a zinc-copper-lime mix.
Phytophthora gummosis or footrot
The second most important disease in the Mogadishu region is footrot or phytophthora gummosis. Normally, Rio Grande gummosis does not kill affected trees, but footrot does. It is a truly destructive disease. The differences between the symptoms of footrot and Rio Grande gummosis are as follows. Phytophthora gummosis is essentially a disease of the hark; though a thin layer of wood under the affected bark may be stained brown: The entire bark is affected by the fungus, not only the outer layer as in Rio Grande gummosis or scaly bark psorosis. Contrary to Rio Grande gummosis, there are no pockets of gum in the wood. The disease often begins at the soil level when a susceptible citrus species (scion or rootstock) is directly in contact with the earth. Indeed, footrot is due to soil-borne fungi of the genus Phytophthora: P. citrophthora, P. nicotianae var. parasitica, P. syringae Kleb., or P. hibernalis Came. When phytophthora-resistant rootstocks are used, footrot lesions
usually begin near the bud-union and expand rapidly in an upward direction (Figs 222 and 223). Trunk lesions rarely extend higher than 35-50 cm from the ground or the bud-union line.
In the following cases footrot can also occur below ground, and soil must be removed from around the tree to expose the lesions:
* The rootstock is phytophthora-susceptible. The order of susceptibility among rootstocks commonly used is starting with the most susceptible sweet lime, lemon, acid lime, sweet orange, rough lemon, Cleopatra mandarin, citranges, sour orange and Poncirus trifoliata. In Somalia only two rootstocks are used commercially: the phytophthora-susceptible rough lemon and the phytophthora-resistant sour orange. At the Government orchard at Balad, only the trees on rough lemon show footrot.
* The bud-union line is below soil-level (see Figs 228 and 230) and the rootstock trunk as well as part of the scion trunk are in the soil. Footrot lesions can develop not only on the rootstock but also on susceptible scions such as grapefruit and sweet orange.
* Soil is put around the trunk, and the bud-union line is covered (see Figs 224 to 226). Removal of the soil exposes phytophthora-footrot lesions (see Fig. 228).
In these cases, development of the pathogen requires the soil in contact with the phytophthora-susceptible trunk to be moist or wet. Soil moisture at or near saturation is most favourable for fungal growth, spore production and movement of zoospores. The fungus is very sensitive to moisture fluctuations; its activity ceases when soil dries out.
P. citrophthora grows fastest when the temperature is near 25°C. P. parasitica has a higher optimum, near 30°C. Such temperatures are characteristic of Somalia at various times of the year.
Finally, a pH of 6.0-7.5 favours the growth and multiplication of the fungus. Such pH levels are common in Somali soils.
Thus, Somalia has excellent conditions for the development of the soil-borne Phytophthora spp. Footrot can only be prevented by the use of resistant rootstocks and proper horticultural practices (Fig. 231). Unfortunately this is not often the case. Rough lemon is often the rootstock, trees are budded too low, with the bud-union close to or even buried in the soil, and soil is put around the trees.
Virus and virus-like diseases in the Mogadishu region
Cachexia-xyloporosis
On practically all mandarin trees encountered, cachexia-xyloporosis symptoms were seen, namely the presence of gum impregnations in the bark' pegs on the cambial side of the bark, and stem pitting, that is, pits in the wood matching the pegs on the bark. Gum impregnations in the bark of susceptible species are easily seen by scratching the trunk with a knife at the bud-union to remove the outer layer of bark, as shown in Figures 38, 40 and 42. When only the scion and not the rootstock is susceptible, gum impregnations will only be seen above the bud-union. This is precisely the case of mandarin (susceptible) on sour orange (tolerant) (see Figs 38,48 and 49). With sweet orange on sweet lime, Rangpur lime, tangelo or Citrus macrophylla, gum impregnation and/or stem pitting would only be seen below the bud-union as the sweet orange scion is tolerant but none of the four rootstocks are (see Fig. 57).
To diagnose cachexia-xyloporosis further, a piece of bark should be removed at the bud-union line as shown in Figures 38, 41 and 44. The piece of bark will show gum only in the susceptible part, the mandarin bark in the case of Figures 38 and 39, but not the sour orange bark. Similarly, only the cambial side of the mandarin bark will show pegs (see Figs 39, 41, 43 and 45). After removal of bark, the exposed wood shows stem pitting (see Figs 38, 41, 44 and 54).
Cachexia-xyloporosis is a bud-propagated disease. This fact is well illustrated in the Al Sabahyia orchards. On this farm there are three mandarin orchards. One is 30 years old, the second, 20 years old and the third, ten years old. Buds for the youngest orchard were taken from trees of the 20-year-old orchard which had, in turn, been taken from the oldest orchard.
In other words, the 30-year-old orchard is the source for both the 20- and the ten-year old orchards. The 30-year-old orchard happened to be contaminated by a mild strain of cachexia-xyloporosis (as well as concave gum). Both the 20- and the ten-year-old orchards also show the symptoms of cachexia-xyloporosis and concave gum.
Concave gum
The concave depressions (see Figs 102 to 105) induced on susceptible species (mandarins, tangelos, sweet oranges, grapefruits, etc.) by the concave gum agent (not yet identified) were seen on mandarin trees at CARS at Afgoi (Avana mandarin from Italy) and at Al Sabahyia orchards on trees which also bore cachexia-xyloporosis symptoms. This example shows that more than one pathogen can infect the same trees concomitantly.
Popcorn
Figure 101 illustrates a sweet orange trunk showing symptoms of popcorn at the Al Sabahyia orchard. Small scales or flakes of the outer bark loosen, break away and finally drop, leaving the small pustules uncovered. Although the pustules are reminiscent of the eruptive forms of scaly bark psorosis, they are smaller, rarely measuring more than 10 mm in diameter, and do not enlarge. Gum exudation may be frequently observed in this type of lesion. Symptoms of popcorn were observed by Childs (1953) on sweet orange trees in Florida and by Rossetti on sweet orange in Brazil and Portugal (Rossetti and Salibe, 1965).
Impietratura
Impietratura is an infectious disease affecting grapefruit, sweet orange, mandarins, lemon and Citrus volkameriana. Affected fruit is hard, like stone - hence the name impietratura -and there are gum pockets in the albedo (see Figs 1 16 and 1 17). Mild impietratura-like symptoms, i.e. gum in the albedo, have been seen on several occasions in Somalia on navel sweet orange. As boron deficiency also results in the presence of gum in the albedo, further work is required to assess the presence of the impietratura agent in the country.
The presence of impietratura in Somalia would not be surprising, however, since several citrus varieties, including navel orange, have been introduced from Sicily, where impietratura is widespread.
Cristacortis
Cristacortis affects many citrus species, and sour orange in particular. The disease is characterized by conspicuous pegs on the cambial side of the bark with corresponding pits in the wood (see Figs 109 to 114). In cristacortis there are no gum impregnations in the bark. Cristacortis-like symptoms have been seen on sour orange carrying a mandarin top. Graft-inoculation experiments are required to assess the presence of the cristacortis agent in Somalia. Like impietratura, cristacortis is well known in Sicily.
Stubborn
Stubborn disease is due to the helical mycoplasma Spiroplasma citri. Highly typical symptoms of stubborn, such as those seen in Figure 148, have been seen at CARS at Afgoi on navel sweet orange trees from California. Trees are stunted, with small, cupped leaves that also display mottle. Fruit peel is thick and coarse at the peduncular end but thin and smooth at the stylar end (see Fig. 165). Seeds are aborted and the fruit axis is curved, giving lopsided fruit (see Fig. 168).
Symptoms identical to those seen at CARS were also noticed on navel sweet orange trees in the Salah Ahmed Ali orchard at Jambalul. This is not surprising as budwood for these navel trees was obtained from CARS.
The navel sweet orange cultivar carrying stubborn disease is of Californian origin. Stubborn is widespread throughout California, and there are several cases where budwood imported from California was found to carry stubborn.
Miscellaneous
Grapefruit trees on sour orange rootstock with overlapping bud-unions have been noticed. This situation is sometimes encountered with tristeza-infected trees on sour orange rootstock. The tristeza-induced necrosis of the sour orange sieve tubes below the bud-union line prevents the rootstock from growing as fast as the scion and results in the scion overlapping the stock. Trees were analysed for the presence of CTV using ELISA on shoots taken to Bordeaux. The assays were CTV-negative.
Alga spots produced by the partly parasitic alga, Cephaleuros mycoida, have been noticed on small-fruited acid lime leaves.
Russeting due to the citrus rust mite, Phyllocoptruta oleivora, has been seen on fruit of grapefruit trees.
Exocortis
Symptoms of exocortis can only be seen when a susceptible rootstock, such as P. trifoliata, citrange, Rangpur lime or sweet lime is used (see Figs 83, 85 to 87). None of these rootstocks is used in the Mogadishu region, as sour orange is the major rootstock. Sour orange is tolerant of exocortis, as is grapefruit, the major scion species grown on sour orange in the Mogadishu area. Exocortis cannot, therefore, be observed on grapefruit trees grafted on sour orange rootstock even when such trees are infected with the exocortis viroid, as is probably the case in several orchards in the Mogadishu region. Only indexing, i.e. graft inoculation of bark from a candidate tree into a highly susceptible Etrog citron (Citrus medica) line, will show if the candidate tree is infected or not. Citron will react to graft inoculation of the exocortis agent by specific symptoms including leaf epinasty and curling, as shown in Figure 90 (see Chapter 1, Tables 2 and 3).
It is well known that many old-line citrus cultivars are infected with the exocortis agent. This is very probably the case with the old grapefruit lines that were imported into Somalia many years ago, from Italy or other countries, at a time when indexing for exocortis was not yet developed. Old sweet orange and mandarin lines are also known to be frequently infected with exocortis, even though, being tolerant, they do not show symptoms of the disease. It is, therefore, more than likely that many old lines of the major commercial citrus species carry exocortis in Somalia.
It is important to be aware of this situation. Indeed, many tristeza-tolerant rootstocks are susceptible to exocortis. Hence, it would be dangerous to graft old-line citrus cultivars on these rootstocks, as they will undoubtedly develop exocortis whenever the old-line cultivar carries the exocortis pathogen.
Important diseases probably not present in the Mogadishu region
Tristeza
For three reasons, tristeza is probably not present in the Mogadishu region.
* None of the many small-fruited acid lime trees examined showed any symptoms of CTV infection. Neither leaf vein clearing nor stem pitting could be observed. From the absence of these symptoms, it is probable that CTV is not spreading in the Mogadishu region.
* None of the many trees grafted on sour orange rootstock that were observed during the survey showed any signs of a tristeza-like decline.
* Most African strains of CTV, such as the Kenya strains, for instance, cause stem pitting on grapefruit. No stem pitting was observed on grapefruit.
It is essential that the virus be kept out of the area, for at least three reasons:
* Even though Toxoptera citricida, the black tropical citrus aphid vector of CTV, is apparently not present in the Mogadishu area, another CTV aphid vector is - Aphis gossypli, the cotton aphid. This aphid spreads CTV in Israel.
* Most trees are on sour orange and with this rootstock form a scion-rootstock combination that is susceptible to CTV.
* Most trees are grapefruit trees and this species is itself susceptible to certain CTV strains, regardless of rootstocks.
Greening
No evidence for citrus greening disease was seen in the Mogadishu region. The psyllid vector of the disease, Trioza erytreae, has never been reported, no signs of its presence were found and the climate of the Mogadishu region is considered too hot for T. erytreae.
MAP 15 The Hargeisa region, Somalia
Citrus canker
No evidence for citrus canker, caused by the bacterium Xanthomonas campestris pv. citri, was found in the Mogadishu region.
Diseases of citrus in the Mogadishu region: A summary
The two major diseases of citrus - which is mostly grapefruit on sour orange rootstock in the Mogadishu region are fungal diseases: Rio Grande gummosis and phytophthora gummosis or footrot. Cachexia-xyloporosis, a viroid disease, was seen on most mandarin trees examined. Exocortis, also a viroid disease, could not be observed, as all grapefruit, sweet orange and mandarin trees on sour orange rootstock are tolerant to the exocortis agent. It is, however, very likely that many old-line grapefruit, sweet orange, mandarin and lemon trees carry the exocortis viroid. Similarly, the grapefruit and sweet orange (but not mandarin) trees on sour orange are tolerant to the cachexia-xyloporosis viroid. Old-line grapefruit and sweet orange cultivars may very well carry the cachexia-xyloporosis agent without showing symptoms of the disease.
No evidence for the presence of tristeza, greening or citrus canker was found in the Mogadishu region. A. gossypii, a vector of tristeza virus, is present in the region. T. erytreae, a psyllid vector of greening, is not present.
Hargeisa region: General information and climatic data
The information given below has been taken from the main report by SOGREAH on the Northwest Region Agricultural Development Project.
The northwestern region has a population of 450 000, of whom 300 000 live in the Hargeisa area (altitude I 300 m). Irrigated land covers 760 ha, of which 490 ha are watered permanently by pumping water from wells. In addition, a further 3 000 ha are suitable for irrigation.
The major agricultural problems are: inadequacy of supply of agricultural equipment and inputs (often no fuel is available to operate pumps for irrigation), lack of qualified extension personnel, poorly organized marketing and insufficient agricultural credit.
With an average rainfall of 400 mm per year, the northwestern region is classified as a semi-arid zone. Rainfall varies from year to year. The northeast monsoon lasts from October to May, and the southwest monsoon from June to September. The major humid season (Gu) -with 60 percent of rainfall - extends from April to June; the second humid season (Der or Karan), from July to October. The main dry season is from October-November to February-March.
In the highlands, the absolute maximum temperatures never go above 33°C, but they are above or close to 30°C from March to October. The absolute minimum temperatures vary between 10°C and 19°C; they are above 15°C from March to September. The mean relative humidity is between 55 percent and 65 percent.
Monthly average meteorological data
Cultivated land is composed mainly of recent alluvial soils, and the soil pH varies from 7.7 to 8.7. The pH of water is between 7.4 and 7.9. Water often has a high chloride content (10 to 700 mg/l) and this explains the numerous cases of salt injury encountered in citrus.
MAP 16 Northwest Region Agricultural Development Project, Somalia
TABLE 47 Agricultural production in the Hargeisa region, Somalia
(tonnes)
Fruit 4 300 7 500
Vegetables 540 2 000
Maize 580 2 000
Coffee 100
Production levels for 1986 and 1988 are given in Table 47.
Citrus covers a total of 270 ha of land irrigated by pumped water. Total production reaches 2 700 tonnes, with an average production of 10 tonnes a year per hectare.
Citrus was introduced into Hargeisa in 1930 from Cyprus and Australia. A citrus nursery was started at Arapsiyo in 1945 with new citrus introductions, but there is no record of their origin. The Arapsiyo nursery was transferred to Geed Deeble (see Map 16) in 1951, but had to be closed later because of lack of water. From 1951 to 1962 the two nurseries functioned together. The Arapsiyo nursery made trees available to all farmers, while the Geed Deeble nursery worked only for the government. New citrus introductions were made in 1959 from various countries including Ethiopia, the United States of America, East Africa (Kenya) and Zanzibar (now part of the United Republic of Tanzania). According to Bové, the trees found to be affected by greening and tristeza (see below) were very probably imported from Kenya, where the two diseases are known to be widely distributed; tristeza is present everywhere, in both the highlands and the coastal lowlands, while greening is present only
in the highlands above 700 m. Greening is also present in Ethiopia.
Greening
Greening in the Hargeisa region
Greening was observed in the Arapsiyo area on 26-year-old navel (Figs 177 and 179) and Jaffa (Fig. 178) sweet orange trees, probably grafted on rough lemon rootstock. The disease in this orchard also affected mandarin trees. The trees affected by greening also carry tristeza.
The diagnosis of greening in this orchard is based on field symptoms and detection of the greening organism by electron microscopy in Bordeaux. Symptoms include yellow, sparse foliage with zinc-deficiency patterns (Fig. 179); off-season flowering (Fig. 179); fruit of various sizes with aborted seeds; and leaves with severe leaf mottling and vein corking (Fig. 180). Electron microscopy revealed the presence of the greening organism in the sieve tubes of the affected trees (Fig. 19).
Other orchards in the Arapsiyo area also had greening-affected trees. In the Osman Ashour Hassan orchard, many navel and non-navel sweet orange trees showed typical symptoms of greening, with severe leaf mottle and seed abortion. Electron microscopy confirmed the presence of greening (Fig. 20). One tree in the Aden Mohamad Olod orchard showed greening-like symptoms, with fruit of various sizes, aborted seeds and off-season flowers. However, the trees in this orchard also suffered from severe drought. The Ahmed Dahir orchard has many beautiful sweet orange trees, but one had very typical and severe symptoms of greening except for a single branch which was still symptomless. It is well known that greening-affected trees often show signs of the disease only on part of the canopy, especially when infection is still recent (see Fig. 217).
MAP 17 Citrus growing areas of Ethiopia
In the Awbarkadle area (see Map 16), east of Hargeisa, trees infected with tristeza virus, and probably also with the greening bacterium, were seen in the orchard of Mohamad Abdullah Aboussita. A mandarin tree and a sweet orange tree in this orchard were found to be infected by tristeza as shown by ELISA in Bordeaux. The trees came from Kenya. It is likely that some of the trees are also affected by greening.
The situation regarding psyllid vectors of greening in the region
Only the African psyllid vector (T. erytreae) of greening is present on the African continent, and in particular in Kenya and Ethiopia. T. erytreae was first reported as being present in Ethiopia by Schmutterer (1971) and, since then, has been reported from all areas where typical greening symptoms have been observed (see Map 17 - greening was found in all citrus areas except Gode, Lower Awash and Dilla/Yirga Alem). It has also been found on a rutaceous bush, Clausena anisata (Willd.) Beneth., known from South Africa to be a host of T. erytreae (Schwarz, 1976). Vepris undulata is another wild rutaceous host of T. erytreae.
The presence of T. erytreae in a citrus-growing area is revealed by the highly typical concave depressions that psyllid nymphs produce on the lower side of citrus leaves (see Figs 189 and 192). Each depression is, so to speak, a nest in which a nymph has developed. The depressions on the lower side of the leaf correspond to an equal number of "bumps" on the upper side of the leaf (see Figs 190 and 193). Diaphorina citri, the Asian psyllid vector of greening, does not produce such depressions and bumps.
No adults or nymphs of T. erytreae were seen during the survey in the Hargeisa region. Furthermore, no bumps or depressions could be found either on young leaves or on adult leaves of any age. This indicates that T. erytreae has probably been absent from the Hargeisa region for the last three or four years. Whether it is absent, or present only in very low numbers, is difficult to say on the basis of these observations. Further surveys must be made at various times of the year and especially when new growth flushes are produced, since the psyllid eggs are deposited on very young citrus leaves. However, knowing that T. erytreae is present in Ethiopia at Erer Gota and Urso in the vicinity of Dire Dawa, a town located only 100 km east of Hargeisa at a similar altitude (1200 m) to that of Hargeisa (I 300 m), it is fairly likely that T. erytreae is present, at certain times at least, in the Hargeisa region.
<section>n</section>
Tristeza in the Hargeisa region
CTV was detected in citrus material from the Hargeisa region both by ELISA on bark samples from young shoots of trees suspected of being infected with the virus, and by electron microscopy of ultra-thin sections through leaf midribs of trees suspected of having greening disease (Figs 32 and 33).
Two navel sweet orange trees (trees 3 and 4), one Jaffa sweet orange tree (tree 5) and one unidentified sweet orange tree (tree 6) that were all infected with the greening organism, were also infected with CTV. One mandarin tree (tree 1) and one additional sweet orange tree (tree 2) were also infected with CTV; they were not tested for greening, but it is likely that they carried the disease. The case of the Osman Ashour Hasan orchard (trees 6 and 7) is significant. This orchard contained many sweet orange trees with greening symptoms, and the greening organism was detected in one tested tree (tree 6). This tree was also infected with CTV and it is probable that all the trees infected with greening were also infected with CTV. In the same orchard, a small-fruited acid lime (C. aurantifolia) (tree 7) had severe greening-like leaf mottle symptoms and, in addition, mild stem pitting. ELISA showed this tree to be CTV positive. On the basis of leaf mottle and ELISA, this tree
could be infected by both greening and CTV. Many other lime trees have been observed in various orchards in the Hargeisa region, but no symptoms of tristeza could be seen on these trees.
Tristeza has been reported in Ethiopia and more particularly in the Dire Dawa region, I 00 km west of Hargeisa (Schwarz, 1976; Dereje et al., 1977). The most efficient aphid vector of CTV, T. citricida, is reported as the most common aphid on citrus in Ethiopia (Crowe and Kamal, 1979). If so, the presence of T. citricida in the Hargeisa region is to be expected, even though no evidence of it was seen during the survey. It should not be confused with Toxoptera aurantii (see the drawings on p. 36). A. gossypii is another vector of CTV. Its presence in the Mogadishu area is well established but whether it occurs in the Hargeisa region is not known.
The rootstock used in the Hargeisa region would appear to be rough lemon, even though no records are kept by the farmers. Sweet orange trees on rough lemon are tolerant of CTV, and only indexing on acid lime seedlings and ELISA are able to detect the virus in these trees. It is likely that there are many more such infected, symptomless trees in the Hargeisa region.
Other virus and virus-like diseases
Scaly bark psorosis
Scaly bark psorosis, or psorosis A, is a graft-transmissible, virus-like disease. Symptoms of it (see Figs 98 to 100) were seen on Jaffa sweet orange trees in the Hadj Ali orchard (Horo-Hadley area). These trees are grafted on rough lemon rootstock and also show bud-union crease (see below).
Concave gum
Concave depressions typical of concave gum were seen on the trunks of navel sweet orange trees and mandarin trees on rough lemon rootstock.
Bud-union crease
Jaffa sweet orange trees grafted on rough lemon often show bud-union crease, a sign of incompatibility between the rootstock and the scion. In certain cases it has been shown that bud-union crease is a graft-transmissible disease. Symptoms of it have been seen in many orchards of the Hargeisa region (Fig. 134). Practically all Jaffa sweet orange trees on rough lemon that were seen showed bud-union crease.
Stubborn
Stubborn-like symptoms, including bushy growth, off-season flowering and navel closure, were seen on navel sweet orange in the Awbarkadle area.
TABLE 48 Diseases observed in Somalia on citrus in October-November 1986
Diseases Relative status
Mogadishu Hargeisa
Virus and virus-like diseases
Bud-union crease ++
Cachexia-xyloporosis +++ 
Concave gum + +
Cristacortis ± ±
Impietratura ± 
Popcorn + 
Scaly bark psorosis +
Tristeza ++++
Diseases due to phloem-restricted prokaryotes
Greening ++++
Stubborn + +
Fungal diseases
Phytophthora footrot +++ ++++
Rio Grande gummosis + + + +
Nutritional disorders
Salt toxicity +++
Fungal diseases
Phytophthora footrot
Several cases of footrot due to poor cultural practices were observed on mandarin and sweet orange trees on rough lemon (Awbarkadle area), on acid lime (Horo-Hadley area) and on Jaffa sweet orange on rough lemon (Malukta area).
Rio Grande gummosis
Severe Rio Grande gummosis with abundant gum exudations was seen on Jaffa sweet orange (Malukta and Horo-Hadley areas).
Salt toxicity
Figure 255 shows typical symptoms of salt toxicity or leaf burn on sweet orange leaves. This is not surprising as the irrigation water often has a high chloride content, sometimes reaching 700 mg/l.
Salt burn was seen in many orchards in all the areas visited. In the Malukta area, rough lemon seedlings in the nursery showed severe salt toxicity symptoms.
Insect pests
Severe infestations of scales (Coccus spp.) on navel sweet orange fruit and twigs have been seen in the Awbarkadle area. This scale problem was even more important in 1983. Coccus hesperidum (soft brown scale) and Coccus viridis (soft green scale) have been reported in Somalia. Control may be obtained by spraying with oil emulsion or malathion. Note that parathion not only does not control soft scale but also destroys the parasites that exert some biological control over it. Chalcid wasps are known to control Coccus spp. in Somalia. Severe infestations of cottony cushion scales (Icerya aegyptiaca) (Homoptera, Margarodidae) have been seen in the Dararwegne area.
Fruit damage due to fruit-flies was mentioned in connection with several orchards, where crop losses as high as 50 percent have been observed. Ceratitis capitata, the Mediterranean fruit-fly, is believed to be involved.
Conclusions and recommendations
Diseases present in Somalia
Table 48 shows the diseases observed in Somalia on citrus during the survey (October-November 1986). As may be seen, the major diseases in the Mogadishu region are Rio Grande gummosis, phytophthora footrot and cachexia-xyloporosis. In the Hargeisa region, greening and tristeza are of paramount importance, but salt toxicity and phytophthora footrot are important too.
Need for certified budwood
In spite of several introductions of budwood in 1966, 1969 and 1978, some apparently free of virus and virus-like diseases, many symptoms of such diseases could still be seen in the Somali orchards, especially on sweet orange and mandarin.
The Genale nursery has begun to release grapefruit trees propagated from the seven grapefruit varieties (Marsh seedless, David seedless, Little River, Thompson, Redblush, Ruby, Shambar) certified free of virus and virus-like diseases, and introduced in 1981-82 from the French Citrus Experiment Station at San Ginliano, Corsica.
Cultivars of sweet orange and mandarin, certified free of virus and virus-like diseases, must also be reintroduced from reliable sources.
Introduction of plant material from countries that cannot guarantee the quality of their material should be prevented. In particular, no citrus plant material should be introduced from the countries in Table 49, because of the presence of the diseases and their vectors as indicated.
Recommendations concerning greening and tristeza in the Hargeisa region
Greening and tristeza are the two most important graft-transmissible diseases of citrus found in Somalia. They occur in the Hargeisa region but not in the Mogadishu region. They are transmitted by insect vectors, the psyllid T. erytreae for greening, and aphids T. citricida, A. gossypii, etc. for tristeza.
An extensive survey based on ELISA detection of the virus must be carried out for tristeza in order to determine the exact extent of the disease. Infected trees must be eradicated if at all possible. It must be remembered that trees on rough lemon rootstock show no symptoms of tristeza as they are tolerant of CTV.
TABLE 49 Presence of diseases and vectors by country
Country Diseases Vectors
Ethiopia Greening T. erytreae
Tristeza T. citricida
India Greening D. citri
Tristeza T. citricida
Citrus canker 
Kenya Greening T. erytreae
Tristeza T. citricida
Oman Witches' broom disease of lime Not identified
Citrus canker 
Saudi Arabia Greening D. citri
Citrus canker 
United Arab Emirates Witches' broom disease of lime Not identified
Citrus canker 
Yemen Greening T. erytreae
Citrus canker 
A similar survey must be carried out for greening. It seems likely that trees infected with CTV are also infected with the greening organism. Thus, eradication of tristeza-infected trees would also remove many greening-affected trees.
Even though no evidence of T. erytreae, the psyllid vector of greening, was found, further surveys are necessary to evaluate the vector status. Also, the presence of T. citricida, the aphid vector of CTV, must be confirmed. This aphid should not be confused with T. aurantii (see the drawings on p. 36).
Finally, no plant material (except fruit) must be moved out of the Hargeisa area. This is to prevent spread of tristeza and greening to other parts of Somalia.
Bibliography
Chapot, H. 1970. The possibilities of improving and developing fruit crops, with particular reference to citrus. Addis Ababa, Inst. Agric. Research.
Childs, J.F.L. 1953. An actinomycete associated with gummosis disease of grapefruit trees. Phytopathol., 43: 101 - 103.
Crowe, T.J. & Kamal, A. 1979. A checklist of aphids recorded from Ethiopia (Homoptera: Aphididae). Inst. Agric. Res. [Addis Ababa] Entomol. Bull., 3.
Dereje, A., Alemu, M., Niemann, E., Lemma, K., Van Bruggen, A.H.C. & Gebre, S.K. 1977. A report on a preliminary phytopathological survey of citrus and pepper plantations. Addis Ababa, State Farms Development Authority.
Rossetti, V. & Salibe, A.A. 1965. Incidence of different types of psorosis in citrus varieties in the State of Sao Paulo. In Proc. 3rd Conf: IOCV, p. 150-153. Gainesville, Univ. Fla. Press.
Schmutterer, H. 1971. Contribution to the knowledge of the crop pest fauna in Ethiopia. Z. Angew. Entomol., 67: 371 389.
Schwarz, R.E. 1976. Citrus greening in Ethiopia. Technical Report for UNDP/ FAO Project ETH/74/002. Addis Ababa, Inst. Agric. Research.
SOGREAH. (n.d.) Report on the North-West Region Agricultural Development Project. Grenoble, France, SOGREAH, Ing. Conseils.
Van Bruggen, A.H.C. & Almaz Yilma. 1985. Virus and virus-like diseases of citrus in Ethiopia. FAO Plant Prot. Bull., 33(1): 2-12.
Chapter 20: The Sudan
Major varieties and rootstocks
Infectious diseases
Non-infectious disorders
Greening
Tristeza
Conclusions and recommendations
Bibliography
The first report on citrus trees in the Sudan dates back to 1896 (see Map 18). Several sweet orange and grapefruit varieties as well as other citrus species (mandarin, lime, etc.) have been imported subsequently, as shown in Table 50.
These introductions, except those between 1967 and 1970 from California, were mostly old lines, whose virus status was unknown at the time of importation. It is, however, very likely that the plant material introduced from Egypt and the country then known as Palestine was infected with several pathogens, namely those known today to have been present in these countries in the 1930s and 1940s (cachexia, psorosis, exocortis, gummy bark, etc.). It should also be noted that sweet orange introductions were made from Kenya and Rhodesia (now Zimbabwe), where the citrus is known to be infected with CTV and the greening bacterium. Hence, infected trees of Kenyan or Rhodesian origin might have been propagated in the Sudan.
Thus the known history leads one to expect the presence of infectious diseases of citrus in the Sudan.
Major varieties and rootstocks
The Sudan grows mostly the following species and varieties: Balady (local) small-fruited acid lime (Citrus aurantifolia), mainly Foster pink but also Marsh seedless grapefruits, Valencia-like and Balady sweet oranges and Balady
(Willowleaf) mandarins. Sour orange is the major rootstock. However, in old plantings other rootstocks have been used: Balady lime, rough lemon, Adalia lemon, sweet lemon and citron. In general, citrus growers do not know on which rootstock their trees are growing. The use of acid lime (C. aurantifolia) as rootstock was imported from Egypt, and the use of sweet lime probably came from Palestine. For these reasons, "Old plantings of citrus orchards in Northern Province are therefore combinations of a range of citrus varietal groups introduced from several places and worked on a number of rootstock varieties" (Khairy, Mahgoub and El Hage, 1969), a statement equally applicable to the other major citrus areas of the Sudan.
Infectious diseases
Table 51 lists the infectious diseases of citrus that have been diagnosed in the various citrus-growing provinces of the Sudan, except the southern provinces. Table 52 indicates the citrus species and varieties found to be affected.
Virus and virus-like diseases
Cachexia. Figures 42, 43 and 46 to 49 illustrate typical and severe symptoms of cachexia on Balady (Willowleaf) mandarin trees on sour orange rootstock in the Sudan: stunting and yellowing of the leaves (Fig. 46) and gum impregnation of the bark (Figs 42, 43, 48 and 49). The disease affects a high percentage of the Balady mandarin trees- probably more than half. All citrus-growing areas are affected (see Table 51). Symptoms are often severe with stem pitting and bark pegging (Fig. 43) and abundant bark gumming extending high above bud-union (Figs 42 and 49). In very severe cases, bark cracking is observed (Fig. 47).
MAP 18 The Sudan
TABLE 50 Citrus introductions in the Sudan
Citrus Location Year of introduction Imported from:
Early introductions 
Sweet orange and limes Dongola 1896 INA^1
Balady white grapefruit Merowe 1904 USA
Later introductions 
Grapefruit 
Foster pink Dongola 1933 Trinidad
Duncan 1930s INA
Marsh seedless 1930s INA
Sweet orange 
Khalily (red and white) 1930s Egypt
Balady Egyptian " "
Jaffa " "
Washington navel " "
Valencia^2 1947 "
Valencia INA Palestine
Hamlin " "
Lue Gim Gong " "
Magnum Bonum " "
Ruby blood " "
Valencia " Rhodesia
Valencia " Kenya
Pineapple " "
Du Roi 
Jaffa 
Washington navel 
Pomelo (while) 1939 Palestine
Mandarins INA INA
Lime " "
Kumquat " "
Citron " "
More recent introductions 
Many species and varieties Shendi 1967-1970 California³
Hudeiba " "
Nyertete " "
Notes:
^1 Information not available.
^2 Grafted on acid lime rootstock.
^3 From Willits and Newcomb nurseries
TABLE 51 Geographical distribution of infectious diseases of citrus in the Sudan
Disease Khartoum Province Kassala Province Northern Province Gezira Province Darfur Province
Gummy bark (l) (3) (3) (3)
Cachexia (1) (1)(3) (1)(2)(3) (1) (1)(3)
Bark gumming (Kassala disease) (3) (3) (3) (3)
Psorosis young leaf symptoms (1) (1) 
Concave gum-blind pocket (1) (1) (1) (1)(3)
Scaly bark psorosis (1) (1) (1)
Popcorn (1) (1) (1)
Exocortis (1) (2) (3)
Stubborn (1) (1) (3) (1) (1) (1)
Phytophthora gummosis (1)(3) (1) (1)(3)
Rio Grande gummosis (1) (1) (1)(2)(3) (1) (1)(3)
Key:
(1) The disease was seen by Childs, 1964.
(2) The disease was seen by Krezdorn, 1983.
(3) The disease was seen by Bové. 1986.
Sweet orange and grapefruit are important symptomless carriers of cachexia. Infection of these varieties is revealed when they are grafted on susceptible rootstocks such as Citrus macrophylla, Rangpur lime or sweet lime. Such a situation has been observed by Childs (1964) in Shendi (north of Khartoum) in the case of a Valencia sweet orange tree grafted on sweet lime (see Table 52) and by Krezdorn (1983) at the Horticultural Research Station in Hudeiba in the case of Foster grapefruit trees on C. macrophylla and Rangpur lime (see Table 52). These observations show that not only the symptomatic Balady mandarin, but also the tolerant, symptom-less Valencia sweet orange and Foster grapefruit lines carry the cachexia agent. Probably many other sweet orange and grapefruit lines carry the cachexia viroid, but demonstration of this would require indexing.
The same is also true for exocortis, as noted below.
Gummy bark. Figures 60 to 79 illustrate the symptoms of gummy bark on sweet orange rootstock. These symptoms are similar to those of cachexia on mandarin. The disease was first described by Nour-Eldin in 1956 in Egypt (see Chapter 10), on sweet orange trees grafted on sour orange rootstock. While the disease has drawn little attention in America, it is widespread and serious not only in Egypt, but in many other citrus-growing countries in the Near East. Bové has seen severe cases of gummy bark in the Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Oman, Saudi Arabia, the Syrian Arab Republic, Turkey and southern Yemen. Surveys in these countries show the disease to be much more widespread than initially thought. It was probably distributed throughout many countries by the introduction of citrus material from Egypt. Indeed, the sweet orange varieties on which the disease is seen are most often of Egyptian origin. In view of the many citrus introductions from Egypt to the Sudan, it is not
surprising that gummy bark is probably present in all the citrus-growing areas of the country. Bové saw severe cases of it in the three areas visited: Kassala, Atbara (Northern Province) and Nyala-Zalingei (Darfur Province) (see Table 51) and more particularly on Balady navel and Nouri sweet oranges (see Table 52). Childs (1964) has mentioned the disease on Balady and Gebeit sweet orange trees (see Table 52).
TABLE 52 Citrus species and varieties affected by infectious diseases in the Sudan
The expression of gummy bark symptoms on sweet orange like that of cachexia on mandarin is probably independent of the rootstock used to grow the sweet orange scion. Sour orange is the major rootstock used in the countries where gummy bark occurs and, therefore, the disease is most often seen on sweet orange trees grafted on sour orange. In mild cases, the gum streaks are not very numerous and affect the bark only in the vicinity of the bud-union. In severe cases, gumming is abundant and extends high above bud-union (see Fig. 66), and may be responsible for bark scaling (see Figs 68 and 71).
Kassala disease, or bark gumming of grapefruit. This new disease was discovered by the author on Foster grapefruit trees in Kassala. While tristeza and cristacortis are able to induce stem pitting in grapefruit, they never result in the production of streaks of gum in the grapefruit bark. He was, therefore, quite surprised to find a grapefruit tree with gum impregnations in the bark - the tree also showed relatively mild stem pitting. The first-such case was observed in Kassala, but later numerous cases were also seen in Khartoum, Atbara, Nyala and Zalingei, not only on Foster, but also Marsh seedless grapefruit trees.
The symptoms resemble those of cachexia on mandarin or of gummy bark on sweet orange. However, the amount of gum in the bark or the number of gum streaks seems to be smaller, even though bark gumming can extend high above bud-union (Figs 80 to 82). In some cases, the pegs on the cambial side of the bark have rounded tips; in more severe cases they are more pronounced and sharper.
When sour orange is the rootstock of an affected Foster grapefruit tree, there seems to be no bark gumming or stem pitting in the sour orange. In the case of a Marsh seedless grapefruit tree on a rootstock, according to the farmer, either of sour orange or of Balady lime, bark gumming affected only the grapefruit scion bark, but stem pitting was present on both the scion and the rootstock (Fig. 82). This indicates that, perhaps, Balady lime was the rootstock and that it is susceptible to Kassala disease of grapefruit.
Bark gumming of grapefruit is probably not due to the agent of cachexia or that of gummy bark, since the agents of these two diseases do not induce symptoms on grapefruit. Tristeza does not seem to be involved, since CTV could not be detected by ELISA in two of the Foster grapefruit trees showing bark gumming in Kassala. Also, in the case of grapefruit trees with Kassala disease grafted on sour orange rootstock, the trees did not show the type of decline associated with CTV.
The two symptoms of Kassala disease, i.e. bark gumming and stem pitting, were always observed on grapefruit trees that were 20 years old. In Kassala, 13-year-old Foster grapefruit trees showed only stem pitting. They were propagated from Foster grapefruit trees now 20 years old, which showed both bark gumming and stem pitting. This observation indicates that stem pitting may be an earlier symptom than bark gumming. In this respect, Childs (1964) noticed, in the Rest House Garden in Kassala, two grapefruit trees with fairly strong wood pitting. He suggested that this symptom could result from CTV infection. As Bové found no evidence of tristeza in the Kassala area, the symptom observed by Childs might have been due to Kassala disease.
Cachexia of mandarin and gummy bark of sweet orange are graft-transmissible diseases. In view of the similarities between the symptoms of these two diseases and those of bark gumming of grapefruit, the latter is probably also due to a graft-transmissible agent, but proof of this must await completion of graft-transmission experiments. The possibility that gummy bark of sweet orange and bark gumming (Kassala disease) of grapefruit could be of a viroid nature is under investigation.
Scaly bark psorosis (psorosis A). This is a classical disease (see Figs 98 to 100) in California, Florida, Morocco, etc. but it seems to be less of a problem in the Sudan. Childs (1964) saw a few cases of it, and some of these trees also showed psorosis young leaf symptoms, thus confirming the psorosis nature of the bark scaling syndrome. Accurate diagnosis of scaly bark psorosis is not always easy, as Rio Grande gummosis and, to a lesser degree, phytophthora gummosis also result in bark scaling, as noted below.
Popcorn. The name refers to numerous small pustules which erupt on the bark of the trunk of sweet orange trees (see Fig. 101). Small scales of the outer bark loosen, break away and finally drop (Rossetti and Salibe, 1965). This disorder has been observed in several citrus areas of the world, including the Sudan (Childs, 1964). It is sometimes associated with scaly bark psorosis, even though nothing is known about the aetiology and pathology of the disorder. As shown by Tables 51 and 52, Balady and Gebeit sweet orange trees in three of the citrus-growing provinces showed symptoms of the affliction.
Exocortis. Commercial citrus species and varieties do not show symptoms of exocortis, as they are symptomless carriers of the exocortis agent, a complex of various viroids. Hence, when grafted on susceptible rootstocks such as Poncirus trifoliata, citranges, Rangpur lime, sweet lime and citron, they infect these rootstocks which, after a period of time, will show symptoms of exocortis: bark scaling (see Figs 83, 85 to 87), stunting or both. Sour orange is a symptomless carrier of the exocortis viroids and so will not show symptoms of the disease. Therefore, exocortis infection cannot be detected by visual examination of scion-rootstock combinations such as sweet orange, mandarin or grapefruit on sour orange. Indexing (see Fig. 90) is required to diagnose exocortis in these symptomless trees.
In the Sudan, sour orange is the major rootstock and no symptoms of exocortis have been seen in commercial orchards except, perhaps, in one case, a white Marsh grapefruit tree on citron, severely stunted and showing exocortis type bark scaling on the rootstock (see Table 52) (Childs, 1964). In citrus experiment stations where rootstocks other than sour orange are tested, exocortis disease is frequently observed in rootstock experiments in which scion varieties of unknown health status have been used. This is, for instance, the case in the rootstock trial at the Hudeiba Horticultural Research Station, where a Foster grapefruit line was grafted on various rootstocks, including Rangpur lime and Citrus macrophylla. The trees on Rangpur lime were stunted and the rootstock showed exocortis-type bark scaling (Krezdorn, 1983). This Foster grapefruit line also carried cachexia, as witnessed by cachexia symptoms not only on Rangpur lime but also C. macrophylla rootstocks (see Table
52). Another example is the government orchard of the Agricultural Research Corporation at Nyertete (Darfur Province), where Foster grapefruit trees on Carrizo and Savage citranges were severely stunted (see Table 52).
These examples show that selection based only on visual examination is totally inadequate as a means of establishing the health status of citrus trees: good-looking, symptomless trees may be symptom-less carriers of several pathogens such as exocortis and cachexia. Only indexing can reveal the true health status in such cases.
The importance of these considerations is related to the problem of tristeza. Control of tristeza implies the replacement of the sour orange rootstock by tristeza-tolerant rootstocks, such as P. trifoliata, citranges, Rangpur lime or sweet orange. As indicated above, some of these are susceptible to exocortis, cachexia or both. Citrus lines to be budded on these rootstocks must be free of exocortis, cachexia and other pathogens, and must therefore be indexed to determine their true health status.
Stubborn. Childs (1964) mentions stubborn disease in all the citrus areas of the Sudan that he surveyed (see Table 51). He also refers to "greening" symptoms. In those days, the respective agents of stubborn and greening were not yet known, and the two conditions were often thought to be closely related. Today it is well known that the agent of stubborn is the helical mollicute, Spiroplasma citri (Saglio et al., 1973), for which Koch's postulates have been fulfilled. In the case of greening, a bacterium of the Gram-negative type, not a mollicute [mycoplasma], has been found to be associated with the disease (Garnier, Danel and Bové, 1984); Koch's postulates have not yet (1990) been fulfilled.
Bové observed typical symptoms of stubborn on Foster grapefruit trees in the Kassala area, bearing not only small, cupped leaves with mottle and zinc-deficiency symptoms, but also small, lopsided fruits with blue albedo (see Fig. 169) and aborted seeds. Blue albedo is a characteristic internal fruit symptom of stubborn, particularly in abnormally small fruits, as is the case here.
In a private orchard in Nyertete, stubborn-like symptoms were seen on a navel tree. The tree was, however, affected by phytophthora gummosis and this is probably the reason for the stubborn-like symptoms.
S. citri is transmitted in nature by leafhopper vectors. The major vector in the Mediterranean area and the Near East, an area extending from the Atlantic coast of Morocco to Afghanistan, is Neoaliturus haematoceps, a leafhopper not present in the Americas. Neoaliturus tenellus, a related species, is the major vector in North America. Nothing is known about these species in the Sudan. They are, however, present in Egypt and could very well occur in the Sudan. Interestingly, at Kassala airfield, Bové found that most of the ornamental periwinkle (Catharanthus roseus) plants showed severe phyllody symptoms. Electron microscopy confirmed the presence of MLOs in these plants. As infection of periwinkle plants by MLO is through leafhopper vectors, the Kassala periwinkles demonstrate that leafhopper species able to transmit MLOs are present in the area. Whether they include N. haematoceps and N. tenellus remains to be determined.
Impietratura. Impietratura disease affects grapefruit trees and results in the presence of gum pockets in the albedo (see Figs 116 and 117). Impietratura-like symptoms have been seen in the albedo of a Foster grapefruit but they were not conspicuous enough to allow unambiguous diagnosis. Indexing is required for accurate determination of the disorder.
Cristacortis. Deep stem pitting, with pronounced pegs on the cambial face of the bark, is typical of cristacortis (see Figs 109 to 1 15). A few such pegs have been seen on a Marsh seedless grapefruit scion in the Kassala area. However, there was, in addition, a milder stem pitting, suggesting early expression of Kassala disease, especially since a line of gum was present at the bud-union. Indexing is required for precise diagnosis.
Woody gall-vein enation. This disease (see Figs 130 and 131) is characterized by the development of galls on rough lemon, Balady lime and Citrus volkameriana rootstocks. On certain species such as Balady lime, sour orange and rough lemon, the virus induces leaf vein enations. Three aphid species transmit the virus: Toxoptera citricida, Myzus persicae and Aphis gossypii.
Childs (1964) saw galls resembling those of woody gall in Balady sweet orange trees (at Merowe, Gureir and Nyala). He did not specify the rootstocks on which these trees were growing. However, since Balady lime is used as a rootstock in the Sudan, the possibility exists that the galls observed by Childs were on Balady lime rootstocks and, if so, they might be due to the woody gall virus.
Fungal diseases
Phytophthora gummosis or footrot. This disease is caused by a soil fungus (Phytophthora citrophthora, Phytophthora parasitica or related species) that kills the bark. This very serious disease is controlled by using resistant rootstocks to prevent the fungus from attacking the susceptible mandarin, sweet orange or grapefruit scion varieties.
Sour orange is a phytophthora-resistant rootstock and this is the major reason why this species has been used so widely as a root stock for more than a century in many parts of the world. The benefit of using a phytophthora-resistant rootstock is however lost when the tree is budded too low bringing the phytophthora-susceptible scion too close to the soil or, even worse, when the tree is planted too deep and the bud-union becomes buried in the soil. Phytophthora gummosis is also favoured when farmers put soil around the trunks and cover up the bud-union lines. Finally, severe forms of gummy bark are associated with bark cracking and scaling. These outer bark lesions may become points of entry for the fungus, especially when, in addition, the bud-union line is close to the soil.
Cases of phytophthora gummosis are numerous in the Sudan and are invariably due to the inadequate horticultural practices mentioned above. Phytophthora gummosis, like all other fungal diseases, is not graft-transmissible but it is a very serious disease as the tree will die as soon as the bark lesions caused by the fungus have girdled the trunk.
In the Sudan, phytophthora gummosis affects sweet orange, grapefruit and Balady lime. Lime trees represent a special case as they are grown as seedling trees, on their own roots. Allowing irrigation water to come into contact with the trunk favours development of phytophthora footrot lesions on the susceptible lime bark and can result in the death of the tree.
Rio Grande gummosis. Figures 236 to 247 show typical symptoms of Rio Grande gummosis. The disease exists in all citrus areas of the Sudan (see Table 51) and affects grapefruit, including Foster, the major variety, and sweet orange (see Table 52). Childs (1964) also reports cases on Balady mandarin, pomelo and Balady lime. Krezdorn (1983) was impressed by the prevalence of the disease in the Sudan. Bové saw typical and severe cases of it during his survey in the Sudan in November 1986, immediately after his visit to Somalia. In the Mogadishu area of Somalia, Rio Grande gummosis is the most important of all diseases of citrus (see Chapter 19). In the Sudan, the situation seems less severe.
On grapefruit and orange trees, the symptoms appear high up the trunk and out on the larger branches. They are expressed as profuse gum production (see Figs 236 to 240). The gum oozes out of vertical cracks in the bark (Fig. 244) and runs down along the trunk or hangs down from the branches, in stalactite manner. At the time of initial gumming there is no scaling of the bark at the sites where the bark is split. However, the first stage in the healing-over process is the sloughing of thin scales of dead outer bark. Then follows the development of scar tissue generated by the bark. Repair is only temporary and healed-over lesions may again start gumming and enlarging. In this way, lesions may pass through repeated cycles of recovery and relapse, in the course of which they progressively enlarge and expose more and more wood. In old, inactive lesions the wood is exposed (see Fig. 240). The gum pockets may be located deep in the wood (Fig. 245), and the gum travels considerable
distances in and along the wood, so that gum pockets may exist far removed from the nearest active, gum-producing lesion.
The bark scaling associated with the healing-over process and the sloughing of scales of dead outer bark can be pronounced but should not be confused with scaly bark psorosis or popcorn symptoms. Rio Grande gummosis should not be confused either with phytophthora gummosis or footrot. Table 14 on p. 83 helps to distinguish between Rio Grande gummosis, scaly bark psorosis and phytophthora gummosis:
Greasy spot. Childs (1964) observed greasy spot sometimes causing considerable defoliation of sweet orange (Darfur Province), grapefruit (Darfur and Blue Nile Provinces) and Balady lime (Blue Nile Province). Early symptoms appear as a slight blistering on the underside of the leaves. The blistered area becomes first pale yellow, then pale orange and later turns brown or black, suggesting a spot of grease. The causal agent of greasy spot is the fungus Mycosphaerella citri Whiteside.
Non-infectious disorders
Mesophyll collapse
In mesophyll collapse the cells of the soft interior tissues of the leaves collapse. Affected areas are irregular in size and shape, but are frequently bounded by the midrib and main lateral veins. When held up to the light the affected areas appear translucent. Frequently part of the affected area will die and become tan-coloured.
Mesophyll collapse may result when the leaves lose water faster than the tree can supply it. Injury by citrus red mites, rust mites, dry winds, drought, heat damage and impairment of the root system, are among the contributory factors (Pratt, 1958). However, the disease probably starts as a physiological or nutritional imbalance.
Childs (1964) observed considerable mesophyll collapse on sweet orange trees in the Khartoum and Darfur provinces.
Salt injury
Salt injury (see Figs 255 to 257), or salt burn, has been observed in many orchards of grapefruit or sweet orange trees in the various citrus-growing areas of the Sudan, but especially in the Northern Province. Trees on sour orange show much more salt injury than those on Balady lime (C. aurantifolia) rootstock and the symptoms increase in severity with the age of the trees. That sour orange is more susceptible to salt injury than Balady lime is not only true when these species are used as rootstocks, but also in the case of seedling trees: seedling trees of sour orange are much more severely affected than seedling trees of lime. Balady lime is also more drought-resistant. Hence, salt tolerance and drought resistance explain why Balady lime has been used as a rootstock in Egypt, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Saudi Arabia and the Sudan. Balady lime being, however, very susceptible to phytophthora gummosis, this species has been used as a rootstock primarily in light
soils. It is also very susceptible to tristeza, and is not to be recommended as a modern rootstock.
Bark cracking
Figure 259 shows bark cracking on the main branches of a Bearss lime tree; Foster grapefruit trees are also affected. Such longitudinal growth cracks are normal in a vigorously growing tree. However, in the case of Persian (Tahiti, Bearss) lime, certain trees show longitudinal cracks with sunken areas in the bark of trunk and branches and, in addition, their leaves show blotching and their fruits have chimera-like longitudinal sectors. This syndrome is called wood pocket or leaf blotch of Tahiti lime in Florida. In California, lemons also show wood pocket. Wood pocket of lemon in California and wood pocket leaf blotch of Persian lime in Florida are probably not infectious - they are of genetic origin. However, a disease of some Tahiti lime selections in Brazil has bark symptoms similar to wood pocket and has been shown to be caused by the agent of exocortis (Salibe and Moreira, 1965). Hence, these observations indicate that perhaps two different diseases are involved; one of
genetic origin and another caused by the exocortis viroid(s).
From the above discussion, it follows that the cause of the bark cracking of the Bearss lime trees illustrated in Figure 259 can only be determined by experimentation, including indexing for exocortis.
Greening
Bové saw no evidence for the presence of greening disease and its African insect vector, the psyllid Trioza erytreae, in the Kassala, Atbara and Nyala-Zalingei regions. The disease is, however, present in neighbouring Ethiopia and Kenya.
Table 53 indicates the average maximum and minimum daily temperatures for each month in various locations in Ethiopia, Kenya and the Sudan. It is evident that the temperatures for various regions of the Sudan (Atbara, Dongola, El Fasher, Juba, Kassala, Khartoum) are far higher than those of regions in Ethiopia (Addis Ababa, Asmara) or Kenya (Nairobi) where greening disease and T. erytreae exist. The cooler climate in these regions of Ethiopia and Kenya is due to their relatively high elevation. The cool climate of the highlands of Ethiopia and Kenya is favourable to the multiplication of the psyllid and to the symptom expression of the disease. The climate of the Sudan is unfavourable.
TABLE 53 Average maximum and minimum daily temperature (°C)
Map 17 on p. 296 shows the greening-affected regions of Ethiopia and Somalia. Comparison of the region of Elaboret in Ethiopia (area 11 on Map 17) with that of Kassala (area 17 on Map 17) in the Sudan is instructive. Elaboret, at an altitude of 1600 m, is affected by the presence of greening and its vector, while Kassala, less than 150 km away, but at an altitude of only 529 m, is unaffected.
<section>o</section>
Tristeza
Although tristeza is not spreading in the northern half of the country, it is of concern to the Sudan because practically all the trees in the country are grafted on two rootstocks sour orange and Balady lime - that will induce decline in the case of infection by CTV. Sour orange as a seedling tree is tolerant of CTV, but as a rootstock it yields a CTV-susceptible combination with scions of sweet orange, mandarin, grapefruit and others, except lemon. Balady lime, as a rootstock as well as a seedling tree, is highly susceptible to many strains of CTV.
Tristeza is a very serious disease because it is insect-transmitted. The vectors are several aphid species. Hence, for tristeza to be spread in nature, two conditions must be fulfilled: a vector must be present and a source of CTV inoculum has to be available for the vector to become infected.
Bové has examined many Balady lime trees in all the regions surveyed. In the case of CTV infection, Balady lime shows leaf vein clearing, a specific symptom, and stem pitting. None of these symptoms has been observed.
On the contrary, the lime trees were growing very well, except for some cases of phytophthora gummosis. Therefore, it seems quite clear that at the time of the survey (1986) natural spread of CTV was probably not occurring, or at least not on a large scale. There are probably several reasons for this fairly satisfactory situation. Toxoptera citricida, the tropical citrus aphid and the most efficient CTV vector, is probably not present in the Sudan. Childs (1964), Krezdorn (1983) and Bové in his 1986 survey saw no evidence of it. Aphis gossypii, the cotton aphid, is present in the Sudan, but it transmits only certain strains of CTV efficiently. Sources of CTV inoculum on which aphids become viruliferous are CTV-infected citrus trees. Bové did not come across trees that might have been infected by CTV. However, Childs (1964) mentions a few suspicious cases. In Shendi (Northern Province), eight-year-old navel sweet orange trees (budwood from Egypt) on Balady lime rootstock were
severely stunted and had severe wood pitting on the lime rootstock. In Kassala, two grapefruit trees showed fairly strong wood pitting, though, according to Bové, these trees were probably affected by Kassala disease rather than tristeza. ELISA for CTV on budwood collected on similar trees by Bové has given negative results. At the Gezira station, Childs also observed wood pitting on sour orange rootstocks of Balady sweet orange; mild wood pitting was also seen on the orange top. These symptoms suggest gummy bark of sweet orange but not tristeza, as CTV does not produce wood pitting on sour orange (nor on most sweet orange varieties). Krezdorn (1983) mentions a stunted navel orange tree on sour orange at the Hudeiba station. In none of these cases has it been shown unambiguously that CTV infection was a fact. However, this does not mean that CTV-infected trees do not exist in the Sudan. It should be remembered that sweet orange varieties were imported many years ago from
Kenya, where tristeza is endemic.
Finally, one has to be aware of strains of CTV which are symptomless in Balady lime (Bové et al., 1988). Detection of such CTV strains is only possible through ELISA.
Conclusions and recommendations
Virus and virus-like diseases
Symptoms of the following diseases were seen on Balady sweet orange trees on sour orange rootstock: gummy bark, psorosis young leaf symptoms, concave gum-blind pocket, scaly bark psorosis, popcorn and stubborn. Many of the trees are probably also infected by cachexia and exocortis, of which these trees (sweet orange on sour orange) are symptomless carriers.
A high percentage of Balady mandarin trees show severe to very severe symptoms of cachexia. They are probably also infected by exocortis, but show no symptoms, as mandarin trees on sour orange are symptomless carriers of the exocortis pathogen.
Foster pink grapefruit trees, when grafted on susceptible rootstocks (see Table 52), show symptoms of cachexia and exocortis. They were also found to be affected by a disease not reported until now: Kassala disease or bark gumming.
These results show that the commercial citrus varieties grown in the Sudan are heavily infected by infectious virus and virus-like diseases. This is not surprising as these varieties are old lines, known to be often infected by virus and virus-like pathogens. Indeed, the old mother trees in the government nurseries at Kassala and Nyala were found to be infected with gummy bark on sweet orange, cachexia on mandarin and bark gumming on grapefruit. Progeny budwood from these mother trees is bound to be infected too.
Control of the virus and virus-like diseases is through the use of virus-free, certified budwood. In the case of the insect-transmitted diseases of tristeza, stubborn and greening, control also involves knowledge of the nature, biology and ecology of the vectors. For tristeza, studies must be made to establish whether T. citricida is really absent in the Sudan and, if not, the geographical distribution of the aphid must be determined, especially as it is reported to be present in Ethiopia and known to be widespread in Kenya. For stubborn, a survey is needed to search for, and, if found, to establish the distribution of, the two leafhoppers, N. haematoceps and N. tenellus, which are known vectors of the disease. This is important, in the light of the knowledge that they are present in Egypt. The African vector of greening, T. erytreae, is probably unable to survive in the hot climate of the Sudan.
Fungal diseases
Phytophthora gummosis is essentially due to inadequate horticultural practices, with trees budded too low or planted too deep. Control of the disease is through good horticultural practices. Trees should be planted on a heap of soil with the crown above soil level, not below. The scion bud should be grafted at about 15-20 cm above the crown of the seedling rootstock. Flood irrigation water should be prevented from reaching the trunk, if necessary, by building soil levees around the trees (see drawings on p. 79).
Rio Grande gummosis is a serious disease in the Sudan. Prevention is the only control measure. Pruning should be reduced to a minimum and only small branches with a diameter of less than 25 mm should be cut. Pruning cuts should be disinfected and, when dry, covered with wound dressing or asphalt. In California, carbolineum with 2 percent phenols has been recommended as a disinfectant for pruning wounds and, for final coating on the disinfected wood, low melting-point asphalt mixed with an equal quantity of carbolineum. Heat and frost-injured areas are also points of entry for the Rio Grande gummosis agent. Obviously only heat injuries need be considered in the Sudan. Whitewashing of trunks and branches that might become exposed to sun (after heavy pruning) should be carried out with a zinc-copper-lime mix.
Greening and tristeza: remarks on rootstocks
Greening is likely to be absent from the Sudan, owing to the hot climate.
There may be a few tristeza-infected trees in the Sudan, but no insect transmission or spread of the tristeza virus could be detected as of November 19X6. This favourable situation may change sooner or later. For instance, in Spain, serious spread of tristeza started in 1956, following a severe frost, in trees that had been introduced in the 1930s. In the Sudan, most commercial trees are on sour orange, while some are on Balady lime rootstock. The latter should no longer be used for several reasons, including susceptibility to tristeza. Commercial citrus species or varieties (except lemon) on sour orange rootstock are susceptible to most strains of CTV. At this stage, however, it seems unwise to try to replace sour orange by tristeza-tolerant rootstocks for the following reasons: there seems to be no insect transmission of CTV; insufficient or no certified budwood of adequate citrus species is available; the nature of any replacement rootstock to be used instead of sour
orange has yet to be determined; not enough experience with new rootstocks has been obtained; and sour orange is tolerant of cachexia and exocortis. Thus it seems wise to continue to use sour orange for the time being, provided that the following steps are taken. First, establish facilities for in-country detection of CTV using ELISA, as this is the tool required to monitor the situation and it must be available in the Sudan at any time; second, try out new rootstocks with certified budwood; and, third, keep the experiments to a reasonable size (see below).
Additional remarks
A large collection of certified, virus-free citrus species and varieties was imported from California between 1967 and 1970 (see Table 50). Bové saw none of these selections in commercial orchards. The orchards harbouring this collection in Hudeiba and Nyertete are neglected, suffering from lack of water and lack of care. Non-certified citrus lines have been planted next to certified ones and this may have enabled mechanical transmission of the viroids of exocortis and cachexia to previously virus-free trees. The 1967-70 citrus programme was probably too large and ambitious in view of the facilities and human resources available, and this mistake should not be repeated if new introductions are to be made, with any new project being kept as simple and small as possible.
An appropriate strategy at this stage would be to introduce a limited number of certified citrus species and varieties from California, Spain or France (Corsica), using any information gained from the 1967-70 introductions when choosing the varieties most appropriate to the Sudan. Grapefruit and lime (Balady or even Persian) are performing well in the Sudan; mid-season or late sweet orange varieties (but not navel oranges) are also doing well. Certain mandarins are delicious. The Sudanese citrus horticulturists should have no difficulty in making the selection.
At the time of writing (1986) the orchards planted in Hudeiba and Nyertete in 1967-70 with certified budwood have to be eradicated, for the reasons indicated above. A new programme will be started, but the Sudan cannot afford to start new programmes every 20 years without having gained any benefit from previous ones. Continuity is a must, and the younger scientists must overlap with the more experienced ones and continue the work of their predecessors. In this way, the "generation gap" from which the Sudanese Citrus Programme seems to suffer today can be prevented.
Bibliography
Bové, C., Vogel, R., Albertini, D. & Bové, J.M. 1988. Discovery of strain of tristeza virus (K) inducing no symptoms in Mexican lime. In Proc. 10th Conf: IOCV, p. 14-16. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Childs, J.F.L. 1964. Observations on virus and other diseases of citrus in Sudan. (unpublished report)
Garnier, M., Danel, N. & Bové, J.M. 1984. The greening organism is a Gram-negative bacterium. In Proc. 9th Conf IOCV, p. 115-124. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Godfrey, G.H. 1946. Infectious wood necrosis and gummosis of citrus. Proc. Lower Rio Grande Val. Citrus Inst., 1: 66-70.
Khairy, M.M.A., Mahgoub, B. & El Hage, A.G. 1969. Citrus culture in the Northern Province of the Sudan: survey of cultivated citrus varieties for local budwood selection. (unpublished report)
Krezdorn, A.H. 1983. Report of visit to Sudan to review fruit tree research program and related factors. WSARP Publication, No. 17, May 1983.
Pratt, R.M. 1958. Florida guide to citrus insects, diseases and nutritional disorders in color. Gainesville, Agric. Exp. Sta.
Rossetti, V. & Salibe, A.A. 1965. Incidence of different types of psorosis in citrus varieties in the State of Sao Paulo. In Proc. 3rd Conf: IOCV, p. 150-153. Gainesville, Univ. Fla. Press.
Saglio, P., Lhospital, M., Laflèche, D., Dupont, G., Bové, J.M., Tully, J.G. & Freundt, E.A. 1973. Spiroplasma citri gen. and sp. nov.: a mycoplasma-like organism associated with stubborn disease of citrus. Int. J. Syst. Bacteriol., 23: 181-204.
Salibe, A.A. & Moreira, S. 1965. Tahiti lime bark disease is caused by exocortis virus. In Proc. 3rd Conf. IOCV, p. 143-147. Gainesville, Univ. Fla. Press.
Chapter 21: The Syrian Arab Republic
Virus and virus-like diseases
Conclusion
Bibliography
Citriculture has flourished in the Syrian Arab Republic for centuries and occupies an important position among crops grown commercially in the country. Plantings are primarily along the Mediterranean coast (see Map 3, p. 71), which has a mild climate. Citrus fruits are highly appreciated by the Syrian people and, in spite of the fairly large local production, additional imports are made from neighbouring countries to meet consumer demand.
The total plantings of citrus in Syria were estimated at around I 000 ha in 1959. Since then, new orchards have been planted and the total area is now nearly 8 000 ha. Plantings could be further expanded, provided the water supply is increased through irrigation projects.
Production of citrus fruit could be increased, without expanding the growing area a great deal, by using modern cultural techniques in existing orchards and healthy, genetically superior propagative material in new plantings. Average yield has already shown an increase in recent years as a result of modern production methods, such as balanced fertilization, better irrigation, appropriate pruning and efficient pest-control measures. However, large production increases in the older orchards would be difficult to achieve, not only because unselected budlings were used in the plantings, but chiefly because virus and virus-like diseases are widespread. Also, older orchards are closely spaced and not uniform.
Citrus growers in Syria have been using the same propagative material for generations to establish their orchards. This has resulted in a decrease in the vigour and productive capacity of trees, owing to the ageing of clones and to infection by debilitating pathogenic organisms. Many orchards in Syria have trees affected by infectious agents, such as psorosis, stubborn, cachexia-xyloporosis, gummy bark and other pathogens causing tree deterioration. The production and selection of genetically superior, healthy material and its multiplication for use in new orchards would result in more vigorous trees with a higher productive capacity.
Some destructive diseases affecting citrus trees in certain areas of the world, such as tristeza, greening and blight, apparently do not occur in Syria. Tristeza, a virus disease, has caused considerable tree death in South America and the United States of America, and now threatens all Mediterranean countries whose citrus industries are based on the sour orange rootstock. Greening, a disease induced by a phloem-restricted bacterium, is spreading in the Southeast Asia region and in South Africa, causing extensive tree decline. It has now reached the Arabian Peninsula and, it is feared, may also reach the Mediterranean basin. Both the tristeza and greening pathogens have efficient insect vectors.
Blight, or young tree decline (of unknown cause), is destroying trees in Argentina, Brazil, the United States of America (Florida), Uruguay and a few other countries. It is suspected to be of viral origin. Proper action should be taken to prevent the introduction of these and other destructive diseases into the flourishing citrus areas of Syria.
Virus and virus-like diseases
Stubborn disease is not included here. In view of the extensive work devoted to stubborn and its transmission in Syria, a special chapter has been prepared on it - Chapter 7.
Diseases inducing psorosis young leaf symptoms
Psorosis young leaf symptoms (see Figs 91 to 96) are associated with various diseases, and are frequently observed throughout the citrus orchards of Syria (Fig. 275).
Scaly bark psorosis (psorosis A). Salibe found no psorosis symptoms in orange orchards, but saw severe scaling in a high percentage of trees in one orchard of Balady mandarin. Bové also noted severe psorosis A symptoms on Mandalina mandarin trees (Fig. 276).
Concave gum-blind pocket. Typical symptoms of the disease were seen by Bové on scions of Washington navel sweet orange at Meterkie (Figs 277 and 278); Balady sweet orange (these trees also had symptoms of gummy bark and cristacortis) and Mandalina mandarin (these trees also had symptoms of cachexia) at Ugarit; and satsuma and Clementine (these trees also had cachexia symptoms) at Mamlaka.
Cristacortis. Bové observed cristacortis symptoms on both the scion and rootstocks of Balady sweet orange trees on sour orange (Hourie orchard, Ugarit). The sweet orange scions also showed gummy bark and concave gum symptoms. Cristacortis and cachexia symptoms were seen on Clementine trees on sour orange at Ashrafie (Figs 280 and 281), on Algerian Clementine trees on sour orange rootstock at the Tartus Centre of Agriculture, and on Mandalina mandarin trees on sour orange at Ashrafie (Figs 282 to 284). On the latter, the cachexia bark-gumming was mild, but the cristacortis stem pitting was severe, not only at the bud-union line (Fig. 283) but also higher up on the trunk (Fig. 284).
Impietratura. Bové observed severe symptoms of impietratura on Washington navel sweet orange at Mamlaka, grapefruits at Besnada (Fig. 279) and Mandalina mandarins at Hmaymim.
Viroid and viroid-like diseases
Cachexia. Salibe observed symptoms of cachexia on Balady mandarin and Clementine trees. Bové also noted cachexia symptoms on many Balady mandarin scions at El Annadeh (Sidawi orchard), Ashrafie and Besnada (Shreita orchard) (Figs 273 and 274); on Mandalina mandarin scions at Ugarit (sib Vitali orchard) and Ashrafie (Figs 282 to 284); on Clementine scions at Ashrafie (Figs 280 and 281) and Mamlaka; and on the C. macrophylla rootstocks of declining lemon trees at Jable (Figs 56 and 57). Some of the trees showing cachexia symptoms were also affected by cristacortis (Figs 280 to 284), concave gum, or both.
Gummy bark. Bové observed very severe symptoms of gummy bark on Balady sweet orange trees on sour orange at Latakia (Awarnia orchard) (Fig. 66) and Ugarit (Hourie orchard). The trees at Ugarit also showed cristacortis symptoms.
Exacortis. Salibe noted typical symptoms of exocortis on the Rangpur lime rootstocks of four-year-old Fortuna mandarin trees in the El Annadeh Government nursery. Some citron plants of a local variety also showed stunting and yellow blotches on branches, which are characteristic of exocortis. Bové observed exocortis symptoms on all the citrange rootstocks of sweet orange trees in certain rows of the Haroun orchard at Tartus, while trees in other rows were free of symptoms. It was found that the trees with exocortis symptoms were propagated from a local old-line mother tree, while the trees without symptoms were budded with certified virus-free plant material from Corsica. Since the exocortis viroid is mechanically transmissible by tools such as pruning knives or scissors, it is to be expected that some of the exocortis-free trees will become infected with the viroid. The old-line mother tree showed no symptoms of exocortis even though it was infected with the viroid, because
both the sweet orange scion and the sour orange rootstock are tolerant of exocortis. Infection is revealed by grafting buds of the infected (but symptomless) tree on susceptible citrange rootstocks. In Syria many sweet orange, mandarin, grapefruit and lemon trees on sour orange are tolerant of exocortis, but are probably infected with the viroid. Similarly, sweet orange, grapefruit and lemon trees (but not mandarin trees) on sour orange are tolerant of cachexia, and may well be infected with the viroid.
Stem pitting of Citrus volkameriana rootstocks: an unidentified disorder
In 1979 Bové was shown, at the Citrus Experiment Station in Jable, stunted, yellowish mandarin trees on C. volkameriana. The rootstocks showed severe stem pitting and wood staining (Fig. 293). Seedling trees of C. volkameriana, on which a mandarin bud has been grafted but stayed dormant, showed similar symptoms.
Bové found the same symptom on C. volkameriana rootstocks of lemon trees at the Tartus Centre of Agriculture (Fig. 294). Uninoculated C. volkameriana seedling trees showed no symptoms. The cause of the disorder remains unknown. Whether it is related to the agent inducing bud-union crease on Parson's Special mandarin grafted on C. volkameriana (Vogel and Bové, 1988) remains to be seen. It has been pointed out that C. volkameriana could be susceptible to cachexia. Whether the disorder in question is cachexia or not can only be determined by experimentation.
Fungal diseases
Mal secco. This is widespread throughout the lemon orchards of Syria (see Figs 232 to 235) and causes severe damage. Control lies in the use of more tolerant or resistant lemon varieties such as Interdonato, Quattrocchi and Santa Teresa. An important collection of lemon cultivars affected by mal secco is at Siano Experiment Station near Jable and should yield interesting information regarding cultivar tolerance of or susceptibility to mal secco.
Phytopithora gummosis. This is not an important problem in Syria, where rootstock seedlings are grafted high enough and trees are planted with bud-unions well above soil level so as to avoid infection of the susceptible scions by spores of soil-borne Phytophthora spp.
Autumn blast
Symptoms of autumn blast (see Figs 252 to 254) were seen by Bové on Washington navel sweet orange trees at Bestan-AI Bacha (Al Eskif orchard).
Diseases not present in Syria
Tristeza, greening and citrus canker have not been detected in Syria. The two psyllid vectors of greening and the most efficient aphid vector of tristeza, Toxoptera citricida, are not present in the Mediterranean basin. In Israel, Aphis gossypii has been found to be an efficient vector of certain strains of tristeza virus. In spite of an eradication programme, tristeza could not be controlled in Israel, and in certain areas (south of Tel Aviv) the virus has swept through the orchards as badly as in South America. The tristeza situation in Israel is a threat to all its neighbouring countries.
Conclusion
The situation regarding virus and virus-like diseases of citrus in Syria reflects the general situation in the Mediterranean citrus-growing countries. As most trees are propagated from old-line mother trees, they show the usual symptoms: cachexia on mandarin trees, psorosis A and gummy bark on sweet orange, impietratura on grapefruit and exocortis on susceptible rootstocks. In many cases, several diseases were found on the same trees: cachexia with cristacortis or concave gum on mandarin trees; and gummy bark and cristacortis with or without concave gum on sweet orange trees. The exocortis viroid is probably also present in several of these trees.
The need for virus-free, certified budwood has long been recognized in Syria. The FAO nursery at El Annadeh was set up in 1978 to satisfy this need. Unfortunately, the sweet orange and grapefruit mother tree blocks became heavily infected with Spiroplasma citri, the causal agent of stubborn disease, as a result of natural transmission of the spiroplasma.
Chapter 7, on stubborn and its transmission in Syria, describes the work that was carried out on the problem by the Bordeaux group and Syrian colleagues from 1981 to 1986 in Syria. This work, supported by FAO and the French Ministry of Foreign Affairs, resulted in the identification of the leafhopper Neoaliturus haematoceps (see Fig. 34) as the vector of S. citri in Syria and other Mediterranean and Near East countries, and the identification of the preferred host plant of the leafhopper, namely Salsola kali (Chenopodiaceae) (see Figs 36, 170 to 174 and 322). The presence of this weed in and around the FAO nursery (see Fig. 174) explains the high rates of S. citri transmission found in the sweet orange and grapefruit mother tree blocks.
By 1986, practically all the trees in these blocks had been indexed for stubborn. The trees found infected were pulled out; those free of S. citri were carefully marked. The chances that they will become reinfected by S. citri are small, as they were seven years old in 1986, and it is now known that natural transmission of S. citri usually occurs only on young trees.
For these reasons, and in spite of the early stubborn problem, in 1986-87 the FAO nursery offered the best plant material available in Syria. Regarding nursery trees, Bové recommended that they be produced in leafhopper-free tunnels (Fig. 290) or that the nursery be kept clean of the primary host of the leafhopper, the weed S. kali.
Bibliography
Vogel, R. & Bové, J.M. 1988. Graft transmission from kumquat of an agent inducing bud-union crease in Parson's Special mandarin grafted on Volkamer lemon rootstock. In Proc. 10th Conf: IOCV, p. 367-369. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Note: See also Bibliography, Chapter 7, p. 109.
Chapter 22: Tunisia
Citrus growing in Tunisia
Virus and virus-like diseases
Other observations
Recommendations
Bibliography
Citrus fruits are highly appreciated in Tunisia and are practically the only fresh fruits available in large quantities during the winter and spring seasons. Average annual per caput consumption of citrus fruit is nearly 30 kg, placing Tunisia in the same category of high citrus consumption as the highly industrialized countries.
Tunisia produces citrus for local consumption and also for export. Oranges are of fine, high quality and increasing volumes are being exported every year. So citrus fruits are becoming a major source of foreign revenue, among other exports, the most important of which are olive oil, wine, grains, phosphates, petroleum and iron ore. In 1983/84, exports of citrus amounted to about 32 000 tonnes out of a total production estimated at around 220 000 tonnes. Increases in output may be expected, provided that orchard productivity is increased and new plantings are made.
Total citrus plantations at present cover 14 500 ha, with average yields ranging from 12 to 15 tonnes per hectare. This is a fairly modest productivity level. A good yield is considered to be around 50 tonnes per hectare. In a number of citrus areas, such as Florida, Sao Paulo (Brazil) and some others, the average yield of adult orchards ranges from 30 to 35 tonnes per hectare, although some orchards are known to produce higher yields, from 50 or 60 up to 80 or 90 tonnes per hectare. Individual trees (40-70 years old) with exceptionally good health are known to produce up to 1 200 kg of fruit per year. The cost of production obviously decreases as the level of productivity rises.
Productivity of citrus orchards in Tunisia is said to have increased in the last few years as a result of improved cultural practices and greater availability of water for irrigation. High crop yields result from a number of interrelated factors, among which the most important are: appropriate and balanced fertilization, good soil management, proper irrigation, a modern pest control programme and, unquestionably, the use of superior, healthy propagation material when establishing the orchards. The bud-eye gives the young citrus tree its horticultural and genetic characteristics; it establishes the potential vigour and productivity and is all-important in the spread or control of virus and virus-like diseases. There is as yet no known method of curing orchard trees of virus infection, and diseased trees are poor bearers that die early. The use of bud-eyes only from healthy mother trees is the only possible control against virus and virus-like diseases.
Citrus growing in Tunisia
Citrus plantings in Tunisia, as in most other countries in North Africa, are concentrated in regions near the Mediterranean coast, which enjoy a mild climate and where rainfall is higher. The total area of citrus orchards in
Tunisia is estimated at around 14 500 ha, of which the major part (11 000 ha) is in the Cap Bon area. The regional distribution of orchards is as follows: Nabeul, 11 000 ha; Tunis, Ariana and Ben Arous, 1 800 ha; Bizerte, 800 ha; Jendouba, 250 ha; Beja, 150 ha; Kairouan, 200 ha; and others, 300 ha (Groupement Interprofessionel des Agrumes et des Fruits [GIAF], 1976).
The average area of each citrus property is only 1.87 ha for private owners and 9.95 ha for government-owned farms. State farms, 111 in number, represent 1 103 ha or about 8 percent of the citrus area. Private farms number about 6 300.
According to the results of a survey conducted in 1975, there were 3 271 000 citrus trees in Tunisia. Varieties grown were: Maltaise orange (53 percent); Clementine mandarin (16 percent); acidless orange (7 percent); lemons (6 percent); mandarins (Willowleaf and Wilking) (6 percent); navel orange (Thompson and Washington navel) (2 percent); Valencia late orange (2.5 percent); sour orange (3.5 percent); and other varieties (2.5 percent).
New citrus plantings made after the official survey (GIAF, 1976) are estimated to have included about 300 000 trees, equivalent to about 8 ha. The primary limitation preventing expansion is lack of water for irrigation. Density of planting is around 270 trees per hectare, the spacing being normally 6 x 6 m. However, higher densities are frequent, up to 400 trees per hectare.
Table 54 shows fruit production for the four seasons from 1980-84, and estimates for 1984/85, according to data supplied to the consultant by the Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique de Tunisie (INRAT).
Exports are mainly to France and practically only of orange varieties, predominantly Maltaise orange. Amounts exported are shown in Table 55. Export normally starts in January each year, and fruits exported are of an exceptionally high quality.
Clementine mandarin is grown only for local consumption and the season starts as early as November. Because orchards are small and generally contain mixed varieties, it is normal to find fruits with one, two or more seeds. This variety is said to have been discovered in Algeria in 1902, in an orphanage of a priest, Father Clement. It was promoted by Trabut, and is believed to be a natural hybrid of a common mandarin (Willowleaf) and sour orange. The best clones of Clementine mandarin grown are named Cassar and Cadoux.
The orange named Maltaise Demi-Sanguine, also known as Portugaise Demi-Sanguine, is the variety most widely grown in Tunisia. It is round to oblong in shape and is normally seedless and of incomparable quality. Nucellar clones are available for propagation. Trees have some characteristics which resemble Shamouti or Palestine Jaffa oranges and the Pera orange of Brazil. However, when ripe, the fruits have a strong orange colour, almost red peel and some blood colour in the pulp. Some other selected clones of Maltaise Demi-Sanguine orange are known: early Maltaise or Boukhobza-Sakesly orange, late Maltaise or Maltaise Ballerin, and also an acidless clone. The origin of the Maltaise Demi-Sanguine orange is unknown.
Other varieties grown include Washington and Thompson navel oranges (Frost nucellar clones introduced from California); Willow-leaf mandarin, locally known as Youssef Effendi or common mandarin; Wilking mandarin (a hybrid King mandarin x Willowleaf mandarin, made by Frost in California); Eureka lemon; Valencia late orange (nucellar from California); and Marsh seedless grapefruit (INRAT, 1981). Also grown is an acidless orange, known locally as Meski orange.
TABLE 54 Citrus production in Tunisia
Season Maltaise orange Clementines Mandarins Lemons Others Total
(tonnes)
TABLE 55 Tunisian exports of citrus
Season 1981/2 1982/3 1983/4 1984/5
(tonnes)
Exports 18144 14958 31613 30000
Sour orange, locally named Bigaradier, is the rootstock commonly used in the country. Also used as rootstock, but on a very limited scale, are Troyer citrange and Cleopatra mandarin.
The area where citrus is grown in Tunisia has a rainfall ranging from 300 to 500 mm per year. Artificial irrigation is used to supplement this low rainfall in most orchards. Because of limited availability of water for irrigation, growers are being urged to change their irrigation systems from flow to drip irrigation. Some problems of salinization have occurred in certain areas.
The topography of the citrus-growing areas is flat and exceptionally good, without erosion problems. Soil is generally sandy and alkaline. According to the 1975 survey (GIAF, 1976), the use of fertilization, by surface area, in citrus orchards was: fertilization well balanced 29 percent; fertilization plus ammonium nitrate - 49 percent; fertilization not balanced -18 percent; and not fertilized - 4 percent.
A positive correlation generally occurs between water deficiency and nutritional deficiency, one factor inducing the other. A programme for leaf analysis, carried out jointly by GIAF and INRAT and started in 1976/77, has shown that nitrogen is lacking in 25 percent of cases, phosphorus in 35 percent and potash in 65 percent. Deficiency of minor elements (oligo-elements), mainly zinc and manganese, was found in more than 80 percent of all leaf samples analysed.
Pruning of trees is a common practice in all orchards and, while beneficial in certain cases, it is exaggerated in most orchards.
Health problems observed in citrus orchards by local specialists are fungal diseases (phytophthora root and trunk rot caused by soil-borne Phytophthora spp., mal secco disease caused by Phoma tracheiphila, and Fusarium spp.); bacterial disease (caused by Phytomonas syringae); virus diseases (psorosis and cachexia); mycoplasmal disease (stubborn); and insect and mite problems (fruit-flies, scales, aphids and mites).
<section>p</section>
Virus and virus-like diseases
Virus and mycoplasma diseases are known to have been affecting citrus trees in Tunisia for more than 20 years. The incidence of stubborn, psorosis, cachexia-xyloporosis and exocortis diseases in various citrus trees was reported by Chapot (1959) and Jamoussi (1961, 1966). These problems are widespread in most Mediterranean countries, as reported by Bové (1966). They are recognized as a major factor preventing high crop yield and an intensive effort is being made towards production, maintenance and distribution to growers of healthy citrus-planting material in many areas of the basin. However, it will take many years to replace gradually disease-affected trees in the orchards. During his visit to Tunisia, Salibe observed symptoms of virus diseases in several orchards of the Cap Bon region and also learnt about the programme under way to eradicate these diseases from the country.
It should be pointed out that field observations for determining the incidence of virus diseases are necessarily limited to the presence of conspicuous symptoms in susceptible hosts. Those with experience can easily detect symptoms indicative of virus diseases. These include tree stunting; malformation of branches, leaves and fruits; vein clearing, ringspots and chlorosis of various types in leaves; bark scaling; stem and trunk pitting; and gumming. Some viruses induce specific and reliable diagnostic symptoms in mature trees and can be easily detected during field inspections. This is, however, not always true and many scion-rootstock combinations can harbour viruses without exhibiting specific symptoms, thus acting as symptomless carriers. Detection of viruses in these trees requires appropriate indexing, which may include greenhouse and laboratory tests. Moreover, extensive losses may result to growers when budwood taken from apparently healthy trees is propagated on
rootstocks other than those of the original mother trees, thus allowing the manifestation of latent viruses or bud-union incompatibilities.
It has become evident that appropriate indexing, using modern techniques, should be carried out to determine the exact extent and status of virus and virus-like diseases in the citrus trees of the country.
Scaly bark psorosis (psorosis A) and concave gum-blind pocket
Psorosis A has a worldwide distribution and is found in most Mediterranean orchards. It has a long incubation period and usually requires a period of about 12 years or more to produce bark lesions, which are followed by slow tree deterioration. Bark scaling rarely occurs before a tree is six years old and symptoms may take many years to appear, sometimes up to 30 or 40 years.
Psorosis A bark scaling is said to be widespread in the orange orchards of Tunisia. Salibe observed typical bark scaling caused by psorosis in Maltaise orange trees of about 50 years old. Since this disease has no known insect vectors and is not normally spread by mechanical means, it must have come from the budwood used for the propagation of the trees.
Trunk malformations, indicative of the presence of concave gum-blind pocket, were also encountered in trees of Maltaise orange and Youssef Effendi mandarin. Careful inspection of the leaves of young shoots of many trees of various citrus varieties revealed no psorosis young leaf symptoms.
Elimination of psorosis virus from new plantings depends simply on using only budwood from healthy mother trees when propagating new trees. Nucellar clones of Maltaise Demi-Sanguine and healthy old-line clones of other varieties have been selected, and use of these should exclude the problem in new orchards. Attention should be paid to seed transmission of psorosis virus, found to occur in certain rootstock types (trifoliate and citranges).
Cachexia-xyloporosis
Cachexia-xyloporosis is widespread in the mandarin orchards of the Mediterranean basin, and the plantations of Cap Bon are no exception. Salibe observed typical symptoms of the disease in the trunk of trees of Clementine and Youssef Effendi mandarins, above the bud-union. Apparently, in the same orchard, trees with and without cachexia coexist, implying that more than one clone of these varieties was used in the formation of the orchards. The incidence of this disease in the orange and lemon orchards will require proper indexing, since they are symptomless carriers.
The use of cachexia-free budwood is the recommended method for excluding this disease from future plantations.
Stubborn
Stubborn was said to be prevalent in the citrus orchards of Tunisia by both Chapot (1959) and Jamoussi (1966), and this was corroborated by information provided by local technicians. However, Salibe, during his visit to the citrus-growing areas of Cap Bon, did not find a single tree with typical symptoms of stubborn. Some trees thought to be affected by stubborn were considered by him to be abnormal owing to mutation, and not diseased. Inverse colouring, considered a symptom of stubborn, is a normal situation occurring in practically all fruits of all varieties in Tunisia. Some trees of Washington navel orange in Cap Bon and one in Ain Ben Mourra displayed some abnormalities which could be a mild form of stubborn. Indexing of these trees for stubborn was recommended.
Salibe, during his recent visits to citrus areas of 'Mediterranean countries, observed trees with typical symptoms of severe stubborn in Cyprus, Egypt, Jordan and the Syrian Arab Republic, but not in the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Morocco or Tunisia. It is possible that a more exhaustive survey would reveal the presence of stubborn in these countries as well. Indeed, as shown by Chapot, Cassin,
Nhami, Bové and others, stubborn is widespread in Morocco. In the Tadla area of Morocco, whole orchards have been removed because of stubborn. Furthermore, Spiroplasma citri has been isolated from many trees, and natural transmission of the spiroplasma occurs (see also Chapters 7 and 15).
Exocortis
Symptoms of exocortis include stunting of trees, bark splitting and scaling of the rootstock portion. The time taken for bark scaling to appear has usually been from four to eight years on trees budded on trifoliate or Rangpur lime rootstocks. Symptoms of exocortis also appear when intolerant varieties used as scion varieties are infected. The symptoms include yellowing of the bark of young branches, splitting and limited shelling. Infected Etrog citron plants of certain very sensitive selections also develop leaf epinasty and are used as indicators of exocortis.
Since no exocortis-intolerant rootstock is used in Tunisia, no conspicuous symptoms could be expected in commercial orchards. However, on the basis of evidence obtained in most citrus-growing areas of the world, exocortis is the most widely distributed pathogen of citrus and probably infects many trees in Tunisia. It is certainly causing tree debilitation in the so-called "symptomless" carriers, but the real destructive capacity of the disease will appear only should intolerant rootstocks (such as Troyer citrange and Rangpur lime) come into use.
Indexing is urgently needed for exocortis, since it may invade the germplasm collection, recently established in the country, through the use of infected tools.
Tristeza and stem pitting
As reiterated in the chapters above, tristeza is a very destructive viral disease affecting trees of sweet orange, mandarin and grapefruit on sour orange and certain other intolerant rootstocks. It occurs in most citrus areas of the world and, to date, tristeza has destroyed about 25 million trees in South America and about 3 million trees in California. It therefore represents a tremendous threat to the citrus industry of the Mediterranean basin, one of the last areas free from the virus, where mainly intolerant scion-rootstock combinations are used. Spain is the first Mediterranean country where the pathogen has become established, and extensive spread of tristeza has occurred, more exactly in the region of Alcira-Carcagente-Carlera in the district of Valencia, starting in 1957. More recently, tristeza was suddenly discovered in Israel and an identification and suppression programme was immediately launched (Raccah et al., 1976; Bar-Joseph et al., 1980), but has apparently
failed.
Clearly the early cases of tristeza disease found in the citrus areas of the Mediterranean basin can be traced back to the introduction of infected budwood from abroad. All countries that have introduced Meyer lemon trees have also introduced tristeza, and these include Algeria, Israel, Italy, Morocco and Tunisia (Bové, 1966). Other varieties imported from Australia, Japan, South Africa and the United States of America have also been reported to have introduced tristeza into Mediterranean countries.
Rebour in 1950, as mentioned by Bové (1966), reported the occurrence of tristeza in Meyer lemon in Tunisia. Possibly the eradication of this variety from the country eliminated all possible sources of the tristeza virus.
Salibe found no abnormal trees with symptoms resembling those of tristeza during his visit to citrus areas of Tunisia. However, the extensive use of sour orange as rootstock in the orchards makes them susceptible to massive destruction should tristeza and its vector be introduced into the country. A list of insects captured by entomologists of INRAT included Myzus persicae, Aphis citricola, Aphis gossypii and Aphis fabae among other aphids which occur in Tunisia.
Other virus and virus-like diseases
Gummy bark of sweet orange, cristacortis, impietratura and rumple are diseases that are present in many citrus-growing areas of the Mediterranean basin. Symptoms of these diseases were not seen by Salibe during his visit to Tunisia. A more careful inspection may reveal the presence of one or more of these problems in citrus trees of the Cap Bon area.
Other virus and virus-like diseases of citrus also not observed during the visit were greening, vein-enation woody gall, satsuma dwarf, yellow vein, multiple sprouting, citrus tatter-leaf, citrange stunt, leaf curl, bud-union crease and gum pocket.
Local specialists should be familiar with the symptoms of these diseases so that they can be immediately identified and eradicated should they appear in the country.
Other disease problems
Three diseases, not of a viral nature, were brought to the attention of Salibe during his visit to the citrus orchards of the Cap Bon area. They were the mal secco disease of lemon caused by the fungus P. tracheiphila
Petri; the trunk rot of many trees induced by Phytophthora spp.; and a decline with many symptoms resembling blight but apparently associated with a Fusarium fungus.
Mal secco is causing extensive destruction of lemon orchards in many countries neighbouring Tunisia. In Cyprus, on one farm Salibe observed that Eureka lemon trees were badly affected by the disease, while some local varieties of lemon, such as one called Lapithos lemon, appeared to have good resistance. Introduction and propagation, under strict phytosanitary supervision, of such resistant varieties was recommended as a priority if Tunisia wants to continue the production of lemons.
Other observations
The germplasm collection at Ain Ben Mourra
A block of mother plants of various fruit crops, including citrus, was established by GIAF in the region of Ain Ben Mourra. This is an isolated area as far as citrus is concerned, since there are no other orchards for many kilometres around.
There are about 500 citrus trees planted in the period 1975 to 1979. Budwood was obtained from INRAT, taken from trees confirmed to be virus-free by indexing carried out in Corsica. The orchard of citrus trees, to which Salibe made a one-day visit, is divided into five main blocks.
* Block 1 comprises:
* 34 trees of Clementine mandarin, selection Cassar, budded on Troyer citrange rootstock;
* 95 trees of Clementine mandarin, selection Cadoux, budded on sour orange rootstock;
* 126 nucellar clone trees of Maltaise Demi-Sanguine orange;
* 140 trees of Maltaise Blonde orange of an old line;
* 19 trees of Boukhobza orange;
* 19 trees of Sanguinelli orange;
* 19 trees of Moro orange; and
* 51 trees of Clementine mandarin, selection Cadoux, planted in 1981.
* Block 2 comprises:
* 25 trees of nucellar Washington navel orange, introduced from California and planted in 1975;
* 25 trees of nucellar Valencia orange, selection Frost California; and
* 25 trees of Frost Eureka lemon.
* Block 3 comprises:
* 412 trees of Clementine mandarin, selection Cassar, on sour orange rootstock, planted in 1976.
* Block 4 comprises:
* 437 trees of Washington navel orange, with many thorny trees, and planted in 1975 at a spacing of 4 x 3 m.
* Block 5 contains smaller numbers of:
* Marsh seedless grapefruit;
* Ruby grapefruit;
* Satsuma mandarin;
* Chami orange;
* Barlerin orange;
* Salustiana orange;
* Maltaise Douce orange; and
* 250 trees of Eureka lemon.
In addition to these five blocks, there are two lines of selected seedlings for seed production, including 140 trees of sour orange and another 140 trees of Troyer citrange.
Budwood from this germplasm collection is sufficient to meet all the requirements of the country for nursery purposes. However, these trees should be reindexed every three to five years, and this is not being done. Also, no special attention is being given to disinfection of pruning tools and so exocortis contamination may be occurring. Trees of Block 5 may be carrying exocortis and other pathogens, since not all the varieties have been indexed.
Trees of some blocks show bark scaling-type popcorn in the trunk but, according to a local specialist, these symptoms resulted from a severe hailstorm.
Trees of nucellar Maltaise Demi-Sanguine were found to be very vigorous and practically without thorns. However, the fruits were observed to be slightly flat while the old line produced round to oval fruits.
Three trees of Valencia orange were found in the Washington navel orange plot in Block 2 and it was recommended that they be eliminated to avoid future mixing of budwood. Also, one tree of Washington navel orange in this same block was suspected of carrying stubborn, and was condemned.
No symptoms of any virus disease were found after careful inspection of most trees of the orchards. However, mal secco is badly affecting the Eureka lemon trees and no budwood from these trees should be used for propagation. Autumn leaf drop was observed in some trees and the abnormality was attributed to the cold mornings (7-8°C) having the effect of a localized frost.
It was strongly recommended that all trees should be reindexed as soon as possible and that all plants found to be infected with any virus or virus-like pathogen should be eliminated.
Disinfection of all pruning instruments to avoid mechanical transmission of exocortis was also recommended.
The germplasm collection at Mornag
A block of healthy mother plants was established by INRAT in Mornag (about 20 km from Tunis) in 1974. This was set up as the National Bank of Healthy Germplasm of Citrus in Tunisia. From here, budwood was taken to produce the block of mother trees of GIAF in Ain Ben Mourra. At present the orchard is partially abandoned and there is a plan to eradicate it in the near future. Trees were severely pruned about two years ago and are not receiving fertilization.
Varieties included in this orchard were Eureka lemon, Citrus limon; Bearss lime, Citrus latifolia; sweet lime, Citrus limetta; Frost Willowleaf mandarin; Hamlin orange; Azizia mandarin; Pineapple orange; Salustiana orange; Barlerin orange; Boukhobza orange; Chami orange; Clementine mandarin; Valencia orange (nucellar); Maltaise Demi-Sanguine orange (nucellar); and Maltaise Petit Pierre orange.
No virus or virus-like diseases were observed on the trees of this mother block. In the same area, one orchard of trees of about 50 years old (apparently of Maltaise orange) was visited and some trees were found to be showing bark-scaling symptoms due to the psorosis A virus.
A visit to the citrus nursery at El Gobba
A visit was made to the GIAF citrus nursery at El Gobba in Cap Bon. The nursery, previously in Sbikha, was established here in 1980, and produces around 20 000 to 50 000 budded plants annually, about half of the country's requirements. Nursery trees are budded mainly on sour orange rootstock, but also on Troyer citrange and Cleopatra mandarin. Budwood is taken from the block of mother trees in Ain Ben Mourra. Salibe was informed that the time required for producing a budded plant is about three years. Problems affecting the production of trees were discussed, mainly those related to nutrition, wind damage and virus and bud-union crease.
A plastic greenhouse is being established in this nursery and an agronomist who recently underwent training in Morocco is working to improve plant production.
The bacterium Pseudomonas syringae was observed to be affecting young seedlings in the nursery.
The INRAT laboratories
During Salibe's stay, two visits were paid to the laboratories of INRAT in Avenue de l'Indépendence in Ariana. Visits included the modern virology laboratory, where ELISA tests are made for several pathogens, the laboratory of shoot-tip grafting, the new laboratory for plant analyses and various others, including one for citrus fruit analysis.
No facilities for an indexing programme for citrus virus and mycoplasmas were shown to the consultant. The need for indexing facilities for citrus budwood certification was strongly emphasized. Training of a citrus virologist is another great need in Tunisia.
A visit to GIAF
GIAF is an organization of real importance to the development of the citrus industry in Tunisia. It provides permanent assistance to citrus growers, with an average of one agent per 1000 ha, in the various citrus locations: Menwel Bou Zelfa (2), Beni Kalled (2), Soliman (1), Grombalia (1), Bou Argoub (1), Hammamet (1), Nabeul (1), Soukra (1) and Mornag (1). Agronomists periodically visit the orchards to make recommendations regarding cultural practices, and to provide help in the acquisition of phytosanitary products and choice of equipment. GIAF produces nursery plants for citrus growers and sponsors courses for the training of qualified workers.
Every year GIAF promotes a control programme for the Mediterranean fruit-fly, Ceratitis capitata, free of charge to growers, which includes three to four spraying operations (aerial and ground applications) of the total area of citrus orchards in the country.
Other GIAF campaigns include control of aphids and scales; a foliar diagnostic service (Diagnostique Foliaire) throughout hundreds of orchards to evaluate the nutritional status of trees; the promotion of drip irrigation systems and many other campaigns.
Recommendations
Citrus trees are not native to any country of the Mediterranean basin. They were brought into the region from their centre of origin in Southeast Asia and the Malayan archipelago. Many, but not all, major pests and diseases were imported with early plant introductions. For this reason, emphasis should be placed on strict quarantine regulations to prevent further introductions of undesirable citrus parasites into the citrus orchards of Tunisia. Special attention should be given to excluding, or eradicating promptly - should they enter the country - the destructive agents of three diseases with the potential to wipe out the citrus industry of any country completely: greening, tristeza-seedling yellows and citrus canker. Citrus decline (blight in Florida, declinio in Brazil, marchitamiento in Uruguay and fruta bolita in Argentina), a disease of unknown nature - though it is thought to be caused by an infectious agent - also deserves attention to avoid its introduction into the
country.
As practically the whole of the Tunisian citrus industry is based on sour orange rootstock, this makes it extremely vulnerable to destruction by tristeza virus. This situation is identical to that of most other citrus areas of the Mediterranean basin and the Near East. Only trees of true lemon, Citrus limon (L.) Burm., on sour orange rootstock would survive the invasion of orchards by tristeza virus. In the light of available knowledge, spread of tristeza in the orchards of the region would result from:
* Introduction into the region of the very efficient tristeza vector, the black aphid Toxoptera citricida Kirk. The aphids Toxoptera aurantii, Aphis gossypii and Myzus persicae are already in the citrus orchards, and environmental conditions that favour high populations of these insects are possibly the same for the black aphid. T. citricida is spreading and has recently reached Venezuela, where considerable destruction of orchards is occurring.
* Occurrence of mutations or changes within the tristeza virus that would permit rapid diffusion of new strains by previously inefficient vectors. The severe seedling yellows-tristeza virus strain is now spreading in California, vectored by A. gossypii, and there is proof that the virus has become transmissible by this aphid following a mutation (Roistacher, 1981). Similarly, in Israel, it was shown recently that A. gossypii was transmitting tristeza at a rate averaging 40 percent (with 100 aphids in each test) when a strain named VT was used, compared with less than 5 percent with two other different isolates (Bar-Joseph and Loebenstein, 1973). The high transmission rate was attributed to an intrinsic property of the VT tristeza strain. The possibility of the spread of this strain into citrus orchards of Tunisia should also not be overlooked.
The establishment of a quarantine station should be considered of vital importance for the continued prosperity of the citrus industry. Finally, it is recommended that an identification and suppression programme for tristeza virus should be implemented in Tunisia.
Bibliography
Bar-Joseph, M. & Loebenstein, G. 1973. Effects of strain, source plant and temperature on the transmissibility of citrus tristeza virus by the melon aphid. Phytopathol., 63: 716-720.
Bar-Joseph, M., Garnsey, S.M., Gonsalves, D. & Purcifull, D.E. 1980. Detection of citrus tristeza virus. 1. Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) and SDS-immunodiffusion methods. In Proc. 8th Conf: IOCV, p. 1-8. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Bové, J.M. 1966. Citrus virus diseases in the Mediterranean area. Report presented at the meeting on Phytiatry and Phyto pharmacy, Marseilles (France), 1965, updated for the 4th Conf. IOCV. 44 pp. (mimeo)
Chapot, H. 1959. First studies on stubborn disease in citrus in some Mediterranean countries. In J.M. Wallace, ed. Citrus virus diseases, p. 109-117. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
GIAF [Groupement Interprofessionnel des Agrumes et des Fruits]. 1976. Résultats du Récensement des Agrumes de 1975. Tunis, Bull. 11 pp.
INRAT [Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique de Tunisie]. 1981. Les variétés fruitières recommandées en Tunisie. Documents Techniques No. 83. Ariana, Imprimerie Officielle, INRAT. 120 pp.
Jamoussi, B. 1961. Citrus virus diseases in Tunisia. In Proc. 2nd Conf: IOCV, p. 253255. Gainesville, Univ. Fla. Press.
Jamoussi, B. 1966. Les viroses des citrus en Tunisie et les moyens de lutte. Ann. Inst. Nat. Recherche Agric. Tunisie, 39(2): 1 -60.
Raccah, B., Loebenstein, G., Bar-Joseph, M. & Oren, Y. 1976. Transmission of tristeza by aphids prevalent on citrus, and operation of the tristeza suppression programme in Israel. In Proc. 7th Conf: IOCV, p. 47-49. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Rebour, H. 1950. Les agrumes, 3rd edition. Alger. 120 pp. (no imprint)
Roistacher, C.N. 1981. A blueprint for disaster. II. Changes in transmissibility of seedling yellows. Citrog., 67(2): 28-32.
Chapter 23: Turkey
Citrus growing in Turkey
Virus and virus-like diseases
Other disease problems
Visits to agricultural agencies
Recommendations
Bibliography
Turkey has been growing citrus fruits for centuries, nearly all destined for the local market. In more recent years the citrus industry has started to modernize its production system, with a consequent sharp increase in fruit output and a growing presence in world trade. Citrus fruits from Turkey are renowned in the European markets for their high quality, and the lemons are particularly famous. Moreover, the exceedingly high quality fruits are presented in sophisticated and attractive packaging, coming from modern packing stations.
The 1984/85 crop totalled about 1.37 million tonnes, made up of 750 000 tonnes of oranges, 350 000 tonnes of lemons, 250 000 tonnes of mandarins and 25 000 tonnes of grapefruit. Exports in recent years have amounted to approximately 130000 tonnes of lemons, 45 000 tonnes of oranges and 50 000 tonnes of mandarins, mainly satsumas. As new plantings come into bearing, total Turkish citrus production is expected to continue to grow in the near future. Domestic consumption of citrus fruits in Turkey is high and will probably absorb most of the increase in fruit output, as a result of growth in population and the rapid improvement in the population's standard of living. Export volume is also expected to expand, particularly to European markets.
Productivity of citrus orchards in Turkey is considered to be fairly low. Considering that the average production of 1.0 to 1.3 million tonnes per year comes from around 70 000 ha, fruit production ranges from 15 to 20 tonnes per hectare. This level of production, while superior to that of most other neighbouring countries in the Mediterranean area, is fairly modest when compared with that of many advanced citrus areas of the world, where the average yield of adult orchards reaches 30,40 and 50 tonnes per hectare, and, exceptionally, as much as 80 tonnes per hectare.
New plantings using selected, virus-free propagative materials are necessary to increase productivity in citrus orchards, and attempts have been made in the last two decades to produce healthy budwood for distribution to citrus growers. However, all initiatives were subsequently discontinued, and most growers are still propagating materials infected with one or more intracellular pathogens. However, a well-planned programme of production, selection and indexing for freedom from virus and virus-like pathogens of local commercial citrus varieties is being launched, but the success of the new programme will depend on the maintenance of financial support from government agencies. International agencies could also be requested to contribute to the development of this programme.
Many infectious diseases, such as psorosis, cachexia-xyloporosis, exocortis and stubborn, are known to occur in practically all citrus areas of the Mediterranean basin, including Turkey. They reduce vigour and productivity and shorten the lives of affected trees, with or without apparent symptoms. Tristeza virus is also suspected to be present in Turkey, in trees budded on trifoliate orange rootstock.
The new phytosanitary programme will certainly eliminate the pathogens that have no insect vector or are not yet present in the country. Fortunately, a number of important destructive diseases do not occur in Turkey, such as greening (induced by an intracellular bacterium and transmitted by psyllids), citrus canker (caused by the bacterium Xanthomonas campestris pv. citri), and the dreadful "blight disease", of unknown aetiology. Protection of new citrus plantations should include strict quarantine precautions to prevent the introduction of these and other diseases and their insect vectors into the country.
Citrus growing in Turkey
Citrus production is an ancient and important sector of agriculture in Turkey. An estimated 70 000 ha of fertile soil are at present under citrus orchards. The major citrus area is concentrated in the Adana-Mersin district, but many other smaller areas exist along the Mediterranean coast, of which Antalya and Izmir are among the most important. A smaller area, about 12.5 percent of all citrus, mainly dedicated to the production of satsuma mandarins, also exists along the Black Sea and Aegean Sea coastal region. Throughout the Mediterranean, winter is wet and mild and summers are hot and dry. The climate in Turkey is generally cool and damp, and frosts are common during winter months. Available data for total plantings in Turkey in 1960 and 1985 are shown in Table 56. A major percentage increase has occurred in lemon plantings, and further expansion of lemon culture is expected in the near future.
Commercial sweet orange varieties include Washington navel and other navel selections, Shamouti, Valencia and a number of local orange types, such as Trablus, Alanya and Finike. Lemon varieties include Interdonato (apparently a local selection of the Italian Interdonato lemon) and local Turkish varieties such as Lamas, Yedi Veren and Molla Mehmet. Some varieties are named Italian lemon and Cyprus lemon. Among mandarins or tangerines, the Clementine, satsuma and the local type of Willowleaf are grown. More recently some plantings of Freemont mandarin were made. Grapefruit trees are all of the Marsh seedless variety.
Major orange and lemon areas are in the Mediterranean provinces. Most oranges are produced in the areas of Mersin, Adana, Iskenderum and Antalya, and most lemons in the provinces of Antalya and Icel (Mersin area). Satsuma is the major variety grown in the Black Sea and Aegean Sea areas and is locally named Rize tangerine. It is important for the domestic markets of Istanbul and Ankara in November and December. Nearly all Turkish oranges and mandarins are consumed in the six-month period from November to May.
The lemon season starts as early as September every year for export. A technique used locally consists of storing fully wrapped packs of lemons in caves for domestic use through the summer months. As many as 500 000 boxes of these "sleeping lemons" are said to be stored every year.
TABLE 56 Total plantings in Turkey for 1960 and 1985
Species Number of trees
Oranges 5 500 000 10 300 000
Tangerines 1 400 000 6 000 000
Lemons 850 000 4 000 000
Grapefruits 250 000
Source: Burke, 1965 (for 1960 data).
Groves are generally small and closely planted and are all irrigated. Many orchards have 40- to 50-year-old trees still producing fairly good crops.
Sour orange is the main rootstock variety used in the Mediterranean citrus areas, while trifoliate orange is used as rootstock for satsuma mandarin in the Black Sea and Aegean Sea regions.
Nurseries, both private and government, produce around 300 000 new plants every year for replanting and new orchards. No certified mother trees exist in the country for use by nursery workers, and registration is carried out only for government-produced trees.
Three juice-processing plants exist in Turkey, processing both citrus and other fruits.
Major pest problems include Mediterranean fruit-fly, red scale, aphids and a number of mites. Fruit losses are mainly due to fruit-fly, which limits the harvesting season of oranges and tangerines. They do not attack lemons. Major fungal diseases are phytophthora root rot on all citrus and mal secco on lemons. Virus and virus-like diseases reported include psorosis, cachexia-xyloporosis, stubborn and possibly tristeza disease.
<section>q</section>
Virus and virus-like diseases
Virus and virus-like diseases are known to have been present in citrus trees in Turkey for more than 30 years (Chapot, 1956; Reichert, 1959; Norman, 1963; Moreira, 1965; Chapot and Bahcecioglu, 1969; Ozbeck et al., 1976). A number of attempts have been made to prevent further spread of infectious diseases into new orchards. However, they have been discontinued and disease pathogens continue to occur in the plantings. They should be considered a major factor limiting high yield and reducing growers' profits.
Virus and virus-like disorders reported in citrus trees in Turkey include psorosis in various forms, stubborn, cachexia-xyloporosis, impietratura, rumple, exocortis and possibly tristeza. Most of these diseases, except tristeza, are widespread in most areas of the Mediterranean countries, as pointed out by Bové (1966) and Salibe (1986). Since most citrus propagative material used in Turkey was probably imported from other Mediterranean countries and from North America, it must be supposed that the intracellular disease agents existing there were inadvertently introduced at the same time.
Comments are made below on some major virus and virus-like diseases and their incidence in Turkish citrus.
Scaly bark psorosis (psorosis A) and concave gum-blind pocket
Psorosis A is widespread in the citrus orchards of Turkey, causing early death of many trees and materially reducing vigour and yields. Norman (1963), during a field survey, found leaf symptoms of psorosis in the spring growth flush in trees of various sweet orange varieties including Jaffa, Balady,
Dortyol, Pineapple, Valencia, Akcay, Sanguinella Muscata and Washington navel. Psorosis was also found in varying degrees in Yerli common, Dancy, Marsh and Rize mandarin varieties. In the Iskenderun area, about 68 percent of all trees examined were found to be infected. Moreira (1965) reported psorosis affecting navel and other sweet orange varieties, with typical bark-scaling symptoms. Both authors emphasized that psorosis seemed to be present generally throughout Turkish citrus plantings, and pointed out that this highly destructive disease was found more frequently expressing leaf symptoms than eruptive bark scaling. Moreira (1965) observed that bark symptoms were frequently found in orchards near Mersin and Izmir, but were less common in the Antalya area. Salibe observed old sweet orange and grapefruit trees exhibiting symptoms of psorosis A bark scaling and concave gum in orchards of the various regions visited. Symptoms of other forms of psorosis were not found. Trees
of Shamouti orange were seen with cracks and scaling in the bark of branches and trunk in varying amounts in orchards of Adana. Concave gum was observed in the trunk of Shamouti orange trees, budded on sour orange rootstock of about 50 years old in the Antalya area. Lemon trees were apparently free from psorosis.
Indexing with proper indicator test plants may reveal the true extent of psorosis contamination in the citrus orchards of Turkey. It is possible that many commercial varieties will be found entirely infected by psorosis. It will require proper methods, such as shoot-tip grafting, to free budwood from this intracellular pathogen. Since psorosis has been shown to be seed-transmitted, indexing of mother trees of rootstock-seed sources should also be included in the indexing programme.
Cachexia-xyloporosis
Cachexia-xyloporosis is a disease widespread in the Mediterranean basin, expressing symptoms in most mandarin orchards. The presence of cachexia-xyloporosis in Turkey was reported by Reichert (1959), Norman (1963) and Moreira (1965). The disease is of economic importance in mandarin and mandarin hybrids, and was found by Norman to be affecting trees of common, Clementine, Daidai and Youssef mandarins and Thornton and San Jacinto tangelos at Iskenderun. Moreira reported that very few trees of common mandarin and Clementine tangerine were found without symptoms of cachexia-xyloporosis. In trees of Shamouti orange budded on sweet lime imported from Israel and about 28 years old, the authors also found normal cachexia-xyloporosis in the rootstock portion of the trunk and inverse xyloporosis above the budding point. Bové observed severe cachexia-xyloporosis at Finike on the mandarin sandwich of an old sweet orange tree on sour orange roots (Fig. 55).
Inspections made by Salibe during his visits to Turkey confirmed previous reports that cachexia-xyloporosis is seriously affecting mandarin trees. Typical gum pockets, plus conoid pits and wood pinholing typical of the disease, were found in the trunk of mandarin trees above the bud-union in many orchards. Knowledge of the real distribution of the viroid in sweet orange, grapefruit and lemon trees (which do not exhibit typical symptoms) will depend upon an indexing programme. Varieties found with symptoms of cachexia-xyloporosis included Clementine, satsuma (imported from Egypt), Speciale (Willowleaf) mandarins and San Jacinto tangelo. The problem appeared to be more severe in the Antalya area. Symptoms ranged from mild to very severe in some blocks of trees, but not all trees were affected, suggesting that more than one source of budwood was used in the formation of the orchard.
Since the cachexia-xyloporosis viroid is perpetuated by the use of infected budwood and as no insect vector is known, it can be excluded from new plantings by the use of healthy propagative material.
Stubborn
Stubborn disease is probably the most serious infectious disease affecting citrus in Turkey. Chapot (1956) first reported the occurrence of the disease in the country, pointing out that the symptoms were highly characteristic of those of severe stubborn, also named "crazy top", "acorn disease", "pink nose", "little leaf" and "xeromorphosis". Norman (1963) and Moreira (1965) confirmed the widespread presence of stubborn in Turkey, and the fact that it is especially damaging in the areas of Adana and Iskenderun.
Spiroplasma citri, the stubborn pathogen, was cultured from the following symptomatic trees by the Bordeaux group in 1980-81 : Washington navel (Midik area, Adana); local sweet orange (Tarsus area); Frost navel, Carter, Skagg's Bonanza navel and Parent Washington navel sweet oranges (Mersin area); Skagg's Bonanza navel (Adana and Alata Erdenti areas); Frost navel and Carter sweet oranges (AIata Erdenti area); and two undetermined sweet oranges (Missis area). These results show that stubborn is widespread in the Adana region.
Salibe observed many citrus trees exhibiting the entire syndrome of stubborn symptoms. Symptoms were more easily recognized in Washington navel orange trees, and included stunting, leaf mottle (Fig. 154), shoot growth with erect or rosetted leaves and multiple buds, many acorn-shaped fruits with curved columella, and off-season blooming. Both local and imported varieties were found affected.
Severe cases of stubborn were observed in the Yesilkent-Dortyol (Hatay) area in several orchards. Other affected trees of Washington navel orange on sour orange rootstock, in addition to the known stubborn symptoms, showed bud-union creasing on the trunk and tristeza-like honeycombing in the rootstock. Washington navel was the variety most affected, with up to 20 percent of trees diseased. Valencia orange and satsuma mandarin also showed symptoms of stubborn, but grapefruit did not. No stubborn-diseased trees were found in the Antalya area.
During a visit to the Horticultural Research Centre in Erdemli, Mersin, a collection of citrus varieties, all of nucellar origin, and established using budwood imported from California in 1975, was inspected for stubborn symptoms. All trees of Bonanza navel were found to be severely affected by stubborn. They were all stunted trees, with typical leaf symptoms and overgrowth and honeycombing in the trunk. Some Valencia orange trees were also affected, but not the grapefruit trees, which were all vigorous and healthy-looking. New orchards propagated from this mother block showed a high percentage of stubborn-diseased trees.
The problem of stubborn is extremely serious in Turkey and, apparently, some field spread of the disease seems to be occurring, in addition to the spread by infected budwood. Indeed, Neoaliturus haematoceps, the major leafhopper vector of S. citri, the stubborn pathogen, has been identified in the Adana region (Fos et al., 1986) and has long been known in Turkey as a vector of sugar beet curly top virus (Bennett and Tanrisever, 1957). Periwinkle plants exposed to natural contamination became infected with S. citri at Abdioglu, Missis and Adana University (Barrage area), showing that natural spread of the stubborn agent occurs.
Extensive work on the transmission of S. citri by leafhoppers has been carried out recently in the Adana region of Turkey (Kersting and Sengonca, 1992 and personal communication). N. haematoceps was shown to be a major vector of S. citri, thus confirming the observations made by Fos et al. (1986) in Syria. In addition, the workers in Turkey showed that Sesamum indicum was a good host not only for N. haematoceps but also for S. citri. The N. haematoceps populations captured on sesamum were infected with S. citri and they were able to transmit the spiro-plasma to healthy periwinkle plants. A second leafhopper was encountered: Neoaliturus opacipennis. This leafhopper was only found on Salsola kali, but was unable to transmit S. citri.
Satisfactory control of citrus stubborn disease is not an easy task in areas where the leafhopper vectors occur in fairly high populations. An intensive study is urgently needed to determine the rate of field spread and identify the insect vectors of the disease in Turkey. Other necessary control measures include an annual survey of orchards, removal of all infected plants and replanting with disease free plants, and using only budwood from disease-free trees for all propagations, including top-working.
Impietratura
The incidence of impietratura in sweet orange fruits in Turkey was first reported by Chapot (1961), who found the problem in almost all areas of the country, with a greater predominance along the south coast, especially around Dortyol, Adana and Finike. This author reported that in one orchard, with 70 percent local orange varieties and 30 percent Washington navels, a large number of severe cases of impietratura were found, but only on local varieties. He also claimed that trees producing abnormal fruits were less vigorous and the leaves were slightly wilted. On the variety named Finike Yerli, which normally has round fruits, the fruits from the impietratura-infected trees were definitely pear-shaped.
According to growers, this disease has existed for several years in Turkey and was first noticed because of the premature drop of many fruits and gum pockets in the albedo. Norman (1963) also found impietratura symptoms in the albedo of both oranges and grapefruits in the Iskenderun, Adana and Finike areas.
Salibe's visit was made early in the season and no typical impietratura symptoms were found. On the basis of surveys made by local scientists and virus experts visiting the country, impietratura seems to be a serious problem, reducing growers' profits. Since no insect vector of impietratura is known to exist, the use of healthy budwood should exclude the problem from new orchards. The problem of impietratura may become more serious should grapefruit, which is very susceptible to the disease, be grown on larger areas in the country.
Rumple
The disease was first reported to be affecting lemons in Turkey by Chapot and Bahcecioglu (1969). They stated that rumple was widespread during the 1960/61 crop in the areas of Antalya, Mersin, Adana and Arsus, and that extreme damage was occurring in some orchards, with as much as 75 percent of fruits being affected. Ozbek et al. (1976) described a number of experiments conducted to determine the nature of rumple in Turkey. They found that manganese deficiency in particular was responsible for the development of rumple and that 3 kg MnSO[4] per 1 000 litres of water was the most effective treatment. However, results were considered preliminary and further investigations were thought to be necessary to clarify the true nature of the disorder.
Salibe visited a number of lemon orchards, but it was not the best season for seeing rumple symptoms. A few abnormal fruits were observed in a local variety named Kut Diken in the Mersin areas, where rumple is known as Cokuntu, Copur and Benek disease. Rumple appears to be a serious problem and, until its true nature is determined, careful selection from only healthy trees of budwood for propagation is recommended.
Gummy bark of sweet orange
Gummy bark disease was first reported to occur in orange trees in Turkey by Moreira (1965). Salibe found xyloporosis-like symptoms on some common sweet orange trees budded on sour orange rootstock in an orchard near Koycogiz, between Dalaman and Mugla. Bové observed symptoms of gummy bark on Valencia late sweet orange trees in the Antalya area (Figs 64 and 65).
Salibe was taken by local scientists to visit an orchard in Yesilkent-Dortyol, where typical symptoms of gummy bark were found in trees of Washington navel and other local varieties of sweet orange budded on sour orange rootstock. Trees were stunted and showed abundant gum impregnation in the bark above the bud-union, plus wood pitting in the trunk, sometimes extending to large limbs. To determine the actual incidence of gummy bark of sweet orange in the orchards of Turkey, a large-scale indexing programme is necessary. Budwood for propagation should be taken only from healthy trees to avoid introducing the problem into future orchards.
Exocortis
Exocortis disease was found by both Norman (1963) and Moreira (1965) affecting citrus trees budded on trifoliate rootstock and hybrids. Moreira reported symptoms of exocortis in four-year-old Washington navel orange trees budded on Troyer citrange rootstock in one orchard near Mersin. Troyer citrange trees budded on sour orange rootstock showing exocortis-like symptoms in the branches were also found in the Antalya and Aksu experiment stations.
Salibe was not able to inspect any citrus orchards budded on exocortis-intolerant rootstock. Exocortis-like yellowing and splitting of the bark of branches were seen in stunted trees of Di Genova shaddock at the Antalya Experiment Station. The evidence is that the exocortis viroid is present in Turkish citrus, and indexing may show that, as in most other citrus areas of the world, the viroi is widespread in Turkish commercial citrus varieties. Should trifoliate or its hybrids be used on a wide scale, exocortis may become a serious problem for citrus growers.
Exocortis is perpetuated by budwood and is also spread by contaminated tools. Special care is therefore required to prevent it spreading into selected mother trees.
Cristacortis
Cristacortis-like symptoms were found by Moreira (1965) in Shamouti orange trees of about 28 years old at the Antalya Experiment Station. Salibe found gumless pitting resembling cristacortis in orange trees in the Adana and Antalya areas. Local scientists also informed him that cristacortis is present in Turkey. A careful field survey and proper indexing are necessary to determine the real extent of the disease in Turkish citrus.
Satsuma dwarf
Satsuma dwarf was reported for the first time in the Izmir region of Turkey by Azeri in 1973. He showed typical symptoms of the disease to Bové in 1978 (Fig. 118).
Satsuma mandarin is an important commercial variety in Turkey. It is an early ripening fruit that is first picked at about the same time as early lemons, towards the end of September. However, owing to the destructive capacity of the disease, a careful survey of satsuma orchards is recommended to serve as the basis for a control programme for this disease.
Reichert (1959) asserted that tristeza virus was not present in local varieties of citrus in Cyprus, France, Greece, Israel, Italy, Portugal, Spain, Turkey and Yugoslavia. Norman (1963) was the first to report that some citrus trees of an orchard near Adana were displaying symptoms indicating the possible presence of tristeza. Anatomical studies of bark samples taken at the bud-union of these and some other declining trees gave inconclusive results. Indexing, using Mexican lime seedlings as indicator, conducted by Moreira (1965) and his counterpart at the Antalya Experiment Station, gave negative results. It is possible that indexed trees were declining owing to severe stubborn, which also causes honeycombing below bud-union, though this symptom is not generally known to be also typical of stubborn.
Salibe was told by local scientists that indexing of satsuma mandarin trees budded on trifoliate rootstock in the western region was positive for tristeza virus. Indeed, Azeri has used small-fruited acid lime to index many satsuma trees on P. trifoliata for tristeza virus in the Izmir region. He found that more than 15 percent of the trees were infected (Azeri, personal communication). Colette Bové used ELISA to detect tristeza virus in the 499 50-year-old satsuma trees on P. trifoliata in the Ahmet Coskun orchard at Inciralti-lzmir. Thirty-three trees (6 percent) were found to be infected, scattered throughout the orchard. She has also indexed severely stunted Owari satsuma trees on sour orange showing conspicuous pinholing in the sour orange bark below the bud-union line (Fig. 129). The ELISA reaction was strongly positive, showing that the trees were infected with tristeza virus. As one of the countries still extensively using sour orange as rootstock, tristeza virus
represents a tremendous threat to the citrus industry of Turkey.
Bud-union crease
Bud-union crease was found by Salibe in some trees of Washington navel orange budded on sour orange rootstock. These trees also showed symptoms of severe stubborn disease.
This abnormality may become a serious problem in Turkey should incompatible scion-rootstock varieties be recommended in commercial orchards. New rootstocks should not be used for local varieties before experimental trials have shown freedom from bud-union crease symptoms.
Virus and virus-like diseases not found in Turkey
None of the following virus and virus-like diseases was observed during the FAO consultants' visits to the citrus orchards: vein enation-woody gall, citrus tatterleaf, infectious variegation, gum pocket, leaf curl, leprosis, yellow vein, citrus blight and citrus decline. Local plant pathologists should make themselves familiar with the symptoms of these and other unwanted diseases in order to be able to recognize them quickly and promptly eradicate any tree suspected of harbouring their pathogens. Good descriptions of such disease problems have been made by Childs et al. (1968); Bové and Vogel (1980); and Wallace (1978).
Other disease problems
Mal secco disease of lemon trees, caused by the fungus Deuterophoma tracheiphila, is a major problem in the lemon orchards of Turkey. Many local and imported lemon varieties are affected (Figs 233 and 235). It takes five years for a lemon tree to come into bearing and usually mal secco destroys the tree after five to ten crops. Selection of lemon clones with resistance to the disease is at present under way, with promising results. Interdonato lemon, the variety most widely grown for its superior fruit quality, is very sensitive to mal secco disease. Selections more resistant to the fungus must therefore be found.
Pseudomonas syringae, a bacterium affecting leaves, twigs and fruits, is present in Turkey and has caused some damage to citrus, but is being controlled with the use of copper sprays.
Shell bark is another problem affecting lemon trees. Citrus bergamia was also seen displaying bark cracks and scaling in the trunk of trees, characteristic of shell bark, a disease considered to be of a physiological nature.
Sieve-tube necrosis is another serious problem affecting lemon trees on sour orange rootstock.
Gummosis, caused by various soil-borne fungi of the genus Phytophthora, is also present in Turkey, affecting the trunk of trees. However, damage is limited owing to the high resistance of sour orange rootstock to the attack of this pathogen. Low budding and deep planting favour the attack of lemon trunk by gummosis.
Abnormal leaf drop was observed in lemon trees in the area of Mersin, resembling the autumn leaf drop disorder. Local scientists attributed the problem to the presence of high populations of the nematode Tylenchulus semipenetrans. Autumn leaf drop is a serious problem affecting citrus in some Mediterranean countries and may also be occurring in certain areas of Turkey. The problem is characterized by abnormal leaf drop during the late autumn and winter months. It probably results from a physiological disorder, caused by cold temperatures in the mornings (7-8°C) that act as a form of localized frost. Damaged trees produce lower yields.
Bové observed strong symptoms of ringspot on sweet orange leaves in the Adana area (Figs 125 and 126).
Visits to agricultural agencies
Antalya Experiment Station
The Experiment Station at Antalya is located in the centre of an important citrus-producing area. It is the main orange-producing centre of Turkey, and about 80 percent of the orchards are planted with sweet orange trees budded on sour orange rootstock. According to local information, about 60 percent of trees are Washington navels, 30 percent are local orange types (such as Alanya and Finike Yerli) and 10 percent are Valencia and Shamouti orange.
The station is provided with modern laboratories and greenhouses, guesthouses and a large experimental field area, split into three plots, that covers about 1 000 ha. Here, several research projects were initiated during the 1960s, involving production and selection of nucellar lines, selection of superior old-line mother trees, indexing for viruses and other projects aimed at providing healthy budwood to citrus growers. Most of these research studies were paralysed around 1978.
There is a large citrus collection with many varieties represented by 45- to 50-year-old trees. Trees of Marsh seedless grapefruit were large and healthy-looking. Some orange trees such as Navalencia were seen with concave gum symptoms on the trunk. Shell bark was found in the lemon interstock of a Shamouti orange tree. Iron deficiency is a problem in most trees of the collection. Careful inspection of the mandarin and mandarin hybrids plot revealed cachexia-xyloporosis symptoms, ranging from mild to very severe, in the trunk of satsuma (from Egypt), Clementine (from Italy), Speciale tangerine, Dancy mandarin and San Jacinto tangelo trees. Thornton tangelo trees were found with concave gum symptoms. One tree of Washington navel orange displayed leaf abnormalities indicative of stubborn disease, but this problem is more rare in Antalya, although widespread in the Adana area.
The collection contains several lemon varieties of great value for work in hybridization and selection for mal secco control. Lemons are more widely grown in the Alanya and Mersin areas than in Antalya.
A large greenhouse in the station still maintains a great number of old seedlings of indicator varieties for virus indexing.
A mother block of young potted trees of commercial varieties is maintained in a screenhouse at the station. Budwood for these trees was taken from selected, apparently healthy trees located in a countrywide survey. The block comprises three to four trees of each variety, including satsuma mandarin, Interdonato lemon, Clementine mandarin, and Washington navel, Shamouti (Jaffa) and Valencia oranges.
A large collection of 88 varieties was established with budwood imported from California. First introductions were made in 1967, followed by further introductions in 1970. They are mostly nucellar clones, each one represented by five trees budded on sour orange rootstock. In this plot, most lemon varieties were destroyed by mal secco disease, with only a few trees remaining alive, including those of Femminello Santa Teresa lemon.
Trees of Rangpur lime, citrons and a few other varieties were eliminated by phytophthora gummosis and cold damage. Most orange trees are vigorous, but with low yields. Trees of one variety, namely Skragg Bonanza navel orange, were stunted and possibly infected with the stubborn mycoplasma. Shoot-tip grafting of all varieties was recommended.
A second block of nucellar trees was visited. These were nucellar clones of local orange varieties, produced over 15 years ago, following the visits of two FAO citrus specialists (Norman and Moreira). No attempt was made to accelerate ageing of these clones to reduce juvenility, nor were comparison trials made with similar old-line clones.
A large citrus nursery was visited at the station, where budwood was taken from trees selected at the station and from commercial orchards on the basis of their healthy appearance. It was said that another government nursery was located in Alanya and that several other private nurseries existed in the area. Private nurseries were all small, except one in Gozipasa, Antalya, that produces 50 000 to 60 000 plants annually. Small nurseries seen by Salibe produce citrus plants in pots or large cans, with a very low standard of quality. He was informed that nursery plants are being used for local orchards and also for export, e.g. to Saudi Arabia.
Salibe was further informed that there is an official project to establish an indexing programme to free citrus from virus diseases, in the two centres (Antalya and Adana). The programme at Antalya is operational at the time of writing (1990). The need to introduce new citrus varieties, especially a mid-season ripening mandarin variety, was also clear.
A rootstock experiment, established on the third plot, was visited. Rootstock experiments were established in four different ecological zones of Turkey: Adana, Antalya, Icel and Mugla. They were planted in 1982 and included 11 rootstocks and the best scion varieties.
Faculty of Agricultural Sciences, Adana
The facilities for the control of virus and virus-like diseases of citrus at the Plant Protection Division of the Faculty of Agricultural Sciences at the University of Adana are limited and there is an urgent need for new laboratories, equipment and greenhouses for virus studies and indexing. However, research work is of a high level. The FAO consultant was extremely impressed with all the work carried out there, which included research on shoot-tip grafting, thermotherapy, tristeza indexing and stubborn.
Indexing for tristeza of satsuma trees budded on trifoliate rootstock has shown that 10 to 15 percent of all trees of this combination are infected with the virus.
A visit was made to the greenhouse dedicated to citrus virus-indexing work. There, seedlings of Mexican lime, Eureka lemon, sour orange, rough lemon as well as Etrog citron are available for a large indexing project. Etrog citron plants inoculated with Washington navel orange were seen to exhibit the typical symptoms induced by severe exocortis. However, most of the indexing work was discontinued a few years ago.
The work of shoot-tip grafting has produced young plants of Washington navel orange, satsuma mandarin, Encore mandarin, Freemont mandarin, Valencia orange and Yerli orange. All this extremely valuable material is now awaiting indexing to guarantee freedom from intracellular pathogens.
Studies with stubborn have confirmed the presence of the spiroplasmal agent in the citrus trees. The insect vector of stubborn, the beet leafhopper N. haematoceps, was found in the orchards, together with other leafhoppers. However, no insect transmission of stubborn resulted in the trials, as periwinkle (Catharanthus roseus) plants remained healthy in orchards contaminated with the disease. Similar results were also obtained by Bové and co-workers in the Syrian Arab Republic. It is now known from the work in Syria that very little or no natural transmission of S. citri occurs within adult orchards. For natural spread to be demonstrated the indicator periwinkle plants must be placed in young, newly planted orchards or in locations where N. haematoceps is known to occur, for instance near Salsola kali plants, known to be a favoured host plant of the leafhoppers.
No psyllid vectors of the greening organism are present in the citrus trees of the Adana region, an area with an estimated 14 million citrus trees.
The faculty is equipped with a modern laboratory prepared to perform ELISA testing that can be used for a tristeza-indexing project. Also, a growth chamber is available for biological indexing of tristeza virus. The consultant was informed that the government plans to establish a modern centre for virus indexing at the faculty in the near future.
Horticultural Research Centre, Mersin
A modern horticultural research centre (Alata Bahce Külturleri Arastirma ve Egitim Merkesi) is established at Erdemli, in Mersin. This centre has 200 ha of experimental fields plus another 200 ha dedicated to forestry. Out of 27 scientists working on various crops, four researchers are working on citrus.
Various citrus plots were visited at the centre. The first orchard was established with Freemont mandarin, a variety showing great promise. The centre recently sold about 5 000 trees of Freemont for commercial plantings.
Another orchard, established in sandy soil 500 m from the sea, included a collection of seedling trees of rootstock varieties. A third orchard was established with the best germ-plasm in the country. It included 14 lemon selections, two mandarins and one orange variety. This material was selected from the Mediterranean coastal area and was planted two years ago at the centre. The orange variety was a superior clone of Washington navel and the mandarins were satsuma and Clementine. Each variety is represented by seven trees budded on sour orange rootstock. Release of budwood from this future mother block will be made only when indexing for intracellular pathogens is completed. The mother block is a replication of that established at the Antalya Experiment Station.
Another plot at the centre is a collection of lemon types, selected for their resistance to mal secco disease. The trees are not yet six years old. Among the more resistant varieties is a local type named Molla Mehmet (Antalya Round).
The last citrus orchard visited at the centre was a collection of nucellar-line trees of various commercial varieties imported from California in 1975. Varieties included oranges, grapefruits and mandarins. Among the orange varieties were Carter, Bonanza and Gillette navel oranges as well as nucellar Frost Valencia orange. Severe symptoms of stub born were observed in many trees of the navel group. The Valencia orange trees were all healthy-looking with no stubborn symptoms. However, it was said that daughter trees in commercial orchards exhibit symptoms of the disease.
Recommendations
Control measures for stubborn
Control of stubborn disease is not an easy task. Bové (1966) pointed out that one can "live with" tristeza by replanting tolerant scion-rootstock combinations, but this is not the case with stubborn.
Sophisticated detection methods have been developed- for stubborn and are available for general use. Studies on the rate of field spread and identification of the pathogen vectors in each country will be very helpful to further understanding and control of the disease.
Stubborn is present in most Mediterranean countries, but fortunately the percentage of affected trees is generally low (about 5 percent) and growers are helping to reduce infection by eliminating diseased trees and avoiding propagation from infected orchards. The work under way at the Department of Plant Protection of the Faculty of Agricultural Sciences, in Adana, will certainly produce very valuable information for use in the control of the disease. Meanwhile, the following recommendations are made:
* Use only disease-free trees for taking budwood for all propagations, including top-working.
* Top-working should be carried out only on trees which are totally free from stubborn.
* Periodically survey young orchards and remove all infected trees, replanting with disease-free plants.
* All replants should be destroyed if found to show stubborn disease symptoms, and only healthy nursery plants should be used for replanting.
* Nurseries should be established in areas free from both S. citri-infected plants and the leafhopper vectors of the spiro-plasma; otherwise nursery trees should be produced in greenhouses.
* Avoid the use of cover crops that are hosts to S. citri in orchards less than six years old in areas subject to high populations of stubborn disease vectors.
These recommendations are similar to those made to citrus growers in California, where stubborn is a serious problem.
Control of mal secco
Control measures used until now to combat mal secco disease of lemons are unsatisfactory. The fungus responsible for the disorder, Phoma tracheiphila - formerly known as Deuterophoma tracheiphila - is capable of infecting all citrus species and hybrids and closely related genera in the Rutaceae family. Eureka lemon, rough lemon, Rangpur lime, Bearss lime, sour orange and citron are very susceptible.
Fortunately, some citrus species have proved to have a high degree of resistance. These include sweet orange, Monachello and Santa Teresa lemons, Citrus volkameriana grapefruit and Palermo mandarin. Lapithos lemon, a lemon type grown in Cyprus, has been shown to be fairly resistant to the mal secco fungus.
The use of resistant lemon types in new plantings is the most convenient approach for the control of this disease. Deep cultivation, fertilization and other cultural practices that wound trees during the infection period should be avoided. Fallen leaves and trunk debris should be removed from the orchards and burnt to reduce inoculum. Diseased shoots and branches should be pruned during the summer to remove the organism and to prevent spread through the vascular system. Spraying with copper fungicides or benomyl during the infection period is another method of control. Mal secco is such a severely destructive disease in lemon orchards in the Mediterranean that it warrants a joint effort to develop control methods.
Other recommendations
* A national citrus budwood certification programme should be established in Turkey for the benefit of all nursery workers and growers. A number of collections of healthy germplasm, under the control of government institutions, should be established in each important citrus area of the country to provide new, superior propagative material. Nucellar and old-line clones should be kept separate in the programme, with a clear indication of their nature. A permanent interinstitutional committee should be set up to supervise continually the execution of this programme and to guarantee long-term support.
* Well-equipped laboratories for shoot-tip grafting should be established in Antalya and Adana to provide local scientists with the necessary tools to free local citrus varieties from intracellular pathogens.
* Appropriate installations and facilities should be established for a full indexing programme for virus and virus-like pathogens. It would be preferable to have these facilities concentrated in one or two centres only, to which propagative material could be brought for indexing.
* The citrus improvement programme should be expanded to include comparison trials between old-line and nucellar clones of commercial citrus varieties.
* New rootstock trials should be established to serve as a basis for a programme of diversification away from the use of sour orange rootstock, as a safeguard against the threat of tristeza virus. Trifoliate selections and hybrids should be introduced under strict phytosanitary supervision and tested for performance as rootstocks for oranges and mandarins under the local environmental conditions of each area.
* A nationwide identification and suppression programme should be conducted to locate and eradicate all possible sources of stubborn and tristeza virus in citrus orchards.
* Quarantine regulations should be strictly enforced to prohibit any plant importation into the country by private growers. At the same time, a post-entry quarantine station under government control should be established to provide safe introduction of new citrus varieties and rootstocks.
* Turkish citrus research workers should be encouraged to attend international meetings and leading citrus centres to learn at first hand about new developments in crop improvement and protection. Financial support should be given to scientists to enable them to participate in such programmes and in the international exchange of knowledge.
* Turkey, in association with all Mediterranean countries, should cooperate in a joint effort to prevent the introduction and diffusion of new pathogens into the region, particularly those of greening disease, tristeza-seedling yellows virus, citrus canker and blight. In particular, all those concerned with the citrus industry must be made fully aware of the major threat presented by greening disease. If both the greening bacterium and its vectors become established in the country, large-scale destruction of Turkey's citrus orchards will follow.
Bibliography
Azeri, T. 1973. First report of satsuma dwarf virus disease on satsuma mandarins in Turkey. Plant Dis. Rep., 57: 149.
Bennett, C.W. & Taurisever, A. 1957. Sugar beet curly top disease in Turkey. Plant Dis. Rep., 41: 721-725.
Bové, J.M. 1966. Citrus virus and virus-like diseases in the Mediterranean area. Report presented at the Meeting on Phytiatry and Phytopharmacy, Marseilles (France), 1965, updated for the 4th Conf. IOCV. 44 pp. (mimeo)
Bové, J.M. 1985. Greening and Stubborn: Results and Perspectives. FAO Expert Consultation on Production, Maintenance and Distribution of Virus-Free Fruit Tree Planting Material. Rome, FAO. 37 pp.
Bové, J.M. 1986. Stubborn and its natural transmission in the Mediterranean area and the Near East. FAO Plant Prot. Bull., 34(1): 15-23.
Bové, J.M. & Vogel, R., eds. 1980. Description and illustration of virus and virus-like diseases of citrus. A collection of colour slides. Paris, IRFA SETCO-FRUITS.
Burke, J.H. 1965. Citrus industry of Turkey. USDA Foreign Agriculture Report, No. 127: 1-36.
Chapot, H. 1956. Une nouvelle maladie des agrumes dans le Moyen-Orient. C.R. Soc. Sci. Nat. Phys. Maroc., 22(6): 99-105.
Chapot, H. 1961. Impietratura in Mediterranean countries. In Proc. 2nd Conf IOCV, p. 177-181. Gainesville, Univ. Fla. Press.
Chapot, H. 1970. Les problèmes de la production des agrumes au Proche-Orient et en Afrique du Nord. UNDP/FAO Report AT 287. Rome, FAO. 93 pp.
Chapot, H. & Bahcecioglu, H. 1969. Some lemon culture troubles in Turkey. In H.D. Chapman, ed. Proc. Ist lnt. Citrus Symposium, p. 1279-1283. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Childs, J.F.L., Bové, J.M., Calavan, E.C., Fraser, L.R., Knorr, L.C., Nour-Eldin, F., Salibe, A.A., Tanaka, S. & Weathers, L.G., eds. 1968. Indexing procedures for 15 virus diseases of citrus trees. USDA/ ARS Agric. Handhook 333. Washington, DC.
Fos, A., Bové, J.M., Lallemand, J., Saillard, C., Vignault, J.C., Ali, Y., Brun, P. & Vogel, R. 1986. La cicadelle Neoaliturus haematoceps (Mulsant & Rey) est vecteur de Spiroplasma citri en Mediterranée. Ann. Inst. Pasteur/Microbiol., 137A: 97-107.
Kersting, U. & Sengonca, C. 1992. Detection of insect vectors of the citrus stubborn disease pathogen Spiroplasma citri Saglio et al., in the citrus growing area of south Turkey. J. Appl. Entomol., 113: 356-364.
Moreira, S. 1965. Report to the Government of Turkey on Citrus Virus Diseases. FAO/UNDP Report No. 1982. 19 pp.
Norman, G.G. 1963. Report to the Government of Turkey on Citrus Virus Diseases. FAO/UNDP Report No. 1641. 19 pp.
Ozbek, N., Ozsman, M., Tuzcu, O. & Danisman, S. 1976. A preliminary study of rumple, a serious rind disorder of lemons in Turkey. In Proc. 7th Conf: IOCV, p. 157-166. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Reichert, 1. 1959. A survey of citrus virus diseases in the Mediterranean area. In J.M. Wallace, ed. Citrus virus diseases, p. 23-28. Riverside, Div. Agric. Sci., Univ. Calif.
Salibe, A.A. 1986. Major virus and virus-like diseases of citrus in the Mediterranean. FAO Plant Prot. Bull. 34(1): 49-64.
Wallace, J.M. 1978. Virus and virus-like diseases. In The citrus industry, vol. IV, p. 67-184. Riverside, Div. Agric. Sci., Univ. Calif.
Chapter 24: The United Arab Emirates
Witches' broom disease of Lime
Virus and virus-like diseases
Citrus canker
Miscellaneous problems
Conclusions
Bibliography
After the discovery of greening disease and its psyllid vectors in Saudi Arabia and southern Yemen, a survey for greening was carried out in the United Arab Emirates (UAE) in 1983. Similarly, when witches' broom disease of lime (WBDL) became recognized as a major problem in small-fruited acid lime (Citrus aurantifolia) trees Oman, a search for WBDL was initiated in the UAE in 1987. Neither greening nor WBDL were encountered during the 1983 and 1987 surveys. However, symptoms resembling those of WBDL were seen in the UAE in 1989. Samples of witches' brooms were collected by Taher (FAO Regional Plant Protection Officer) in the UAE in 1990. They were analysed at Bordeaux and found to be infected with an MLO. This MLO was serologically identical to that associated with WBDL in Oman, demonstrating that WBDL is now also present in the UAE.
Another very serious disease of citrus was introduced into the UAE in the early 1980s citrus canker. This bacterial disease is also present in the Salalah area of Oman. A second focus of the disease was detected near Ibri but was eradicated in 1987.
Citrus has been introduced into various experiment stations or farms in the UAE, such as those at Hamraniyah, Dhaid, Fujairah and Kalba. Farmers grow primarily lemon and lime trees (650 ha), with other cultivars (sweet orange, mandarin) covering only 96 ha. Citrus represents 5 percent of total fruit production (65 000 tonnes). Dates amount to 80 percent and mangoes, with 10 percent, come second.
Witches' broom disease of Lime
The disease was first observed in 1989 in the Hatta and Bitna regions. By now (March 1993) the disease is present throughout the United Arab Emirates and has even reached the northern region. The affected areas include Dhaid, Kaber, Siji, Hatta, Daftah, Hamraniyah-Digdagga, Rul-Dhadna, Fujairah and Kalba.
Small-fruited acid lime is by far the major citrus species affected. While on his 1987 survey, Bové noticed not a single affected tree, in March 1993 he saw whole orchards fully destroyed by the disease. This indicates how fast the disease is spreading. The situation is now similar to that in Oman, and probably too advanced for an eradication programme to be effective. It is to be feared that all susceptible citrus trees will be wiped out within a few years.
While in Oman only acid lime trees are affected, in the UAE additional citrus species show the symptoms of the disease: citron, Palestine sweet lime and sweet limetta.
In the UAE, as in Oman, the leafhopper Hishimonus phycitis could be captured in great numbers on all acid lime trees tested, as well as on trees of the additional citrus species showing symptoms of the disease.
<section>r</section>
Virus and virus-like diseases
Severe symptoms of cachexia-xyloporosis were observed on the Citrus macrophylla rootstocks of stunted Jaffa (Figs 299 to 301) and Balady sweet orange trees at the Hamraniyah Experiment Station. In addition to cachexia symptoms, the Balady sweet orange scions showed symptoms of gummy bark above the bud-union line.
Balady and Jaffa sweet orange trees on C. macrophylla turn out to be good indicator plants for cachexia detection in the field. The infected (but tolerant) sweet orange buds were grafted on healthy (but susceptible) C. macrophylla rootstock seedlings, and the symptoms subsequently showed up on the rootstock.
Similarly, exocortis can be detected in the field when exocortis-tolerant scions (sweet orange, mandarin, grapefruit, lemon or lime) are grafted on susceptible rootstock such as Poncirus trifoliata, citranges, Rangpur lime or citron. This is particularly the case at the Hamraniyah Experiment Station where bark-scaling symptoms of exocortis were observed on the Carrizo citrange rootstocks of old-line Jaffa sweet orange trees. It is very likely that many more old-line citrus cultivars are infected with the exocortis viroid(s) in the UAE than elsewhere in the world.
The above old-line Jaffa sweet orange trees were part of a rootstock experiment. But an old-line cultivar of unknown health status should never be used for rootstock experiments. This is well illustrated here where the Jaffa sweet orange trees on C macrophylla developed cachexia, and those on Carrizo citrange, exocortis. The experiment is worthless as a rootstock trial, but useful to demonstrate that the old-line Jaffa sweet orange cultivar is infected with the viroids of cachexia and exocortis.
At the Dibba Fruit Farm, many Balady sweet orange trees showed typical symptoms of bud-union crease of the type shown in Figure 135, with gum in the bark and a line of necrotic wood at the bud-union.
Symptoms of stubborn were observed on Washington navel sweet orange trees at the Fujairah Experiment Station, in the Hossein Bin Rahama orchard (Kalba area) where the trees were of Syrian origin, at the Hamraniyah Experiment Station, and on Balady sweet orange trees in the Masafi area. Symptoms included palmate leaves with yellow, pinched-in tips (Fig. 302), fruits with aborted seeds and/or thin albedo at the stylar end and thick albedo at the peduncular end (Figs 303 and 304).
No efforts were made to isolate Spiroplasma citri, the causal agent of stubborn, from the symptomatic sweet orange trees. However, the spiroplasma could be seen by electron microscopy in the leaves of a symptomatic periwinkle (Catharanthus roseus) plant (Fig. 305) collected in an ornamental periwinkle bed in Dubai harbour. Infection of periwinkle plants indicates that natural transmission of the spiroplasma occurs. The leafhoppers Neoaliturus haematoceps and Neoaliturus tenellus are the major vectors of S. citri. Their principal host plant is Salsola kali (Chenopodiaceae). This plant occurs along the seashores of the UAE, and it is important to determine whether it harbours the two leafhoppers.
WBDL is caused by an MLO (Bové et al., 1988; Garnier, Zreik and Bové, 1991). As stated above, the disease was restricted to Oman until 1989 when its symptoms were observed for the first time in the UAE. Taher collected lime shoots from witches' brooms at the Ibrahim Abdul Rahman and Naser Mukhtar farms in the Fujairah area, the Mohamed Salem El Rayes farm and another farm in the Hatta area. All four samples contained an MLO, as found by electron microscopy, and gave strongly positive reactions when examined by immunofluorescence using WBDL-MLO specific MAs. Leaves from normal lime trees gave negative reactions.
These results show that WBDL is no longer restricted to Oman but has now appeared in the UAE, not only along the coast at Fujairah immediately north of the area where WBDL is most severe in Oman, but also inland in the Hatta area, again immediately north of the border. In view of the rapid spread of WBDL in Oman, it is to be expected that other regions in the UAE will soon show signs of the disease. The vector of the disease in both countries must be determined as soon as possible.
The witches' brooms of WBDL are highly typical (see Fig. 140). Another type of witches' broom was occasionally observed, not only in the UAE (Fig. 306) but also in Oman, and it should not be confused with WBDL witches' brooms. While a WBDL-affected lime tree shows progressively more and more witches' brooms, trees with a witches' broom of the type shown in Figure 306 seem to carry only one such witches' broom' and when it is removed they do not produce new ones. The cause of this type of witches' broom is not known, but it does not seem to be infectious. Still other types of witches' brooms exist, such as those induced by the fungus Sphaeropsis tumefaciens Hedges in Yemen. Stubborn affected trees may also develop witches' brooms, but these are not as typical as those of WBDL.
No symptoms of greening were seen in the orchards surveyed. Only one suspect case was encountered in the Hamraniyah Experiment Station in Kinnow and Feutrell mandarin trees imported from Pakistan in 1979. A decline apparently caused by the greening bacterium affects citrus, including mandarin, in Pakistan. As citrus tristeza virus (CTV) has also been detected in several trees in Pakistan, it is not advisable to introduce citrus from that country.
At the Hamraniyah Experiment Station, the Kinnow mandarin trees were in a severe state of decline (Fig. 307) and the Feutrell mandarin trees were less affected. It was advised that all the trees of Pakistani origin be eliminated.
Lime trees are very susceptible to tristeza and are excellent indicator plants for CTV detection. They show specific vein clearing and characteristic stem pitting. None of these symptoms were observed on the many lime trees surveyed. This indicates that no spread of CTV has occurred in the UAE, even though some of the disease's aphid vectors are present in the country, namely, Aphis gossypii, Aphis.spiraecola and Myzus persicae. The most efficient aphid vector of CTV, Toxoptera citricida, is absent from the UAE. However, under certain circumstances A. gossypii, which is present, can be a fairly efficient vector. Tristeza must be kept out of the UAE by reinforcing restrictions on citrus importations from abroad. Introduction of CTV through citrus material and its subsequent spread by aphid vectors would be highly detrimental to the major citrus cultivar grown in the UAE - lime. The disease would also affect all trees grafted on sour orange rootstock.
Citrus canker
Citrus canker is a serious disorder. It produces lesions on leaves, twigs and fruit. The causal agent is the bacterium Xanthomonas campestris pv. citri. Several pathotypes of the bacterium are known. Pathotype A (Asiatic canker) affects essentially lime and grapefruit. This is the type present in the UAE as well as in Oman. The first symptoms in the UAE were observed in 1984 in the Dhaid area. Twenty-seven farms were affected, with a total of 5 000 trees, of which 200 showed canker lesions. The trees were not eradicated, but pruned to remove affected parts and sprayed with copper oxychloride. In the Masafi area, three- to four-year-old seedling lime trees were also affected; they were pulled out and burnt. At Kayathi (Abu Dhabi Emirate) and Ahwir (Dubai Emirate) canker lesions were seen on mandarin. The trees were pruned and sprayed.
No lesions of citrus canker were seen during the 1987 survey, indicating that control of the disease by pruning and spray treatments with copper oxychloride three times a year (in February, March and April) is relatively efficient. It is, however, unfortunate that no efforts were made to eradicate the disease when it first appeared in 1984.
More than 10 000 lime trees from private nurseries in the Masafi area are sold each year to Oman. Despite phytosanitary certificates, canker could be introduced to Oman with these trees and thus represents a serious threat to the, as yet, canker-free lime industry in the Tihama.
Miscellaneous problems
At the Hamraniyah Experiment Station, mal secco-like symptoms, first noted in the early 1980s, affect Eureka lemon trees on Citrus volkameriana rootstock (Fig. 308). The lemon line comes from California. The cause of this disorder was not discovered. Shoots lose their leaves and show dieback only at the tip. There is a clear-cut borderline between the dead brownish bark of the dieback-affected shoot tip and the still live green bark. In the case of mal secco there is no such distinct zone between dead and live bark. Leaves show necrotic zones (Fig. 309) from which Alternaria spp. can be isolated. The shoots also have a rubbery consistency. In India, Ahlawat (personal communication) has described rubbery wood on lemon trees as a new MLO disease.
Several cases of severe sunburn were observed at the Hamraniyah Experiment Station on fruit of Orlando tangelo, Marsh and Ruby blood (Fig. 310) grapefruits, Lisbon lemon and citron, and on leaves of Balady and Jaffa sweet oranges. [Ed. note At the same station cases of Rio Grande gummosis were observed in March 1993.]
Sweet orange shoots with palmate or cordate leaves, caused by excessive heat, were observed in several cases. When in addition such leaves show yellowish tips (Fig. 302), infection with the stubborn agent must be suspected.
Conclusions
Two diseases present in the UAE are of major concern: WBDL and citrus canker. The first symptoms of WBDL were seen in the UAE only in 1989. [Ed. note. In February 1993 the disease had reached catastrophic proportions in all regions of the UAE.] It is to be expected that the number of affected trees will increase over the coming years. Control of the disease must be based on control of its putative insect vectors, leafhoppers or psyllids. Identification of the vectors must receive first priority, not only in the UAE, but also in Oman.
Regarding citrus canker, it is now too late for eradication of the disease agent, and control of the bacterium must be maintained by spraying programmes.
Diseases such as cachexia, exocortis and gummy bark, which have no insect vectors, can be excluded from new citrus orchards by using only citrus budwood certified free of infectious diseases, and by avoiding mechanical transmission by pruning tools.
Stubborn disease is present in the UAE. Natural transmission of the causal agent, S. citri, occurs, as periwinkle plants infected with the spiroplasma have been found in nature, but at this time the importance of S. citri transmission to citrus remains unknown. A search for the two major leafhopper vectors of S. citri, N. haematoceps and N. tenellus, especially on their preferred host plant' S. kali, should be initiated. Identification of the vector of WBDL and a search for S. citri leafhopper vectors could be part of the same programme.
Greening and its two psyllid vectors are not present in the UAE. They do, however' occur in southwestern Saudi Arabia and in northern Yemen. No foci of tristeza have been found in the UAE, or elsewhere in the Arabian Peninsula, even though aphid vectors of tristeza virus occur in the region. It is essential to keep greening and tristeza out of the UAE. This implies rigid restrictions on the importation of citrus plant material from areas where the diseases are known to be present, such as
Pakistan, India and Asia in general. Movement of citrus material between the UAE and Oman should be rigidly restricted. Citrus canker could be introduced with nursery trees from the UAE into the as yet canker-free Tihama region of Oman. Conversely, the danger of introducing more sources of WBDL from Oman to the UAE with nursery trees is real.
Many beautiful citrus trees are growing in the UAE. It is enough to cite lime trees at Hamraniyah, Kalba (Fig. 311) and Fujairah, lemon trees at Dhaid (Fig. 312) and Dibba and grapefruit trees at Dibba (Fig. 313). The potential of the UAE for citrus production should be maintained by proper control of virus and virus-like diseases.
Bibliography
Bové, J.M., Garnier, M., Mjeni, A.M. & Khayrallah, A. 1988. Witches' broom disease of small-fruited acid lime trees in Oman: first MLO disease of citrus. In Proc. 10th Conf: IOCV, p. 307-309. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Garnier, M., Zreik, L. & Bové, J.M. 1991. Witches' broom, a lethal mycoplasmal disease of lime trees in the Sultanate of Oman and the United Arab Emirates. Plant Dis., 75(6): 546-551.
Chapter 25: Yemen
Northern Yemen
Southern Yemen
Bibliography
While carrying out a survey for virus and virus-like diseases of citrus in Saudi Arabia in November 1981 on behalf of FAO, Bové discovered the presence of citrus greening disease in the southwestern part of the country. The geographical extent of the disease was further determined during two additional surveys in Saudi Arabia in April 1982 and December 1983. The 1982 mission also included northern Yemen (previously the Yemen Arab Republic) and the 1983 inspection covered northern Yemen again and also took in southern Yemen (previously the People's Democratic Republic of Yemen).
These surveys established that citrus greening disease as well as its insect vector, the psyllid Diaphorina citri, were present in Saudi Arabia from Jeddah to the border with northern Yemen. Since the disease was found not only at the fairly high altitudes of the southwestern plateau of the Arabian Peninsula, but also at the low altitudes of the coastal plains of Saudi Arabia, and since the vector was identified as the Asian psyllid D. citri, it was concluded that the form of greening present in Saudi Arabia was the heat-tolerant Asian form.
The 1982 and 1983 surveys showed that greening disease was also present in northern Yemen, but only at altitudes of I 000 m and more, not on the coastal Tihama plain. The form of greening present in northern Yemen is very probably the heat-sensitive African form, since the insect vector is the African psyllid, Trioza erytreae, and the disease, as well as the psyllid, only occurs on cool elevated areas, not on the coastal plains or in hot oases such as Marib and Harib (see Map 19).
Finally, during the 1983 survey it was found that the two psyllids, D. citri and T. erytreae, occur together in the Abha area of Saudi Arabia, only 100 km north of the border with Yemen. This shows that T. erytreae probably introduced into Yemen from Ethiopia - is moving northwards, while D. citri probably introduced into the Mecca area with pilgrims from the Indian subcontinent or Southeast Asia -is moving southwards. The psyllids have "met" at Abha, only slightly north of the border between Saudi Arabia and Yemen.
The search for greening in northern Yemen in 1983 showed the disease and its vector, T. erytreae, to be present and well established in the Al Baida area, which is very close to the former border between northern and southern Yemen. Therefore, an attempt was made in 1983 to visit the Mukayras area in the south, only a few kilometres from Al Baida. However, Mukayras proved impossible to reach and the 1983 survey in southern Yemen was thus restricted to the Lawdar-Mudia area and the Say'un-Tarim area in Wadi Hadramawt. A second attempt to get to Mukayras was successful in April 1987. The survey included orchards in the Lawdar-Mudia as well as the Zinjibar-Gaar area, and the Jawl-Madrum district, near Al Musaymir.
MAP 19 Yemen
The major results of the surveys in southern Yemen confirmed the presence of T. erytreae in the Mukayras area and the importance of gummy bark disease throughout the areas visited.
Northern Yemen
The 1982 and 1983 surveys for virus and virus-like diseases of citrus in northern Yemen were carried out essentially to determine whether or not citrus greening disease was present in the country. Concern that greening might be present arose from the fact that in 1982 Bové discovered the disease in the southwestern part of Saudi Arabia, as described in Chapter 18. The 1982 and 1983 surveys showed that greening was also present in northern Yemen.
Greening
Ta'izz region (April 1982 and December 1983 surveys). The first place where evidence for greening was found was the citrus collection at the Agricultural Research Station (Aussfera farm) at Ta'izz. This collection (Fig. 181) was established in 1974 with plant material from Italy. In April 1982, most of the sweet orange trees showed severe symptoms of greening: sparse foliage, yellow, mottled leaves (Fig. 184); lopsided fruits of all sizes and off-season flowering. In addition, typical T. erytreae-induced galls were present on the leaves. The occurrence of the psyllid T. erytreae was confirmed the same day by the entomologist in charge, who was trying to control the psyllid population by dimethoate sprays. In fact, nymphs or galls of T. erytreae could be seen on leaves of sweet orange, lemon (Figs 192 and 193), sour orange and mandarin. Confirmation that the symptoms observed were those of greening came from electron microscopy observations carried out in Bordeaux on leaf
midveins and fruit axes from symptomatic trees. In all cases the BLO associated with greening was detected (Fig. 3).
Advice was given in April 1982 to eradicate the badly infected citrus collection by pulling out the trees, but this was not done. On his second visit to Ta'izz in December 1983, Bové was surprised to see that the trees had been severely pruned (Fig. 182) rather than removed. This treatment resulted in the growth of many young, tender shoots (Fig. 182), on which psyllids were feeding, becoming infected at the same time with the greening pathogen. This heavy pruning contributed to enhanced transmission of the disease agent. Evidence that this was the case was observed in the three-year-old Washington navel sweet orange block, adjacent to the infected citrus collection. Several of the young trees were already stunted and showed symptoms of greening (Fig. 183). Electron microscopy showed the trees to be infected by the greening BLO. In another nearby block, young small-fruited acid lime trees were similarly stunted and showed severe leaf mottle as well as psyllid-induced galls
on the leaves. They also carried the greening BLO.
An extensive survey was carried out in December 1983 south of Ta'izz, in the Barakani area, where sweet orange and mandarin trees were known to have been dying since the 1970s. Indeed, no such trees could be found in the whole area, in spite of an extensive search. It was learnt subsequently that over 1 000 declining sweet orange trees had been pulled out in 1979. However, many small fruited acid lime trees were seen, some of which were 15 years old. Practically all of them had clear-cut symptoms of greening (Figs 185 to 187). Some of the leaves showed T. erytreae-induced galls or bumps (Fig. 187). Electron microscopy detected the greening BLO in the leaves of all four lime trees examined. These observations demonstrate that greening disease affects most of the lime trees in the Barakani area. A 20-year-old sweet lime seedling tree also carried greening. The decline of sweet orange and mandarin that occurred in the 1970s is therefore most probably due to greening, as sweet
orange and mandarin are much more susceptible to greening than small-fruited acid lime. A situation similar to that in the Barakani area also occurs on a much larger scale in the southwestern part of Saudi Arabia, where sweet orange and mandarin trees have disappeared, and only acid lime trees now survive. In both situations, the lime trees are still growing relatively well because they are only moderately susceptible to greening and are not affected by tristeza. Indeed, no evidence for tristeza could be seen on the many trees observed: there was no vein clearing or stem pitting.
Ironically, the budwood for the sweet orange and mandarin trees that have died or were pulled out in the Barakani area came through the extension services from the Agricultural Research Station in Ta'izz. It is quite possible that greening was introduced into the Barakani area with budwood from the Ta'izz station, where greening is well established.
Al Baida region (December 1983 survey). Dinahem area, Nasser Al Kahr Shuft orchard The orchard comprises about 100 12-year-old Valencia late sweet orange trees. The planting material came from Aden (where greening has never been reported). The trees showed severe T. erytreae damage, but symptoms of greening occurred only on some branches, suggesting that the disease was of recent introduction. Symptoms of greening were seen on the leaves (zinc-deficiency pattern, mottle and yellow midveins), and on the fruit (Figs 194 and 195). The greening BLO was detected by electron microscopy (Fig. 5).
No psyllid damage or greening symptoms could be seen on three-year-old navel and Valencia late sweet orange trees of Egyptian origin in three nearby orchards, indicating again that introduction of greening and its vector is relatively recent.
Zaher area, Homegani orchard. Severe greening was seen on an eight-year-old sweet orange tree that was introduced from Ta'izz. Electron microscopy detected the greening BLO in the tree (Fig. 6).
T. erytreae-induced galls and symptoms of greening were seen on 20 three-year-old acid lime trees.
In summary, in the Al Baida region, T. erytreae and greening are present. Their introduction into this relatively isolated area must have occurred recently, probably in the late 1970s. Eradication of the relatively few affected trees was advised.
In 1985 when northern and southern Yemen were still separate countries, it was not possible to go from Al Baida in the north to nearby Mukayras in the south. Bové was, however, given the opportunity to reach Mukayras in April 1987 via Aden and Lawdar. As expected, he observed the presence of T. erytreae on leaves of sour orange (Figs 189 and 190) and small-fruited acid lime (see the section on southern Yemen below). These observations indicate that the whole Al Baida-Mukayras area is infected.
Hammam Ali region (April 1982 survey). T. erytreae-induced galls were seen on leaves of sweet orange, Clementine (Fig. 191) and mandarin. Eggs and nymphs of the psyllid were abundant on young sweet orange leaves. Greening symptoms were seen on certain branches. The disease is probably of recent introduction.
Wadi Dahr, San'a region (December 1983 survey). In the Hassan Al Buchari orchard, severe T. erytreae damage was observed on leaves of lemon, small-fruited acid lime and sweet orange. The greening BLO was detected by electron microscopy of yellow, mottled sweet orange leaves (Fig. 4). Leaves of a nearby fig tree had many galls. These were due to Trioza buxtoni, not T. erytreae.
Other regions. No evidence for the presence of greening and its psyllid vector, T. erytreae, was found in the Tihama or Marib-Harib areas.
Other virus and virus-like diseases
Marib-Harib region (December 1983 survey). The Marib region contains many fine sweet orange and mandarin trees and seems well suited to citrus production. Unfortunately, trees were not propagated from certified bud-wood and show symptoms of several transmissible diseases of citrus. Psorosis young leaf symptoms (Figs 94 and 96) were observed in every orchard on practically all sweet orange trees. Such symptoms are associated with several diseases (scaly bark psorosis, concave gum, cristacortis, impietratura and infectious variegation). In Marib, they seem to be more particularly associated with concave gum. Indeed, severe concave gum was frequently observed (Figs 103 and 104). In one orchard (Mohamed Eberi Saad) young sweet orange trees showed conspicuous psorosis young leaf symptoms, but were too young to show trunk symptoms. However, the 15-year-old mother trees from which they had been propagated showed very severe symptoms of concave gum (Fig. 103) as well as psorosis
young leaf symptoms. This indicates that the symptoms shown by the young sweet orange trees are, in this case, due to the concave gum agent, and that this agent has been transmitted from the mother trees to the progeny trees.
In several orchards, the trunks of young trees were covered with soil (Fig. 224). This inadvisable practice favours phytophthora gummosis on the susceptible sweet orange and lemon scions, and the disease was indeed observed on several lemon trees. Some lemon trees also showed symptoms resembling mal secco. The causal fungus, Deuterophoma tracheiphila Petri is believed to be present in northern Yemen, and the German plant protection group in northern Yemen has reported mal secco in Hammam Ali (though Bové did not observe it there). It is important to confirm or refute the presence of mal secco in Yemen.
In the Harib region, two interesting cases were observed in the Al Sagifa Abduraba Golan orchard, one on sweet orange trees, the other on mandarin trees. Several sweet orange trees on unrecorded rootstocks were declining. The trees showed bud-union crease, conspicuous stem pitting with corresponding bark pegging on the rootstock (Figs 76 and 77) and gum impregnation of the sweet orange scion bark (Fig. 78). The presence of gum in the sweet orange bark is characteristic of gummy bark. The other symptoms observed on these trees (bud-union crease and stem pitting on rootstock) could also be due to the gummy bark agent if the rootstock were rough lemon. This is very probably the case, since a shoot growing out of a root from an affected tree (Fig. 76) was identified as rough lemon on the basis of its leaves. Hence, the declining sweet orange trees are affected by gummy bark and show the symptoms of this disease both on the sweet orange scions and the rootstocks, identified as
rough lemon. Some of the trees are also affected by concave gum.
The second case involved Willowleaf mandarin trees. Practically all showed symptoms of cachexia: heavy gum impregnation of the mandarin bark (Fig. 262, right) and stem pitting with corresponding bark pegging on the mandarin scion (Fig. 262). The unrecorded rootstock also showed stem pitting and mild bark gumming below the bud-union. The rootstock is again probably rough lemon, since rough lemon has been identified in this orchard (see above). If so, the symptoms observed on the rootstock are those of gummy bark. These mandarin trees are thus affected by two diseases: cachexia as seen on the scion, and gummy bark as seen on the rough lemon rootstock.
The above two cases illustrate how difficult it is to diagnose certain diseases accurately when the nature of the rootstock is not recorded. The farmers' attention must be drawn to the importance of recording the major characteristics of their trees: origin of budwood, age of trees at date of planting, name of scion cultivar and name of the rootstock cultivar.
In summary, the major diseases observed in the Marib-Harib region are concave gum, psorosis young leaf symptoms and gummy bark on sweet orange trees, and cachexia and gummy bark on mandarin trees. As the trees are old-line trees, they are probably also infected with the exocortis viroid, but this can only be determined by indexing. No evidence of tristeza and greening was seen. No psyllids or psyllid galls were found. Contrary to a 1983 report, no symptoms of cristacortis were observed. The Marib-Harib region is well suited to citrus, but new citrus projects must make use of only certified budwood so as to avoid the many diseases whose symptoms are seen in today's orchards.
Hammam Ali (April 1982 survey). Hammam Ali is among the regions that harbour T. erytreae, the vector of citrus greening disease. Early symptoms of greening were seen there, as noted earlier.
In addition, very strong and typical symptoms of cristacortis were seen on many mandarin trees on sour orange rootstock, which were also affected by cachexia. Cristacortis stem pitting and corresponding bark pegging were seen on the sour orange trunk (Figs 109 and 112). Cachexia was diagnosed by the presence of gum in the mandarin bark (Fig. 112). An additional symptom of cachexia is stem pitting. Figure 112 clearly shows the difference between the conoid type of pitting associated with the strain of cachexia involved here and the cristacortis stem pitting, in which the pits occur as distinct, deep and narrow, longitudinal depressions (Fig. 110).
Ibb (April 1982 and December 1983 surveys). In April 1982, no evidence for the presence of T. erytreae was seen. In December 1983, however, galls of the psyllid were seen on many leaves of lemon, sour orange and sweet orange trees.
The most widespread symptom observed in April 1982 was the psorosis young leaf symptom. This symptom (see Figs 91 to 97) must be observed at the right time of the year, when the leaves are still young and soft and the temperature is cool. April seems to be a good period for this in the highlands of Yemen, and, indeed, psorosis young leaf symptoms (see Fig. 97) were seen on all navel sweet orange trees on sour orange rootstock imported from Egypt.
Typical symptoms of cristacortis were observed in 1983 on the sour orange rootstocks of lemon trees of Egyptian origin (Figs 114 and 115). Cristacortis is one of the diseases in which psorosis young leaf symptoms occur.
In December 1983, severe symptoms of phytophthora gummosis were observed on the scions of lemon trees grafted on sour orange (Figs 229 and 230). This is a typical case. Phytophthora gummosis developed because the trees were planted too deep, with their bud-union buried below soil level, and trees began to show phytophthora lesions above soil level. When soil was removed from around the trunks, the lesions were seen to extend all the way down to the bud-union line (Fig. 230). Figures 229 and 230 show how circular soil levees have been built around the trees to protect them from irrigation water.
Warazan nursery, Al Rahida region (April 1982 survey). It is a pity that the budwood used in this well-kept nursery came from uncertified, old-line mother trees. Indeed, every navel sweet orange budling of Egyptian origin showed psorosis young leaf symptoms whether the plants were still in plastic bags or already planted in the field. Seedlings of several rootstock cultivars other than sour orange, such as rough lemon, Troyer citrange and Cleopatra mandarin, were growing in shaded seed-beds. It is not advisable to graft uncertified budwood from the above sweet orange trees on these seedlings, especially Troyer citrange, as problems may be encountered with diseases such as exocortis.
Citrus trees imported from a commercial nursery in Rome (Italy) were also seen. They were not certified free of transmissible diseases.
No symptoms of tristeza (leaf vein clearing) were seen on the many small-fruited acid lime seedlings, and no signs of T. erytreae were seen in the nursery, though the psyllid is probably present in the area.
Agricultural Research Station, Aussfera farm, Ta'izz (April 1982 and December 1983 surveys). On this farm Bové found evidence of citrus greening disease for the first time in Yemen.
Psorosis young leaf symptoms were again seen on navel sweet orange trees from Egypt. Trees had also been imported from India and Japan. Coorg mandarin trees on different rootstocks came from Bangalore, and sweet orange budlings from Japan. Both India and Japan are known to be infected with CTV as well as the citrus canker bacterium. Introduction of citrus from such countries should be strictly prohibited, even for agricultural experiment stations. It is highly likely that citrus canker was introduced into Yemen by citrus trees from India.
Typical stem-pitting symptoms of cristacortis were seen on sweet orange trees of Italian origin.
Mauza farm, Wadi Safia region (April 1982 survey). Mauza is southwest of Ta'izz and close to the coastal Tihama. Its low altitude (200 m) explains why no T. erytreae psyllids or greening symptoms were seen. However, many other citrus disorders were observed in this old citrus farm on sweet orange, mandarin and lemon trees over 20 years of age.
Typical symptoms of gummy bark (gum impregnation of bark) were observed above the bud-union lines of sweet orange trees grafted on sour orange rootstock. The tolerant rootstocks showed no symptoms. An interesting case of gummy bark was observed on sweet orange trees that were top-grafted with mandarin. The sweet orange part of the mandarin trees was present in between the sour orange rootstocks and the mandarin tops. Severe gummy bark symptoms were present only on the susceptible sweet orange middle section (Fig. 79).
Some of the sweet orange trees with gummy bark also had characteristic symptoms of Rio Grande gummosis. Old, inactive lesions with exposed wood at the centre (Fig. 242) indicate that Rio Grande gummosis is not a disease of recent appearance in Mauza.
Typical cristacortis stem pitting was present on some of the sweet orange trees (Fig. 113) and suggests that trees are of Italian origin. Shell bark (Fig. 258) was seen on an old-line lemon tree on sour orange rootstock.
Garouba Citrus Project, Bait al Faqih region, Tihama (1982 survey.) With 50 000 nursery trees, this is the largest citrus project in Yemen and extends over 5 ha. It was started with the help of USAID in 1978-79. Budwood for the various field blocks comes from the United States of America and Spain and was certified free of transmissible diseases. Indeed, no symptoms of such diseases were seen. Because of the low altitude - less than 200 m - and the hot climate, T. erytreae is absent. Unfortunately, however, citrus canker has been detected and is a severe blow to the whole project.
Jaraba Citrus Project, Bajil region, Tihama (1982 survey). As in Garouba, the hot climate associated with the low altitude prevents the occurrence of T. erytreae, but citrus canker has been introduced with citrus trees from India. Such trees were seen growing in the open field. No symptoms of tristeza were seen on four-year-old small-fruited acid lime trees.
Greening and other virus and virus-like diseases in northern Yemen: conclusion
Greening. Greening and its psyllid vector, T. erytreae, were seen in Ta'izz and the Barakani area, Al Baida (as well as in the nearby Mukayras area in southern Yemen), Hammam Ali and San'a (Wadi Dahr). The disease and its vector were not seen in the Tihama, or the Marib-Harib region. In other words, the disease and its vector only occur in areas where citrus is present at an altitude above 700-1 000 m. In these relatively cool areas the heat-sensitive psyllid vector thrives well, whereas it does not withstand the hot climate of the Tihama and other low-lying areas (Marib and Harib). Similarly, greening was only observed in the areas where T. erytreae was present. This indicates that the form of greening present in northern Yemen is the heat-sensitive African form. It is most probable that greening and T. erytreae entered Yemen over the Bab al Mandab strait from neighbouring Ethiopia where the disease and its vector are known to be well established. After having spread
throughout the highlands of Yemen moving northwards, the insect eventually entered Saudi Arabia where it has already reached the Najran, Fayfa and Abha areas. The latter harbours not only T. erytreae but also D. citri, the Asian psyllid vector of the greening BLO. While T. erytreae invades new favourable zones travelling northwards, D. citri is moving southwards from the Mecca area. It has now reached Abha and could one day enter Yemen. As D. citri and the Asian form of greening are both heat-tolerant, they could easily become established, not only in the cool highlands of Yemen, but also in the hot lowlands of the Tihama. They are therefore potentially a great threat to Yemen.
Other virus and virus-like diseases. Psorosis young leaf symptoms were frequently seen on sweet orange leaves in the following areas: Marib-Harib, Ibb, Ta'izz and Warazan. In the Marib area, psorosis young leaf symptoms were associated with concave gum. At Ibb and Warazan, they were observed on practically all sweet orange trees of Egyptian origin, showing that these trees were not propagated from virus-free budwood.
Typical cases of cristacortis were seen on sour orange or sweet orange in Hammam Ali, Ibb, Ta'izz and Mauza. Cristacortis is a widespread disease in the Mediterranean islands of Sicily and Sardinia (Italy) and Corsica (France). It is therefore interesting to see such numerous and typical cases of the disease in Yemen. The presence of cristacortis in the country is probably due to the importation of infected trees or budwood from Italy. Indeed, Italy is among the countries from which trees were and still are imported to Yemen. For instance, in April 1982, at the Ibb and Warazan nurseries, Bové saw many mandarin, sweet orange and lemon trees just imported from Eurogarden nurseries in Rome. Therefore, the cristacortis-affected mandarin trees in Figures 109 to 1 15 illustrate a situation where the nature of the disease gives an indication of the origin of the trees.
Cases of gummy bark on sweet orange were seen in Harib and Mauza. This disease was first described in Egypt and is widespread in the Near East. Southern Yemen contains many such cases.
Cachexia was present on practically all mandarin trees in Hammam Ali and Harib. In Harib, the mandarin scions showed cachexia symptoms and their rough lemon rootstock, symptoms of gummy bark.
Exocortis symptoms were not observed because the rootstocks used in northern Yemen, sour orange and rough lemon, are tolerant of the exocortis viroid. It is, however, more than likely that most of the old-line cultivars introduced from Italy, Egypt, southern Yemen or Saudi Arabia are infected with the exocortis viroid(s). Propagation of the budwood of these old lines on rootstocks such as Troyer citrange would most probably result in exocortis appearing on the rootstock.
No symptoms of tristeza were seen on the many small-fruited acid lime trees observed, indicating that tristeza virus is not spreading in northern Yemen. Suspect trees were seen occasionally, but they all indexed negative for tristeza by ELISA in Bordeaux.
Symptoms of three fungal diseases were observed: phytophthora gummosis in the Marib and Ibb regions; Rio Grande gummosis at Mauza; and a mal secco-like disorder in Marib. Presence of Phoma tracheiphila, the causal fungus of mal secco, must be confirmed. Phytophthora gummosis can be prevented by proper horticultural practices and Rio Grande gummosis by keeping pruning to a minimum and disinfecting wounds.
Citrus canker, a disease caused by the bacterium Xanthomonas campestris pv. citri, was detected in the Tihama in 1982. No symptoms were observed by Bové during his 1982 survey in the Tihama, because the affected trees had been eradicated. The disease has subsequently spread to the highlands and eradication is no longer feasible. Citrus canker was very probably introduced with citrus trees from India, where the disease is widespread.
No evidence of citrus canker was found by Bové during his 1983 and 1987 surveys in southern Yemen, and it is essential that citrus canker be kept out of this part of the country. To this end, severe restrictions must be imposed on the movement of citrus material from the infected northern part of Yemen to the as yet uninfected south.
The Tihama was thought to be a suitable region for growing citrus nursery trees, because it is free of greening, and T. erytreae, the vector of the disease, does not multiply there. Unfortunately, the presence of citrus canker has made this region much less attractive. If, however, citrus canker has now spread throughout northern Yemen, it is not really important, as far as citrus canker is concerned, where the nurseries are established and the Tihama might again be used for nurseries.
<section>s</section>
Southern Yemen
Citrus in southern Yemen
Citrus has been introduced into southern Yemen from various countries, such as Egypt, Iraq and Italy. None of the introduced plant material was certified free of virus and virus-like diseases, and can thus be expected to be contaminated with a whole range of diseases known to be present in the countries of origin.
The major citrus area is the Lawdar-Mudia region, with approximately 22 000 sweet orange trees covering a total of 100 ha. Sweet orange makes up about 60 percent of all citrus, the other cultivars including Willowleaf mandarin and Clementine, grapefruit, lemon and Balady lime (Citrus aurantifolia). Water for irrigation is from wells. The decrease in rainfall over the last ten years is probably the reason why the Lawdar-Mudia area is running short of water for irrigation, and explains why the acreage of citrus has declined over the last decade. Now, rainfall ranges from 200 to 400 mm per year and occurs in the cool winter season. The summers are hot and dry.
The Say'un-Tarim area in Wadi Hadramawt (see Map 19) grows mostly Balady lime seedling trees (12 000) and some sweet orange trees (2 000). The soils are saline and of high pH, about 8.0. The Bayhan area, close to Harib in northern Yemen, has mainly sweet orange trees (4 000). The author surveyed the Harib area in 1983 but not the Bayhan. Finally, there are about 6 000 Balady lime trees in the coastal Zinjibar-Gaar area.
Two rootstocks seem to have been used in southern Yemen: sour orange and rough lemon. Unfortunately the rootstocks are almost never recorded. Lack of rootstock identification has made it difficult to interpret certain symptoms seen on rootstocks.
Greening in southern Yemen and the Arabian Peninsula
The situation in southern Yemen. Since greening disease and its insect vector, the African psyllid T erytreae, are both present in northern Yemen and in particular at Al Baida, an area very close to Mukayras in the south, the probability was high that the disease and the vector also existed in the Mukayras area. The 1987 survey has indeed shown that T. erytreae is present and reproduces on citrus in the Mukayras region. Developing nymphs and young adults (Fig.189) of the psyllid have been found in the A. Hydan orchard on sour orange (Figs 189 and 190) and Balady lime. Evidence for the occurrence of T erytreae is based on the presence of nymphs and adults, but conveniently also on the development of bumps on the upper leaf surface (Fig. 190). Each "bump" is a concave depression seen on the lower surface of the leaf, and represents a nest in which a nymph has grown. (It should be pointed out that D. citri does not produce concave depressions or bumps.)
In spite of the presence of T erytreae, symptoms of greening disease were not seen in the Mukayras region, while across the border at Al Baida the disease was widespread. The reason is that there is very little citrus in the Mukayras region. In fact, citrus could only be seen in one farm, and even there the number of citrus plants was very small. Yet, on these few isolated citrus trees, there was abundant multiplication of T erytreae Greening being present at Al Baida, it is clear that if citrus orchards were to be developed in the Mukayras region, greening disease would soon appear.
Greening disease and T erytreae are not present in the Lawdar-Mudia area, in spite of its close proximity to the Mukayras area. The reason is that Mukayras is at an altitude of 2 100 m, which offers favourable climatic conditions for the development of T erytreae and the African heat-sensitive form of greening. In contrast, the Lawdar region is at a much lower altitude, 800 m, and the climate is probably too hot and dry for T erytreae and greening to occur.
There was no evidence of greening or T. erytreae in Jawl-Madrum, near Musaymir, on the road to Ta'izz and close to the former border with northern Yemen. There are, however, other areas in southern Yemen adjacent to the northern part of the country where greening and its vector could occur. Dhala in the south is near Qataban in the north. If Qataban turns out to be affected by the disease and its vector, Dhala might also be, unless its location is similar to that of Lawdar, i.e. at too low an altitude for the disease and its vector to survive.
Bayhan on the southern side of the former border is close to Harib on the northern side. The 1983 survey showed that there was no greening or T erytreae in Harib (or in nearby Marib). For that reason, it is likely that the Bayhan area is also unaffected.
Recommendations concerning greening in southern Yemen. Greening disease is absent from the citrus-growing regions of southern Yemen, but the African psyllid vector, T. erytreae, is present in Mukayras and perhaps in other areas close to northern Yemen where the disease and its vector occur.
Therefore the recommendations below are directed at preventing the disease and its vector reaching the Lawdar-Mudia area, the major citrus-growing region in southern
Yemen. Even though the relatively low altitude of the Lawdar-Mudia area (800 m) seems to protect it from becoming easily affected, the following recommendations are made for further security.
* Do not extend citrus culture to the Mukayras plateau, or to any other region close to northern Yemen where greening is known to occur.
* In view of the very limited number of citrus trees growing in the Mukayras area, pull out and destroy all these trees.
* Prevent movement of citrus plant material from Lawdar to Mukayras and, even though disease spread is unlikely, from Mukayras to Lawdar.
* Prevent movement of citrus plant material from Al Baida into southern Yemen. More generally, prevent introduction of any citrus from the north to the south, not only because of greening, but also in view of the fact that citrus canker, a bacterial disease caused by Xanthomonas campestris pv. citri, is spreading through northern Yemen, from the Tihama up to the plateau. Citrus canker is carried by fruit and especially limes. Therefore, do not even import fruit from canker-affected regions. Greening also affects fruit, but the disease is not likely to be spread by fruit alone.
* Only T. erytreae, the African psyllid vector of greening, is present in northern Yemen, and now in the Mukayras area in the south. D. citri, the Asian vector, is present in the southwestern part of Saudi Arabia and is moving southwards. D. citri could very probably become established, even in the coastal areas where many limes are grown. Prevent introduction of citrus plant material from Saudi Arabia. Remember that D. citri, contrary to T. erytreae, does not produce leaf bumps, and is therefore more difficult to detect: watch for eggs and adults.
* Greening and T. erytreae were very probably introduced into Yemen from Ethiopia where the disease and T. erytreae are endemic on the plateaux. Prevent introduction of citrus plant material from Ethiopia. The same holds for the Hargeisa area in northwestern Somalia where greening and tristeza are present.
Stubborn
Stubborn-like symptoms were shown by several sweet orange trees in the Lawdar-Mudia and Say'un-Tarim areas. The symptoms were seen on Washington navel (Mudia and Lawdar nurseries), Valencia late (Al Radod orchard, Say'un) and unrecorded sweet orange trees (El Hayied orchard, Lawdar-Mudia area; Jaima orchard, Say'un area).
The presence of stubborn in southern Yemen is not surprising as countries such as Egypt and Iraq, from whence the initial citrus budwood was introduced, are known to harbour stubborn disease (Bové et al., 1984).
Infection in the south could spread through natural transmission of S. citri by leafhoppers, though nothing is known about the presence there of S. citri-vector leafhoppers such as N. haematoceps and N. tenellus. It is, however, established that leafhoppers able to transmit MLOs are present in southern Yemen, since typical symptoms of MLO-infection such as phyllody were seen on periwinkle (Catharanthus roseus) plants at the El Kod experiment centre. These plants contained MLOs as determined by electron microscopy. Whether the leafhoppers able to transmit MLOs in the south are also able to transmit S. citri remains to be seen.
At the present time, stubborn does not seem to be a major problem in southern Yemen. Caution is necessary, however, as the hot climate of the citrus-growing areas favours symptom expression of the disease. The following recommendations should be followed.
* Use only budwood free of virus and virus-like pathogens.
* Remember that stubborn is an insect-transmitted disease.
* Young citrus trees (sweet orange, grapefruit, etc.) are more susceptible to natural infection with S. citri through leafhoppers than are mature trees, and so nursery trees and trees in young orchards represent the main target for infection. Once the trees have reached the age of six to seven years, their chances of becoming infected are low.
* Survey nurseries and young orchards at least once a year, pull out infected or suspect trees and replace them with healthy ones.
Gummy bark of sweet orange
Of all virus and virus-like diseases of citrus, gummy bark of sweet orange is probably the most conspicuous disease of citrus in southern Yemen.
The symptoms of gummy bark on sweet orange are similar to those of cachexia on mandarin. The disease was first described by Nour Eldin (1956) in Egypt on sweet orange trees grafted on sour orange rootstock. While the disease has attracted little attention in America, it is a widespread and serious disease not only in Egypt, but in many other citrus-growing countries in the Near East. The author has seen severe cases of gummy bark in the Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Oman, Saudi Arabia, the Syrian Arab Republic, the Sudan and Turkey. Surveys in these countries show the disease to be much more widespread than initially thought. It was probably distributed in many countries by the introduction of citrus material from Egypt. Indeed, the sweet orange varieties on which the disease is seen are most often of Egyptian origin. In view of the many citrus introductions from Egypt into southern Yemen, it is not surprising that gummy bark is present in all the citrus-growing areas.
All the major sweet orange varieties grown in the southern region (Washington navel, Valencia late and Hamlin) are affected. In the Lawdar-Mudia area, the Lawdar and the Mudia government nurseries have distributed many trees to commercial orchards. Since sweet orange trees in these nurseries are affected by gummy bark, it is not surprising that the disease has been distributed by these nurseries all over the area. The same situation occurs in the Say'un-Tarim area: severe gummy bark affects Aboussoura navel sweet orange trees of Egyptian origin in the Jaima farm. This farm acts as a local nursery and is probably responsible for the dissemination of the disease.
Several cases or different types of gummy bark have been seen in southern Yemen (see Table 57). When the sweet orange bark is heavily impregnated with gum and the outer bark is rough or scaly (Fig. 68), scaling probably starting at the bud-union. Some trees show gummy bark symptoms only on the sweet orange scion (Figs 61, 68 and 69), others on both the scion and the rootstock (Figs 74, 75 and 77).
Only two citrus rootstocks have been used in southern Yemen: sour orange and rough lemon. Sour orange is tolerant, but rough lemon is susceptible to the gummy bark agent (Nour-Eldin, 1956, 1968, 1980). Therefore, it is very likely that the gummy bark-affected sweet orange trees without symptoms on the rootstock are grafted on sour orange, while those with symptoms are on rough lemon roots. In addition, it is known that when sweet orange trees on rough lemon are infected with the gummy bark agent, a bud-union crease is obtained. This is exactly what is observed with the gummy bark-affected sweet orange trees on symptomatic rootstocks (Figs 74, 76 and 77), suggesting that these rootstocks are indeed rough lemon.
The cases of gummy bark with heavy gum impregnation of the sweet orange bark are probably due to severe strains of the pathogen. Some strains might, however, be more severe on rough lemon than on sweet orange, as illustrated by the tree in Figures 74 and 76, where gum impregnation and pegging are more severe on the rootstock (rough lemon) bark than the sweet orange bark (Figs 75 and 77).
Finally, in southern Yemen the most conspicuous symptom of gummy bark on sweet orange is gum impregnation of the bark. Stem pitting (bark pegging) is mild to moderate on sweet orange and sometimes more severe on the rootstock (rough lemon) (Fig. 77). In several cases, the cambial face of the sweet orange bark shows moderate to severe (Fig. 71) pinholing.
As shown in Figures 67 and 72, gummy bark can be detrimental to trees, not only when they are grafted on the sensitive rough lemon and show bud-union constriction, but also when grafted on the tolerant sour orange. As discussed above, there are different strains of the gummy bark agent and, obviously, severe strains that induce heavy gum impregnation of the bark accompanied by sweet orange bark scaling can seriously affect the tree.
When gummy bark is accompanied by bark scaling, the thin bark underlying the scales can become points of entry for Phytophthora spp. (Fig. 68) which, once established, can severely affect the sensitive sweet orange bark above the bud-union as well as sensitive rootstocks, such as rough lemon, below the bud-union.
The only recommendations concerning gummy bark are:
* Do not take plant material for propagation from affected, symptomatic trees.
* Use only budwood free of virus and virus-like pathogens.
* On the basis of symptomatology, gummy bark on sweet orange resembles cachexia on mandarin. The causal agent of cachexia being of a viroid nature, it is not unlikely that viroid(s) could also be involved in gummy bark. Viroids are mechanically transmissible. At this stage, it is not known whether the gummy bark agent is mechanically transmissible. If it is, a good precautionary measure is to disinfect pruning tools, using household bleach diluted to give a 5 percent solution of sodium hypochlorite, after pruning each tree.
TABLE 57 Various cases of gummy bark in sweet orange in southern Yemen
Cachexia
In southern Yemen, a high percentage of mandarin in all areas visited showed typical symptoms of cachexia. In the Lawdar area, affected trees were seen in the Lawdar and Mudia government nurseries, and the El Hayed orchard (where Clementine trees were affected); the Quasr Al Qubba orchard in the Say'un-Tarim area had cachexia symptoms on all Willowleaf mandarin trees; the case illustrated by Figures 52 and 53 was seen in the Ali Mohson Al Fakir orchard in the Zinjibar-Gaar area.
Since mandarin trees in the Lawdar and Mudia government nurseries are affected, the disease has probably been spread to commercial orchards by budlings propagated with budwood from the affected trees. It is well known that many old lines of sweet orange, grapefruit and lemon often carry the cachexia viroid. As these species are tolerant of the cachexia agent, they show no symptoms of the disease. Therefore, the number of citrus cultivars carrying the cachexia agent is probably much larger than the number given by the affected mandarins only.
Recommendations concerning cachexia are:
* Do not take plant material for propagation from affected mandarin trees or on any other citrus species that have not been shown by indexing tests to be free of the cachexia agent.
* Use only budwood certified free of virus and virus-like diseases.
Kassala disease or bark gumming of grapefruit
A survey for citrus diseases in the Sudan revealed a new disorder of grapefruit: Kassala disease - named after the area where it was first seen - or bark gumming if one refers to the major symptom, namely gum impregnation of the grapefruit bark. Affected trees show grapefruit stem pitting in addition to bark gumming. Kassala disease is probably not due to the agents of cachexia and gummy bark, since these pathogens do not induce symptoms in grapefruit. The disease is cited here, because of the similarities in symptomatology with gummy bark and cachexia. Its viroid nature is being investigated. Only a few cases were found at the Lawdar nursery.
Scaly bark psorosis (psorosis A), concave gum and psorosis young feat symptoms
During the December 1983 and April 1987 surveys, typical psorosis young leaf symptoms were seen on many sweet orange and mandarin trees, both on budling trees in the nursery and on mature trees in the orchard.
Historically, these young leaf symptoms were first thought to be associated only with scaly bark psorosis (psorosis A) and concave gum-blind pocket. Today, it is well established that they also accompany impietratura and cristacortis. Therefore, psorosis young leaf symptoms alone, when observed on young trees, are not sufficient for identification of the disease involved.
Two forms of such symptoms are distinguishable - vein flecking, in which small, cleared spots or bands of lighter colour than the rest of the leaf are present on, and adjacent to, veins and veinlets (see Fig. 91), and a zonate or oak-leaf pattern, in which part of the leaf on each side of the midvein vaguely resembles an oak leaf. The portion of the leaf outside this pattern displays vein flecking (see Figs 92 to 97).
In California, oak-leaf pattern is thought to be specific to concave gum, but this view is not shared by other experts. Nevertheless, the presence of psorosis young leaf symptoms is indicative of either psorosis A, concave gum-blind pocket, cristacortis or impietratura. The first three diseases are characterized by trunk symptoms on mature trees: bark scaling, concave depressions and stem pitting, respectively. Impietratura causes typical fruit symptoms (gum pockets in the albedo). When such trunk or fruit symptoms are seen, it is wise to look for psorosis young leaf symptoms: their presence confirms the diagnosis. For instance, in southern Yemen, young leaf symptoms were seen in particular on adult trees with concave depressions and trees with bark scaling, thus confirming that these trunk symptoms were due to concave gum-blind pocket and scaly bark psorosis, respectively.
Psorosis young leaf symptoms can be seen only on young leaves, particularly during the spring and autumn growth flushes. They do not develop when the temperatures are too high. Also, they can be observed only for a relatively short time, since they disappear as leaves mature. These are the reasons why adult trees affected by concave gum-blind pocket or scaly bark psorosis do not always, or constantly, show psorosis young leaf symptoms. In southern Yemen, such trees, with and without these symptoms, were encountered.
Concave gum-blind pocket-affected sweet orange and mandarin trees were more numerous than trees with scaly bark psorosis. In concave gum, the concave depressions are wider than in blind pocket where the longitudinal lips or rims of the vertical depressions are closer together. The two types of concavity can often be seen on the same tree. Whether concave gum and blind pocket are different strains or different manifestations of the same virus is not yet clear. In southern Yemen, concave gum was the major form of the disease and could be seen in the following orchards of the Lawbar-Mudia area: Mudia nursery, El Hayed, M. Ali Rabbash, M.S. Al Daker and Abdullah Hosein orchards and Lawdar nursery. In the Hadramawt valley, strong psorosis young leaf symptoms were seen on young budlings in the nursery of the Jaima farm. In the M. Ali Rabbash orchard, severe concave gum symptoms were seen only on five-year-old Hamlin sweet orange trees; these trees came from the Mudia government
nursery. These examples show that young nursery trees showing psorosis young leaf symptoms, and thus infected with either psorosis A, concave gum-blind pocket, cristacortis and/or impietratura, are the major means by which these diseases are spread.
Control is only possible by the use of budwood certified free of virus and virus-like diseases.
Phytophthora gummosis
The disease is caused by any of a number of related soil-borne fungi of the genus Phytophthora, usually P. citrophthora or P. parasitica, which kill the bark. Control of this serious disease resides in the use of resistant rootstocks to prevent the fungus from attacking the susceptible mandarin, sweet orange or grapefruit scion varieties.
Sour orange is a phytophthora-resistant rootstock, and this is the major reason why the species has been used so widely as a rootstock for more than 100 years. However, the benefit of using a phytophthora-resistant rootstock is lost when the tree is budded too low, bringing the susceptible scion too close to the soil or, even worse, when the tree is planted too deep and the bud-union becomes buried in the soil. Phytophthora gummosis is also favoured when farmers put soil around the trunks and cover up the bud-union lines (Figs 224 to 226).
Cases of phytophthora gummosis are numerous in southern Yemen (see Table 58) and are often due to the bad horticultural practices mentioned above. Infection is favoured by gummy bark-induced bark cracking or scaling. Phytophthora gummosis, like all other fungal diseases, is not graft-transmissible, but it is a very serious disease, as the tree will die as soon as the bark lesions caused by the fungus have girdled the trunk.
In southern Yemen, phytophthora gummosis affects primarily sweet orange, but also grapefruit and Balady lime. Lime trees represent a special case as they are grown as seedling trees on their own roots. Allowing irrigation water to come into contact with the trunk favours development of phytophthora lesions on the susceptible lime bark and can result in the death of the tree. Infection can be prevented by planting the tree on a heap of soil.
Rio Grande gummosis
The disease was seen in the Lawdar nursery on grapefruit trees (Table 58) but seems less widespread in southern Yemen than in the Sudan or Somalia. Rio Grande gummosis is sometimes confused with phytophthora gummosis as well as scaly bark psorosis. To avoid confusion, Table 14 on p. 83 distinguishes between the symptoms of these three diseases.
TABLE 58 Virus and virus-like diseases and fungal diseases in southern Yemen
Sphaeropsis knot and witches' broom
A typical case of this fungal disorder was seen on lime trees in the Jawl Madrum area. The causal fungus, Sphaeropsis tumefaciens, can infect most citrus species but is found naturally only on lime and sweet orange trees. The fungus will live for several years in citrus tissue and is probably disseminated by pycnidiospores developed in dead tissues. The disease can damage and even kill trees of all ages.
An effective means of control is to remove the affected parts several inches beyond the innermost gall, thus removing all invaded tissue.
Boron toxicity and salt injury
Boron toxicity has been commonly observed in arid areas dependent on irrigation, such as Wadi Hadramawt. Even a very low boron content in irrigation water is sufficient to produce boron toxicity symptoms in citrus (see Figs 255 to 257). Irrigation water containing over I ppm of boron is generally considered unsuitable for use on citrus. The fact that boron is highly toxic to citrus in relatively low concentrations explains why, in the case of saline water or soils, boron toxicity symptoms are often the first manifestation of salt excess. As shown by Figure 255, in the case of boron toxicity, leaves show tip yellowing, followed by interveinal yellowing, which is more prominent at the apex. Burning (necrosis) of tips and margins occurs as injury progresses. Brownish, resinous gum spots or pustules are characteristic on the underside of leaves (not shown in Figure 255). It is generally observed that lemon, including rough lemon (see Figs 256 and 257), is more susceptible than
sweet orange.
In Australia, the order of decreasing susceptibility is lemon, sour orange, mandarin, kumquat, grapefruit and sweet orange; trees of sweet orange are more affected by boron toxicity when grown on rough lemon than on sour orange. In the Islamic Republic of Iran and the Sudan, Bové observed that Balady lime (C. aurantifolia) seedling trees were much more tolerant of salt injury than sour orange seedling trees; also, trees on Balady lime showed less salt burn than trees on sour orange.
The same could be seen in Wadi Hadramawt, where rough lemon trees showed severe boron toxicity, while adjacent Balady lime seedling trees showed much less toxicity. These lime trees were, however, severely affected by mite damage and this resulted in defoliation of the upper shoots. Balady lime is also fairly drought-resistant. Salt tolerance and drought resistance explain why Balady lime has been used as a rootstock in Egypt, Iran, Iraq, Saudi Arabia and the Sudan. However, as Balady lime is very susceptible to phytophthora gummosis and tristeza virus, it is not recommended as a modern rootstock.
Exocortis
The commercial citrus species (sweet orange, mandarin, grapefruit and lemon) do not show symptoms of exocortis. They are symptomless carriers of the exocortis agent, a complex of various viroids. Hence, when grafted on exocortis-susceptible rootstocks such as Poncirus trifoliata, citranges, Rangpur lime, sweet lime or citron, they infect these rootstocks which, after a period of time, will show symptoms of exocortis, namely bark scaling and/or stunting. Sour orange and rough lemon are symptomless carriers of exocortis viroids and, in contrast to the above susceptible rootstocks, will not show symptoms of the disease. Therefore, exocortis infection cannot be detected by visual examination of scion-rootstock combinations such as sweet orange, mandarin or grapefruit on sour orange or rough lemon. Indexing is required to diagnose exocortis in these symptomless trees.
In southern Yemen, sour orange and rough lemon are the major rootstocks, and no symptoms of exocortis have been seen in commercial orchards. It is, however, highly probable that many sweet orange, mandarin, grapefruit and lemon cultivars carry the exocortis agent. Indeed, in citrus experiment stations where exocortis-susceptible rootstocks have been tried, exocortis disease is frequently observed in rootstock experiments in which scion varieties of unknown health status have been used.
Tristeza
Balady lime is very susceptible to CTV and shows specific symptoms of the disease namely, leaf vein clearing and stem pitting. Limes in southern Yemen are grown as seedling trees and, since CTV is not transmitted through the seed, seedling trees are free of the virus (as well as of most other virus and virus-like agents of citrus). When seedling lime trees show symptoms of tristeza, it means that aphid vectors of the virus have inoculated it into the trees. Several aphid species are vectors of CTV, the most efficient being Toxoptera citricida, the black tropical citrus aphid. This aphid is not present in southern Yemen, and northern Yemen, Saudi Arabia and Oman are also free of it. However, other aphid vectors of tristeza such as Aphis gossypii, the cotton aphid, occur in southern Yemen and could transmit CTV.
No evidence for insect (aphid) transmission of CTV has been seen in southern Yemen. Many Balady lime seedling trees have been observed in practically all of the citrus orchards visited. No symptoms of tristeza have been seen on these trees.
The two rootstocks used in southern Yemen are sour orange and rough lemon. Trees of sweet orange, mandarin and grapefruit on sour orange roots are susceptible to tristeza, and show decline with most strains of the virus (some very mild, rare strains do not produce decline). No declining trees on sour orange rootstock have been seen, except in 1983 in the Ahmed Ruwais orchard (Lawdar-Mudia area) where a row of seven Hamlin sweet orange trees on sour orange showed typical symptoms of quick decline of the tristeza type. These trees, however, indexed negative for CTV by ELISA when analysed in Bordeaux. The adjacent trees showed no decline and were still in a good condition in 1987. Both the declining and non-declining trees were on sour orange and showed symptoms of gummy bark.
Trees on rough lemon are tolerant of tristeza: when infected by the virus, they show no symptoms. Therefore, theoretically, the possibility remains that some trees on rough lemon could be infected. However, as there is no spread of CTV in southern Yemen, these trees have not served as sources of inoculum for aphids to become viruliferous and spread the virus, as of April 1987.
Conclusions and further recommendations
The African psyllid vector of citrus greening disease, T. erytreae, has entered the Mukayras area in the south from Al Baida in northern Yemen. Even though no symptoms of greening disease were seen in the Mukayras area, mainly because very little citrus is grown there, the disease could easily become established on the Mukayras plateau if citrus were to be developed, and from there the disease could eventually reach the Lawdar-Mudia area. The recommendations that have been made above are intended to keep the disease and its vector out of the citrus-growing areas of southern Yemen.
The major virus and virus-like diseases of citrus, the symptoms of which can be seen throughout southern Yemen (see Table 58), are gummy bark of sweet orange, cachexia of mandarin and psorosis young leaf symptoms, mainly associated with concave gum disease. Exocortis cannot be observed on the commercial trees in southern Yemen as the scions and rootstocks (sour orange or rough lemon) of these trees are symptomless carriers of the exocortis viroid(s). It is, however, probable that a high percentage of these grapefruit, sweet orange and mandarin trees carry the exocortis agent. Similarly, sweet orange and rough lemon are symptomless carriers of the cachexia viroid. It is highly likely that many of the sweet orange and grapefruit cultivars in southern Yemen are infected with the cachexia agent. The presence of exocortis or cachexia, or both, in symptomless carriers can only be determined by indexing. The indicator plant for exocortis indexing is Etrog citron 861S1 and Parson's
Special mandarin for cachexia.
Many of the tristeza-tolerant rootstocks are susceptible to exocortis, cachexia or both. Such rootstocks (P. trifoliata, citranges, Rangpur lime or C. macrophylla) can only be used with cultivars free of cachexia and exocortis.
Bibliography
Bové, J.M. 1986. Greening in the Arabian Peninsula: toward new techniques for its detection and control. FAO Plant Prot. Bull., 34(1): 7-14.
Bové, J.M. & Garnier, M. 1984. Citrus greening and psylla vectors of the disease in the Arabian Peninsula. In Proc. 9^th Conf. IOCV, p. 109-114. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Bové, J.M., Saillard, C., Vignault, J.C. & Fos, A. 1984. Citrus stubborn disease in Iraq and Syria: correlation between symptom expression and detection of Spiroplasma citri by culture and ELISA. In Proc. 9th Conf IOCV, p. 145-152. Riverside, Univ. Calif.
Nour-Eldin, F. 1956. Phloem discoloration of sweet orange. Phytopathol., 46: 238239.
Nour-Eldin, F. 1968. Gummy bark of sweet orange. In J.F.L. Childs et al., eds. Indexing procedures for 15 virus diseases of citrus trees, p. 50-53. USDA/ARS Agriculture Handbook 333.
Nour-Eldin, F. 1980. In J.M. Bové & R. Vogel, eds. Description and illustration of virus and virus-like diseases of citrus. A collection of colour slides. Paris, IFRA SETCO-FRUITS.
<section>t</section>
Conclusion
Surveys for virus and virus-like diseases of citrus were conducted between 1 9X I and 1990 in the following countries of the Near East region: Algeria, Cyprus, Egypt, the Islamic Republic of Iran, Iraq, Jordan, the Libyan Arab Jamahiriya, Morocco, Oman, Pakistan, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, the Sudan, the Syrian Arab Republic, Tunisia, Turkey, the United Arab Emirates and Yemen. Data from additional surveys in 1991, 1992 and 1993 and from recent laboratory work in Bordeaux have been used to update the previous surveys.
The geographical distribution of citrus diseases in the countries of this region, as well as other countries of the world, is summarized in the Annex Table. The following diseases are present in most, if not all, countries of the Near East: cachexia-xyloporosis, concave gum-blind pocket, exocortis and scaly bark psorosis. Gummy bark and impietratura were seen in many countries of the region and especially those of the Mediterranean basin. These diseases are not transmitted by insect vectors and can be eliminated, by shoot-tip grafting, for instance. There is no reason for them to be seen in new orchards in the future.
Symptoms of stubborn and/or the presence of Spiroplasma citri, the stubborn agent, were detected in all countries of the region, except Pakistan. The leafhopper Neoaliturus (syn. Circulifer) haematoceps has been identified as a major vector of S. citri in the Near East. In certain countries such as Iran and Morocco, the closely related species, Neoaliturus tenellus, a vector of the stubborn agent in California, was also encountered. Salsola kali (tumbleweed, Russian thistle), a plant of the Chenopodiaceae family, is the preferred host of the two leafhopper species. The distribution of these leafhoppers follows that of S. kali, which itself is widely distributed throughout most of the region, from Morocco to Iran. In the Syrian Arab Republic, the high percentage of stubborn-affected trees in young mother trees of a newly established nursery could be correlated with the presence of S. kali and N. haematoceps within and around the nursery.
The occurrence of S. kali must be taken into account when new citrus nurseries or orchards are to be established. Its presence favours the development of high populations of the two S. citri vectors and, hence, abnormally high transmission rates of the stubborn spiroplasma can be obtained.
Sesamum indicum is another important plant. In the Adana region of Turkey, sesamum is infected with S. citri. N. haematoceps leafhoppers collected on sesamum fields were infected with S. citri and these naturally infected leafhoppers were shown to transmit the spiroplasma to healthy plants.
Another major result of the surveys was the discovery of greening disease in the southwestern part of the Arabian Peninsula, involving both Saudi Arabia and Yemen. The Asian form of greening and the Asian citrus psyllid vector, Diaphorina citri, are present in Saudi Arabia from Jeddah, in the north of the affected region, to Abha in the south. The African form of greening and the African citrus psyllid vector, Trioza erytreae, are present both in Saudi Arabia and Yemen, and extend from Ta'izz in the south of Yemen to Abha in Saudi Arabia. In the Abha area the two psyllid vectors of the greening agent have been observed in the same orchards. D. citri has probably been introduced from Asia into the Mecca area and has moved southwards until, in 1983, it reached the Abha area. T. erytreae has probably entered Yemen from Ethiopia and has progressed from south to north, entering Saudi Arabia and overlapping with D. citri in the Abha area. After Reunion, Mauritius and Saint Helena
islands, the Abha area is only the fourth region in the world where the two vectors of greening occur together. In Saudi Arabia, Asian greening, the more severe form of the disease, is responsible for the decline and disappearance of practically all sweet orange and mandarin trees, and, in the affected areas, only small-fruited acid lime trees survive as they are less susceptible to greening. In addition, lime is the citrus host on which the two psyllid vectors prefer to feed. The numerous greening-affected lime trees are thus as many host plants on which the feeding psyllids become infected with the disease agent. This situation explains why there is such a high rate of transmission of the greening agent in Saudi Arabia. In Yemen, the form of greening present is the African form. African greening and the African psyllid, ;T. erytreae, are sensitive to heat and occur only in relatively cool regions. This is why African greening and T. erytreae in Yemen and Saudi Arabia are
present only at altitudes above 1 000 m and do not occur on the coastal plains.
The surveys have also revealed that African greening is present in the northwestern part of Somalia, near Hargeisa. This is not surprising as the disease and T. erytreae are present in neighbouring areas of Ethiopia. However, the greening-affected trees in the Hargeisa area were found to be infected with citrus tristeza virus as well. This lends weight to the idea that the trees might have been imported from Kenya, where both tristeza and greening are endemic.
Greening and the Asian citrus psyllid vector are present in Pakistan. The disease is probably the cause of the decline that has been affecting sweet orange and mandarin trees for many years. Except for Ethiopia, the Hargeisa region of Somalia and the southwestern pan of the Arabian Peninsula, no countries west of Pakistan in the Near East region are as yet affected by greening. Iran, Iraq and the Mediterranean countries are still free of the disease and its two psyllid vectors. Greening remains, however, a major threat to these countries. The recent development of DNA probes for the detection of the greening BLO in plants and insects will undoubtedly help to prevent greening from entering these countries.
A new, lethal disease of lime has been discovered in the Sultanate of Oman: witches' broom disease of lime trees (WBDL). The causal agent of the disease is an MLO. WBDL is the first MLO disease of citrus. The disease is spreading fast and had reached the United Arab Emirates in 1989. An insect vector is probably involved in the transmission of the MLO. The leafhopper Hishimonus phycitis has been found on all lime trees tested in Oman and the United Arab Emirates. Its role as a vector of the WBDL MLO is being studied, especially in the light of the fact that the same leafhopper is known as the vector of an MLO disease in India - eggplant little leaf disease. Spread and development of WBDL may be connected to the recent introduction of H. phycitis from India to the Arabian Peninsula. In 1987 over 20 percent of all lime trees were already affected by WDBL in Oman. Death of the tree occurs within five years of the appearance of the first witches' broom. Whether citrus species
other than lime can become infected in nature is not yet known. Troyer citrange was infected experimentally and found to be susceptible. MAs and DNA probes have been developed and will make it possible to identify the insect vector. WBDL represents a major threat to lime and perhaps other citrus species in the Arabian Peninsula, the Persian Gulf countries, including Iran, and other citrus areas.
Tristeza is widespread throughout Asia and Southeast Asia where the aphid Toxoptera citricida is an efficient vector. The tristeza virus and T. citricida are present in the Indian subcontinent. In Pakistan the virus was detected in the Peshawar area and several parts of the Punjab. In these areas, T. citricida is not present. However, Aphis gossypii, Myzus persicae and other aphid species known to be vectors of tristeza virus are present in Pakistan.
In Iran, tristeza virus was introduced at Mahdasht, near Sari. in the Caspian Sea area, with the importation of thousands of satsuma trees from Japan. As the trees are grafted on Poncirus trifoliata, they are tolerant of tristeza and show no signs of disease. This is probably why it has not yet been possible to obtain the eradication of these trees, even though they represent a threat of utmost importance to the whole citrus industry along the Caspian Sea, as sour orange is the only citrus rootstock used there. The 1985 survey showed that only very limited spread of tristeza had occurred. The low level of natural transmission is probably due to the fact that T. citricida is absent. Toxoptera aurantii and Aphis citricola are the predominant aphid species in the Caspian Sea area.
Tristeza is spreading and has caused considerable damage in Spain and Israel, even though the most efficient vector, T. citricida, is not present. Other aphid species, such as A. gossypii and A. citricola, are responsible for the spread. This shows that even in the absence of T. citricida, tristeza virus can be transmitted by less efficient species. This is the reason why tristeza-affected trees should be eradicated even in areas where apparently no spread of the virus has yet been observed. Such areas are those of Turkey in the Izmir region and the Black Sea coast, where quite numerous tristeza-infected satsuma trees occur. These trees are grafted on P. trifoliata and are thus tolerant of tristeza. Only ELISA offers a quick technique to detect the infected trees, and these trees must be eradicated. A similar situation exists in the former Yugoslavia and probably in Albania along the Adriatic coast. Italy also has tristeza-infected trees with no apparent spread of the virus.
To repeat, these situations are dangerous, as tristeza decline may eventually sweep through these orchards as it has done in Spain and Israel.
The agent of vein enation-woody gall is transmitted by the same leafhoppers that spread tristeza virus - T. citricida, A. gossypii, A. citricola, etc. Except fore few cases in Iran, symptoms of this disease were not seen, as the usual scion-rootstock combinations are tolerant of this virus. It is however very possible that many trees harbour the pathogen. In Spain, indexing has shown this to be the case. It even seems that the vein enation-woody gall virus is more effectively spread by A. gossypii or A. citricola than is tristeza virus, since the former virus is transmitted in a persistent manner and the latter in a semi-persistent way (see Table 11). This means that, once infected with the vein enation virus, the aphid will remain viruliferous for a long period, while in the case of tristeza the retention period could be shorter, possibly only two to three weeks.
A virus disease not encountered in the surveys is that of tatterleaf-citrange stunt, again because most scion-rootstock combinations seen are tolerant of this virus. It is present to a significant extent in China. Indexing, on Rusk citrange, for instance, is required to determine the incidence of the virus in the Near East region.
Many cases of bud-union crease were observed during the surveys. Not all cases of this disorder are due to viruses. In one case at least, a graft-transmissible pathogen seems to be involved in the Near East region: the case of sweet orange trees on rough lemon rootstock when they are infected by the gummy bark agent. It has been revealed that gummy bark is much more widespread and a much more serious disease than was previously thought. It could be of a viroid nature and should be easily eliminated by shoot-tip grafting. While the agents of cachexia and gummy bark induce bark gumming and stem pitting respectively in mandarin and sweet orange, Kassala disease, discovered during the survey in the Sudan, produces similar symptoms in grapefruit. The disease was encountered also in southern Yemen. It, too, could be of a viroid nature.
Horticultural practices are generally poor in most of the countries surveyed. Trees are planted too deep in the soil, in depressions rather than on heaps, and rootstocks are budded too low. All this results in trees having their bud-union line close to, or buried in, the soil. This is the major cause of phytophthora gummosis, the most frequently observed disease in the Near East region. Other fungal diseases are Rio Grande gummosis, especially severe in Somalia, and mal secco which is affecting many trees in the Mediterranean area.
Citrus canker, a bacterial disease known to be present in the Indian subcontinent, has unfortunately appeared in Oman, Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates and Yemen. It is very unfortunate that the disease was not promptly eradicated in these countries. There is still some hope that it can be eradicated in the Salalah area of Oman.
Movement of citrus plants must be controlled by all means possible so as to avoid, for instance, the introduction of tristeza virus and citrus canker into Oman, with plants imported irresponsibly from India by incompetent nurseries. Bové was able to spot such a consignment of plants, infected with both tristeza and canker, within 48 hours of their release from customs. Had these trees not been destroyed immediately, the lime orchards of Oman would have begun to die not only from WBDL, but also from tristeza and canker. This shows how important it is to control importation of citrus plants and to establish effective quarantine control measures.
It is hoped that the information presented in this review will result in increased production and better-quality citrus fruit.
<section>u</section>
Annex table
Geographical distribution of citrus diseases
Country^1 Disease
BL CA CG CR EX GR GB GP IM IV KD LE MO MS PS PY RI RW RU SD SY ST TL TR^2 VE WB YV ZC CK MA PG RG AB
Algeria + + + + + + + + + + 
Argentina + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + 
Australia (+) + + + + + + + + + + + 
Benin + + 
Brazil + + + + + + + + + + + + + + + 
Cameroon + + + + 
Chile + + + + + + + + + 
China: mainland + + +^3 + + + + + + + + 
- Taiwan Province + + + +^3 + + + + + (+) + + 
Columbia + + + + + 
Comoros + + + 
Congo + + + + + 
Cook Islands + + + + + 
Côte d'Ivoire + + + + + 
Cuba + + + + + + 
Cyprus + + + + + + + + + + + + + 
Ecuador + + + + 
Egypt + + + + + + + + + 
Ethiopia + + +^4 + + + + + + + 
Fiji + (+) + + + + + + 
France: mainland + + + + + + + + 
- Corsica + + + + + + + + + + + 
- New Caledonia + + 
- Polynesia + + + + + 
- Reunion + + +^3, 4 + + + + 
- West Indies + + 
Greece + + + + + + + + + + (+) + + 
Guyana + 
India + + +^3 + + + + + + + + + + + + + 
Indonesia + + +^3 + + + + + 
Iran + + + + + + + + + + + + 
Iraq + + + + + + + + + +
Israel + + + + + + + + + + + + 
Italy + + + + + + + + + + (+) + + + 
Japan + + + + + + + + + + + + 
Jordan + + + + + + + + + 
Lebanon + + + + + + + + + + + 
Libya + + + + + + + +
Madagascar + + + +^4 + + + 
Malaysia (+) +^3 + + + 
Maldives + 
Mauritius + + + + +^3, 4 + + + + + + 
Mexico + + + + (+) + + + 
Morocco + + + + + + + + + + + + + 
New Zealand + + + + + 
Geographical distribution of citrus diseases (continued)
<section>v</section>
Figures
Figures 1 - 162
Figures 162 - 322
Figures 1 - 162
FIGURE 1 Helical virions
FIGURE 2 Icosahedral virions
FIGURES 3 to 21 are electron micrographs of the BLO associated with citrus greening disease
FIGURE 3 BLO in sieve tube of the peduncular end of the columella of a very young sweet orange. The inner (cytoplasmic) membrane and the outer (cell-wall) membrane are clearly visible on this enlarged BLO (Citrus collection block, Agricultural Research Station. Aussfera farm. Ta'izz. Yemen) x 55 000
FIGURE 4 BLO in sieve tube of a sweet orange leaf. Notice the inner and outer membranes of the BLO (Hassan AI-Buchari orchard, Wadi Dahr, Sana'a area, Yemen) x 30 000
FIGURE 5 BLOs in sieve tube of a Valencia late sweet orange leaf (Nasser Al Kahr Shufi orchard, Al Baida area, Yemen) x 30000
FIGURE 6 BLO in sieve tube of a sweet orange leaf from a eight-year- old tree, originally imported from Ta'izz (Homegani orchard, Zaher area, Al Baida region, Yemen) x 25 000
FIGURE 7 Numerous BLOs in sieve tube of fruit axis of a sour orange fruit from a seedling tree (Ibn Gemeyh orchard, Taif area, Saudi Arabia) x 7 500
FIGURE 8 Enlargement of part of the electron micrograph in Figure 7 x 30 000
FIGURE 9 BLOs in sieve tube of a small-fruited acid lime leaf (Maid Wazen orchard, Turabah, Saudi Arabia) x 22 000
FIGURE 10 BLOs in sieve tubes of mandarin feat from tree in Figure 200 (Maid Wazen orchard, Turabah, Saudi Arabia) x 12 000
FIGURE 11 BLOs in sieve tube of a small-fruited acid lime leaf (Ode Gambi orchard, Turabah, Saudi Arabia) x 15 000
FIGURE 12 BLOs in sieve tube of mandarin leaf. Tree is also affected by severe cachexia (Bakhit Addaussari orchard, Bishah, Saudi Arabia) x 24 000
FIGURE 13 BLO in sieve tube of sweet orange leaf (Bakhit Addaussari orchard, Bishah, Saudi Arabia) x 30 000
FIGURE 14 BLOs in sieve tub of mandarin leaf. Tree is also affected by severe cachexia (see Figure 38) (Ben Kadassa orchard, Bishah, Saudi Arabia) x 14 000
FIGURE 15 BLO in sieve tube of sweet orange leaf (Ben Kadassa orchard, Bishah, Saudi Arabia) x 55 000
FIGURE 16 BLOs in sieve tube of smallfruited acid lime leaf (Boua area, Saudi Arabia) x 40 000
FIGURE 17 BLO in sieve tube of smallfruited acid lime leaf from tree in Figure 206 (Brehim Khaibar, Khamis Mushait area, Saudi Arabia) x 55 000
FIGURE 18 BLOs in sieve tube of mandarin leaf from one of the two mandarin trees in Figure 206 (Brehim Khaibar, Khamis Mushait area, Saudi Arabia) x 40 000
FIGURE 19 BLO in sieve tube of navel sweet orange leaf from tree in Figure 177. Tree is also infected with citrus tristeza virus (see Figure 32) (Awadle Elmi-Mohamad Abdullah Hersi orchard, Hargeisa, Somalia) x 21000
FIGURE 20 BLOs in sieve tube of sweet orange leaf. Note a mitochondrion in the lower part of the electron micrograph. Tree is also infected with citrus tristeza vi us (see Figure 33). A bundle of tristeza virions can be seen on this electron micrograph below the round form of the BLO (Osman Ashour Hassan orchard, Hargeisa region, Somalia) x 30 000
FIGURE 21 A high concentration of greening BLOs (strain from Poona, India) in periwinkle sieve tubes. Several strains of the greening BLO have been transmitted from graft-inoculated sweet orange seedlings to periwinkle (Catharanthus roseus) plants by dodder (Cuscuta campestris) (INRA, Bordeaux) x 16 000
FIGURE 22 Spiroplasma citri in sieve tube of a graft-inoculated periwinkle (Catharanthus roseus) plant (INRA, Bordeaux) x8000
FIGURE 23 Spiroplasma citri in sieve tube of a naturally infected periwinkle plant (Rabat, Morocco) x16000
FIGURE 24 Spiroplasma citri in sieve tube of a naturally infected periwinkle plant (El Annadeh, Syria) x24000
FIGURES 25 to 28 are electron micrographs of the MLOs associated with witches' broom disease of small-fruited, acid lime trees in Oman. They show the MLOs in the sieve tubes of leaf midveins from various lime trees (see Table 38 in Chapter 16 for the correspondence between electron micrographs and leaf samples)
FIGURE 25 Adult tree in an advanced stage of decline (see Figure 138) in Roufeli orchard, Liwa. Sample E 2-3 x 10 000
FIGURES 26, 27, 28 Three-year-old tree in Roufeli orchard, Liwa. Sample E 1-1
FIGURES 29 and 30 The MLO associated with witches' broom disease of lime was transmitted from graft- inoculated lime seedlings to periwinkle (Catharanthus roseus) plants by dodder (Cuscuta campestris). The electron micrographs show how densely the MLOs fill the sieve tubes of periwinkle leaves
FIGURE 31 Citrus tristeza virion detected by immunosorbent electron microscopy in satsuma tree R7T4 on Poncirus trifoliata rootstock of Mahdasht orchard, Sari, Mazandaran province, Iran (C. Gove, INRA, Bordeaux) x 200 000
FIGURE 32 Closely packed visions of CTV in sieve tube of 26-year-old navel sweet orange tree (see Figure 177) also infected with the greening BLO (see Figure 19) (Awadle Elmi- Mohamad Abdullah Hersi orchard, Hargeisa, Somalia) x 30 000
FIGURE 33 Closely packed virions of CTV in sieve tube of Jaffa sweet orange leaf from tree in Figure 178. Tree is also infected with the greening BLO (Awadle Elmi-Mohamad Abdullah Hersi orchard, Hargeisa, Somalia) x 30 000
FIGURE 34 Neoaliturus (Circulifer) haematoceps (Baker). This leafhopper is the major insect vector of Spiroplasma citri in the Old World. It is not present in the New World (America). It has been reported as a vector of sugar beet curly top virus in Turkey (INRA, Bordeaux)
FIGURE 35 Neosliturus (Circulifer) tenellus (Mulsant and Rey). This leafhopper is the major insect vector of Spiroplasma citri in the United States of America where it also transmits sugar beet curly top virus. It is a vector of S. citri in the Old World (Courtesy of G. Oldfield, Riverside, California)
FIGURE 36 Salsola kali L. (Russian thistle, tumbleweed Chenopodiaceae), the major host plant of the leafhopper vectors of S. citri (Neoaliturus haematoceps and/or M tenellus) in the Old and New Worlds. S. kali is, however, not a host of S. citri (Fidio, El Annadeh, Syria)
FIGURE 37 Eggs, nymphal instars and adults of the two citrus psyllids, Trioza erytreae (Del Guercio and Diaphorina citri (Kuwayama), the vectors of the greening bacterium in Africa and Asia respectively (Courtesy of B. Aubert, IRFA, France)
FIGURE 38 Trunk of an old, cachexia-affected, declining mandarin tree on sour orange rootstock. Scratching away outer layers of bark across bud-union reveals streaks of gum in mandarin bark but not in sour orange bark. Removal of a piece of bark across budunion reveals pits in the mandarin stem (stem pining) with matching pegs on the inner face of the bark (see Figure 39) (Ben Kadassa orchard, Bishah, Saudi Arabia)
FIGURE 39 Pegs on inner (cambial) face of piece of bark removed from trunk of Figure 38. Note gum impregnation of mandarin bark only
FIGURE 40 Trunk of 25-year-old cachexiaaffected Clementine tree on sour orange rootstock. Removing outer layers of bark reveals mild bark gumming of Clementine bark only (Agricultural Research Station, Iskenderun, Turkey)
FIGURE 41 Removal of a piece of bark across bud-union of trunk in Figure 40 reveals a round, conoid type of pining on Clementine stem (middle) with matching pegs on cambial face of bark (left) and relatively mild gumming of Clementine bark (right)
FIGURE 42 Cachexia-affected mandarin tree on sour orange rootstock. In severe cases of cachexia, bark gumming extends high above bud. union (A.H. Al Hassa orchard, Kassala, the Sudan)
FIGURE 43 Inner (cambial) face of piece of bark from tree in Figure 42 removed across bud-union. Note pegs on mandarin bark but no pegs on smooth sour orange bark. Note also presence of abundant gum in mandarin bark, but not in sour orange bark
FIGURE 44 Twelve year old, cachexiaaffected mandarin tree on sour orange rootstock. Removal of strip of bark across bud-union reveals severe stem pitting, somewhat resembling cristacortis stem pitting (see Figure 110) (K. Al Sudeyri orchard, Najran, Saudi Arabia)
FIGURE 45 Lett: inner (cambial) face of strip of bark removed from trunk in Figure 44. Pegs on the cambial side of the mandarin bark fit into corresponding pits on the stem. Right: longitudinal section of strip of bark shows the presence of gum only in mandarin hark
FIGURE 46 Stunted, cachexia-affected mandarin tree on sour orange rootstock (Talab orchard, Kassala, the Sudan)
FIGURE 47 Trunk of stunted, cachexiaaffected affected mandarin tree in Figure 46. Note bark cracks above budunion. Such cracks are associated with severe forms of cachexia. A sucker with typical sour orange leaves grows out of the trunk well below bud-union, and identifies the rootstock as sour orange
FIGURE 48 Scratching away outer layers of bark from trunk shown in Figure 47 reveals very heavy gum Impregnation of mandarin bark, but not sour orange bark. Removal of piece of bark across bud-union reveals stem pitting and staining of wood
FIGURE 49 Gum extends high up above bud- union of the stunted, cachexia affected mandarin tree on sour orange rootstock in Figure 46 and of similar mandarin trees in the same orchard, illustrating the severity of the form of cachexia involved
FIGURE 50 Trunk of cachexia-affected mandarin tree on sour orange rootstock. Bark cracks above budunion are similar to those in Figure 47 (Bakhit Addaussari orchard, Bishah, Saudi Arabia)
FIGURE 51 Removal of a piece of bark across bud-union of the trunk in Figure 50 shows the exposed mandarin wood (left) to be studded with bristly pegs (inverse stem pitting). The pin- or needle-like pegs fit into holes up to 1 mm in diameter on the inner (cambial) face of the mandarin bark (pinholing, honeycombing) (right). Note gum impregnation of mandarin bark
FIGURE 52 Front view of a mandarin scion growing out of a sour orange trunk. Note cracking and scaling of the mandarin bark. Removing the scales and scratching away the outer lavers of bark reveal heavy gum impregnation of the mandarin bark only. These symptoms are typical of cachexia. The mandarin bud that was Initially grafted on the sour orange seedling did not grow well and the sour orange seedling tree took over. Today, the tree is essentially a sour orange seedling tree with a lateral mandarin scion. The mandarin scion did not grow well because it was infected with the cachexia agent as shown in this figure and in Figure 53 (All Mohson Al Fakir orchard, Zinjibar-Gaar area, southern Yemen)
FIGURE 53 Upper: longitudinal section of strip of bark removed across bud-union shown in Figure 52. Note heavy gum in mandarin bark only. Lower: inner (cambial) face of same strip of bark showing severe pinholing on mandarin bark
FIGURE 54 Bark was removed from one of the main branches of this dead mandarin tree on unrecorded rootstock. Note extent of cachexia viroid-induced stem pitting on scion but not on tolerant rootstock (Abdel Jalil orchard, Najran area, Saudi Arabia)
FIGURE 55 Piece of bark removed from the trunk of an old top-grafled tree. The initial tree was a mandarin tree on sour orange rootstock; later, sweet orange was topgrafted on the mandarin scion. Hence, the trunk of this tree has two bud-unions: one between sour orange and mandarin, and a second between mandarin and sweet orange. The mandarin portion of the trunk is sandwiched between sour orange and sweet orange. The tree is infected by the cachexia agent, but only the mandarin portion shows (mild) bark gumming (left) and severe bark pegging (right), as both sour orange and sweet orange are tolerant of the cachexia agent (Finike, Turkey)
FIGURE 56 Yellowish lemon tree on the right is on Citrus macrophylla rootstock; green tree (left) is on sour orange. Dieback of shoots in top of tree is due to the mal secco fungus. See also Figures 232 to 235 (Siano Experiment Station, Jable, Syria)
FIGURE 57 Trunk of yellowish lemon tree on Citrus macrophylla (see Figure 56). Removal of a piece of bark across bud-union shows the tree to be affected by cachexia, as indicated by bark gumming end pegging, and wood staining and pitting of the cachexiasusceptible C. macrophylla rootstock. There are no symptoms above bud-union on the lemon scion, as lemon is tolerant of cachexia
FIGURE 58 Parson's Special mandarin on Citrus volkameriana rootstock, graftinoculated with cachexia agent. Note gumming at bud-union (Citrus Experiment Station, Corsica)
FIGURE 59 Healthy Parson's Special mandarin on Citrus volkameriana- no gumming (Citrus Experiment Station, Corsica)
FIGURE 60 Trunk of young, gummy barkaffected Valencia late sweet orange tree on sour orange rootstock. Scratching away the outer layers of bark reveals the presence of numerous brownish red flecks of gum in the susceptible sweet orange bark but not in the symptomless, tolerant sour orange rootstock bark (Agricultural Research Centre, Rumais, Oman)
FIGURE 61 Trunk of adult, gummy bark-affected Washington navel sweet orange tree on sour orange rootstock with heavy gum impregnation of sweet orange bark, but no gum in the rootstock bark (All Mohson Al Fakir orchard, Zinjibar-Gaar, southern Yemen)
FIGURE 62 External face of scratched piece of bark removed across bud-union of tree in Figure 61; bark gumming affects only sweet orange bark
FIGURE 63 Inner (cambial) face of piece of In sweet orange tree on sour orange rootstock - Figure 62 - removed across bud- union of gummy bark- affected showing round, conoid pegging and some pinholing of sweet orange bark
FIGURE 64 Trunk of old, gummy bark affected Valencia late sweet orange tree on sour orange rootstock with mild bark gumming, but conspicuous stem pitting on sweet orange above budunion (Antalya, Turkey)
FIGURE 65 Piece of bark from trunk of old, gummy bark-affected Valencia late sweet orange tree on sour orange rootstock In Figure 64 showing mild gumming and conspicuous pegging of sweet orange bark
FIGURE 66 Trunk of gummy bark-affected sweet orange tree on sour orange rootstock showing heavy bark gumming high above bud- union but relatively mild stem pitting (Awamia orchard, Syria)
FIGURE 67 Gummy bark-affected sweet orange tree on unrecorded rootstock (probably sour orange), showing severe dieback (Al Khader Hassan orchard, MudiaLawdar, southern Yemen)
FIGURE 68 Trunk of gummy bark-affected sweet orange tree on unrecorded rootstock in Figure 67 showing bark scaling on sweet orange immediately above bud-union. As shown in Figure 69, sweet orange bark above bud-union is heavily impregnated with gum. Bark scaling is often observed in severe cases of gummy bark. Note also a phytophthora lesion on the right above bud-union line
FIGURE 69 Trunk of the gummy bark-affected sweet orange tree on unrecorded rootstock in Figure 67 after scratching away outer layers of bark to show presence of gum only in sweet orange bark, and removal of a piece of bark across bud. union to show presence of needle. like pegs only on sweet orange stem (inverse stem pitting)
FIGURE 70 External face of piece of bark removed from trunk in Figure 69 showing heavy gumming of sweet orange bark above bud-union, and no symptoms on rootstock bark
FIGURE 71 Inner (cambial) face of piece of bark showing pronounced pinholing of sweet orange bare These holes correspond to the needle-like pegs on the sweet orange stem shown In Figure 69
FIGURE 72 Declining adult Valencia late sweet orange tree on unrecorded rootstock affected by gummy bark (Mudia nursery, southern Yemen)
FIGURE 73 Trunk of declining adult Valencia late sweet orange tree in Figure 72. Scratching away outer layers of across budunion reveals many conspicuous streaks of gum in the sweet orange bark, but also some less conspicuous ones in the rootstock bark. Removal of a piece of bark across bud-union has revealed presence of stem pitting on both sweet orange scion and rootstock, similar to that shown in Figure 74. Note cracks in rootstock bark
FIGURE 74 Trunk of a declining, gummy barkaffected Valencia late sweet orange tree on unrecorded rootstock with bud-union crease, bark splitting at bud-union and vertical bark cracks. Removal of a strip of bark reveals severe stem pitting on rootstock, mild on sweet orange (El Hayed orchard, MudiaLawdar, southern Yemen)
FIGURE 75 Right: Inner (cambial) face of strip of bark removed from trunk in Figure 74, showing pinholing of sweet orange bark and conspicuous pegs on rootstock bark. Left: longitudinal section of strip of bark showing bud-union crease, and appreciable gum impregnation of rootstock bark as compared to sweet orange bark. On the basis of the symptoms shown by the rootstock of tree in Figure 74, the rootstock is probably rough lemon. The symptomless rootstock of the trees in Figures 60, 64, 66 and 68 is probably sour orange
FIGURE 76 One of several declining sweet orange trees on unrecorded rootstock. Note on the right a shoot growing from a root. The leaves on this shoot are very similar to those of rough lemon. Hence, rootstock is very probably rough lemon (Al Sagifa Abduraba Golan orchard, Harib, northern Yemen)
FIGURE 77 Trunk of declining sweet orange tree on unrecorded roostock In Figure 76. Note bud-union crease. Cambial tree of piece of bark removed across bud-union is shown on right and presents conspicuous pegging on rootstock bark and mild pinholing on sweet orange bark. The exposed wood shows bud-union crease, pitting on rootstock stem and pin-like pegs on sweet orange stem
FIGURE 78 A piece of bark from trunk in Figure 76 showing mild but clear-cut gum impregnation of both sweet orange and rootstock bark. Symptom shown here and in Figure 77 identifies the disease affecting the sweet orange tree in Figure 76 and similar trees in the same orchard as gummy bark
FIGURE 79 Strip of bark from a "sandwich" mandarin tree. The initial sweet orange tree on sour orange was top grafted with mandarin. The tree is effected by gummy bark, the symptoms of which (gum impregnation of the bark and bark pegging) are shown on the susceptible "sandwich" sweet orange bark, but not on the gummy barktolerant sour orange and mandarin barks. Compare also with Figure 55 (Mauza, northern Yemen)
FIGURE 80 Upper part of the trunk of a 20-year-old Foster grapefruit tree on sour orange rootstock. Bark of the grapefruit scion showed gumming above bud-union. Removing a strip of bark and scratching away the outer layers of bark from below bud-union up to 2 m above budunion revealed (in places taint) gumming (Eastern Government nursery, Kassala, the Sudan)
FIGURE 81 Strip of bark removed across bud-union (white line) of tree in Figure 80. Note pegs on cambial face of grapefruit bark as well as presence of gum (arrow) in grapefruit bark, but no symptoms on sour orange rootstock bark
FIGURE 82 Upper: longitudinal section of a strip of bark removed across bud union of a Marsh seedless grapefruit tree on unrecorded rootstock (sour orange or acid lime). Note presence of gum only in the grapefruit bark. Lower: inner, cambial face of strip of bark showing pegging on both grapefuit and rootstock bark (Mustapha Osman orchard, Atbara, the Sudan)
FIGURE 83 Sanguinella sweet orange tree showing severe bark scaling on the Poncirus trifoliata rootstock due to the exocortis viroid (Kotra Experiment Station, Mazandaran province, Iran)
FIGURE 84 Exocortis-free satsuma tree on Poncirus trifoliata rootstock. The fact that the diameter of the P. trifoliata rootstock trunk is larger than that of the scion trunk is normal (Izmir, Turkey)
FIGURE 85 Lisbon lemon tree on Rangpur lime rootstock. Bark scaling of the Rangpur lime rootstock is due to exocortis viroids. In addition, phytophthora gummosis is seen on the lemon scion above bud-union on the left. Phytophthora invasion was probably favoured by exocortis bark scaling which provides an entry point for the fungus (Zafarania, Iraq)
FIGURE 86 Duncan grapefruit tree top-grafted on Troyer citrange, selt-grafted on Cleopatra mandarin. The figure shows the Cleopatra mandarin rootstock and part of the Troyer citrange "sandwich". Clear-cut symptoms of exocortis are seen on the susceptible citrange sandwich, but not on the tolerant Cleopatra mandarin rootstock or the grapefruit (not shown in the figure). Exocortis was probably introduced into the tree with the exocortis-tolerant Duncan grapefruit scion. Symptoms have shown up on the citrange, the only susceptible species among the three partners of the tree (Zafarania, Iraq)
FIGURE 87 Seven-year-old Bloodred sweet orange tree on Troyer citrange rootstock. The tree is very small for its age: it is affected by exocortis as shown by bark scaling and cracking of the exocortis-susceptible rootstock (Tarnab Agricultural Research Institute, Peshawar, Pakistan)
FIGURE 88 Local citron (Abaichy) with bark scaling symptoms caused by exocortis viroids. Nearby Eureka lemon trees show shell bark symptoms (shell bark is a genetic disease-see Figure 258). Shell bark is characteristic of old lines of Eureka lemon, which are known to carry the exocortis viroids. It is also known that exocortis is mechanically transmissible, especially to citrons. Hence, the presence of exocortis in the citron tree shown could be due to transmission of the viroid from the infected lemon trees to the citron by pruning hors, scissors, knives, etc. Mechanical transmission of exocortis viroid to tolerant species (orange, mandarin, etc.) could also have occurred at Zafarania, but would not have been noticed since such species are symptomless (Zafarania, Iraq)
FIGURE 89 The three citron twigs on the right were from the tree in Figure 88; they show cracks and yellow blotches typical of exocortis. The green twig on the left is from a healthy citron
FIGURE 90 Etrog citron (cultivar 60-13) on Citrus volkameriana. Healthy control: right. Graft-inoculated with exocortis viroid(s) inducing severe (left) or moderate (middle) leaf epinasty (Citrus Experiment Station, Corsica)
FIGURE 91 Young, soft sweet orange leaf showing typical vein flecking symptoms. When the leaf is shaded from direct sun and viewed against a bright background for light to shine through the leaf, small spots or bands of lighter colour than the rest of the leaf show up on, and adjacent to, veins and veinlets. These flecks represent zones where transmission of light through leaf is higher than for the rest of the leaf. This so-called "vein flecking" may be general over the entire leaf, as shown here, or may occur only on portions of the leaf (see Figure 96). Tristeza virus induces vein clearing on young, soft leaves of acid lime. Tristeza vein clearing affects the actual veins or veinlets, not the zones adjacent to the cleared veins or veinlets (see Figure 128). Psorosis vein flecking affects the adjacent zones (Mubarak Al Motlaba orchard, Najran, Saudi Arabia)
FIGURE 92 Young, soft sweet orange leaf showing vein flecking as well as an oak-leaf pattern. This pattern results from the fact that on both sides of the midvein, certain zones do not show vein flecking. The line between these inner zones without vein flecking, and the outer zones where vein flecking occurs, are of a lighter colour and show up conspicuously, suggesting the shape of an oak leaf, hence the name oak-leaf pattern (Mubarak Al Motlaba orchard, Najran, Saudi Arabia)
FIGURE 93 Young, soft sweet orange leaf with vein flecking and oak-leaf pattern. Distinct, individual flecks are few. Several have coalesced to form conspicuous blotchy spots or bands. Vein flecking involves large zones on both sides of the cleared veins and veinlets (Mubarak Al Motlaba orchard, Najran, Saudi Arabia)
FIGURE 94 Young, soft sweet orange leaf with conspicuous vein flecking and a narrow but clear-cut oak-leaf pattern (Marsuk Ali Maheli orchard, Marib-Mukrab, northern Yemen)
FIGURE 95 Young, soft sour orange leaf with typical but mild win flecking and oak-leaf pattern. It is well known that psorosis young leaf symptoms disappear as leaves mature. This is probably the case here where the symptoms shown by this leaf seem to fade away. The sour orange leaf was from a sucker growing on the sour orange rootstock of a three-yearold sweet orange tree, the leaves of which showed psorosis young leaf symptoms (see Figure 92) (Mubarak Al Motlaba orchard, Najran, Saudi Arabia)
FIGURE 96 Right: young, soft sweet orange leaf with typical vein flecking at the tip of the leaf, and a large "oak leaf" comprising the vein flecking-free remaining lower part of the leaf (Marib, northern Yemen). Left: young, soft navel sweet orange leaf with coalescing flecks, especially near the midvein, suggestive of an oak-leaf pattern (Citrus nursery, Ibb, northern Yemen)
FIGURE 97 Mature leaf symptoms of psorosis B. Right: upper leaf surface. Left: lower leaf surface; notice gum-impregnated eruptions (Los Mimbrabes orchard, Rocio, Andalusia, Spain)
FIGURE 98 Typical scaly bark psorosis symptoms on 30year-old Valencia late sweet orange scion (A. Katsaris orchard, Phrenaros, Cyprus)
FIGURE 99 Sweet orange tree on sour orange rootstock showing symptoms of scaly bark psorosis above bud-union (Unaizah Agricultural Research Station, Saudi Arabia)
FIGURE 100 Sweet orange tree on sour orange rootstock showing symptoms of scaly bark psorosis immediately above bud-union. Note sour orange leaf, immediately below bud-union (Unaizah Agricultural Research Station, Saudi Arabia)
FIGURE 101 Sweet orange trunk showing typical symptoms of popcorn. Small scales or flakes of the outer bark loosen, break away, and finally drop, leaving the small pustules uncovered (Al Sabahyia orchard, Mogadishu, Somalia)
FIGURE 102 Trunk of 70 year-old Shamoutl sweet orange tree on sour orange rootstock showing typical symptoms of concave gum-blind pocket disease on the sweet orange scion. Concave gum refers to large, open, concave depressions or concavities, while blind pocket refers to deep narrow depressions or pockets, the rims of which are relatively close together. On this trunk, blind pockets can be seen immediately above the budunion, while concave gum depressions occur on the large limb on the left (Finike, Turkey)
FIGURE 103 Sweet orange trunk showing concave gum symptoms (Mohamed Eberi Saad orchard, Al Ramsa, Marib, northern Yemen)
FIGURE 104 Valencia late sweet orange trunk showing concave gum symptoms (Marsuk Ali Maheli orchard, Mukrab, Marib, northern Yemen)
FIGURE 105 Hamlin sweet orange trunk showing concave gum symptoms (M. Ali Rabbash orchard, MudiaLawdar, southern Yemen)
FIGURE 106 Trunk of navel sweet orange tree on sour orange rootstock showing deep depressions representative of concave gum, and streaks of gum in the sweet orange bark, especially at bud-union line, representative of gummy bark (Government orchard, Zalingei, the Sudan)
FIGURE 107 Mature leaves from 27-year-old Jafla sweet orange trees on sour orange rootstock. The three leaves on the left are from a normal tree; the three leaves on the right come from a neighbouring tree, whose leaves show crinkling and distortion, indicating that the tree is infected by the infectious variegation-crinkly leaf virus (Phassouri orchard, Limassol, Cyprus)
FIGURE 108 Upper: normal fruit from healthy Jaffa sweet orange tree. Lower: bumpy fruits from the infectious variegation-crinkly leaf virusinfected tree in Figure 107
FIGURE 109 Trunk of mandarin tree on sour orange rootstock. Bud-union can be seen at upper part of trunk (see also Figure 112). The small concavities on the sour orange rootstock are representative of cristacortis (Hammam Ali, northern Yemen)
FIGURE 110 Trunk in Figure 109 after removal of a strip of bark. Comparison of trunk before (Figure 109) and after (this figure) removal of bark shows that the concavities seen in Figure 112 correspond to pits in the stem (Hammam Ali, northern Yemen)
FIGURE 111 Pegs on the inner (cambial) face of the strip of bark removed from trunk in Figure 109. These pegs are characteristic of cristacortis and match the pits of the stem | (compare Figure 110) Hammam Ali, northern Yemen)
FIGURE 112 Trunk of mandarin tree on sour orange rootstock in Figure 109. Close-up of bud-union region after removal of strip of bark. Longitudinal section of strip of bark is shown on left. The exposed wood shows cristacortis stem pitting below bud-union and cachexia stem pitting above budunion. Cachexia infection of the tree is confirmed by presence of gum in the susceptible mandarin bark, but not in the tolerant sour orange bark. Mandarin is also susceptible to cristacortis, but the mandarin parts of the trunk shown in Figure 109 and this figure appear to be free of cristacortis symptoms (Hammam Ali. northern Yemen)
FIGURE 113 Pits in sour orange stem (right) and corresponding pegs on cambial face of bark (left) are diagnostic of cristacortis. Note gum-like material in the bottom of pits (Mauza, northern Yemen)
FIGURE 114 Lemon tree of Egyptian origin on sour orange rootstock. Figure shows sour orange rootstock near soil level. Note small depressions within incised bark. These depressions suggest cristacortis (see Figure 115)
FIGURE 115 Trunk in Figure 114 after stripping off the patch of bark corresponding to incision in the latter figure. Pits in the sour orange stem corresponding to pegs in the bark are diagnostic of cristacortis (Citrus nursery, Ibb, northern Yemen)
FIGURE 116 Upper figure: impietraturaaffected orange showing a green zone where normal colour development has failed to occur. Gum pockets are located underneath such zones. Lower figure: slicing away the outer parts of the albedo at the green zones reveals gum pocket in impietratura-affected sweet orange (Adana, Turkey)
FIGURE 117 Sectioned sweet orange showing impietratura-induced gum pocket in albedo (Emir Nasser Ben Sehmi orchard, Turabah area, Saudi Arabia)
FIGURE 118 Normal Owari satsuma shoot on left; satsuma dwarf-affected satsuma shoot on right with spoon- or boat-shaped leaves (Izmir, Turkey)
FIGURE 119 Lemon leaves photographed with transmitted light to show yellow vein clearing (Perwaiz Klan orchard, Sihala, Pakistan)
FIGURE 120 Close-up of Eureka lemon leaves showing yellow vein clearing. The symptoms essentially affect the lateral veins, rather than the midveins. The yellowing may extend into the tissue adjacent to the veins. Most often lateral veins are not uniformly affected (Faisalabad Agricultural Research Institute, Pakistan)
FIGURE 121 Close-up of Lisbon lemon leaves showing yellow vein clearing (Horticultural Research Station, Sahiwal, Pakistan)
FIGURE 122 Yellow vein clearing-affected Eureka lemon leaves. Lemon leaves with yellow vein clearing are sometimes crinkled and/or boat. shaped (Faisalabad Agricultural Research Institute, Pakistan)
FIGURE 123 Symptoms of ring pattern leaf of local sweet orange tree graft-inoculated with the disease agent (Citrus Station, Khorram Abad, Iran)
FIGURE 124 Symptoms of ring pattern on leaf and fruit of a Clementine tree graft-inoculated with the disease agent (Khoshkeh-Daran Laboratory for Virus Diseases and Pests, Tonekabon, Iran)
FIGURE 125 Sweet orange shoot from a field tree showing various types of ringspot symptoms on mature leaves: yellow spots, vein clearing and flecking, irregular chlorotic blotches (Adana, Turkey)
FIGURE 126 Close-up of a sweet orange leaf from shoot of field tree showing various types of ringspot symptoms in Figure 125 with irregular yellow spots, vein clearing and flecking
FIGURE 127 Ringspot pattern on Washington navel sweet orange (Realengo orchard, Rafelguaraf, Valencia province, Spain)
FIGURE 128 Young, soft leaves of small-fruited acid lime tree showing tristeza virus-induced vein clearing symptoms. To see vein clearing, the leaf should be shaded from direct sunlight and viewed against a bright background for light to shine through the leaf. Vein clearing means that, under these viewing conditions, certain parts of the veins or veinlets have a lighter colour than the rest. The lighter colour is restricted to the veins or veinlets and does not extend out of the vein. Vein clearing on acid lime leaves is diagnostic of tristeza. With psorosis young leaf symptoms (see Figures 91 to 96), vein flecking affects not only veins and veinlets themselves but also the adjacent tissues
FIGURE 129 Left cambial face of strip of bark removed across bud-union of severely stunted, tristeza-affected Owari satsuma tree on sour orange rootstock. Note conspicuous pinholing of sour orange bark immediately below bud-union. Exposed wood shows bristly pegs (inverse stem pining) fining into the pinholes of the bark. Sour orange bark pinholing and inverse stem pining are characteristic but not specific to tristeza, as stubborn-affected trees, for instance, may show the same symptoms (Ecref-Seymen orchard, Misis area, Turkey)
FIGURE 130 Frost Valencia late sweet orange tree on small-fruited acid lime rootstock. Note woody galls on the lime rootstock (Citrus Collection, Minab, Iran)
FIGURE 131 Local mandarin tree on Bakravi (small-fruited, acid lime x mandarin) rootstock. Note conspicuous woody galls immediately below bud-union on the Bakravi rootstock (Abbes Abad orchard, Jiroft, Iran)
FIGURE 132 Sweet orange tree on sweet lime rootstock. Gum-impregnated budunion line is revealed by scraping away the outer layers of bark (Emir Meteb orchard, Buraidah area, Saudi Arabia)
FIGURE 133 Twenty-two-year-old Bloodred sweet orange tree on rough lemon rootstock showing severe bud-union crease. The bud-union shows a pronounced bulge or protrusion with a rough, uneven surface, forming a prominent collar or fissure of eruptive bark encircling the trunk (upper view). Bark breaks easily at constricted budunion line, revealing gum deposits at union (lower view) (Nasar Ullah Khan orchard, Sargodha, Pakistan)
FIGURE 134 Bud-union crease on Jaffa sweet orange tree grafted on rough lemon rootstock (Kaiser Omar orchard, Awbarkadle, Hargeisa, Somalia)
FIGURE 135 Bud-union crease on sweet orange tree on unrecorded rootstock, but probably rough lemon. Note collar of eruptive bark encircling the trunk at budunion. Removal of piece of bark shows that wood at union line is invaginated with corresponding pegs or projections on the inner surface of the bark. There is also gum impregnation of bark at bud-union (Mohamed Al Shumaymri orchard, Unaizah area, Saudi Arabia)
FIGURE 136 Early stage of witches' broom disease on small-fruited acid lime tree. Tree still appears normal, except for a witches' broom that has suddenly appeared. Early witches' brooms are perceptible by their dense foliage and their slightly pale green colour (All Bin Musbeh Said Al Badi orchard, Sohar, Omen)
FIGURE 137 A more advanced stage of witches' broom disease. Part of the canopy still has normal leaves, but many witches' brooms have appeared (Mohamed Ali Roufeli orchard, Liwa, Oman)
FIGURE 138 Advanced stage of witches' broom disease on small-fruited acid lime tree. Practically no normal shoots and leaves are left. Several witches' brooms have died; on some, the dead leaves are still present; on others they have dropped, exposing the dead shoots (Mohamed Ali Roufeli orchard, Lima, Oman)
FIGURE 139 Late stage of witches' broom disease on small-fruited acid lime tree. The tree is almost dead, except for a few witches' brooms (Mohamed Ali Roufeli orchard, Liwa, Oman)
FIGURE 140 Shoots of small-fruited acid lime. From right to left: shoot, except for some salt burn symptoms at the tip of the leaves; shoot from a very early witches' broom (leaves are still relatively large and internodes are quite long); well-developed witches' broom with compact foliage, small leaves, short internodes; dead witches' broom with dry leaves still attached to shoots (Salem Hamdan Al Amri orchard, Shines, Oman)
FIGURE 141 Troyer citrange seedling graftinoculated with a witches' broom-effected lime shoot. The grafted lime shoot can be seen in the lower right hand corner of the figure. Immediately above the grafted lime shoot, a citrange shoot has developed and shows very small, pale yellow green leaves and short internodes. Electron microscopy and immunofluorescence have detected the witches' broom MLO in the phloem of the affected citrange leaves (INRA, Bordeaux)
FIGURE 142 Witches' broom disease on periwinkle (Catharanthus roseus) seedling inoculated through dodder (Cuscuta campestris) strands connecting a witches" broom-affected lime seedling to the periwinkle plant. In comparison with normal periwinkle shoots and leaves still present in the lower part of the plant, affected parts are characterized by the growth of many frail, whitish axillary shoots, minute leaves and virescent flowers (not shown) (INRA, Bordeaux)
FIGURE 143 Longitudinal thin section through midvein of witches" broomaffected periwinkle Catharanthus roseus leaf. MAs developed against the witches" broom MLO have been used to detect the MLOs by immunofluorescence. When viewed under ultraviolet light, the MLOs present in the phloem are detected by a greenish-yellow fluorescence on a red background of plant tissue (INRA, Bordeaux)
FIGURE 144 Twenty-year- old Washington navel sweet orange tree on sour orange rootstock severely affected by stubborn. Tree was number 2 on row 8, hence the designation R8A2 ("A" stands for arbre, the French for "tree"). The strain of Spiroplasma citri isolated from this tree was designated as "Maroc R8A2" and Is the type strain 015. citri) (Gontard orchard, Beni Mellal, Morocco)
FIGURE 145 Inner (cambial) face of piece of bark removed across bud-union line of stubborn-affected tree R8A2 In Figure 144. Note conspicuous pinholing or honeycombing on the sour orange bark below bud-union. Similar pinholing Is also seen In the case of tristeza-affected sweet orange trees on sour orange rootstock. Here pinholing Is due to stubborn disease, not tristeza (indexing showed the tree to be free of tristeza virus). In tact, pinholing of sour orange bark is specific to neither tristeza nor stubborn; it is seen on suffering, stressed trees, whatever the cause of the stress (see also Figure 129)
FIGURE 146 Normal, six-year- old local sweet orange tree on small- fruited acid lime rootstock (Moïn orchard, Bab Anar, Khafr, Fars province, Iran)
FIGURE 147 Six-year-old local sweet orange tree on smallfruited acid lime rootstock showing classical symptoms of severe stubborn disease: stunting; roundheaded canopy; absence of new shoots; dense, bushy type of growth; shoots with short internodes; small, spoonshaped leaves; leaf mottle; poor crop; fruit drop (Moïn orchard, Bab Anar, Khafr, Fars province, Iran)
FIGURE 148 Ten-year-old Washington navel sweet orange tree on sour orange rootstock with severe symptoms of stubborn disease. Note in particular the tendency of shoots to be oriented in one direction, off-season blooming and presence of fruits of all ages and sizes (see also Figure 149) (Toukatly orchard, Saleh Basatine, Syria)
FIGURE 149 Close up of stubbornaffected Washington navel sweet orange tree on sour orange rootstock to show offseason blooming and heterogeneity of crop, ranging from young green fruit to fullsized orange fruit (Toukatly orchard, Saleh Basatine, Syria)
FIGURE 150 Close up of stubborn-affected Washington navel sweet orange tree on sour orange rootstock to show spoonshaped leaves with yellowish midveins. Nob also that leaves at tip of shoots tend to form rosettes (Toukatly orchard, Saleh Basatine, Syria)
FIGURE 151 Normal four-yearold Atwood navel sweet orange tree on sour orange rootstock (Siano Experiment Station, Jable, Syria)
FIGURE 152 Stunted, stubbornaffected, four-year-old Atwood navel sweet orange tree on sour orange (Siano Experiment Station, Jable, Syria)
FIGURE 153 Shoot from four year-old, stubborn-affected Washington navel sweet orange tree on sour orange rootstock, showing leaves with mottle and pale green to yellow tips and margins, characteristic of stubborn (Citrus office, Amrit, near Tartus, Syria)
FIGURE 154 Stubborn-affected sweet orange leaves showing typical stubborn mottle. Some leaves are spoon-shaped with blunt tips. Spiroplasma citri was cultured from these leaves (Adana, Turkey)
FIGURE 155 Leaves of a Valencia late sweet orange tree on Poncirus trifoliata rootstock affected stubborn as shown by culture of Spiroplasma citri from fruit of this tree in Bordeaux. S. citri often induces yellow tips and margins on leaves as shown In this figure (Kotra Experiment Station, Mazandaran province, Iran)
FIGURE 156 In Iraq summers are very hot, winter can be cold. Citrus is mainly grown in the shade of date-palm trees for protection against heat and cold. Expression of stubborn disease is affected by these conditions (Dorah, Iraq)
FIGURE 157 Mahali sweet orange trees on sour orange rootstock in a palm-shaded orchard. Stubbornaffected tree on left; normal tree on right. The affected tree is of a lighter colour, especially in the top. Fruits are very small and contain many aborted seeds. Leaves are mottled, but only rarely spoonshaped with blunt tips. Bushy type of growth is also rare (Aboud El Neimi orchard, Rachidiva area. Iraq)
FIGURE 158 Mottled Mahali sweet orange leaves of the stubborn-affected tree in Figure 157
FIGURE 159 Leaves grown under high temperature conditions. They show blunting of leaf tips, shortening of midribs (resulting in cordate leaves), lateral veins running parallel to midrib or leaf margins (resulting in palmate leaves). However, leaves remain uniformly green without yellow tips or margins (Dijab Mhisan open orchard, Dorah-Um Elasafir, Iraq)
FIGURE 160 These Valencia late sweet orange leaves show the effect of heat: they are palmate, i.e. their lateral veins run more or less parallel to a (reduced) midrib. In addition, they show stubborn symptoms: pale green to yellow, pinched-in tips. Such leaves are frequent on stubborn-affected sweet orange trees in Iraq And Iran (Courtesy of C. N. Rolstacher, Riverside California)
FIGURE 161 Palmate leaves with yellow, pinched-in tips from a stubbornaffected Mahali sweet orange tree on sour orange rootstock. Spiroplasma citri was cultured from this tree (Aboud El Neimi shaded orchard, Rachidiya, Iraq)
FIGURE 162 Mahali sweet orange shoots. Left: normal. Right: stubbornaffected shoot with pale green, palmate leaves showing pinched-in, yellow tips (Aboud El Neimi shaded orchard, Rachidiya, Iraq)
<section>w</section>
Figures 162 - 322
FIGURE 163 Washington navel sweet orange shoots. Left: Right: stubbornaffected shoot with short internodes, pale green, palmate leaves with yellow tips (Latif El Dileimi orchard, Rachidiya, Iraq)
FIGURE 164 Pink, seedless Thompson grapefruit tree on Cleopatra mandarin rootstock, with dieback and fruit of different sizes ranging from small green to fully matured. Foliage was yellowish because of high pH. Some leaves were mottled because of stubborn agent. Indeed, Spiroplasma citri was cultured from this tree (Deir Alla Experiment Station, Jordan)
FIGURE 165 Upper figure: acorn-shaped Washington navel sweet orange fruit, characteristic of stubborn. Peduncular (upper) end of fruit is thickened and has a coarse texture; styler (lower) end is smooth (Citrus mother tree plantation, Akhelia-Paphos, Cyprus). Lower figure: cross section through stubborn-affected, acornshaped Washington navel sweet orange fruit showing thick albedo at peduncular (upper) end and thin albedo at styler (lower) end (Heguy orchard, Rharb, Morocco)
FIGURE 166 Ripening of normal fruit (sweet orange). Stylar (lower) end is already orange while peduncular (upper) end is still green. Degreening begins at styler end (Algeria)
FIGURE 167 Ripening of stubborn-affected fruit (Washington navel sweet orange). Degreening begins at peduncular (upper) end which turns orange, while styler (lower) end is still green. This phenomenon is called "colour inversion" (Toukatly orchard, Saleh Basatine, Syria)
FIGURE 168 Sectioned Mahali sweet orange fruits from stubborn-affected tree. Note that fruits are lopsided and have a curved axis (columella). Seeds are aborted. Some fruits have mummified styler ends. Spiroplasma citri was cultured from the peduncular ends of the columellae (Behadli orchard, Kerbala, Iraq)
FIGURE 169 Lopsided, stubborn-affected, young grapefruit. Note that part of the albedo is coloured blue. Blue albedo, as shown here, is often found on fruit (sweet orange, grapefruit) from stubborn-affected trees, but is not specific to stubborn (Resvan orchard, Bab Anar, Fars province, Iran)
FIGURE 170 Salsola kali is extremely common from Morocco to Iran. It grows particularly well along the seashores of Morocco, Syria and Cyprus (Amrit-Tartus, Syria)
FIGURE 171 Salsola kali is an annual plant. It turns brown and dies in the winter, as shown here on the seashore near Curium in Cyprus
FIGURE 172 Close-up of a dead Salsola kali shoot. Note prickle-like tips of floral leaves (Petra ton Romiou, Cyprus)
FIGURE 173 In the winter, under the influence of strong winds, dead Salsola kali plants break off easily and tumble over the ground, hence the name "tumbleweed" (Seashore near Ormidhia, Cyprus)
FIGURE 174 Salsola kali growing as a weed in a citrus nursery. Being a major host plant of the leafhopper vectors of Spiroplasma citri, the presence of this weed in a nursery explains the high rate of S. citri transmission to citrus that is observed in such nurseries (New citrus nursery, El Annadeh, Syria)
FIGURE 175 Periwinkle (Catharanthus roseus) plants. Left: healthy plant. Right and middle: Spiroplasma citri-infected plants. Plant at right was grown at 25°C and shows essentially feat yellows. Middle plant was grown at 32°C and shows S. citri-induced lethal wilting in addition to feat yellows (INRA Bordeaux)
FIGURE 176 Periwinkle (Catharanthus roseus) plant naturally infected with Spiroplasma citri which has developed lethal wilting (see Figure 175) during the hot summer months (Beni Mellal, Tadla, Morocco)
FIGURE 177 Twenty-six-year-old greening affected navel sweet orange tree on unrecorded rootstock (probably rough lemon). Presence of greening bacterium in phloem was confirmed by electron microscopy (Awadle Elmi-M.A. Hersi orchard, Arapsiyo area, Hargeisa, Somalia)
FIGURE 178 Twenty-six- year-old greening-affected Jaffa sweet orange tree on unrecorded rootstock (probably rough lemon). Presence of greening bacterium in phloem was confirmed by electron microscopy (Awadle Elmi- M.A. Hersi orchard, Arapsiyo area, Hargeisa, Somalia)
FIGURE 179 Close-up of greeningaffected navel sweet orange tree showing dieback, sparse foliage with zinc-deficiency patterns and off-season flowering. Presence of greening bacterium in phloem was confirmed by electron microscopy (Awadle Elmi-M.A. Hersi orchard, Arapsiyo area, Hargeisa, Somalia)
FIGURE 180 Leaves of sweet orange showing mottling symptoms characteristic of greening disease. Note also vein corking (Awadle Elmi-M.A. Hersi orchard, Arapsiyo area, Hargeisa, Somalia)
FIGURE 181 Citrus collection at Aussfera farm, Ta'izz (northern Yemen). Most trees in this collection were affected by greening and advice was given to eradicate the trees (see Figure 182)
FIGURE 182 Citrus collection at Aussfera farm after heavy pruning. Trees were not pulled out as advised (see Figure 181) but heavily pruned. The many young, tender shoots induced by this treatment are used by Trioza erytreae, the psyllid vector of greening, as a source of food. Thus, heavy pruning involuntarily favours transmission of the greening agent
FIGURE 183 Three-year-old Washington navel sweet orange trees. Left: normal tree. Right: stunted, greening-affected tree; infection with the greening bacterium (confirmed by electron microscopy) was probably through natural transmission by Trioza erytreae psyllids (Aussfera farm, Ta'izz, northern Yemen)
FIGURE 184 Sweet orange leaves showing leaf mottle characteristic of greening (Aussfera farm, Ta'izz, northern Yemen)
FIGURE 185 Greening-effected, small-fruited acid lime seedling tree. Upper, yellow part of tree shows symptoms of greening (confirmed by electron microscopy) (Barakani, Ta'izz region, northern Yemen)
FIGURE 186 Close-up of greening-affected, small-fruited acid limo tree. Normal shoot: lower left corner in figure (Barakani, Ta'izz region, northern Yemen)
FIGURE 187 Small-fruited acid lime leaves showing feat mottle characteristic of greening; the greening BLO was detected by electron microscopy in this tree. Three leaves show, in addition, bumps specific to Trioza erytreae (see also Figures 189 to 193) (Barakani, Ta'izz region, northern Yemen)
FIGURE 188 Eggs of Trioza erytreae along the midrib and the margins of a lemon feat (Ihalidanana, Madagascar)
FIGURE 189 Lower tree of a sour orange feat with many small, concave depressions produced by the developing nymphs of Trioza erytreae (see also Figure 192). Some of the depressions are empty, others are still occupied by nymphs. On the upper face of the feat many protuberances or bumps can be seen, which correspond to the concave depressions of the lower face (see also Figures 190 and 193) (Ahmed Hydan orchard, Mukayras, southern Yemen)
FIGURE 190 Upper facet of sour orange leaves with many bumps caused by the development of Trioza erytreae nymphs on the lower face. Leaf on left Is that In Figure 189 (Ahmed Hydan orchard, Mukayras, southern Yemen)
FIGURE 191 Trioza erytreaeinduced bumps on Clementine feat (Hammam Ali, northern Yemen)
FIGURE 192 Trioza erytreae-induced depressions on lower face of lemon leaves (Aussfera farm, Ta'izz, northern Yemen)
FIGURE 193 Bumps on the upper face of the leaves in Figure 192. Depressions on the lower face are seen as bumps on the upper face
FIGURE 194 Heterogeneous fruit from greening-affected, 12-year-old Valencia late sweet orange tree. Note colour inversion on some fruit (Nasser Al Kahr Shuti orchard Dinahem, Al Baida, northern Yemen)
FIGURE 195 Fruit in Figure 194, when sectioned, show curved fruit axes and seed abortion
FIGURE 196 Stunted, greeningaffected mandarin tree on sour orange rootstock. Presence of greening bacterium was confirmed by electron microscopy (King Faizal orchard, Taif, Saudi Arabia)
FIGURE 197 Stunted, greeningaffected sweet orange tree on sour orange rootstock. Presence of bacterium was confirmed by electron microscopy. Tree was also affected by gummy bark. Cambial face of bark revealed conspicuous pinholing on both sweet orange and sour orange bark (see Figure 198). Tree was negating for tristeza virus by ELISA (Bakhit Addaussari orchard, Bishah, Saudi Arabia)
FIGURE 198 Inner (cambial) face of piece of bark removed across bud-union of stunted, greening-affected affected sweet orange tree on sour orange rootstock in Figure 208 and showing conspicuous pinholing above and below budunion line
FIGURE 199 Ten-year-old mandarin orchard destroyed by greening (Maid Wazen orchard, Turabah, Saudi Arabia)
FIGURE 200 Close up of one of the mandarin trees of Maid Wazen orchard (Figure 199). Presence of greening bacterium in leaf phloem was confirmed by electron microscopy (see Figure 10)
FIGURE 201 Fruit from mandarin tree in Figure 200 with many brownish, aborted seeds
FIGURE 202 Zinc-deficiency symptoms and some mottle on leaves from greening- affected mandarin tree in Figure 200
FIGURE 203 Mottle and some zinc-deficiency symptoms on mandarin leaves from the Abdelhahmid Al Saigh orchard in Wadi Nahman (Mecca area, Saudi Arabia). The leaves were collected on trees initially imported from Jordan. The trees became infected in Saudi Arabia after having been planted, as the Al Saigh orchard is heavily infested by Diaphorina citri, the psyllid vector of the greening BLO, and Jordan is tree of both greening and its vector
FIGURE 204 Greening-affected mandarin tree similar to that in Figure 200. Strong suckers have grown out of the sour orange rootstock of this greening-affected tree and have overgrown the dying mandarin scion (Maid Wazen orchard, Turabah, Saudi Arabia)
FIGURE 205 Dying, greeningaffected mandarin tree in the Bishah area (Abdelaziz Abdula orchard, Saudi Arabia)
FIGURE 206 Foreground: Iwo dying mandarin trees affected by both greening and mild cachexia. Background: greening affected lime tree. This figure illustrates well that lime trees are less susceptible to greening than mandarin trees. It is in this area that the two psyllid vectors of greening occur together in the same orchards (Brehim Khaibar, Khamis Mushait area, Saudi Arabia)
FIGURE 207 Leaves of small-fruited acid lime tree showing galls induced by Trioza erytreae, the African psylild vector of greening. These galls look like bumps on the upper face of the leaves (upper row of leaves) and depressions (in which the nymphs have lived) on the lower face (lower row of leaves) (Brehim Khaibar, Khamis Mushait area, Saudi Arabia)
FIGURE 208 Foliage of three year-old Washington navel tree showing zincdeficiency symptoms, most probably due to greening. Indeed, the greening BLO was detected by electron microscopy in this tree, and many leaves showed galls induced by Trioza erytreae, the African psyllid vector of greening (Agricultural Experiment Station, Fayfa, Saudi Arabia)
FIGURE 209 Shoot from threeyear-old Washington navel tree in Figure 208 showing Trioza erytreae. induced depressions or galls on lower leaves and zinc deficiency symptoms on upper leaves
FIGURE 210 Adults of Diaphorina citri feeding on lower face of a small-fruited acid lime leaf (Abdula Abbouche orchard, Taif, Saudi Arabia). Insert: arrow points at a Diaphorina citri psyllid feeding on the lower face of a sour orange feat (Tarnab Agricultural Research Institute, Peshawar, Pakistan)
FIGURE 211 Many nymphs and a few adults of Diaphorina citri feeding on small-fruited acid lime leaves. Leaves are very misshapen and are covered with honeydew (Ode Gamdi orchard, Turabah, Saudi Arabia)
FIGURE 212 Diaphorina citri induced damage on small-fruited acid lime foliage. Leaf curling and distortion (Mohamed Yousset Atouwem orchard, Khurmah, Saudi Arabia)
FIGURE 213 Diaphorina citri induced damage on small-fruited acid lime tree: leaf drop, dieback, leaf curling (Maid Wazen orchard, Turabah, Saudi Arabia)
FIGURE 214 Greening- induced leaf mottle on small-fruited acid lime leaves. Presence of greening bacterium in phloem was confirmed by electron microscopy (El Gharif, Khurmah, Saudi Arabia)
FIGURE 215 Declining Kinnow mandarin orchard near Lahore (Pakistan). Insert shows fruit sectioned from this orchard; note the many aborted seeds
FIGURE 216 Declining Bloodred sweet orange tree on rough lemon rootstock with greening-like aspect (Horticultural Research Station, Sahiwal, Pakistan)
FIGURE 217 Right half of tree Is still normal. Left half is affected by greening-like symptoms (Horticultural Research Station, Sahiwal, Pakistan)
FIGURE 218 Murraya paniculata (Aurantioldeae), a widely used ornamental citroid, is a preferred host of Diaphorina citri, the Asian psyllid vector of the greening BLO. It can be used successfully to rear a citri in the glasshouse (Wat Phra Keow, Bangkok, Thailand)
FIGURE 219 Dodder (Cuscuta campestris) strands connect greening affected sweet orange seedling to periwinkle (Catharanthus roseus) for transmission of the greening bacterium from citrus to periwinkle (INRA, Bordeaux)
FIGURE 220 Leaf symptoms of periwinkle (Catharanthus roseus) infected with the greening bacterium (Poona strain) (INRA, Bordeaux)
FIGURE 221 Longitudinal thin section through midvein of greening-affected periwinkle (Catharanthus roseus) leaf. MAs developed against the BLO associated with greening have been used to detect the BLO by immunofluorescence. When viewed under ultraviolet light, the BLOs present in the phloem are detected by a greenish-yellow fluorescence on a red background of plant tissue (INRA, Bordeaux)
FIGURE 222 Typical phytophthora footrot lesion on grapefruit tree on sour orange rootstock with budunion too close to the soil (Folco orchard, Mogadishu, Somalia)
FIGURE 223 Balady sweet orange tree on sour orange rootstock showing streaks of gum on the scratched part of the trunk, and phytophthora lesions on either side. Gum streaks in the sweet orange bark show the tree is affected by gummy bark. Phytophthora infection is caused by the bud-union being too close to the soil (Mussa Bahardin orchard, Nyertete, the Sudan)
FIGURE 224 Young sweet orange tree on sour orange rootstock with soil piled around trunk, covering up bud-union line (All Al Emir orchard, Al Raju, Marib, northern Yemen)
FIGURE 225 Sweet orange tree with soil piled around trunk and covering up bud-union line (Al Radod orchard, Say'un-Tarim, southern Yemen)
FIGURE 226 Upper view: grapefruit tree on sour orange rootstock with soil piled around the trunk, covering bud-union (Government orchard, Baled, Somalia). Lower view: in Iraq, soil removed when cleaning irrigation ditches is piled around citrus trunks (Dorah, Iraq)
FIGURE 227 In this young citrus orchard, trees are planted at the right- angle crossings of irrigation furrows. To prevent the trunks of the trees from being in direct contact with water, soil will undoubtedly be piled up against the trees, thus favouring quick phytophthora damage (Saad Al Sudeyri orchard, Al Khelil, Medina region, Saudi Arabia)
FIGURE 228 Young lemon tree on sour orange rootstock. Removal of soil from around trunk showed bud-union to be buried below soil level, with lemon scion in contact with soil. Removal of bark shows severe and extended phytophthora lesion on the lemon scion above bud-union, but no attack on the resistant sour orange rootstock (Fahama, Iraq)
FIGURE 229 A row of young lemon trees on sour orange rootstock. Trees were planted too deep, with bud-unions buried below soil level and trees began to show phytophthora lesions above soil level. Soil was removed from around the trunks and used to build circular levees to protect the trunks from irrigation waters (Government nursery, Ibb, northern Yemen)
FIGURE 230 One ot the young lemon trees on sour orange rootstock in Figure 229, showing severe phytophthora lesions extending high above bud-union
FIGURE 231 Circular soil levee protects trunk from irrigation water (M. Abdullah Aboussita orchard, Awbarkadle, Hargeisa, Somalia)
FIGURE 232 Five year-old, mal secco affected lemon tree on sour orange rootstock (Slang Experiment Station, Jable, Syria)
FIGURE 233 Left: mal secco-affected Limoneira A8 lemon shoot. Right: normal shoot (Finike, Turkey)
FIGURE 234 The hyphae of Deuterophoma tracheiphila (Petri), the causal fungus of mal secco, stain the wood red, as shown here in an Ortanique tangor shoot (Lanitis orchard, Limassol, Cyprus)
FIGURE 235 Woody cylinders of Limoneira A8 shoots after removal of bark. Left: normal wood. Right: pinkish-red stained wood from a mal secco-affected shoot (Finike, Turkey)
FIGURE 236 Rio Grande gummosis-affected, 20-year-old grapefruit tree on sour orange rootstock. Note profuse exudations of amberbrown gum through cracks or lesions of the bark (see Figures 244 and 245). The gum runs down the trunk and accumulates in stalactite-like masses (Central Agricultural Research Station, Afgoi, Somalia)
FIGURE 237 Rio Grande gummosis affected grapefruit tree on sour orange rootstock (AFMET farm, Giohar, Somalia)
FIGURE 238 Rio Grande gummosis-affected grapefruit tree on sour orange rootstock (Quarantine orchard, Afgoi, Somalia)
FIGURE 239 Rio Grande gummosis-affected, 20-year-old grapefruit tree on sour orange rootstock (Central Agricultural Research Station, Afgoi, Somalia)
FIGURE 240 Rio Grande gummosis-affected, 20-yearold grapefruit tree on sour orange rootstock with young, active, gum-producing lesions and old, inactive, nonproducing (dry) lesions with exposed wood at the centre (Central Agricultural Research Station, Afgoi, Somalia)
FIGURE 241 Rio Grand gummosis-affected, 20-year-old grapefruit tree with several old, inactive, dry lesions with bark scaling on the rims or lips and exposed wood at the centre (Central Agricultural Research Station, Afgoi, Somalia)
FIGURE 242 Close up of an old, inactive lesion on Rio Grande gummosis-affected sweet orange trunk (Mauza, northern Yemen)
FIGURE 243 Grapefruit tree showing bark scaling associated with Rio Grande gummosis (Central Agricultural Research Station, Afgoi, Somalia)
FIGURE 244 Rio Grande gummosis-affected Marsh seedless grapefruit tree. Gum oozes out through vertical cracks of the bark (upper view). The cracks are revealed by cutting off the outer layers of bark (lower view, left) (Mustapha Osman orchard, Atbara, the Sudan)
FIGURE 245 The trunk of the tree in Figure 244. When a piece of bark is further removed to expose the wood (upper view, left) abundant gum, located between bark and wood, flows out of the open wound. Removal of the outer layers of wood (lower view, left) shows that there are also gum pockets within the wood
FIGURE 246 Rio Grande gummosisaffected Jaffa sweet orange tree showing leaf drop. Here, defoliation is essentially due to a high salt problem, but expression of Rio Grande gummosis seems to be favoured by high concentrations of chlorides in the soil (Kharalambos Hadji Georgiou orchard, Alaminos.Latouros, Cyprus)
FIGURE 247 Crosssection of a branch from Rio Grande gummosis-affected Jaffa sweet orange tree on sour orange rootstock in Figure 246. Note ambencoloured gum oozing out from between bark and wood
FIGURES 248 and 249 Upper (Figure 248) and lower (Figure 249) faces of a small-fruited acid lime leaf with canker lesions due to the bacterium Xanthomonas campestris pv. citri A canker lesion has raised, corky, craterlike eruptions on both faces of the leaf. Citrus scab and, more particularly, sour orange scab due to the fungus Elsinoe fawcetti also have raised pustules, but only on the Involved face of the leaf (Said Ben Rachid Kilbani orchard, Homania, Ibri, Oman)
FIGURE 250 Close-up of advanced canker lesions on upper (left) and lower (right) faces of a small-fruited acid lime leaf. Note yellow hald around lesions (Said Salem Al Wahebi orchard, Salalah, Oman)
FIGURE 251 Cork-like canker pustules on twigs of small-fruited acid lime (Said Ben Rachid Kilbani orchard, Homania, Ibri, Oman)
FIGURE 252 Sweet province orange tree with symptoms of autumn blast (Jiroft Development Organization, Kerman, Iran)
FIGURE 253 Close-up of autumn blast on sweet orange twig. Note abundant gumming at arrows (Mansurya, Iraq)
FIGURE 254 Autumn blast on Valencia late sweet orange (Mudia nursery, southern Yemen)
FIGURE 255 Upper: symptoms of salt injury on Jaffa sweet orange leaves. Note yellowing and "burning" of leaf tip and margins. Excess of chloride, sodium, potassium, magnesium, ammonium, lithium and other elements produces these symptoms. Here excess of ClNa is Involved (Had; Dalan orchard, Horohadle, Hargeisa, Somalia) Lower: excess boron induces similar effects. In addition, brownish resinous gum spots are present on lower surface of leaf (Al Shumaymri orchard, Unaizah region, Saudi Arabia)
FIGURE 256 Symptoms of boron excess on upper tree of lemon leaves. Note tip and marginal yellowing and/or mottling. See also Figure 255 (Hindya, Iraq)
FIGURE 257 Lower face of the lemon leaves in Figure 256. Note brownish, resinous gum spots or pustules characteristic of boron excess. See also Figure 255
FIGURE 258 Old-line lemon tree on sour orange rootstock with shell bark-like scaling of the outer layers of bark above bud-union. Shell bark is a genetic affection. The outer bark dries out and cracks into vertical strips. The inner bark and cambium remain intact, and the affected outer bark is sloughed after healing occurs (Mauza, northern Yemen)
FIGURE 259 Bearss lime tree on sour orange rootstock showing bark cracking. Such longitudinal cracks are normal in vigorously growing trees. Wood- pocket of Persian (Tahiti, Bearss) lime in Florida is somewhat similar but affected trees show leaf blotch in addition (Government orchard, Zalingei, the Sudan)
FIGURE 260 Trunk of a stunted, five-yearold Musambi sweet orange tree on Seville Kimb. sour orange rootstock. Removal of a piece of bark across bud-union reveals conspicuous stem pitting and some inverse stem pining on the sour orange wood, with corresponding pegging and pinholing on the cambial face of sour orange bark (see Figure 261 ) (Horticultural Research Station, Sahiwal, Pakistan)
FIGURE 261 Inner (cambial) tree of bark removed from trunk in Figure $0 showing pegging, pinholing and staining with gum. like material on sour orange bark only. Tree indexed negative by ELISA for tristeza virus
FIGURE 262 Two views of the cambial face of a piece of bark removed across the bud-union of a mandarin tree on an unrecorded rootstock. Pegging and gumming of mandarin bark are characteristic of cachexia. Pegs on the unrecorded rootstock bark cannot be traced back to a given disease as the nature of rootstock is not known. However, in this orchard rough lemon has been identified as the rootstock of a sweet orange tree (see caption to Figure 76). If the rootstock were rough lemon, the pegs on its bark as well as some bark gumming below the bud-union could be due to gummy bark (Al Sagifa Abduraba Golan orchard, Harib, northern Yemen)
FIGURE 263 Trunk of mandarin tree on unrecorded rootstock (tree A). Mandarin scion shows severe stem pining symptoms of cachexia; note also cracks in the bark. Rootstock is symptomless. See also Figure 265 (M. Wabrane orchard, El Jorba area, Najran, Saudi Arabia)
FIGURE 264 Trunk of mandarin tree on unrecorded rootstock (tree B). Mandarin scion is symptomless, but there is severe stem pitting and bark cracking on rootstock. See also Figure 265 (M. Wabrane orchard, El Jorba area, Najran, Saudi Arabia)
FIGURE 265 Inner face of bark from the two mandarin trees in Figures 263 (tree A) and 264 (tree B). Middle: piece of bark from tree A showing pegs on mandarin bark; rootstock bark is symptomless. Left and right: two pieces of bark from tree S showing pegs on unrecorded rootstock bark; mandarin scion bark is symptomless. Symptoms on rootstock of tree B cannot be traced back to a given disease as nature of rootstock is not known. They could be those of gummy bark it the rootstock were rough lemon. They cannot be due to the cachexia agent as there are no symptoms on the cachexia-susceptible mandarin scion. Cracks in the bark resemble those exocortis on sweet lime or Dorshapo sweet lemon
FIGURE 266 Inner face of a piece of bark removed across bud-union of a mandarin tree on unrecorded rootstock. Here, there is severe bark pegging and gumming on the mandarin scion indicating presence of cachexia agent, but also pegging on the rootstock bark similar to that of tree in Figure 264; rootstock bark shows also cracking (M. Wabrane orchard, El Jorba area, Najran, Saudi Arabia)
FIGURE 267 Stunted, ten-year-old sweet orange tree on unrecorded rootstock. Rootstock bark shows splitting; see Figure 268 (All Abdel Jalil orchard, Najran, Saudi Arabia)
FIGURE 268 Trunk of sweet orange tree in Figure 267 showing splitting and cracking of rootstock bark. There is also stem pitting on rootstock
FIGURE 269 Trunk of sweet orange tree on unrecorded rootstock. Note pitting on rootstock stem (right) and corresponding pegging on inner face of rootstock bark. Cracks on rootstock bark are similar to those in Figures 268 and 270 (Khaled Al Sudeyri orchard, Najran, Saudi Arabia)
FIGURE 270 The bark cracking and stem pitting observed on the unrecorded rootstocks of trees in Figures 268 and 269 show up even on young sweet orange trees as seen here (AIi Aboussak orchard, Najran, Saudi Arabia)
FIGURE 271 Stunted sweet orange tree on sweet lime (Emir Meteb orchard, Buraidah region, Saudi Arabia)
FIGURE 272 Trunk of tree in Figure 271. Nob poor union, splitting of rootstock bark (exocortis?) and staining of rootstock stem immediately below bud-union
FIGURE 273 Trunk of Balady mandarin tree on sour orange rootstock. The bark has been scraped to show cachexia symptoms: streaks of gum in the mandarin bark but not in the sour orange bark (Shreita orchard, Besnada, Syria)
FIGURE 274 Trunk of tree in Figure 273 after removal of a strip of bark to show symptoms of cachexia. In the case shown here stem pitting is very mild while bark gumming is heavy
FIGURE 275 Psorosis young leaf symptoms of the vein-flecking type on young nursery sweet orange trees. See also Figures 93 to 97 (Government nursery, El Annadeh, Syria)
FIGURE 276 Scaly bark psorosis (psorosis A) on scion of Mandalina mandarin trees on sour orange rootstock (Ashrafie, Syria)
FIGURES 277 and 278 Symptoms of concave gum on two branches of a Washington navel sweet orange tree. As shown here, concave gum symptoms are of two types: broad concavities - concavity in Figure 278 is deeper than that in Figure 277; gum production, especially with cultivars such as Washington navel sweet orange and Orlando tangelo. Note the heavy gum production near the concavities (Hassad Kanaan orchard, Meterkie, Syria)
FIGURE 279 Severe symptoms of impietratura (pockets of gum in albedo) on grapefruit (Shreita orchard, Besnada, Syria)
FIGURE 280 Clementine tree on sour orange rootstock showing cachexia symptoms, immediately above the scraped bud-union zone: streaks of gum In the bark, small stem pits and corresponding pegs on bark (see Figure 281). The tree also shows cristacortis symptoms: the deep, narrow, longitudinal pits with corresponding pegs on bark (see Figure 281) (Ashrafie, Syria)
FIGURE 281 Inner (cambial) side of strip of bark removed from tree in Figure 280
FIGURE 282 Trunk of Mandalina mandarin tree on sour orange rootstock affected by cachexia and cristacortis. Cachexia is diagnosed on the basis of gum deposits in the mandarin bark (gumming is mild); stem pining above bud union line and in the top part of the trunk is due to the cristacortis agent. The bumpiness of the trunk above bud-union and higher up is typical of severe cristacortis stem pining (Ashrafie, Syria)
FIGURE 283 Close-up of bud-union part of trunk in Figure 282
FIGURE 284 Close-up of top part of trunk in Figure 282
FIGURE 285 Four-year-old Washington navel sweet orange trees (cultivar 141). Symptomless tree is on the left. Stubborn-affected tree (R4A27) on right became infected with S. citri through natural contamination. Tree was positive for S. citri by ELISA and the culture assay (Sweet orange mother tree plot, FAO project, El Annadeh, Syria)
FIGURE 286 Four-year-old Atwood navel sweet orange trees. Symptomless tree is on the left. Stubborn-affected tree (R3A7) on right became infected with Spiroplasma citri through natural contamination. Tree was positive for S. citri by ELISA and the culture assay (Sweet orange mother tree plot, FAO project, El Annadeh, Syria)
FIGURE 287 Four-year-old Marsh seedless grapefruit trees (cultivar 119). Symptomless tree is on the right. Stubbornaffected tree (R8A46) on left became infected with Spiroplasma citri through natural contamination. Tree was positive for S. citri by ELISA and the culture assay (Grapefruit mother tree plot, FAO project, El Annadeh, Syria)
FIGURE 288 Shoots from symptomless tree in Figure 287 are on left; shoots from stubborn-affected tree (R8A46) are on right
FIGURE 289 Four-year old Clementine trees (cultivar 88). Stubborn-affected tree Is in the middle and became infected with Spiroplasma citri through natural contamination. Tree was positive for S. citri by ELISA and the culture assay. Syrnptomless trees are on each side [Mandarin mother tree plot, FAO project, El Annadeh, Syria)
FIGURE 290 Tunnels covered with tine mesh screen tissue to grow nursery trees in the absence of leafhoppers (New citrus nursery, El Annadeh, Syria)
FIGURE 291 D-vac aspirator for capture of leafhoppers and other insects on plants and trees (Kassab area, Syria)
FIGURE 292 Periwinkle (Catharanthus roseus) plant (number 203) infected with Spiroplasma citri through natural contamination. Plant was positive for S. citri by ELISA and the culture assay (Nursery III, FAO project, El Annadeh, Syria)
FIGURE 293 Trunk of tree grafted on Citrus volkameriana rootstock. Note stem pitting and wood staining on rootstock. Vogel indexed the tree for cachexia on Parson's Special mandarin and found the tree tree of cachexia. Therefore the symptoms on C. volkameriana cannot be due to the cachexia agent. C volkameriana is tolerant of cachexia (Citrus Experiment Station, Jable, Syria)
FIGURE 294 Trunk of lemon tree grafted on Citrus volkameriana rootstock. In addition to the symptoms shown on rootstock in Figure 293, there seems to be bud-union incompatibility (Centre of Agriculture, Tartus, Syria)
FIGURE 295 Stubborn-affected Valencia late sweet orange tree on Cleopatra mandarin rootstock. Yellow foliage results from the joint effect of stubborn and high pH of soil. Spiroplasma citri was cultured from the columella of a fruit with colour inversion and seed abortion (see also Figure 164) (Deir Alla Experiment Station, Jordan)
FIGURE 296 Streaks of gum in scraped bark of cachexi-axyloporosis-affected Mandalina mandarin; no gum is present in the tolerant rootstock. The mandarin scion also showed concave gum-blind pocket symptoms (Deir Alla Experiment Station, Jordan)
FIGURE 297 Stunted Washington navel sweet orange tree on sour orange rootstock with severe bud-union crease (see Figure 298) (Deir Alla Experiment Station, Jordan)
FIGURE 298 Cambial side of piece of bark removed across bud-union of tree in Figure 297. Because of bud-union crease the piece of bark broke at the bud-union line while being removed from the trunk. Note tine pinholing below and more conspicuous pinholing above bud-union line. Bud-union crease is not a symptom of stubborn. Pinholing on the sour orange rootstock below bud-union line is a symptom associated with stubborn and tristeza but is not specific. It is open found on severely stressed trees. The tree in Figure 297 indexed negative for tristeza virus by ELISA and Spiroplasma citri could not be cultured from the tree
FIGURE 299 Stunted, cachexiaxyloporosis-affected Jaffa sweet orange tree on Citrus macrophylla rootstock. The symptoms of cachexia, stem pitting (Figure 300) and bark gumming (Figure 301) are seen on the cachexia-susceptible rootstock (Hamraniyah Experiment Station, United Arab Emirates)
FIGURE 300 Trunk of tree in Figure 299 with severe stem pitting on Citrus macrophylla rootstock, but no symptoms on tolerant sweet orange scion
FIGURE 301 Cambial side of piece of bark from trunk in Figure 300 with cachexia symptoms on rootstock bark: conspicuous pegs matching the pits in the stem (right) and gum in the outer layers of bark (left); no symptoms on scion bark
FIGURE 302 Shoots from a Washington navel sweet orange tree; leaves are palmate with blunt tips as a result of heat. In addition, the tips of some leaves are yellow, which suggests stubborn disease. Salt injury can also induce yellow tips (Hamraniyah Experiment Station, United Arab Emirates)
FIGURE 303 Washington navel sweet orange from in Figure 302. Fruit is lopsided; albedo is thick at peduncular end and thin at styler end. These symptoms are indicative of stubborn
FIGURE 304 Aborted seeds In a fruit from a Balady sweet orange tree with stubborn like symptoms (Masafi, United Arab Emirates)
FIGURE 305 Periwinkle (Catharanthus roseus) plant naturally infected with Spiroplasma citri as detected by electron microscopy. This plant was one of many periwinkles growing as ornamentals along Dubai creek, in Dubai town (United Arab Emirates)
FIGURE 306 Witches' broom from a smallfruited acid lime tree resulting probably from a bud mutation. Witches' brooms induced by the MLO of witches' broom disease of lime are very different (compare this figure with Figures 136 to 140) (All Bin Rogha orchard, Kalba area, United Arab Emirates)
FIGURE 307 Declining Kinnow mandarin tree of Pakistani origin showing severe dieback (Hamraniyah Experiment Station, United Arab Emirates)
FIGURE 308 Declining Eureka lemon trees of Californian origin on Citrus volkameriana rootstock. The cause of this decline is not known. It does not seem to be mal secco. Alternaria sp. was isolated from affected leaves (see Figure 309) (Hamraniyah Experiment Station, United Arab Emirates)
FIGURE 309 Leaves with necrotic zones from lemon tree in Figure 308. Alternaria sp. was isolated from the necrotic zones
FIGURE 310 Sunburn on Ruby blood grapefruit (Hamraniyah Experiment Station, United Arab Emirates)
FIGURE 311 Fine orchard of small-fruited acid lime trees (Sheik Sakar orchard, Kalba, United Arab Emirates)
FIGURE 312 Fine Lisbon lemon trees at the Dhaid Substation for Agricultural Development (Dhaid, United Arab Emirates)
FIGURE 313 Fine grapefruit trees in the fruit farm at Dibba (United Arab Emirates)
FIGURE 314 Chimera type variegation on leaves of Valencia late sweet orange on sour orange rootstock. This variegation is not infectious and should not be confused with that caused by infectious variegation-crinkly leaf virus (Phassouri orchard, Limassol, Cyprus)
FIGURE 315 Ortanique tangor on sour orange rootstock suddenly killed by the mal secco fungus, Deuterophoma tracheiphila (Petri), invading the tree from the soil through the roots. In mast cases infection is in the canopy and trees are not killed so suddenly (see Figures 232 to 235) (Lanitis orchard, Limassol, Cyprus)
FIGURE 316 Clementine tree on Poncirus trifoliata showing exocortis induced bark scaling on the rootstock (Boufarik Experiment Station, Boufarik, Algeria)
FIGURE 317 Rows of trees on Poncirus trifoliata rootstock. Trees in centre row are affected by exocortis; tree in Figure 316 is the first tree in the row. Trees in the row on right were also affected by exocortis. They were approach grafted to sour orange seedlings (see Figure 318) and have grown well ever since
FIGURE 318 Rootstock of the first tree In row on right in Figure 317. The central rootstock is me initial Poncirus trifoliata rootstock which is still showing exocortis bark scaling. The lateral rootstocks come from sour orange seedlings that were approach-grafled to the Clementine scion above the P. trifoliata stock. The exocortis-tolerant sour orange rootstocks have taken over and have allowed the trees to grow well
FIGURE 319 Normal Poncirus trifoliata tree on sour orange rootstock. This is a rare combination as P. trifoliata is usually seen as a seedling tree or as the rootstock of a grafted tree (Ferme Blanche, Oued Fodda, Orleanville region, Algeria)
FIGURE 320 Exocortis-affected tree on sour orange rootstock. Usually, exocortis-bark scaling is seen on Poncirus trifoliata used as a rootstock. Here, exocortis symptoms are seen on P. trifoliata used as a scion. Compare with exocortis-tree tree in Figure 319 (Ferme Blanche, Oued Fodda, Orleanville region, Algeria)
FIGURE 321 Poncirus trifoliata shoot from exocortis-affected tree in Figure 320, with yellow blotches typical of exocortis
FIGURE 322 View of Bouregreg River, with Salsola kali plants in the foreground and the city of Rabat, with "Hassan" tower, the landmark of Morocco, in the background. Hundreds of Neoaliturus haematoceps leafhoppers were captured on the S. kali plants. Several Spiroplasma citri-infected periwinkle plants were discovered in ornamental flowerbeds near "Hassan" tower in 1978 and 1990. The proximity of S. kali plants harbouring M haematoceps, the leafhopper vector of S. citri, probably explains why S. citri-infected periwinkle plants are found nearby. Notice that some S. kali plants are still green, others are brownish. In fact S. kali plants grow throughout the year and support continuous populations of M haematoceps
<section>x</section>
TABLE 5 Rutaceous and non-rutaceous plants: their susceptibility to citrus virus and virus-like disease agents^1
Plant Susceptible to the agents of:
Rutaceous plants 
Aeglopis chevalieri 
Bergamot Impietratura, Multiple sprouting, Phytophthora
Calamondin Stubborn
Chinotto 
Citranges 
Carrizo Citrange stunt, Exocortis, Satsuma dwarf, Stubborn
Cunningham 
Rusk Citrange stunt, Exocortis, Stubborn, Tristeza (stem pitting)
Troyer Citrange stunt, Exocortis, Kumquat (Meiwa), Ringspot, Satsuma dwarf, Stubborn, Witches' broom
Uvalve Tristeza
Citremons (1448-1449) Citrange stunt, Ringspot
Citrons Exocortis (CEV, CV-III, CV-IV, CV-Q, Greening, Infectious variegation-Crinkly leaf, Leaf cud, Psorosis young leaf symptoms, Tristeza
Citron (Etrog) Exocortis, Infectious variegation-Crinkly leaf, Phytophthora, Psorosis (shock), Tristeza, Witches' broom, Yellow vein
Citrumelos Exocortis
Citrumelo 1452 Tristeza
Citrumelo 4475 (Swingle) Tristeza (some isolates: vein clearing)
Citrus amblicarpa 
Citrus daidai 
Citrus excelsa Psorosis (shock), Ringspot, Satsuma dwarf, Tatterleaf, Tristeza
Citrus hystrix Tristeza
Citrus junos Satsuma dwarf, Tristeza
Citrus macrophylla Cachexia-Xyloporosis, Kumquat (Meiwa), Tristeza, Phytophthora
Citrus pectinifera Cristacortis
Citrus volkameriana Cachexia (some isolates), Impietratura, Woody gall
Clausena sp. 
Clementine Cachexia-Xyloporosis, Concave gum, Cristacortis, Impietratura, Infectious variegation, Crinkly leaf, Kumquat (Meiwa), Phytophthora, Psorosis A, Ringspot, Satsuma dwarf
Grapefruit Concave gum, Cristacortis, Greening, Impietratura, Infectious variegation-Crinkly leaf, Kassala disease, Kumquat (Meiwa), Leaf rugose, Leprosis, Multiple sprouting, Phytophthora, Psorosis A, Psorosis young leaf symptoms, Ringspot, Satsuma dwarf, Seedling yellows, Stubborn, Tristeza (stem pitting), Zonate chlorosis
Grapefruit on rough lemon Night
Harvey lemon Exocortis
Hassaku Tristeza (stem pitting)
Kumquats Cachexia-Xyloporosis, Greening, Multiple sprouting, Stubborn, Tristeza (stem pitting), Yellow vein, Zonate chlorosis
Lemons Greening, Impietratura, Infectious variegation-Crinkly leaf, Leaf curl, Leaf rugose, Multiple sprouting, Kumquat (Meiwa), Phytophthora, Psorosis young leaf symptoms, Ringspot, Rubbery wood, Rumple, Satsuma dwarf, Seedling yellows, Stubborn, Vein enation, Witches' broom, Yellow vein, Zonate chlorosis
Lime (Kagzi, Key, Mexican, West Indian) Greening, Infectious variegation-Crinkly leaf, Leaf curl, Leaf rugose, Phytophthora, Psorosis young leaf symptoms, Ringspot, Rubbery wood, Satsuma dwarf, Seedling yellows, Stubborn, Tristeza, Vein enation-Woody gall, Witches' broom, Yellow vein, Zonate chlorosis
Limequats Tristeza (stem pitting), Yellow vein
Mandarins Cachexia-Xyloporosis, Concave gum, Cristacortis, Greening, Leaf curl, Leprosis, Phytophthora, Psorosis A, Psorosis young leaf symptoms, Ringspot, Satsuma dwarf, Stubborn, Tristeza (some stem pitting isolates from Japan, Indonesia), Vein enation, Zonate chlorosis
Mandarin (Cleopatra) Infectious variegation-Crinkly leaf
Mandarin (Parson's Special) on C. volkameriana Cachexia-Xyloporosis, Bud-union crease (Corsica)
Mandarin limes Exocortis, Stubborn
Natsudaidai Satsuma dwarf
Poncirus trifoliata Exocortis, Gum pocket, Ringspot, Satsuma dwarf, Witches' broom, Zonate chlorosis
Poncirus X citrus Citrange stunt
Pomelos Greening, Infectious variegation-Crinkly leaf, Leaf cud, Psorosis young leaf symptoms, Seedling yellows, Stubborn, Tristeza (stem pitting)
Rangpur lime Cachexia-Xyloporosis, Cristacortis, Exocortis, Greening, Phytophthora, Ringspot, Woody gall
Rough lemon Cristacortis, Greening, Gummy bark, Impietratura, Leprosis, Phytophthora, Psorosis young leaf symptoms, Ringspot, Satsuma dwarf, Stubborn, Vein enation-Woody gall, Witches' broom, Yellow vein
Satsuma Cachexia-Xyloporosis, Cristacortis, Infectious variegation-Crinkly leaf, Phytophthora, Satsuma dwarf, Stubborn
Satsuma on P. trifoliata Tatterleaf virus-induced Bud-union crease
Severinia buxifolia Ringspot
Siamelos Concave gum, Cristacortis
Sour orange Cristacortis, Impietratura, Infectious variegation-Crinkly leaf, Kumquat (Meiwa), Leprosis, Multiple sprouting, Psorosis young leaf symptoms, Ringspot, Satsuma dwarf, Seedling yellows, Stubborn, Vein enation
Sweet lime Cachexia-Xyloporosis, Cristacortis, Exocortis, Greening, Infectious variegation- Crinkly leaf, Leaf cud, Phytophthora, Stubborn, Tristeza, Witches' broom
Sweet limetta Witches' broom
Sweet orange Concave gum, Cristacortis, Greening, Gummy bark, Impietratura, Infectious Variegation-Crinkly leaf, Leaf curl, Leprosis, Multiple sprouting, Phytophthora, Psorosis A, Psorosis young leaf symptoms, Satsuma dwarf, Stubborn, Tristeza(severe isolates induce vein clearing and stem pitting on some varieties), Vein Clearing, Vein enation, Zonate chlorosis
Sweet orange 
Mediterranean, Pera Tristeza (stem pitting)
on P. trifoliata Tatterleaf virus-induced Bud-union crease
on sour orange Tristeza
on rough lemon Blight, Bud-union crease (South Africa)
Tahiti lime Exocortis, Phytophthora, Tristeza (stem pitting), Zonate chlorosis
Tangelo (Orlando) Cachexia-Xyloporosis, Concave gum, Cristacortis, Greening, Impietratura, Kumquat(Meiwa), Psorosis A, Psorosis young leaf symptoms, Satsuma dwarf, Stubborn, Yellow vein
Tangors Cristacortis, Ringspot, Tristeza (stem pitting)
Dweet tangor Concave gum, Cristacortis, Impietratura, Kumquat (Meiwa), Psorosis A, Ringspot
Non-rutaceous plants 
Capsicum annuum Virus associated with California psorosis A
Chenopodium amaranticolor 
Chenopodium quinoa California psorosis A virus, Infectious variegation-Crinkly leaf, Leaf rugose, Psorosis A and B, Ringspot, Satsuma dwarf, Tatterleaf-Citrange stunt
Chrysanthemum Exocortis (CEV), CV-IIa viroid
Crotalaria spectabilis Infectious variegation-Crinkly leaf, Leaf rugose
Cucumis sativus Infectious variegation-Crinkly leaf, Cachexia (CV-IIa, CV-IIb, CV-IIc), Leaf rugose
Gomphrena globosa California psorosis A virus, Infectious variegation-Crinkly leaf, Ringspot
Gynura aurantiaca Exocortis (CEV)
Momordica balsamina Infectious variegation-Crinkly leaf, Leaf rugose
Nicotiana benthamiana and N. megalosiphon California psorosis A virus
Nicotiana tabacum Satsuma dwarf
Passiflora glacilis Tristeza
Petunia hybrida Exocortis, Satsuma dwarf
Phaseolus aureus Infectious variegation-Crinkly leaf, Satsuma dwarf
Phaseolus vulgaris Infectious variegation-Crinkly leaf, Leaf rugose, Satsuma dwarf, Tatterleaf
Physalis floridana Satsuma dwarf
Sesamum indicum Satsuma dwarf
Tomato Exocortis (CEV)
Vigna sinensis (cowpea) Infectious variegation-Crinkly leaf, Tatterleaf
Vigna unguiculata Leaf rugose
Vinca rosea Greening, Witches' broom
Vinca rosea and many other non-rutaceous species Spiroplasma citri
Note:
Phytophthora, a fungal agent, has also been included in the list.
TABLE 6 Rutaceous and non-rutaceous plants: their tolerance to citrus virus and virus-like disease agents^1
Plant Tolerant of or resistant to the agents of
Rutaceous plants 
Aeglopis chevalieri Citrange stunt
Bergamot Cristacortis
Calamondin 
Chinotto Impietratura
Citranges 
Carrizo Cachexia-Xyloporosis, Concave gum, Cristacortis, Greening, Multiple sprouting, Phytophthora, Psorosis A, Tristeza
Cunningham Stubborn
Rusk Cachexia-Xyloporosis, Concave gum, Cristacortis, Greening, Multiple sprouting, Phytophthora, Psorosis A
Troyer Cachexia-Xyloporosis, Concave gum, Cristacortis, Greening, Multiple sprouting, Phytophthora, Psorosis A, Tristeza
Uvalve 
Citremons (11448-1449) 
Citrons Cachexia-Xyloporosis, Concave gum, Cristacortis, Impietratura
Citron (Etrog) Cachexia-Xyloporosis, Concave gum, Cristacortis, Impietratura, Satsuma dwarf
Citrumelos Cachexia-Xyloporosis, Multiple sprouting
Citrumelo 1452 
Citrumelo 4475 (Swingle) Tristeza (most isolates)
Citrus amblicarpa Gummy bark
Citrus daidai Psorosis leaf symptoms
Citrus excelsa Citrange stunt, Phytophthora
Citrus hystrix Cristacortis
Citrus junos Phytophthora
Citrus macrophylla 
Citrus pectinifera 
Citrus volkameriana Cristacortis
Clausena sp. Psorosis leaf symptoms
Clementine Exocortis, Rumple, Tristeza
Grapefruit Cachexia-Xyloporosis, Exocortis, Gummy bark, Rumple
Grapefruit on rough lemon 
Harvey lemon 
Hassaku Satsuma dwarf
Kumquats Impietratura
Lemons Cachexia-Xyloporosis, Citrange stunt, Concave gum, Cristacortis (except certain isolates), Exocortis, Gummy bark, Psorosis A, Tatterleaf, Tristeza
Lime (Kagzi, Key, Mexican, West Indian) Cachexia-Xyloporosis, Citrange stunt, Concave gum, Cristacortis, Exocortis, Gummy bark
Limequats 
Mandarins Exocortis, Gummy bark, Rumple, Seedling yellows, Tristeza (most isolates)
Mandarin (Cleopatra) Leaf curl
Mandarin (Parson's Special) on C. volkameriana 
Mandarin limes 
Natsudaidai 
Poncirus trifoliata Cachexia-Xyloporosis, Concave gum, Cristacortis, Greening, Gummy bark, Infectious variegation-Crinkly leaf, Leaf curl, Multiple sprouting, Phytophthora, Psorosis A, Tristeza, Yellow vein
Poncirus X citrus 
Pomelos Cachexia-Xyloporosis, Exocortis, Phytophthora
Rangpur lime Concave gum, Gummy bark, Gum pocket, Leaf curl, Tristeza (A, B)
Rough lemon Cachexia-Xyloporosis, Citrange stunt, Concave gum, Exocortis, Psorosis A, Seedling yellows, Tatterleaf, Tristeza
Satsuma Tristeza
Satsuma on rough lemon Tatterleaf
Severinia buxifolia Citrange stunt
Siamelos Phytophthora
Sour orange Cachexia-Xyloporosis, Concave gum, Exocortis, Gummy bark,
Psorosis A, Phytophthora, Rumple, Tatterleaf, Tristeza 
Sweet lime Concave gum, Psorosis A
Sweet orange Cachexia-Xyloporosis, Citrange stunt, Exocortis, Rumple, Seedling yellows, Tatterleaf, Tristeza (most isolates)
Sweet orange 
Mediterranean, Pera 
on sour orange 
on rough lemon Tatterleaf
Tahiti lime Cachexia-Xyloporosis, Citrange stunt, Satsuma dwarf
Tangelo (Orlando) Exocortis, Gummy bark, Satsuma dwarf, Tristeza
Tangors Exocortis
Non-rutaceous plants 
Catharanthus roseus and many other non-rutaceous species
Chenopodium amaranticolor Satsuma dwarf
Chenopodium quinoa 
Crotalaria spectabilis 
Cucumis sativus Exocortis (CEV, CV-IV), Satsuma dwarf
Gomphrena globosa 
Gynura aurantiaca 
Momordica balsamina 
Nicotiana glutinosa Satsuma dwarf
Nicotiana tabacum 
Petunia hybrida 
Phaseolus aureus 
Phaseolus vulgaris 
Physalis floridana 
Sesamum indicum 
Tomato CV-II viroids
Viburnum odoratissimum Satsuma dwarf
Vigna sinensis (cowpea) 
Note:
^1 Phytophthora, a fungal agent, has also been included in the list.
<section>y</section>
TABLE 7 Citrus virus and virus-like diseases: rutaceous and non-rutaceous plants that are symptomatic
Disease (or agent) Symptomatic Plants
Blight Sweet orange and Grapefruit (when grafted on Rough lemon, Citrus volkameriana, Rangpur lime, evidence of disease is lower on mandarins and lemons)
Brittle twig yellows Sweet orange in Iran
Bud-union crease (Marumi and Nagami kumquat agent) Parson's Special mandarin on C. volkameriana (Corsica)
Bud-union crease Sweet orange on Rough lemon (South Africa and Spain)
Cachexia-Xyloporosis Citrus macrophylla, Clementine, Kumquat, MANDARINS, Rangpur lime, Satsuma, Sweet lime, TANGELOS (Nocatee, Orlando, Seminola, Wekiwa), Cucumis sativus (cucumber)
Concave gum-Blind pocket Clementines, Grapefruits, MANDARINS, Siamelo, SWEET ORANGES, Tangelos (Orlando, Sampon, Sunshine, Waft), Dweet tangor
Cristacortis Citrus pectinifera, Clemea, Clementine, Grapefruits, MANDARINS, Rough lemon, Satsuma, Siamelos, SOUR ORANGE, Sweet lime, SWEET ORANGES, TANGELOS, Dweet tangor
Exocortis CITRANGES, Etrog citron, Harvey lemon, Mandarin limes, PONCIRUS TRIFOLIATA, Rangpur lime, Sweet lime, Tahiti lime, Chrysanthemum (CEV), Gynura aurantiaca (CEV), Petunia hybrida, Tomato, Solanum spp.
Fatal yellows Citrus macrophylla and lemon on C. macrophylla, in California
Fovea Murcott tangor in Florida
Greening Catharanthus roseus, (dodder transmission), Citrons, Grapefruits, Kumquats, Lemons, MANDARINS, Pomelos, Rough lemon, Rangpur lime, Sweet lime, SWEET ORANGES, TANGELOS, West Indian lime
Gummy bark Rough lemon, SWEET ORANGE
Gum pocket P. trifoliata
Impietratura Bergamot, C. VOLKAMERIANA, Clementine, Grapefruits, Lemons, Rough lemon, Sour orange, SWEET ORANGES, Tangelos, Dweet tangor
Infectious variegation-Crinkly leaf Citron (Etrog), Clementine, Grapefruits, LEMONS, CLEOPATRA MANDARIN, Pomelos, SATSUMA, Sour orange, Sweet lime, Sweet oranges, West Indian lime, Chenopodium quinoa, Crotalaria spectabilis, Cucumis sativus, Gomphrena globosa, Momordica balsamina, Phaseolus aureus, P. vulgaris, Vigna sinensis
Kumquat (Meiwa) agent(s) Inoculation of the agent(s) induces vein clearing of sweet orange, Troyer citrange, Citrus macrophylla, Dweet tangor, Marsh grapefruit, Orlando tangelo, Sour orange and Cleopatra mandarin, stem pitting in Etrog citron, graft incompatibility on Troyer citrange (Spain)
Kumquat (Marumi and Nagami) agent Inoculation of the agent induces bud-union crease of Parson's Special mandarin on Volkameriana lemon (Corsica)
Leaf curl Citrons, Grapefruits, Lemons, Mandarins, Pomelos, Sweet lime, SWEET ORANGES, West Indian lime
Leaf rugose Mexican lime, Eureka lemon, Duncan grapefruit, Bush bean (cultivar Red Kidney), Crotalaria spectabilis, Vigna unguiculata, Chenopodium quinoa, Cucumis sativus, Momordica balsamina
Leathery leaf in India See Satsuma dwarf
Leprosis Grapefruits, Mandarins, Rough lemons, SOUR ORANGE, SWEET ORANGE
Mosaic (India) Sweet orange, Kagzi lime, Rangpur lime, Grapefruit, Mandarin, Lemon, Pomelo, Aegle marmelos
Mosaic (Japan) See Satsuma dwarf
Multiple sprouting Bergamots, Grapefruits, Kumquats, Lemons, Sour orange, Sweet oranges
Natsudaidai virus (Japan) See Satsuma dwarf
Navel orange infectious mottling (Japan) See Satsuma dwarf
Phytophthora Bergamot, Citrons, Citrus macrophylla, Clementine, Grapefruit, Lemons, Mandarins, Rangpur lime, Rough lemon, Satsuma, Sweet lime, SWEET ORANGE, Tahiti lime, West Indian lime
Psorosis A Bark scaling: GRAPEFRUITS, Mandarins, SWEET ORANGE, Tangelo (Orlando) Symptoms on leaves: Citrons, Grapefruits, Lemons, Mandarins, Pomelos, Rough lemon, SOUR ORANGE, SWEET ORANGES, DWEET TANGOR, Tangelos, WEST INDIAN LIME, Chenopodium quinoa
Ringspot Citrange Troyer, Citremon 1449, Citrus excelsa, GRAPEFRUITS, Lemons, Mandarin (Parson's Special, Szinkom), Poncirus trifoliata (Pomeroy), Rangpur lime, Rough lemon, Severinia buxifolia, Sour orange, Sweet oranges, Dweet tangor, West Indian lime, cowpea, bean, Chenopodium quinoa, Gomphrena globosa, Crotalaria spectabilis, Petunia hybrids, Zinnia elegans
Rubbery wood Lemon, small-fruited acid lime
Rumple Lemon (Eureka, Femminello, Lisbon, Villafranca)
Satsuma dwarf (leathery leaf in India) Citranges (Carrizo, Morton, Troyer), Citrus excelsa, C. junos, Clementine, Grapefruits, Eureka lemon, Mandarin (Dancy, Cleopatra, King), Natsudaidai, Poncirus trifoliata, Rough lemon, Satsuma, Sour orange, Sweet oranges, Tangelos, West Indian lime, Chenopodium capitatum and quinoa, Nicotiana tabacum, Petunia hybrids, Phaseolus aureus, P. vulgaris, Physalis floridana, Sesamum indicum, Vigna sinensis
Seedling yellows Grapefruits, LEMONS (Eureka, Lisbon), Minneola tangelo, Pomelos, SOUR ORANGE, West Indian lime
Stubborn Calamondin, Catharanthus roseus and many other non-rutaceous species, Citrange, Grapefruit, Kumquat, Lemon, Mandarin, Mandarin limes, Pomelo (Chandler), Rough lemon, Satsuma, Sour orange, Sweet lime, SWEET ORANGES, Tangelos, West Indian lime
Sweet orange vein clearing Sweet orange
Tatterleaf-Citrange stunt Citrus excelsa, CITRANGE (Carrizo, Rusk, Troyer), Citremons (1448, 1449), Satsuma or sweet orange on P. trifoliata, Chenopodium quinoa, Blackeye cowpea, Masterpiece bean
Tristeza I - STEM PITTING WHETHER USED AS SEEDLINGS, SCIONS OR ROOTSTOCKS
a) Strains of California, Florida, Spain: Walve citrange, Etrog citron, Citrus excelsa, C. hystrix, C. junos, C. macrophylla, Sweet lime, West Indian lime
b) Strains of South Africa, South America, Japan: Species and varieties in a) and: Citranges (Morton, Rusk, Savage), Grapefruits, Hassaku, Kumquats, Limequats, Pomelos, Sweet orange (Mediterranean, Pera), Tahiti lime, Tangor
c) Strains of certain areas of Brazil, Japan, Southeast Asia, Cameroon, Mauritius, Reunion: Species and varieties in a) and b) and Citrumelo 1452, Rangpur lime, Tangors
II - DECLINE WHEN GRAFTED ON SOUR ORANGE (OR ON LEMONS) Species or varieties except lemons and sour orange
III - DECLINE UNDER CERTAIN CONDITIONS Mandarins on Rangpur lime (Brazil), Sweet orange on Rangpur lime (Brazil), Sweet orange on P. trifoliata (?) (South America), Sweet orange on Troyer citrange (California)
Vein clearing (Meiwa kumquat) agent Sweet orange, Troyer citrange, C. macrophylla, etc. See Kumquat agent(s)
Vein enation-Woody gall On leaves: Citrons, Lemons, Mandarins, ROUGH LEMON, SOUR ORANGE, Sweet oranges, WEST INDIAN LIME Galls on trunk: C. VOLKAMERIANA, Rangpur lime, Rough Lemon, West Indian lime
Witches' broom Small-fruited acid lime trees in Oman and the United Arab Emirates, Troyer citrange, Catharanthus roseus (dodder transmission), P. trifoliata, Eureka lemon, Rough lemon, Citron, Palestine sweet lime, Sweet limetta
Yellow vein Citron (Etrog), Citrus macrophylla, C. volkameriana, Kumquats, Lemons, Limequats, ROUGH LEMON, Tangelos, WEST INDIAN LIME
Zonate chlorosis Grapefruits, KUMQUATS, LEMONS, MANDARINS, P. TRIFOLIATA, SWEET ORANGES, Tahiti lime, West Indian lime
Note:
Names in capital letters: most susceptible species, varieties or combinations.
TABLE 8 Citrus virus and virus-like diseases: rutaceous and non rutaceous plants which are symptomless
Disease Symptomless plants
Blight Sweet orange or Grapefruit on Swingle citrumelo, Sweet orange and Cleopatra mandarin are less affected than trees on other rootstocks
Cachexia-Xyloporosis Citranges, Citrons, Citrumelos, Grapefruits, Lemons, Poncirus trifoliata, Pomelos, Rough lemon, Sour orange, Sweet oranges, Tangelos (Webber, Williams), West Indian lime
Concave gum-Blind pocket Citranges, Citrons, Lemons, Rough lemon, P. trifoliata, Sour orange, Sweet lime, West Indian lime
Cristacortis Bergamot, Citranges (Carrizo, Troyer), Citrons, Citrus hystrix, C. volkameriana, Lemons, P. trifoliata, West Indian lime
Exocortis Clementine, Grapefruits, Lemons (Eureka, Lisbon), Mandarins, Pomelos, Rough lemon, Sour orange, Sweet oranges, Tangelos, Tangor, West Indian lime
Greening Citranges, P. trifoliata
Gummy bark Citrus amblicarpa, Grapefruits, Lemons, Mandarins, Rangpur lime, Sour orange, Orlando tangelo, P. trifoliata, West Indian lime
Gum pocket Troyer citrange, Empress mandarin, Rangpur lime
Impietratura Chinotto, Citron, Kumquat
Infectious variegation-Crinkly leaf Willowleaf mandarin, P. trifoliata
Leaf curl Troyer citrange, Cleopatra mandarin, P. trifoliata, Rangpur lime
Leprosis Sweet orange (Valencia late in Florida)
Multiple sprouting Citranges, Citrumelos, P. trifoliata
Phytophthora Citranges (Carrizo, Morton, Rusk, Troyer), Citrus excelsa, C. junos, Pomelos, P. trifoliata, Siamelos, Sour orange, Tangelo seminole
Psorosis A (bark scaling) Citranges, Lemons, Mandarin (Comun de Concordia), P. trifoliata, Rough lemon, Sour orange, Citrus daidai, Clausena sp.
Rumple Clementine, Grapefruits, Mandarins, Sour orange, Sweet orange
Satsuma dwarf Etrog citron, Hassaku, Tahiti lime, Orlando tangelo, Chenopodium amaranticolor, Cucumis sativus, Nicotiana glutinosa, Viburnum odoratissimum
Seedling yellows Mandarins, Rough lemon, Sweet orange
Stubborn Citrange (Cunningham, Troyer), P. trifoliata
Tatterleaf-Citrange stunt Aeglopsis chevalieri, Lemons, Rough lemon, Severinia buxifolia, Sour orange, Sweet orange, West Indian lime
Tristeza I - NO STEM PITTING WHETHER USED AS SEEDLINGS, SCIONS OR ROOTSTOCKS:
Citranges (Carrizo, Troyer), Citrumelo 4475, Lemons, Mandarins, P. trifoliata, Rangpur lime, Rough lemon, Satsuma, Sour orange, Sweet orange, Tangelo. (Some tristeza isolates do stem pit some of these hosts
- Lemons, Mandarins, Rangpur lime, Rough lemon and Sweet orange)
II - NO DECLINE WHEN GRAFTED:
Mandarins, Sweet oranges on Citranges (Carrizo, Troyer), Citrumelo 4475, Cleopatra mandarin, P. trifoliata, Rangpur lime, Rough lemon
Yellow vein P. trifoliata
TABLE 10 Insect and mite vectors of virus and virus-like disease agents of citrus
Disease Agent Vector Type of vector Persistent; semi- persistent or non- persistent agent
Greening BLO Diaphorina citri Kuw. Psyllid Persistent
Trioza erytreae Del Guercio Psyllid Persistent
Leathery leaf (India) Virus Aphis gossypii Glover Aphid Not known
Leprosis Capillovirus (?) Brevipalpus phoenicis (in Brazil) Mite 
Brevipalpus californicus (in Florida) Mite 
Brevipalpus obovatus (in Argentina and Venezuela) Mite 
Mosaic (India) Probably virus Myzus persiceae Sulz. 
Aphid Aphis craccivora Koch Non-persistent
Psorosis (Argentina) Virus Not identified, but evidence of natural spread 
Ringspot (Texas, Florida) Virus Not identified, but evidence of natural spread 
Rubbery wood MLO Not identified, but natural spread is suspected 
Satsuma dwarf Virus Not identified, but evidence of natural spread 
Stubborn Spiroplasma Neoaliturus (Circulifer) haematoceps Mulsant & Rey Leafhopper Persistent
Neoaliturus (Circulifer) tenellus Baker Leafhopper Persistent
Scaphytopius nitridus Baker Leafhopper Persistent
Scaphytopius acutus delongi Baker Leafhopper Persistent
Tristeza Closterovirus Toxoptera citricida Kirk. Aphid Semi- persistent
Aphis gossypii Glover Aphid Semi- persistent
A. citricola van der Goot (= A. spiraecola Patch) Aphid Semi- persistent
A. craccivora Koch Aphid Semi- persistent
M. persicae Sulz. Aphid Semi- persistent
Toxoptera aurantii Bsy. Aphid Semi- persistent
Dactynotus jaceae L. Aphid Semi- persistent
Vein enation-Woody gall Luteovirus T. citricida Kirk. Aphid Persistent
A. gossypii Glover Aphid Persistent
M. persicae Sulz. Aphid Persistent
Witches' broom MLO The leafhopper Hishimonus phycitis is a putative vector Leafhopper Persistent
TABLE 11 Relationships between citrus disease agents and homopterous insect vectors
Citrus disease agents Spiroplasma, BLO, MLO Mosaic virus (India) Tristeza virus vein enation Virus
Type of agent Persistent agent Non-persistent agent Semi-persistent agent Persistent agent
(circulative) (non-circulative) (non-circulative) (circulative)
(propagative) (non-propagative) (non-propagative) (non-propagative)
(stylet-borne) 
Vectors Leafhoppers, psyllids Aphids Aphids Aphids
Localization of agent in plant Phloem-restricted Not phloem-restricted Phloem Phloem-restricted
Superficial cell-layers 
Acquisition period Long (24-48 hours) Brief (minutes or less) Long (24-48 hours) Long
(insect has to find phloem tissue) (time for sap-sampling puncture) (insect has to find phloem tissue) Long
Incubation period Long (8-12 days) None (insect is immediately infectious) None Long
Retention period Very long (whole life of insect) Short (a few hours at most) Quite long (2-3 weeks) Very long (perhaps whole life of insect)
Multiplication of agent in insect Yes No No No
Transovarial transmission No No No No
TABLE 12 Indicator plants for the detection of the major virus and virus-like agents of citrus
Agents of Indicator plant Symptoms observed Time required for symptom expression (temperature condition)
Blight (uncharacterized) Adult Valencia sweet orange on rough lemon, graft inoculated with root pieces from candidate tree Blight syndrome 2 years at least
Cachexia (viroid) Parson's Special mandarin on rough lemon^1 Gumming at graft union(Figs 58, 59) 1-2 years (warm)
Concave gum-Blind pocket(uncharacterized) o Sweet orange seedling Vein flecking, oak-leaf patterns on young leaves A few weeks (cool)
o Sweet orange seedling tree Cortical symptoms A few years
Cristacortis (uncharacterized) o Sweet orange seedling Vein flecking, oak-leaf patterns on young leaves A few weeks (cool)
o Orlando or Wekiwa tangelo seedling Stem pitting 1-2 years
Exocortis complex (viroid complex) Etrog citron 861 -S1 on rough lemon^1 Leaf epinasty and/or stunting midvein necrosis, petiole necrosis, leaf tip browning (Fig. 90) Weeks to months (warm)
Greening (BLO) Sweet orange seedling Leaf yellowing and mottling with zinc deficiency-like patterns Several months (Asian form: warm; African form: cool)
Gummy bark (uncharacterized) Sweet orange on rough lemon Gumming of sweet orange and sometimes rough lemon bark, bud-union constriction Several years
Gum pocket-Gummy pitting Sweet orange on Poncirus trifoliata Gum pockets in the bark and wood of P. trifoliata Several years
Impietratura, (uncharacterized) o Sweet orange seedling Vein flecking, oak-leaf patterns on young leaves A few weeks (cool)
o Fruiting grapefruit Gum in fruit albedo A few months
Infectious variegation-Crinkly leaf (ilarvirus) o Lemon seedling, Etrog citron Leaf variegation and/or crinkle A few weeks
o Cowpea (cultivar Black) Chlorotic lesion on mechanically infected leaves A few days
Leaf rugose (ilarvirus) o Mexican time seedling Leaf puckering A few weeks
o Eureka lemon seedling Pinpoint chlorotic spotting A few weeks
o Red kidney, Bush bean Local lesions A few days
Psorosis A (scaly bark) (virus) o Sweet orange seedling Vein flecking, oak-leaf patterns on young leaves A few weeks (cool)
o Sweet orange tree Bark scaling and flaking A few years
Ringspot (virus) o Sweet orange seedling Necrotic shoot reaction ring patterns, mottled chlorotic areas on young leaves. Chlorotic patterns on mature leaves. Stem lesions A few weeks
o Chenopodium quinoa Necrotic local lesions on mechanically infected, fully expended leaves. No systemic infection A few days
Rubbery wood (MLO) Lemon seedling Flexible, downward bent shoots A few months
Satsuma dwarf (virus) o Satsuma mandarin Stunting, boat- or spoon-shaped leaves Several months (cool)
o Sesame, C. quinoa Local lesions on mechanically infected leaves A few days
Stubborn (Spiroplasma citri) Madame Vinous or Hamlin sweet orange seedling Leaf tip chlorosis, leaf mottle, leaf cupping, stunting A few months (warm)
Tatterleaf-Citrange stunt(virus) o C. excelsa seedling Deformed leaves with chlorotic zones A few months
o Rusk citrange seedling Deformed leaves with chlorotic leaf blotch. Stem with zigzag growth pattern A few months
o C. quinoa Chlorotic local lesions and systemic chlorotic mottle A few days
Tristeza (closterovirus) Small-fruited acid lime seedlings Leaf vein clearing, leaf cupping, stem pitting, stunting Weeks to months (cool)
Tristeza with seedling yellows reaction Grapefruit, lemon, sour orange seedlings Stunting, leaf yellows at seedling top A few months
Vein enation-Woody gall (luteovirus) o Small-fruited acid lime seedling Vein enations A few months
o Small-fruited acid lime or rough lemon seedlings Galls on stems near thorns in association with wounds A few months
Witches' broom (MLO) Small-fruited acid lime seedling Small to very small leaves, witches' brooms Several months (warm)
^1 Other vigorous rootstock seedlings such as C. volkameriana may be used.
TABLE 13 Techniques for the detection of virus and virus-like agents of citrus or constituents of the agents
Disease Techniques Agent or agent-constituent detected
Blight Sodium dodecyl sulphate (SDS)- polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis (PAGE) Immunospot, western blot Proteins (pathogenesis-related proteins?)
Cachexia Sequential PAGE (sPAGE) and silver staining of the viroid RNA bands Cachexia viroid(s)
Exocortis sPAGE Exocortis viroid(s)
Greening o Electron microscopy (Figs 3-21) Greening BLO in sieve tubes
o Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay(ELISA) with monoclonal antibodies (MA) Greening BLO
o Immunofluorescence (MA) on leaf midrib sections Greening BLO in phloem tissue
o DNA probes BLO DNA
Infectious variegation-Crinkly ELISA Viral coat protein
Leaf rugose ELISA Viral coat protein
Psorosis (California isolate) PAGE Double-stranded RNAs
Stubborn o Culture of S. citri S. citri
o ELISA (polyclonal antibodies, PA) Membrane proteins of S. citri
o S. citri DNA probes S. citri DNA
o Amplification by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) of spiralin-gene sequences Spiralin-gene of S. citri
o Electron microscopy (Figs 22-24) S. citri in sieve tubes
Tatterleaf o PAGE Double-stranded RNAs
o ELISA Viral coat protein
Tristeza o Electron microscopy Bundles of tristeza virions in phloem tissue
o ELISA DIBA (dot immuno binding assay), IEM (immuno electron microscopy) with polyclonal or monoclonal antibodies Viral coat protein
o cDNA probes Viral RNA
o Light microscopy after azure A staining of sections Aggregates of tristeza virions
o PAGE Double-stranded RNAs
Vein enation o Electron microscopy Virions
o PAGE Double-stranded RNAs
Witches' broom o ELISA (monoclonal antibodies, MA) Membrane proteins of Witches' broom MILO
o Immunofluorescence (MA) on leaf midrib sections Witches' broom MILO in phloem tissue
o DNA probes MLO DNA
o Electron microscopy (Figs 25-30) Witches' broom MLO in sieve tubes
<section>z</section>
TABLE 17 Spiroplasma citridetection by ELISA and culture in adult citrus orchards in the Syrian
Location
Sample (tree number)
Species or variety
Date^1
Stubborn symptoms
ELISA (E)
Culture (C)
(E)+(C)
Plant tissue^2
Result
Plant tissue^2
Result
Ugarit, Dib Vitali orchard 38 Washington navel sweet orange 1983 (July) + Fa + Fa + +
44 Washington navel sweet orange 1982 + Fa + Fa + +
46 Washington navel sweet orange 1982 + Fa + Fa - +
48 Washington navel sweet orange 1982 + Fa + Fa + +
Ugarit, Demsarko orchard 67 Washington navel sweet orange 1982 + Fa + Fa + +
68 Washington navel sweet orange 1982 + Fa - Fa + +
Besnada, S. Affif orchard 33 Valencia late sweet orange 1982 + S + s + +
34 Valencia late sweet orange 1982 + Fa - Fa - -
35 Valencia late sweet orange 1982 ? Fa - Fa - -
36 Valencia late sweet orange 1982 - Fa - Fa - -
37 Satsuma 1982 ? Fa - Fa - -
Besnada, Shreita orchard R5A3 Valencia late sweet orange 1983 + L, Fa + L, Fa + +
R11A6 Valencia late sweet orange 1983 + L, Fa + L, Fa + +
Mamlaka (north of Latakia) 31 Clementine 1982 - Fa - Fa - -
32 Washington navel sweet orange 1982 + Fa + Fa + +
El Annadeh, Sidawi orchard 98 Washington navel sweet orange 1982 + L + L + +
105 Washington navel sweet orange
Jaffa sweet orange top-grafted on
Washington navel sweet orange on sour orange rootstock (5 trees) 1982 + Fa + Fa + +
94 Tree 1 Jaffa 1982 + L + L + +
95 " Washington navel 1982 + L + L - +
96 Tree 2 Jaffa 1982 + L + L - +
97 " Washington navel 1982 + L + L - +
99 Tree 3 Jaffa 1982 + L + L - +
100 " Washington navel 1982 + L + L + +
101 Tree 4 Jaffa 1982 + L + L + +
102 " Washington navel 1982 + L + L + +
44 Tree 5 Jaffa 1983 (July) + L - L + +
45 " Washington navel 1983 (July) + L - L + +
43 Washington navel sweet orange 1983 (July) + Fa - Fa + +
46 Washington navel sweet orange 1983 (July) + Fa - Fa + +
R4A3 Washington navel sweet orange 1983 + L, Fa + L, Fa + +
R9A2 Washington navel sweet orange 1983 + L, Fa + L, Fa + +
Snowbar, Anderson orchard A Washington navel sweet orange 1981 + ND^3 L, Fa + +
B Washington navel sweet orange 1981 + ND Fa + +
C Washington navel sweet orange 1981 + ND Fa + +
51 Washington navel sweet orange 1982 + L, Fa, Fl + L, Fa, Fl + +
55 Washington navel sweet orange 1982 + Fa + Fa + +
56 Washington navel sweet orange 1982 + L, Fa, Fl + L, Fa, Fl + +
54 Washington navel sweet orange 1982 + L - L + +
58 Shaddock sweet orange 1982 + Fa - Fa + +
R3A1 Washington navel sweet orange 1983 + L, Fa + L, Fa + +
R3A5 Washington navel sweet orange 1983 + L, Fa + L, Fa + +
Jablé Experiment Station Butler sweet orange 1979 + Fa, S + Fa, S + +
R14A4 Washington navel sweet orange 1983 + L, Fa + L, Fa + +
R13A5 Washington navel sweet orange 1983 + L, Fa + L, Fa + +
Al Bourjan, Mikati Govt orch. 88 Washington navel sweet orange 1983 + Fa + Fa + +
Amrit, A. Haroun orchard Hamlin sweet orange 1979 + Fa, S + Fa, S + +
28 Ortanique tangor 1982 + L, Fa, S + L, Fa, S + +
29 Ortanique tangor 1982 + Fa, S + Fa, S + +
30 Ortanique tangor 1982 - L, Fa, S - L, Fa, S - -
Amrit, A. Hasri orchard 1 Washington navel sweet orange 1982 + Fa + Fa + +
Tartus Centre of Agriculture 22 Washington navel sweet orange 1982 + L, Fa - L, Fa - -
27 Washington navel sweet orange 1982 + Fa + Fa + +
23 Frost Valencia sweet orange 1982 + Fa, S + Fa, S + +
24 Frost Valencia sweet orange 1982 + Fa, S + Fa, S + +
25 Frost Valencia sweet orange 1982 - Fa, S - Fa, S - -
26 Jaffa sweet orange 1982 + L + L + +
R2A6 Navelina sweet orange 1983 - L, Fa - L, Fa - -
R2A5 Navelina sweet orange 1983 + L, Fa + L, Fa + +
Notes:
^1 In 1979 and 1981 samples were collected in November; in 1982, 1983 and 1984 they were taken in October; some samples were collected in July 1983; they are indicated in the table.
^2 L: Leaf; Fa: Fruit axis; S: Seed; Fl: Flower.
^3 ND: not done.
TABLE 18 Percentage of stubborn - affected trees in various orchards in the Latakia Tartus region
No.
Area
(distance from coast)
Orchard
Cultivar
Origin of budwood
Date of planting
Total number of trees
Stobborn-affected trees
Number
1 Hmaymin (1 km) Yunes Washington navel Local 1980 232 70 30
Hmaymin (1 km) Yunes Valencia late Corsica^1 1980 252 151 55
2 Stamoue (6 km) Jazae Washington navel Local 1981 200 20 10
3 Annadeh village (6 km) Sidawi Washington navel Local 1970 112 18 16
4 Al Bassa (3 km) Sidawi Washington navel Corsica 1981 72 7 9
5 Kam El Jouze (30 km) Abou Kaf Washington navel Corsica 1980 130 13 10
6 Saleh-Basatine (2 km) Toukatly Washington navel Local 1979 89 81 90
7 Anadeh (1 km) FAO project Washington navel Corsica 1979 157 41 25
Anadeh (1 km) FAO project Valencia late Corsica 1979 155 55 35
Anadeh (1 km) FAO project Grapefruit Corsica 1979 167 75 45
Anadeh (1 km) FAO project Washington navel Corsica 1981 72 6 8
Anadeh (1 km) FAO project Valencia late Corsica 1981 96 11 10
8 Amrit (1 km) FAO project Washington navel Corsica 1979 69 29 41
Amrit (1 km) FAO project Clementine Corsica 1979 21 3 14
Note:
^1 Budwood from Corsica was certified free of virus and virus-like disease agents, including S. citri.
TABLE 22 Relative frequency of leafhoppers and planthoppers in the Syrian Arab Republic and number of samples analysed for presence of Spiroplasma citri
Species 
Relative frequency
Number of
samples analysed
Cicadellidae leafhoppers
Aconurella prolixa (Lethierry) ++ 1
Adanus sp. + 0
Agallia laevis (Ribauti) ++ 1
Allygus provincialis (Ferrari) + 0
Asymmetrasca decidens (Paoli) + 0
Austroagallia sinuata (Mulsant & Rey) ++ 0
Balclutha hebé (Kirkaldy) ++++ 20
Balclutha rosea (Scott) ++ 4
Balclutha saltuella ++ 0
Cicadulina bipunctella bipunctella (Matsumara) +++ 18
Chiasmus translucidus (Mulsant & Rey) + 1
Doratura homophyla + 0
Empoasca vitis +++ 12
Euscelis sp. + 0
Exitianus capicola (Stal.) +++ 21
Fieberiella florii (Stal.) + 0
Gogiagnatus guttulinervis (Kirschbaum) + 2
Hecalus glaucenscens (Fieber) + 0
Irinula erythrocephala (Ferrari) + 0
Macrosteles quadripunctatus (KMB) ++ 6
Neoaliturus fenestratus (Herrich & Schaffer) ++ 1
Neoaliturus haematoceps (Mulsant & Rey) +++ 20
Orosius albicinctus (Distant) + 0
Platymetopius major (Kirschbaum) + 0
Psammotettix nodosus (Ribaut) + 0
Psammotettix striatus (Linné) +++ 25
Psammotettix sp. + 0
Ricilia angostisectus (Linnavuori) +++ 5
Ricilia schmidtgeni (Wagner) + 0
Scleroracus sp. + 0
Ziginidia scutellaris (Herrich & Schaffer) + 1
Fulgomorpha planthoppers
Cixiidae:
Olarius linbergi (Dalbola) + 0
Tachycixius sp. + 0
Delphacidae:
Asiraca clavicornis (Fabr) + 0
Delphax sp. +++ 3
Laodelphax striatellus (Fallen) ++++ 43
Sogatella vibix ++ 7
Toya pripinqua (Fieber) +++ 12
Perkinsiella insignus (Distant) + 2
Issidae:
Bruchoscellis peculiaris (Horv) + 0
Hysteropterum sp. + 3
Key:
+ a few individuals per capture;
++ about ten individuals per capture;
+++ about 25 individuals per capture;
++++ more than 50 individuals per capture;
TABLE 23 Periwinkle (Catharanthus roseus)plants naturally infected with Spiroplasma citri or S. phoeniceum in the Syrian Arab Republic
Location Periwinkle designation Period of exposure Infecting agent(s)
Ugarit, Dib Vitali orchard 39 June - October 1982 Spiroplasma spp.
Wizan 20 June 1984 S. phoeniceum
El Annadeh project
- Nursey II 203 17 July - 9 August 1983 S. citri (Fig. 292)
24 July 1984 S. citri
25 July 1984 S. citri
30 September 1983 - June 1984 S. phoeniceum
- Sweet orange mother tree plot 41 September 1983 - June 1984 S. phoeniceum + phyllody MLO
22 July 1984 S. phoeniceum + phyllody MLO
El Annadeh Government nursery 36 September 1983 - June 1984 S. phoeniceum
El Annadeh, Fidio 26 July 1984 S. phoeniceum + stolbur MLO
El Annadeh, Sidawi orchard 13 17 July - 18 October 1983 S. phoeniceum
14 17 July - 18 October 1983 S. phoeniceum
43 September 1983 - June 1984 S. citri
Jablé Experiment Station 25 17 July - 23 October 1983 S. phoeniceum
200 17 July - 23 October 1983 S. phoeniceum
204 17 July - 23 October 1983 S. phoeniceum
9 June 1984 S. phoeniceum
Tartus Centre of Agriculture 146 17 July - 19 October 1983 S. phoeniceum
147 17 July - 19 October 1983 S. phoeniceum
Amrit Citrus Office 145-4 17 July - 19 October 1983 S. phoeniceum
65 September 1984 S. phoeniceum
