<title>The Legal Status of Rural Women in nineteen Latin American countries. The legal status of rural women in 19 Latin American countries</title>
<section>1</section>
Introduction
Introduction
Concern over women's subordination in law is not new. Beginning in the nineteenth century and continuing throughout the twentieth, the world has been witness to innumerable women's movements seeking to pressure governments and societies to recognize not only women's civil rights but that women should enjoy equal working conditions and wages with men.
However, it was not until feminist movements gained recognition in the 'seventies and the United Nations' Women's Decade achieved significant advances, that it became possible to conduct a series of studies on rural Latin-American women. These studies show clearly and conclusively that women's contribution to the development process is much greater than previously assumed, and that women suffer from problems stemming from the traditional gender-based division of labour, which sees them exclusively taken up with their reproductive role as mother and homemaker.
It was shown that the gender division of labour, not only determines rural women's workload, but influences as well the way their productive work is perceived, with the result that, on grounds of gender alone, their form of participation in society is different from that of men.
This, in turn, has given rise to a number of customary and statutory rules that sanction the status quo and constitute a real obstacle to change.
In Latin America this problem dates back to colonial times, when new laws and regulations were imposed by Spanish and Portuguese colonizers. In fact, with few exceptions, customary law*^1 virtually disappeared from the continent, as people were divested of their indigenous culture in the wake of the conquest.
(^1 Some words appear followed by an asterisk. This indicates that their meaning is given in the Glossary of Legal Terms found in Annex II.)
Most of the new laws promulgated in the colonized territories were the expression of the Spanish and Portuguese visions of the world, and failed to provide for the real context of native peoples. However, while Spanish Law of the Indies consisted of a huge body of legislation intended to apply to the conquered people, the same cannot be said of Portuguese Law. Unfortunately, systematic non-observance made the Laws of the Indies largely inoperative.
The shortcomings of and non-compliance with more equitable statute law*, in some cases led to the emergence of de facto rules, but did not give rise to any new system of customary law. The rules were merely the expression of isolated preconceptions, which, in the specific case of rural women, resulted in the manifestation of male-biased attitudes which further degraded women's legal status vis-à-vis men of the same class and ethnic group. As a consequence of this, there are certain shortcomings in Latin-American legislation that are not covered by custom*, the statute being the sole overriding principle. One example of this is the legislation governing conjugal property and inheritance by the spouse or companion - a matter of great economic importance for the woman.
This is one area where Latin America differs fundamentally from the African countries whose customary law covers the shortcomings of statute law at the rural level through a system of rights, obligations and penalties, established by the traditional authorities who abide by a series of rules when it comes to passing judgement. This is also probably why Latin-Americans essentially look to statutory rules and why these are so important in the rural sector.
FAO's Regional Office for Latin America and the Caribbean was fully aware of this situation and, in a pioneer effort, between 1987 and 1990 sponsored a series of case studies on the legal status of rural women in Latin America and the Caribbean by the following consultants: Soledad Alvear (Chile, Guatemala, Peru, Dominican Republic and Colombia), Emma Castro de Pinzón (El Salvador), Támara Columbié (Cuba), Martha Torres Falcon (Mexico) and Gladys Yrureta (Venezuela). Also, as part of a Technical Cooperation Project in the English-speaking Caribbean in 1988, Norma M. Forde prepared a paper containing data on Barbados, Belize and Saint Lucia, which was included in FAO's Regional Office publication "The Caribbean Woman in Agriculture".
A Regional Round Table on "Legal Mechanisms to facilitate Rural Women's Participation in Rural Development", also took place in 1990. Its discussion paper, based on a review of the case studies, pinpointed de jure and de facto areas where the main discriminations against rural women lay.
The Round Table was attended by experts from 17 Latin-American and Caribbean countries: Argentina, Bolivia, Brazil, Chile, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Ecuador, El Salvador, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay and Venezuela.
The discussions and conclusions on that occasion ² were indeed able to pinpoint where the discriminatory rules lay, and showed how the rural woman's legal status differed from country to country and why women were unable to play their part fully in what was an economically and socially inequitable society.
(^2 FAO. 1990. Report of the Round Table on "Legal Mechanisms to facilitate Women's Participation in Rural Development". Santiago, Chile. FAO/RLAC.54 p. (DERU-36).)
It was shown, for instance, that one cause of the legal discrimination of which rural women are the victims is the traditional division of labour between the sexes, the ideological conception of which underpins the "values" that are expressed in both customary and statute law.
Under this division of labour the woman was responsible for the private or reproductive sphere, closely associated with domestic work and caring, for which she received no economic remuneration whatever. This influenced custom and law in the following ways: (1) The woman's main responsibilities were in the private, not the public, sphere. Thus, she could work outside the home only when there was no man available to do that work and provided she did not neglect her assigned tasks. This gave rise to the idea of women's work being of secondary importance and to their doubly long working day; (2) since the woman did not receive payment for her work in the reproductive sphere, she was not recognized as a producer - for either the community or herself; (3) in practice, what emerged was a hierarchical power structure in the home, the labour market and the area of production - traditionally the man's domain; and (4) the de jure and de facto basis ³ for the subordination of woman is
to be found in the areas of civil, labour and agrarian legislation relating directly or indirectly to her reproductive role.
(^3 FAO. 1990. Report of the Round Table on "Legal Mechanisms to facilitate Women's Participation in Rural Development". Santiago, Chile. FAO/RLAC. 54 p (DERU-36).)
From a review of the nine case studies and the country contributions to the Regional Round Table "Legal Mechanisms to facilitate Women's Participation in Rural Development" on the four points above, it emerges that:
- Civil law in several Latin-American and Caribbean countries' legally institute Marital Authority (potestad marital)*, the principle underlying women's subordination, whereby the husband exercises authority over his wife's person and property* and is granted special privileges, which are specifically defined in law. De facto marital jurisdiction of this kind is traditionally widely observed in the countryside throughout the region - a practice that often hinders the enforcement of non-discriminatory legislation.
- In the area of labour legislation, the measures barring women from certain types of work do not carry conviction that they are really based on the wish to provide for their physical protection; they are probably a response to the needs of the labour market. The failure to amend these prohibitive measures corroborates one's conviction on this point.
- As regards the legislation on maternity-related matters, it is generally accepted in most of these countries that responsibility for the maternal function rests with the woman. This has led to legislation granting the working mother certain privileges. These privileges, however, are not looked upon as a duty of society, but as a gracious concession to the woman. In point of fact, this type of legislation opens the way to illegal expedients whereby employers may be exempt from what they consider as the "burden of maternity''.
- Many countries, however, have had the political will to change this state of affairs. Unfortunately, measures to protect working mothers have not been extended to rural women, except in Cuba and, more recently, Colombia, where the Instituto de Bienestar Familiar (Family Welfare Institute) is setting up a system of rural nurseries using the "substitute home" formula.
- As regards salaries, the supposed inferiority of women's work finds expression, for instance, in the low wages paid temporary workers, most of whom are women. The fact that women are treated as adult minors* is another source of injustice; and the already widespread and growing practice of informal hiring for women leaves many of their number without legal protection and further aggravates their already disadvantaged situation.
- The problems arising from the gaps in agrarian legislation (a fairly new field, not equally well-developed in all the countries) and the way they are filled in, have seriously damaged the rural women's economic situation. In accordance with the rules of legal interpretation, the gaps in agrarian law are usually remedied by recourse to the Civil Code, which, as the most traditional expression of Law, is often discriminatory to rural women. For instance, the Civil Codes of several countries consider the man as the head of household, an additional obstacle to rural women's gaining equal access to land. A similar problem arises whenever the Civil Code is appealed to in cases of succession to land allocated under the agrarian laws.
- Extralegal practices in the area of agrarian, labour and civil legislation further aggravate rural women's situation. Failure to bring the law in these three sectors into line with the real situations of rural women has made the law itself unenforceable. Discriminatory customs tend to replace unbiased and sound laws if these are unaccompanied by appropriate enforcement regulations. Justice is thus at the mercy of the prejudices of those whose task is to apply the law - or of the women themselves, who are either unaware of their rights or else do not dare to claim them. In many countries the authorities responsible for allocating land under the agrarian laws refuse to recognize women as heads of household even when the law does.
- One's supposition that discriminatory rules stemmed from women's reproductive role is confirmed. Indeed, in both enactments and custom, these rules concern the various branches of the law having to do with that role and with the power structure stemming from the gender-based division of labour.
- The above examples highlight the need for special legislation for rural women that takes account of their situation with respect to both their productive and their reproductive role. Neutral legislation is often a source of injustice given that the situations of rural men and rural women are different.
It must also be stressed that any legislation intended to improve women's status should take a global approach to the problem in all legal spheres, thus avoiding the inconsistencies and conflict of law rules that may be observed in various countries and are dealt with in this book.
Some Notes on Methodology
A number of difficulties were encountered in the preparation of the present study. The first was the shortage of gender-disaggregated data to give a clearer picture of rural women's status and show how it is affected by both formal and the de facto rules.
Although the nine case studies in the background and country papers submitted to the Regional Round Table "Legal Mechanisms to facilitate Rural Women's Participation in Rural Development" provided further insight into the legal status of the region's rural women, some very important questions remain unanswered. For instance, which legal rules in each country have contributed most effectively to improving rural women's status, how many rural women have benefited, and to which socioeconomic groups do they belong?
As to the effectiveness of the laws benefiting rural women, again it was not possible to obtain statistical data on the number of rural women having recourse to the courts to claim their rights or the number of rulings in their favour. Also to be noted are the breadth of the subject and the number of countries involved (nineteen), each with a different historical background and using a different legal language.
A study on rural women's legal status needs to be based on a review of the rural woman's situation in general if it is to be of real use in bringing about concrete economic and social changes. Thus it was necessary to consult an extensive bibliography in order to have both a general picture of the situation and a compartmentalized view of constitutional, civil, labour and agrarian legislation.
Significantly, since agrarian law is a fairly new area, the data from the basic documents and from the additional literature consulted were incomplete. Available statistics are sketchy, and often there is no cross-referencing, making it difficult to formulate any useful conclusions. There is clearly a far greater need for statute law and for the relevant enforcement regulations in the agrarian than in other branches of the law. It would therefore be useful to continue and expand this study so as to gather more information and more accurately define the options for legal mechanisms or policies needed in order to change the very precarious situation of poor rural women in Latin America.
<section>2</section>
I. The subordination of rural women in law in Latin America: Introduction
1. Rural women's subordination in law: The historical background
2. The legal subordination of rural woman in Latin America
2.1 Gender-based division of labor^16
2.2 Rural woman's work and her participation in productive activities
2.3 Gender-based division of labour and the law
2.3.1 The origin of the law and of its promulgators
2.3.2 Customary law and written law
2.3.3 Discriminatory rules in civil, labour and agrarian law
I. The subordination of rural women in law in Latin America: Introduction
1. Rural women's subordination in law: The historical background
Bearing in mind that society is a dynamic, ever-changing entity with new, sometimes conflict-spawned social structures and institutions, it is important to take history into account in any review of the legal subordination of rural women in Latin America. This approach will reveal not only the political changes inherent in the demands of this marginalized sector for participation, but also the ways in which these changes have affected women in general and rural women in particular.
The conquest, one of the most significant historical events in Latin America, abruptly arrested the social development of the continent's indigenous peoples and partially if not entirely destroyed their culture, including the rules of traditional law. As a result, customary law vanished from vast areas, surviving, in a somewhat reduced form, only in relatively isolated regions.
The arrival of the Spaniards signified a radical change for the women partners in indigenous marriages, which were polygamous or monogamous depending on the region and its level of prosperity. In times of plenty, but when there was a shortage of young men, polygamy (with one wife the favourite) was the norm, while in harder times, monogamy predominated. The Church and the Spanish laws abolished polygamy, leaving numerous women unprotected.^4 The conquistadors, on the other hand, took native women as concubines, with or without their consent, in breach of the rules established by the Church and by the Spanish and Portuguese Crowns.
(^4 RAMOS ESCANDON, M. 1988. Mujer y sociedad novohispana. In ISIS. Nuestra memoria, nuestro futuro: mujeres e historia. America Latina y el Caribe. Santiago de Chile, Andromeda pp.21-33. (Ediciones de las Mujeres N°10).)
The new forms of social organization gave rise to new family structures and new ethnic groups, each with its own special features and place in a highly stratified society. The women bore the brunt of the convergence of two these worlds, each with its own culture and political and economic systems.
The Spanish and Portuguese colonial venture was particularly hard on the indigenous woman in terms of labour^5. Even though the provisions of the Spanish Indian Legislation sought to protect the Indian woman, she was subjected to a strict, cruel labour regime sadly like serfdom.
(^5 PEREZ SAN VINCENTE, G. 1984. A mulher e sue atuaçao durante os primeros cinquenta anos de vida novohispánica. In CEHILA. A mulher pobre na historia da igreja latinoamericana. Sao Paolo, Ed. Paulinas. pp.138-151.)
All this shows that the personal and work relations of Indian women to the conquistadors and male settlers was one of subservience - a situation that was to have a significant impact on relations between men and women and between women and society.
At the time of the conquest, collective land ownership (working the land for the benefit of the community) was the system used by the Indians.^6 For them, the most important relationship was with the land, followed by consanguinity. Then came the settlers with their own forms of economic organization. Colonial policy toward the rural community was largely geared to the expansion of the capitalist economy. The control of physical space was particularly important, and could only be achieved if the indigenous communities were culturally and physically dismembered.
(^6 SANCHEZ, L.A. 1972. Historia general de America. Santiago de Chile, Ed. Ercilla. 3 v.)
The Spanish king authorized the conquistadors to divide land on the strength of Crown decrees, mercedes (grace and favour dispositions), etc., as a reward for their exploits. This later gave rise to the encomienda system^7 which, despite its paternalistic objective, in practice became an efficient tool for appropriating land and even destroying the crops that grew there.
(^7 The encomienda was a institution in Spanish law whereby groups of Indians were assigned to conquistadors, who were supposed to protect and educate them.)
The legal situation of the Indians living in the Portuguese colonies was even worse. The document establishing hereditary rights^8 granted the settlers a number of privileges, the most important of which was the right to take Indians into bondage to serve in their homes or on their ships, and to send up to 39 of them per year tax-free to Lisbon as slaves.
(^8 DE VARNHAGEN, F.A. 1952. Historia general do Brasil. Sao Paolo, Melhoramentos. 7a. ed. 2 v.)
In practice, sugar cane cultivation involved expelling the Indians and taking over their land, enslaving many of their number to plant the cane and work the sugar mills, and ghettoizing them for this purpose.^9 The men did the agricultural work, while the women were servants in the homes of the Portuguese settlers. Both the men and the women were legally slaves, but the women also had to submit to the sexual whims of their masters.
(^9 BEOZZO, J.O. 1952. A mulher indigene e a igreja na situaçao esclavista do Brasil colonial. In: CEHILA, Op. cit., pp.70-93. )
The laws of the Indies enacted by the Spanish Crown were not enforced, given the fact that their principal opponents were also in charge of enforcing them. In addition to the characteristic colonial disobedience of the law, usage had sanctioned the habit of paying lip service to provisions of the law considered unenforceable or counter-productive. The laws were acknowledged, but not given any practical application.^10
(^10 SANCHEZ, L.A. Op. cit. pp.361-380.)
There thus came into being a parallel system of rules that institutionalized a new social phenomenon in Latin America: a behavioural model based on total contempt for the native woman. There came a point where the encomienda holders and Portuguese settlers could exploit the women sexually with the tacit approval of society. With time, this practice took on the status of custom and later came to be considered one of the conquistadors' rights over the conquered peoples. This macho behaviour toward women represented a significant shift away from the paternalism embodied in the Spanish Laws of the Indies.^11 This treatment of the native women continued during the Republican period under the ranchers and local leaders, who maintained this custom-hallowed ''parallel law".
(^11SARA-LAFOSSE, V. 1988. Crisis familiar y social en el Peru. Lima, Ministry of Justice. 11 p. (Mimeo).)
The humiliating treatment of the Indians by the Spanish and Portuguese led to numerous indigenous uprisings throughout Latin America. Women's part in these has been little documented, but recent historical research suggests that they had an active role, either actually taking part in the action or supporting or accompanying their menfolk.^12 It has proved impossible to learn just how many took part, but some particularly heroic deeds by indigenous women have been brought to light.
(^12 DE SILKS, M.E. 1981. Bartolina Sisa, Gregoria Apaza. Dos heroínas indígenas. La Paz, Biblioteca Popular Ultima Hora. pp.4085.)
The late 18th and the 19th Centuries saw the Wars of Independence and the strengthening of republican legal systems in Latin America. The now independent States based their constitutions on those of the United States and France which, in theory, recognized equality for all.
Women, nevertheless, continued to be discriminated against in various areas of law: any declaration of equality was reversed by the paternalistic civil and labour legislation, based on the Code Napoleon, which considered women inferior, weak and in need of protection, and placed wives and mothers under their husbands' authority. The Republican Constitutions denied women the right to vote, while the Civil Codes prevented married women from disposing of their property, entering into work contracts without their husband's permission, or jointly exercising patria potestas over the children born of the marriage.
Whilst it is true that rural women did not suffer any further formal legal discrimination than that already described, they continued to be victimized by the parallel rules which were backed by custom and gave real effect to prejudices stemming from mistaken preconceptions rather than from judgements founded on women's actual ability.
It is important to specify that while rural women have certainly been the major victims of this juridical situation in Latin America, their social class, ethnic group and concept of authority have heavily influenced the extent to which they have been victimized. This is directly linked both to the existence of parallel norms, which lie outside the written law, and to the problem of the effectiveness of the law.
The now independent Latin-American republics inherited, to varying degrees, the subjugation of the judiciary to the political will of the governing classes. ^13 This is why the courts regularly decided in favour of the latter, breeding distrust among the rural populations in general. The women were not unaffected by this distorted application of the law or the general mistrust of the judiciary, since they were also the victims of abusive practices and the denial of justice by men of their same class and ethnic group.
(^13 REVILLA VERGARA, A.M. 1985. La problemática del fuero privativo agrario y su integración al fuero común. Lima, Universidad Católica. pp.130-169 (Degree thesis).)
Latin-American women's struggle for equal political and labour rights intensified in the late 19th century and has continued during the 20th. During the first half of the present century the countries gradually came to recognize political rights for women so that, today, one cannot imagine democratic movements without women participants, even though their practical gains bear little relation to the formal content of the written laws. The figures show that there is still much to be done before real political equality between men and women is achieved. Even now, Latin-American women are far from having half the seats in their parliaments or half their countries' decision-making responsibilities.
The fight for equal working conditions has not been as successful as the civil rights movements. While it is true that most Constitutions have abolished sexual discrimination in their eligibility requirements for the office of head of state or judge, the fact remains that "protectionist" measures limiting women's right to work persist. Again, women continue to be paid less than men for the same work. Latin-American labour laws include a long chapter on the treatment of women in their capacity as mothers yet, in practice, there is general acceptance of unfair customs which not only disregard the written law, but have established illegal formalities designed to allow employers to avoid contributing to the economic costs associated with the women's reproductive role. Because of this, women have come to look upon maternity with a feeling of guilt, because they associate it with job loss or social disapproval.
The active participation of rural women in civil rights and labour movements has not led to any real recognition of their capacity or any improvement in their status. The European settlers established predominantly masculine political relationships and leadership systems, still in operation today, which explain society's failure to acknowledge female leadership.
The 20th Century has also witnessed important peasant movements to gain access to land. The land tenure system (the big estates and the sharecropping arrangements - a colonial legacy that the advent of the republic has failed to do anything about), aggravated by the consolidation of the latifundio-minifundio structure and the existence of this type of land tenure side by side with a precarious feudal-type, farm labourer-based form of land holding (as had developed in the Peruvian sierra, or among the "huasipungos" in Ecuador), and an expanding landless peasant population, were the factors that unleashed nation-wide movements pressing for land. ^14
(^14 GARCIA,A. 1982. Modelos operacionales de Reforma Agraria y Desarrollo Rural en America Latina. San Jose de Costa Rica, IICA. p.196)
The intensity of these peasant struggles for land, dignity, work, culture and independence varied from country to country and with the historical context, but they all led to the enactment of agrarian legislation and, in many countries, to actual agrarian reform. In this way agrarian legislation assumed a new dimension, coupling land ownership with social usefulness through a system of limitations and obligations or through rights, and even penalizing inappropriate land use.
Although there is little documentation on the role of women in these peasant movements^15, there are indications that women were energetic participants, sometimes playing a leading role (as in Chile and Peru) and sometimes an invisible, silent one.
(^15 LEON DE LEAL, M. et al. 1987. Acceso de la mujer a la sierra en America Latina. Panorama general y estudios de caves en Honduras y Colombia. In: FAO. Mujeres Campesinas en America Latina: desarrollo rural. acceso a la sierra. migraciones. leqislaciones. Santiago de Chile, FAO/RLAC. pp. 1-81.)
All the same, poor rural women have not gained equal access to land. This is mainly due to cultural impediments, which have bred discriminatory laws designating males as heads of household; the one-sided interpretation of the law to the detriment of rural women; and the women's own preconceptions (which have prevented them from claiming their rights and obtaining other productive resources).
The peasant movements and the new agrarian legislation did, however, gradually make rural women aware of their rights, and of the need to be organized in order to claim them. According to Leal de Leon and her collaborators^12, Latin America has in recent years seen a significant rise in the number of organized rural women seeking access to land. These authors cite organizations in Colombia, Cuba, Chile, Bolivia, Brazil, Honduras and Nicaragua as particularly active in the fight for the establishment and enforcement of unbiased agricultural legislation.
In recent years the advent of democratic governments has brought significant political changes in countries where military dictatorships had predominated since the 'seventies. This has led to greater freedom of expression and greater awareness of women's issues, and has inspired governments with the political will to make changes in women's favour. The democratic government of Chile is one of these, even though income differences between urban and rural workers and between men and women of the same class and ethnic group still persist. Bettering the living standards of rural women (who occupy the lowest rung of the rural poverty ladder) has been a slow and difficult process, as traditional social, legal and economic structures are still in place.
Latin-American development studies and policies have avoided coming to grips with the question of rural women's legal status. Governments have, with few exceptions, shown little willingness to improve rural women's official or actual legal status in any concrete way which would effectively enhance their economic and social condition and thus contribute to their countries' development as well.
2. The legal subordination of rural woman in Latin America
2.1 Gender-based division of labor^16
(^16 The term "sex" refers to the congenital and universal biological differences between men and women; "gender" relates to the socio-cultural and historical characteristics that determine how men and women interact and apportion their roles. These characteristics may change with time and do vary widely from culture to culture. However, gender is a social category which may be used to analyse the different roles, responsibilities, restrictions and opportunities that apply to men and to women in a given community, nation or culture.)
Rural women's legal subordination is part and parcel of women's overall position of subordination, stemming from the historical separation of human activity into two completely different, but closely interrelated, spheres. One sphere is about reproduction, the other about production. Included in the reproductive sphere are biological reproduction and related social activities - activities closely associated with domestic work, and belonging to the private domain, and are not quantified economically and have traditionally been assigned to women. Production comprises social and trade relations, falls within the public sphere, is quantified economically and is invariably a male responsibility. ^17
(^17 BAENA DE ESPARZA, R. 1982. Considerations sur la division sexuelle du travail. In: CENTRE HAITIEN D' INVESTIGATION EN SCIENCES SOCIALES (CHISS) ET UNIVERSITE D'ETAT D'HAITI (UEH). La femme rurale en Haïti et dans la Caribe. Traditions et innovations. Port-au-Prince. pp.205-225.)
This division of labour is strict to the point where, in every society, some activities and tasks are considered typically feminine (rearing the children and looking after the home, for instance) and others typically masculine (heading the household and providing for the family). Even so, the division is not equally strict for both spheres of activity. For instance, although the current economic crisis in the region has led to a greater female presence in the productive sector, it has not altered the woman's workload in the reproductive sphere (i.e. activities that are not quantified economically and are therefore unpaid and unprotected by the State).^18
(^18 LEON DE LEAL, M. 1982. Las trabajadoras del agro. Bogotá, ILET. 2 v. is a constant feature of the rural woman's situation throughout Latin America.)
This skewed rapport between men's and women's activities not only affects the woman's workload, increasing her working day two- or even three-fold, but also her remuneration, so that sex - a biological factor - becomes a social one with its own specific connotations in terms of values and standards, and its own ideological and economic consequences.
FIGURE 1 - TRADITIONAL MALE AND FEMALE SPHERES OF ACTIVITY AND HOW THEY INTERACT
HUMANS
PRODUCTIVE SPHERE
(REMUNERATION)
REPRODUCTIVE SPHERE
(NO REMUNERATION)
o^ä
o[+]
The above table 1 illustrates what has been said all along. Not only does the woman have a double workload because she is held solely responsible for the tasks inherent in her reproductive role, she is not paid for these tasks and is paid less than the man for her work in the productive sphere. This is constant feature of the rural woman's situation throught Latin America.
Again, the status of rural women varies depending on the position assigned to them in the different rural economies, which are neither homogenous nor static. Jobs range from agroindustrial enclaves to enterprises producing for the export market, to home market production, to sectors which have very little to do with the market, and to various combinations of these. Woman's position in the economic scheme determines both her workload in the productive sector and the onerous nature of her domestic work, which, in addition to care of her family, includes activities which only help to perpetuate the social status quo.
The maintaining and perpetuation of the status quo extend to such important questions as - the conscious or unconscious imparting of the rules of social relations, language, cultural standards and guidelines, and scales of values. All this is combined with and reinforced by the emotional bonds that are essential components of intimate primary relationships. The rural woman's role in perpetuating society and transmitting the ideology that subordinates her needs no emphasizing here. Paradoxically, then, the woman is both the victim and the victimizer of other women in that she passes on to her children and, through them, to society, a series of prejudices that keep women in a subordinate position.
This ideology of subordination goes counter to unbiased legislation (where such exists) and hinders its enforcement, either by engendering distorted preconceptions on which judges may base their decisions or preventing women from recognizing and claiming their rights. It is also a barrier to the legal reforms designed to amend discriminatory statute law and correct customary practices.
2.2 Rural woman's work and her participation in productive activities
The Latin-American rural woman's activities, as briefly mentioned above, consist mainly of domestic work, which may be defined as "the universal role of the woman: time spent being productive at home and processing goods bought or exchanged in the market",^19 - work, it should be recalled, that is unpaid.
(^19 FAO. 1990. La situación de la mujer campesina frente a la legislation en nueve parses... Op. cit. p.5.)
Rural women's domestic work varies in form and scope depending on social class and the degree of development of the economy. Because survival is a major concern among the landless in peasant economies, women's domestic work includes collecting wood and fetching water, cultivating a home garden, managing and rearing animals, selling or exchanging their products in the market, and helping (without pay) their husbands in their work. Domestic working conditions improve, however, as the women move up the social ladder, so that in more developed economies, they participate on equal terms.
The conditions governing rural women's participation in productive activities are strictly related to the gender-based division of labour. Unfair wages, job insecurity, and the absence of a formal contract; and, again, how many activities women perform and how these relate to the size of the farm, are all part of this pattern. Additionally, women are either denied access to land, or they have precarious tenure and inadequate access to other productive resources.
Statistics on women's participation in the Latin-American workforce show that even though their numbers are rising ^20, a picture of marginalization is what emerges from data on such questions as wages, working hours, formal contracts with employers, and social security benefits in the various countries is one of alienation.
(^20 BARSTED LINHARES, L. 1990. Información acerca de la situación de la mujer rural frente a la legislation en Brasil. Río de Janeiro, CEPIA. 16 p. (Mimeo).)
Concerning wages, studies in the different countries recognize that women are usually paid less than men of the same class for the same work. Women are also often recruited for temporary work without any formal, legal contract with the employer, which implies lower wages, irregular working hours, disregard by the employer for the provisions of the labour laws and, as a result, a total lack of social protection.
Rural women are much harder hit by exclusion from access to land or by precarious land tenure than rural men of the same class and ethnic group.^21 This is linked to their precarious access to other productive resources, as there is a direct link between women's ownership of land and their possibility of obtaining credit, technical assistance and training, and participating in farmers' etc., organizations.^22 As regards land ownership and how it is related to work, the size of the farm has a direct bearing on how and to what extent women participate in productive activities. For instance, the smaller the holding, the more work they have to do: women's workload is lighter on the larger holdings .^23
(^21 LEON DE LEAL, M. et al. 1990. Acceso de la mujer a la tierra ... Op. cit. pp. 58-75.)
(^22 This is the opinion of such experts as DEERE (1979), LEON DE LEAL (1982), BARSTED LINHARES y PITANGUY (1985).)
(^23 DEERE, C.D. 1979. Peasants and proletarians; the struggle of third world workers. New York, Monthly Review Press. pp. 3845.)
The statistical data the countries use in their development plans do not give a true picture of women's contribution to the rural sector. They do not, for instance; take into account women's activities in the informal sector of the economy or in the home. The situation in Brazil is a good illustration of the gravity of the problem: according to 1983 statistics, 93.7% of rural working women had no formal job contract and only a small proportion were able to take advantage of the labour legislation and social insurance.^24
(^24 BARSTED LINHARES, L. 1990. Op. cit. p. 10.)
All this keeps the rural-woman in poverty - a situation due mainly to tradition stemming from gender-based division of labour and the "value" attached to women compared to that attached to men. The fact that the woman is considered the weaker vessel and in need of protection is partly why she has been assigned "reproductive responsibilities" and, consequently, why she has been denied the possibility of participating in development. As briefly noted in what precedes, there are many different ways in which rural women are excluded from the productive process.
It is not easy to answer the question: in which legislative areas is the Latin-American woman best protected? It can be shown, however, that factors such as failure to acknowledge her productive role, her lack of technical training, and wage discrimination - all stemming directly from her subordinate position - have restricted her access to productive resources.
This problem of value judgements, of course, is to be met with in most countries of the region and not only in the traditions that have, as noted before, led to the emergence of rules of de facto legal force, but also in the explicit regulations deriving from existing legislation. There can be no generalizing as to where the problem is at its most serious, for situations differ from country to country depending on historical, political and economic factors. Some recent studies have, nevertheless, brought out the direct relationship between rural women's exercise of their rights and their degree of control over productive resources.^25 If this is true, then it argues to the importance of the implications at law for women's reproductive-related activities and, again, the implications of these if a fair and efficient female participation in productive activities is to be achieved and to be enshrined in the law.
(^25 FAO. 1987. Mujeres campesinas ... Op. cit. pp.15-86.)
2.3 Gender-based division of labour and the law
As mentioned in the previous section, the roles that men and women have traditionally been assigned are based on the values and standards that society has adopted and which come to govern uses and habits, custom, and customary and statute law, and lead to economic differences, of which the wages a person receives is but one. These values and standards reflect an ideological way of seeing things that is based on the assumption that women in general, and rural women in particular, are inferior, weak, and in need of protection.
The effect of all this at law, which is to subordinate women, are governed by three fundamental factors: (a) the origin of the legislation and of the authority of the lawgiver; (b) the dynamics of custom vis-à-vis written law; and (c) the area of the law in which the discriminatory rules are to be found.
2.3.1 The origin of the law and of its promulgators
Law, as the product of legislation, is the written expression of rules having legal force that are established by custom or are the written expression of the conscious intent of those with authority to change uses and customs contemplated in customary law, into customs as distinct from the latter, or in statute law.
Legislation may be defined as the body of rules, corresponding to objectives set more or less consciously by human beings to regulate society. All institutions of the law, therefore, respond directly or indirectly to the conception of society held by those who have brought those institutions into being, i.e. by those holding power, which may be defined as the ability to act on behalf of another. Power is also synonymous with dominion, authority and capacity to exact obedience.
The rules of law differentiating the legal status of men from that of women are no doubt largely an extrapolation of the unequal power relationship between the sexes arising from gender-based division of labour. History has shown that unequal power relationships are characteristically hierarchical and oppressive and place individuals in different situations: some in a position of unjustifiable authority, others in an equally unjustifiable subordinate position. Thus, the fact that males have been assigned functions considered of paramount importance for the preservation and continuity of society as a whole, and are given authority in all spheres of activity, including the household, has led to male-oriented legislation and to insufficient participation by Latin-American women in their countries' legislative areas.^26
(^26 BAENA DE ESPARZA, R. 1982. Considerations sur la division .... Op. cit. pp. 209-216.)
2.3.2 Customary law and written law
Whether discriminatory customs have been assigned the force of law by enactment, or are just inveterate practices clashing with law and impeding or distorting its implementation, they are very important factors in women's legal subordination.
Custom is of even greater importance for Latin-American rural women, for it fills the many gaps where legislation is silent about the specific situation of rural people. And custom, moreover, is a decidedly effective barrier to the implementation of non-discriminatory rules in the countryside, where it is even more entrenched than in the urban sector.^27
(^27 FAO. 1990. La situación de la mujer campesina ... Op. cit. pp. 6-12.)
It is essential to recall here that the customary law observed by the Latin-American indigenous peoples ceased to apply to most of the rural sector following the eradication of their culture and the ensuing breakdown of indigenous political and social life that began with the Conquest and continued throughout colonial times and under the Republican governments that came to power with the 19th Century. When one speaks of customary law today what is meant is an integrated body of legal rules, customarily observed and binding under sanctions, that is still to be found in operation in some isolated indigenous communities. Mention has also been made of the existence of a parallel set of rules in certain areas of the law (especially criminal law), observed in certain indigenous or marginal communities again representing so many "enclaves" of informal law .^28
(^28 BRANDT, H.J. 1989. Justicia Popular: nativos y campesinos. Lima, Fundación Friedrich Neumann. 2 ed. pp.180-199.)
The customs having force of law generally observed with respect to rural women in Latin America, which fill in gaps in the law (or in practice hinder its correct implementation), do not appear to constitute a full set of guidelines for social organization. They seem rather to have sprung from prejudices^29 which have been incorporated into the value systems of rural social groups, influencing certain specific areas within the law (areas inevitably having some connection with women's reproductive role and the implicit and erroneous conception of women's legal capacity*.
(^29 Prejudices or preconceived opinions and biased attitudes are defined by Allport as "antipathy based on false generalizations, directed against an individual because he/she is the member of a particular group". There is a link between prejudice and stereotypes, the latter implying preconceived opinions about class, groups or objects, stemming from patterns of perception and judgement, and not from opinions formed about individual phenomena.)
Although such customs are limited to certain areas of the law having to do directly with biological and social reproduction and, consequently, with the inferior role assigned to woman in society, the answer as to just how much of a hindrance they are and to what extent these customs are observed will depend on such circumstances as the position of the rural woman in the various peasant economies, her class status or her ethnic group, which determine the options available to her and the complexity of the social and domestic work she does.
This, again, is sure to determine the effectiveness of actions and strategies designed either to correct legislation sanctioning customs that discriminate against women, or to correct customs which hinder or distort the implementation of unbiased legislation.
Custom, in principle, precedes and gives rise to law. Because of the widespread destruction of political and social organization that occurred on this continent, most of the rural customs that subordinate women today were, as noted earlier, established by the conquistadors and settlers in the first place, and then taken over by the big landowners and local leaders with the advent of the Republican era. Many of these customs then took on the status of law and were incorporated into legislation based on European codes, the most important of which in Spanish and Portuguese Latin America was the Code Napoleon.
Under this Code, adopted with amendments in the new republics, women were treated as adult minors, on the paternalistic pretext that they needed protection. The Code also contained numerous male-oriented provisions; for instance, the administration of the woman's property fell to the man, even though he was under no obligation as regards its proper and efficient management. According to the rules of succession in many countries, the married woman, paradoxically, was not numbered among the forced heirs* and was thus left unprotected, contrary to the purpose of the legislation, which was to provide protection - the pretext, moreover, on which the mistaken conception of women's relative incapacity* was based.
The injustices discriminating between the status of men and the status of women (the cases cited above are but a few examples) gave rise to numerous movements designed to prove that not every custom should be converted into law, and that a discriminatory custom enshrined in law not only adversely affects the individuals directly involved but undermines overall development as well.
These views have been gradually accepted by some governments which have passed laws repealing and amending discriminatory rules. Legislative reforms have varied from country to country, responding to their respective concrete historical situations. Military dictatorships, for example, or the lack of economic and social development in some countries have slowed progress in bettering women's status in law. On the other hand, because the content of law is inevitably geared to a particular social, economic and cultural context, it often happens that not all the aspects of subordination are taken into account, with the result that the legislation is incomplete and lacks enforcement regulations and ways and means of making it effective.
The application of law and the rules for the settlement of disputes or the claiming of rights are also bound up with this situation. Officially, law requires compliance with a number of formalities (presupposing equal participation in economic and legal areas) but in practice this does not really happen.
As regards the judiciary's role in dealing with litigation and in the struggle for the recognition of rights, sociologists detect a common lack of confidence in and ignorance of this branch of Government among rural people (particularly women), but there are no gender-disaggregated data available offering a clear idea of the problem in Latin America.
The implication of all these difficulties in effectively enforcing unbiased laws in rural areas, and the role of tradition in impeding the enforcement of such laws and filling in any gaps in them, is that in most Latin-American countries, rural inhabitants lag behind urban dwellers not only in terms of socioeconomic development but also in their understanding and use of the law. It also suggests that the woman's subordinate status is even more marked in the rural areas where so many of the customary rules, more widely observed there, are prejudicial to women, who lack the arms to oppose them.
The figure below illustrates how custom and law interact.
FIGURE 2 - CUSTOM AND LAW: HOW THEY INTERACT
* The customs referred to here are those (de facto unions*, for instance) where the lack of statutory enactment has serious consequences.
** The statutes in this case govern traditional discriminatory rules; the repeal of such legislation should be accompanied by strategies and actions designed to change the discriminatory custom that led to the law being enacted.
*** When a discriminatory custom prevails over non discriminatory legislation and impedes its implementation strategies should be adopted to ensure compliance and to change the discriminatory custom.
2.3.3 Discriminatory rules in civil, labour and agrarian law
Reproductive and productive activities imply a series of concrete links which, in the specific area of law, take the form of rules governing behaviour between individuals, and acts of individuals where property is concerned. The rules find expression in the provisions of the law or customary legal procedures that regulate concrete situations. This is why most of the unfair rules are found in the various areas of subjective law* (e.g. those of Criminal, Civil, Labour and Agrarian legislation), which governs the exercise of the individual's rights, and almost never in objective law*, which sets out more general legal principles.
The conceptual origin and legal consequences of this unfair legislation are closely interrelated. As noted earlier, the key factor determining woman's role in society and underlying the discriminatory rules applied to her is the restriction of her activities to her reproductive role, a presupposition that reappears in all areas of subjective law. For example, the exercise of land tenure rights by rural women has repercussions on other institutions of the law (such as the marriage regimes*, de facto unions or successions). The final outcome of this interrelationship will depend on the conceptual content of the rules governing such institutions. The implications for women's access to land by women differ depending on whether or not the rules governing marriage regimes embody the concepts of ''marital authority", of consensual unions, or, again, of wives or companions included among the forced heirs.
Underlying discriminatory laws in Latin America are the paternalistic preconceptions of the Code Napoleon, on which the Civil Codes of most countries in this continent are based. Under paternalism, laws that apply specifically to women are based on their need to be protected and hedged round because of their being weak and defenceless - characteristics, these, assigned to the female sex.
And yet, if one looks at the interaction of discriminatory legislation in the various fields of Law, it will be seen that these legal rules often afford little protection and that they actually leave those whom they are supposed to protect quite defenceless. Testamentary succession in countries where the spouse is not an obligate heir and, under certain marriage regimes, where the administration of the wife's and the community property* by the husband (who is not held accountable or responsible before the law for gross negligence in his administration of such property) confirm this.
These considerations warrant the conclusion that the real reason behind this paternalistic philosophy is people's conception of authority, which is the decisive factor in men's domination of women. According to one dictionary definition, authority is "the power to require and receive submission: the right to exact obedience to dominate others", and, according to another definition "implies one becoming dependent on another". Dependency in the present context implies that, among other things, the man has control over the woman's capacity to engage in productive activities.
On this premise, the rural woman's subordination in law becomes easier to understand, for it follows from the rules that limit her civil capacity and consent to unequal working conditions and unequal access to productive resources. Again, the introduction of the "authority" factor into the analysis of subordination makes things clearer, as this factor underlies all discriminatory legislation (unlike paternalism, which has to do with protection alone).
To those who argue that protection/defence provide the rationale for such legislation, it must be countered that this aim cannot be consistent throughout the legislation as there are too many cases where injustices sanctioned by the law victimize women, where the idea of "protecting" them is entirely absent.
Accordingly, the rules that result in women's subordination, whether these are actually embodied in the law or are sanctioned by practice, belong to those areas of subjective legislation that deal with matters relating to gender-based division of labour and with the philosophical presuppositions sustaining them.
In civil law, such rules are likely to be found in family law and in all provisions closely related to the family and the traditional family power structure. They find expression in husband's authority, which is recognized explicitly or implicitly in some marriage regimes, in patria potestas, i.e. where the law expressly establishes the authority of the father, in succession*, and in cases where the law is silent on questions relating to the family and the home - a silence which is particularly prejudicial to the woman.
The discriminatory rules in labour law also stem from the rationale that the woman's major responsibility lies in the reproductive sphere, and the impact that this has on her productive work. They include the statutory and customary provisions that bar women from certain types of work and protect maternity (not, be it noted, as a social function but rather as a concession to the woman). Labour law also fails to provide for certain situations, and this gives rise to inequality between men and women, and particularly rural women whenever the law is silent on the subject of the rural woman worker.
In agrarian legislation, the discriminatory rules relating to the woman's access to productive resources are also likely to be found in legislation and customs governing the woman's work in the reproductive sphere. The interrelationship between civil and agrarian law is very marked here, since the rural woman's access to productive resources is directly a matter of civil law. It should be noted that because agrarian law is a more recent branch, it has not developed equally in every country; and it should also be pointed out that custom acts to reinforce discrimination in all the branches of law considered here.
<section>3</section>
II. Review of Latin-American rural woman's legal status^30
1. Constitutional law
2. Civil law
2.1 Authority (potestas) and its role in women's legal subordination
2.2 Marital authority (potestad marital)
2.2.1 Marital authority over the wife's person
2.2.2 Marital authority over the woman's property
2.3 Patria potestas
2.4 De facto unions
2.5 Succession
2.6 The family estate and its importance
3. How labour law subordinates rural women
3.1 Rural labour: an informal reality
3.2 Labour law and the rural woman
3.3 Freedom to work and legal capacity in labour matters
3.4 Women excluded by law from certain types of work
3.5 Protective legislation concerning maternity
3.6 Temporary or casual work
3.7 General remarks on labour law and the practice of a parallel legal system
4. Access to productive resources under the general law and agrarian law in particular
4.1 Access to land
4.2 Succession in agrarian law
4.3 Other ways in which women gain access to land
4.4 The rural woman and access to credit
4.5 Rural women's access to technical training
4.6 The rural woman and technical assintance
4.7 Rural women's membership in organizations
II. Review of Latin-American rural woman's legal status^30
(^30 This chapter is based on case studies commissioned by FAO and carried out by the following lawyers: Soledad Alvear (Chile, Colombia, Dominican Republic, Guatemala and Peru), Emma Castro de Pinzón (El Salvador), Támara Columbié (Cuba), Martha Torres Falcon (Mexico) and Gladys Yrureta (Venezuela), and the country papers submitted to the Round Table "Legal Mechanisms to facilitate Women's Participation in Rural Development", held in Santiago, Chile in September 1990.)
As mentioned in the previous chapter, provisions discriminatory to women are likely to be found in the rules of subjective law, which is the branch governing concrete relationships between individuals and between individuals and property, particularly in the provisions dealing with woman's reproductive role.
1. Constitutional law
As constitutions* are the expression of objective law, generically governing individual and group relations, their rules do not usually deal with specific situations between individuals and between individuals and property, and this is why they are rarely discriminatory.
Indeed, the nine case studies and seventeen papers presented by the participating countries at the Regional Round Table cited not one single case where a constitution contained a discriminatory provision. On the contrary, the constitutions lay down as an overriding principle the equality of all citizens regardless of sex, race or social position. Some not only establish equality between the sexes, as just mentioned, but explicitly state that men and women have equal individual and social rights, and prescribe rules covering the woman's civil, family, political and labour relations. An example here is the 1980 Brazilian Constitution, which also calls upon the State to establish mechanisms to prevent violence within the family.
Putting the legislation into effect is an enormous problem, striking directly at the principles of legal hermeneutics^31, which assign priority to the constitution, and stipulate that all other laws are inferior to it. Despite this, most countries continue to implement civil, labour and agrarian laws containing numerous discriminatory provisions, and women continue to suffer the effects of biased, and in many cases, unconstitutional legal rules. This shows the lack of an integrated approach to legal progress by lawmakers and the difficulty of those in charge of administering justice in keeping pace conceptually with their Constitutions. The difficulty here is reflected, for instance, in court rulings that go against the basic constitutional principles.
(^31 Legal hermeneutics is the study of the principles of legal interpretation. We are referring here to the stratification system whereby legislation of a lower order (Civil, Labour, Agrarian) is subordinate to the Constitution. Thus, any incompatible rules are to be considered unconstitutional and, by that token, null and void.)
It should nevertheless be stressed that the removal of discriminatory rules from the various branches of subjective law should be seen as itself warranting the status of a provision of the Constitution. This, plus the express constitutional stipulation of full legal equality between the sexes, might not change women's status outright, but it would give women the opportunity to denounce the discriminatory rules as unconstitutional and have them eliminated from subjective law.
2. Civil law
Civil law is that body of rules governing relationships between individuals and between individuals and property. It contains (as a consequence of these legal relationships) the rules pertaining to contracts* and obligations having to do with property and succession.
Civil has its origins in Roman Law, which was largely taken over into the Code Napoleon, and served as the conceptual framework for the Latin-American Republican Civil Codes. This, the oldest branch of law, is closely related to the other branches, which have borrowed from it their basic principles. This is why judges refer to the Civil Code when faced with problems of interpretation or with situations that are not governed by other legislative areas. Civil law has a privileged place in the pre-established hierarchy of laws in some countries, and it is obligatory to refer to it in appropriate cases.
2.1 Authority (potestas) and its role in women's legal subordination
Authority or potestas is defined as the control or power exercised over a person or thing. As noted above, authority in this sense subtends all the rules of law that discriminate against women.
The Napoleonic Civil Code and most of Latin America's Republican codes contain two legal institutions explicitly classified under the heading "authority": Marital, i.e. husband's authority (potestad marital) and parental authority or patria potestas. The justification for these two types of authority is the incapacity of minors to dispose freely of their persons and their property because they are not responsible for their acts. Incapacity may be absolute or relative*, depending on the age of the person concerned.
2.2 Marital authority (potestad marital)
The definition commonly used is the one which appeared in the Chilean Civil Code until November 1989: "Marital authority (potestad marital) is the body of rights that the law confers on the husband over the person and property of his wife".^32 In order to implement this body of rights favouring the husband, the lawmakers had to resort to a legal fiction* whereby a woman of legal age becomes an "adult minor" upon contracting marriage under certain conditions and loses the capacity she had acquired on reaching adulthood.^33 Thus, the woman's legal incapacity and, consequently, the husband's legal authority over her may refer to the woman's person or to the administration of her property.
(^32 Under a 1989 reform, the Pinochet Government removed the definition but not the spirit of this authority from Chile's Civil Code.)
(^33 Adult minors are adolescents (generally women over 12 and men over 14 years of age). Their status is one of relative incapacity before the law, i.e. their acts may be legally binding if certain conditions are fulfilled.)
2.2.1 Marital authority over the wife's person
The woman's diminished capacity over her own person is connected with extrapatrimonial rights*, i.e. rights not directly having to do with property, which may not always be immediately quantifiable in monetary terms.
A number of rights are personal: the right to respect, to consideration, or to work, to take up residence, etc. But, for Latin-American women in general, and rural women in particular, these rights have been diminished: a woman is obliged to obey her husband and to live where he chooses; and the husband can oblige the woman to give up her job outside the home if he considers that she is neglecting her children or her home.
This is the treatment which married women in many Latin-American countries endure under law, irrespective of the property regime* they have chosen. The Table 1 sums up the different situations in certain countries concerning married women's loss of capacity over their persons.
2.2.2 Marital authority over the woman's property
The women's capacity to administer her property is diminished through the legal fiction whereby she becomes an adult minor merely by marrying under certain property regimes. Marital authority usually implies the establishment of a community property regime in which the property that both spouses bring to the marriage and that acquired during the marriage are administered by the husband.
TABLE 1* - LIMITATIONS ON THE MARRIED WOMAN'S CAPACITY WITH RESPECT TO HER PERSON IN THE CIVIL CODES OF VARIOUS LATIN AMERICAN COUNTRIES
Main limitations on the married woman's capacity with respect to her person
Countries where such limitations exist
1. Obligation to obey the husband
El Salvador: this is explicitly stated in the law.
2. Limitations on the woman's Nicaragua: right to elect her domicile.
Nicaragua: The wife must live with the husband. Panama: If they fail to . agree, the husband's choice prevails.
Paraguay: The husband's decision prevails. Dominican Republic: The husband decides on the conjugal domicile.
3. Limitations on the right to work.
Bolivia, Guatemala, Mexico (States of Durango, Aguas. Calientes, Sonora, Nueva León, Oaxaca, Guanajuato, Michoaccán, Tabasco and Mexico Federal District), Paraguay: The husband may oblige the wife to give up her job if he feels this is in the interest of the children and the home.
* This table includes the data from the nine case studies and seventeen papers presented at the Round Table "Legal Mechanisms to facilitate Women's Participation in Rural Development".
However, there are exceptions to the condition of incapacity attached to certain marriage regimes and to the constitution of the community property. In the Dominican Republic, for instance, the man administers the property under all the property regimes, even that of separate property*. In Guatemala, the husband administers the property under the conjugal partnership regime, where, by definition, each spouse manages his or her individual assets during the marriage and the conjugal property is divided between them if the marriage is dissolved.
Table 2 shows how women are affected by marital authority over their assets. Paraguay is the only country mentioned in this table where marital authority is still contemplated and defined described in the legislation. The other countries have removed all mention of it from their texts, but it continues implicitly in the legal rules that diminish the married woman's legal capacity.
Of the countries reviewed in this study, the concept of marital authority has disappeared from the letter and spirit of the law only in Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Peru, Uruguay and Venezuela. Even so, this does not mean that it has been completely eradicated in these countries. Throughout Latin America, it continues to be one of the fundamental unwritten rules endorsed by custom. In rural areas, marital authority is one of the most important institutions governing relations within the couple, whether or not the partners are married. It is extremely difficult to find a rural woman who does not take up the domicile of her husband or companion, or does not give up her job outside the home when the man decides she should. Also, a woman's assets are almost always administered by the husband or companion. As noted above, customs such as these are the major reason why so much egalitarian legislation is ineffective.
Customs, again, are more difficult to eradicate in rural areas than in the towns. This is due, among other factors, to the relative isolation of the social groups that observe such customs.
2.3 Patria potestas
Patria potestas or parental authority is defined as the body of rights and obligations conferred by the law on the parents over their children who are minors. Unlike marital jurisdiction, this legal institution implies obligations as well as rights. The subordination of the woman arises here when the law grants the father sole or preferential rights to administer the property and take decisions concerning the education of the minor children.
TABLE 2* - LIMITATIONS ON THE MARRIED WOMAN'S CAPACITY WITH RESPECT TO PROPERTY IN THE CIVIL CODES OF VARIOUS LATIN-AMERICAN COUNTRIES
Country
How marital authority is represented in the Civil Codes
Chile
The husband is the administrator and representative of the conjugal property under the community property regime.
Ecuador
Unless agreed otherwise in the marriage contract, the husband administers the conjugal property.
El Salvador
The husband administers his wife's assets if she is a minor.
Guatemala
The husband administers the property under both the community property and the property of conjugal partnership regimes.
Mexico (States of Aguas Calientes,. Oaxaca and Sonora)
The husband administers the conjugal property under the community property regime.
Nicaragua
The husband is the family's representative or, in his absence, the . wife (Civil Code, Art. 151). In practice, however, this does not appear to have any economic consequences.
Paraguay
Unless otherwise stated in the marriage contract, the husband is the administrator of the property.
Dominican Republic
The husband administers the property, even under the separate property regime.
* The data in this Table were taken from the case studies and papers presented at the Round Table on "Legal Mechanisms to facilitate Women's Participation in Rural Development".
The Latin-American Civil Codes differ on the subject of Patria potestas, some granting equal rights to both parents, others giving priority to the father. Brazil, Colombia, Costa Rica, Cuba, Ecuador, Guatemala, Honduras, Mexico, Nicaragua, Panama, Peru, Uruguay and Venezuela are examples of the former, and Chile, El Salvador, Dominican Republic and Paraguay of the latter. Patria potestas is usually granted to the mother when children born outside marriage live with her.
The general opinion, based on knowledge of rural family customs, is that in the Latin-American countryside the father's decision prevails in matters pertaining to the persons and assets of the children, whether these are the offspring of marriage or of a de facto union. In the eyes of both statute and customary law, children born of temporary unions and living with their mother are, of course, under her authority.
2.4 De facto unions
It has already been said that the subordination in law of women in general, and of rural women in particular, is met with under "legal" rules or customs which are often in conflict with the written law. It also occurs, however, in cases where the law fails to recognize certain situations, such as de facto unions.
A de facto union may be defined as cohabitation of a man and woman with a view to a long-term partnership. The purpose of such a union is similar to that of marriage. However, in countries where it is not legally recognized, the woman who does not solemnize her union through marriage is discriminated against and deprived of the protection that legislation offers the married woman. Some countries have become aware of this grave problem, and passed laws to deal with it. These laws, however, are in such contradiction with the provisions of other legislative areas (especially those dealing with succession in civil law, and succession to or reallocation of land allocated under agrarian legislation) that they are often ineffective.
At the root of this problem is the way Latin-American laws have traditionally dealt with consensual unions. The Catholic church and the Spanish lawmakers, unaware of the legal principles governing unions between men and women in the indigenous territories, instituted marriage as the only legal form of union. This not only gave rise to a situation where many indigenous women, including those living in polygamous relationships, found themselves totally unprotected, but placed those living in consensual unions in a separate category from married women. This situation and its ideological consequences continue to underlie both the refusal of some governments to recognize the institution and the contradictions that exist in countries where consensual unions are legally accepted. Examples of these contradictions follow:
(a) in some countries, a de facto union is admitted only as between individuals who have no legal impediment to entering into a marriage contract. This rules out recognition of de facto union for many couples in countries where divorce does not exist; and, even in countries where it does, couples may not be able to undertake proceedings of this kind, either because they are too poor or because they live too far from the courts. The absence of a legal impediment to marriage is a prerequisite for the recognition of a de facto union in Brazil, Mexico Federal District and Peru;
(b) although the laws of many countries recognize de facto unions, civil and agrarian law is not always consistent with regard to succession in such cases. While civil law recognizes the companion (male or female) as entitled to a share of the legitim*, the woman is not accorded priority, following the death of the first allottee, to land granted under agrarian legislation. This is the situation in Paraguay and Venezuela. In Paraguay, proof of cohabitation must be provided for a common-law wife or husband to inherit under civil or agrarian legislation. In Peru, the woman partner in a consensual union does not figure share in the legitim;
(c) in some countries where consensual unions are not recognized by law, a companion may receive a pension following the partner's death, or compensation following a work-related accident. Although the de facto union is not legally recognized in Colombia ^34, Costa Rica and Uruguay, a companion may inherit the pension (upon the other partner's death) or the compensation (paid as a result of his or her work-related accident). Things are otherwise in Chile and El Salvador, where the woman in a consensual union has no protection whatever.
(^34 The new Colombian Constitution, approved in July 1991, recognizes de facto unions. For these to be legally valid, however, the conjugal property (in the case of a previous marriage) must first be liquidated and the couple must have cohabited for more than two years.)
Consensual unions are legally recognized on a par with marriage for all purposes in the legislation of Cuba, Ecuador, Honduras, Mexico (the States of Durango, Hidalgo, Mexico Federal District, Morelia, Queretaro and Sonora), Nicaragua, Panama and Peru. Although cohabitation is recognized in Brazil, the woman may not claim support or alimony after the union is dissolved. In this connection, the laws of the Mexican States of Queretaro, Morelia, Sonora and Durango are the only ones that are absolutely clear on the subject of a common-law wife's right to claim support.
The lack of consistency in the provisions governing this legal institution in some countries and the total absence of legal recognition in others are a further and serious problem for the rural woman. Although it is not possible to provide statistical data for all the countries so as to give an overall picture of de facto unions in Latin America, the practice is certainly widespread throughout Central America and the Caribbean. For instance, 61% of unions in rural El Salvador are consensual^35, as are most of those in Brazil and Paraguay. The number of marriages in the rural areas of the Andean region increased under the impact of agrarian reform which required that the man be head of the household in order to be allocated land. This, however, has not significantly changed the situation as regards extralegal unions in rural Latin America and the resulting subordinate position of rural women, in socioeconomic terms and in relation to men.
(^35 FAO. 1990. La situación de la mujer campesina frente a la legislación ... Op. cit. p.20)
2.5 Succession
The importance for the rural woman of succession following the death of the husband or companion and its relation to development lies in the fact that succession is one of the most common ways for women to accede to land ownership. This is particularly true now that the agrarian reform processes have been suspended in a good number of countries i.e. those where the aim is to incorporate the rural woman into development without changing the land tenure system.
The laws in Latin America are not consistent as to how the married woman, or partner in a de facto union, inherits from her husband or companion. They are more consistent, however, in their treatment of succession where adult daughters are concerned.
The Civil Codes of the various countries distinguish between the succession of the spouse and his or her share of the joint estate once the conjugal union ceases upon the death of one of the spouses. The same rules apply to both husband and wife. The spouse's share depends on the property regime chosen by the contracting parties. Thus, if the spouses have chosen the separate property regime, there is no liquidation of a joint estate property: each spouse retains his or her own assets, and whatever is acquired during the marriage remains under separate ownership.
Under the community property and property of conjugal partnership regimes, the property brought to the marriage and that subsequently acquired becomes jointly owned and must be shared equally between the spouses. The assets of the succession are therefore half of the community property plus the assets that each spouse obtained through inheritance, lottery wins, etc., which do not form part of the community property. Now, as mentioned earlier, the laws of the various Latin-American countries are not consistent on this point, and the conditions for inheriting a spouse's or companion's property vary depending on whether the succession is testamentary or intestate*, and whether the property is subject to the Civil Code (as in the case of purchased or inherited land), or to agrarian law (for land allotted thereunder).
Table 3 gives a clearer picture of the woman's situation in different countries. In some countries the spouse is completely free to make a will*, in which case it is possible for one spouse to leave the other totally unprotected (under the separate property regime, and where the survivor has no assets).
This is the situation of the surviving spouse in El Salvador, Costa Rica, Honduras and Panama. In Guatemala, Mexico and Uruguay the testator has freedom of disposal by will, with one limitation - the obligation to provide support and maintenance. In the remaining countries in the table, the testator has limited freedom: he or she may only dispose freely of part of his or her assets and is obliged to share the remainder among whom the law specifically requires be treated as heirs. Sometimes the spouse is not one of these heirs, but in that case part of the succession, called the spouse's share (porción conyuqal), must be left to a spouse who has no assets.
In the case of intestate succession, the heirs are obliged to abide by the law. The spouse is heir to the mandatory spouse's portion in all the countries under review, but the amount due to him or her varies from country to country.
In some countries the married woman inherits the same proportion as the children only if she is their mother, which is tantamount to saying that the law accords some benefit to the woman solely on reproductive - biological - considerations.
The situation is different for the women partners in a consensual union. They are heirs under Civil law only if their union is legally recognized (in some cases this means that it is equated with marriage for all effects and purposes). In Peru, as noted earlier, the partner in a consensual union is not a forced heir.
As regards succession to land allocated under agrarian legislation, it is possible to discern two distinct tendencies, depending on the field of law applicable. Some cases fall under the Civil Code, which allows the heirs to share the land among themselves, in which case the parcels will be physically divided up; other cases are governed by agrarian legislation introduced for the express purpose of preventing the land from being fragmented. Agrarian law also specifies the order of priority for reallocation. Some countries name the wife or companion if she works on and earns her living from the land; and others indicate one of the family members, usually the eldest son, thus discriminating against the women in the family.
TABLE 3* - SITUATION OF THE SURVIVING SPOUSE UNDER THE RULES OF SUCCESSION IN VARIOUS LATIN-AMERICAN COUNTRIES
Country
Civil law
Agrarian law
Testamentary Succession
Intestate Succession
Succession to land allocated under Agrarian law
Bolivia
Freedom of disposal by will not absolute. The spouse is forced heir. if there are children.
The spouse is one of the heirs if there are children
The rules of the Civil Code apply.
Brazil
Freedom of disposal by will not absolute. The.. spouse is forced heir
The spouse is one of the heirs to the non-freely disposable portion.
The rules of the Civil Code apply
Colombia
Freedom of disposal by will not absolute. The spouse or spouse's mandatory share
The spouse is one of the forced heirs with the spouse's share (an allowance for support and maintenance, the need for which must be demonstrated).
The agrarian rules apply. The spouse or companion inherits.
Costa Rica
Absolute freedom of applies.disposal by will.
The spouse is one of the forced heirs.
The rules of the Civil Code apply.
Honduras
Absolute freedom of disposal by will.
The spouse is one of the forced heirs, but must show that maintenance is necessary.
Agrarian law applies.
Mexico
Freedom of disposal by will, but testator obliged to provide support and maintenance.
The spouse is one of the forced heirs.
Agrarian law applies.
Nicaragua
No freedom of disposal by will. The spouse must be provided for.
The spouse is one of the forced heirs.
Agrarian law applies.
Panama
Absolute freedom of disposal by will. But the spouse's share applies.
The spouse is one of the forced heirs.
The Civil Code applies.
Paraguay
Freedom of disposal by will not absolute. The spouse must be provided for.
The spouse is one of the forced heirs.
The Civil Code applies.
Peru
Freedom of disposal by will not absolute. The spouse must be provided for.
The spouse is one of the forced heirs.
Agrarian law applies.
Dominican Republic
Freedom of disposal by will not absolute. The spouse must be provided for.
The woman is one of the forced heirs.
Agrarian law applies.
Uruguay
Freedom of disposal by will, with one limitation: the spouse's share (an adequate subsistence allowance)**.
The spouse's share is mandatory.
The Civil Code applies.
Venezuela
Freedom of disposal by will not absolute. The spouse must be provided for.
The spouse is one of the forced heirs.
Agrarian rules apply.
* The data in this table were taken from the nine case studies and the country papers presented at the Round Table "Legal Mechanisms to facilitate Women's Participation in Rural Development".
** An adequate subsistence allowance is the amount of money the spouse needs to live modestly in a manner corresponding to his or her social status.
In matters relating to the succession to land allocations, the agrarian laws of Bolivia, Costa Rica, Chile, Ecuador, El Salvador, Panama and Paraguay comes under the Civil Code, while in Colombia, Cuba, Honduras and Nicaragua the Agrarian Code applies. In Colombia, where the new Constitution recognizes de facto unions as legal, the Agrarian Reform Act recognizes the right of the companion to inherit the land allocated under that Act from the de cujus*. In Venezuela, although consensual unions are legally recognized, neither spouses nor companions are among those with a priority claim to land reallocation, but they may appeal under the Agrarian Reform Act for "agrarian protection" (amparo agrario).
In Cuba, the Civil Code recognizes consensual unions and accepts that the surviving partner shares in the succession. Smallholdings may only be inherited by heirs who work the land personally. Even so, the law makes an exception for women who cannot work the land themselves but earn their livelihood from it. This exception is also valid for succession to land allocated under the Agrarian Reform Act.
There are two ways in which custom obstructs the law to the detriment of women: one, at family level, where patriarchal preconception allows fathers during their lifetime to hand over to their sons portions of land to cultivate; and two (for similar preconceptions) the mix-application of agrarian law by those in charge of its enforcement (who often reallocate land to the male family members despite the fact that the law does not expressly discriminate against women).
The temporary transfer of land by fathers to their sons in some regions often deprives the women of their right to it, as they are unable to pay for the improvements made. This leaves them no option but to relinquish their claim. However, the custom seems definitely to be falling into disuse, and, according to the participants at the Regional Round Table mentioned earlier, is no longer a serious problem.
2.6 The family estate and its importance
The family estate* is the legal institution through which families with minor children may retain control of a dwelling or small rural holdings. It gives the family security, because property incorporated into a family estate thereby becomes inalienable*; it may not be divided or seized, but may be conveyed through inheritance.
Here again, the lack of socio-economic studies means that there are no statistical data, so it is not possible to say accurately how many families have established a family estate in the countries where it is recognized by law, or to what socioeconomic class they belong. From the very limited data available all that can be said is that:
1. The establishment of family estates is more frequent in the urban than in the rural sector;
2. in the countryside, family estates concern dwellings rather than agricultural holdings;
3. the institution has fallen into disuse in many countries;
4. whether or not it is retained in both law and practice depends on the accompanying regulations. For instance, the institution would have been more widely resorted to, had it been made compulsory to incorporate government-allocated real property, essential to house or maintain the family, into the family estate; and
5. one reason why the family estate concept has been little developed on this continent is that the banks prefer mortgage security, and property that has been declared family estate cannot be mortgaged.
Credit policy aimed at persuading the banks to discontinue this preclusion and to be more ready to accept collateral security* in the form of a pledge or, say, a future harvest would give large numbers of poor rural families with minor children the possibility of buying at least a minimum of their subsistence requirements.
The laws of Bolivia, Colombia, Cuba, Dominican Republic, Guatemala, Mexico, Nicaragua, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay and Venezuela include provisions instituting the family estate. In some of these countries the peasants hardly ever take advantage if it, for the reasons already mentioned; and unless enforcement regulations and supporting action are developed for this useful piece of legislation, it will become a dead letter.
3. How labour law subordinates rural women
Labour law may be described as the body of rules governing relations between employees and employers. This branch of law began expanding significantly in the 19th Century in the wake of the many workers' movements that developed in protest against the social injustices of capitalism. These movements also gave rise to the trade unions and to new political parties based on differing ideologies, but having one common denominator: they were the product of 18th Century economic policy and of the economic and social changes generated by what is known as the Industrial Revolution^36.
(^36 SULTAN, P. 1964. Economía política del trabajo. Mexico, Trillas. pp. 133-160.)
Among the conquests of the trade union movement and the new political parties was the development of labour law and the promulgation of rules of law governing worker-employer relations. These rules reflected a particular ideology. As in other areas of indigenous law and practice, the labour rules of the indigenous peoples were wiped out in most of the continent and new working conditions and rules established; and today's legal practices in labour matters basically fall in line with these.
Enforcement certainly poses serious problems in the rural sector, as the rules of labour law fail to take account of the real situation of working people, particularly working women, there.
An important point here is that this field of law has also been influenced by ideological trends in other latitudes. Labour law was first established in the wake of urban worker movements and was adopted in Latin America with little regard for this continent's particular situation. Until the mid-twentieth century Latin America was predominantly agricultural: more than half the population lived in the countryside and agriculture accounted for the largest share of the countries' GDP. Migration, urbanization, industrialization, etc., led many rural dwellers to abandon the countryside, a trend which in many countries reversed the urban/rural population figures. Even so, Latin America remains predominantly agricultural today.
The causes of the differences between urban and rural labour legislation in most Latin-American countries are many and varied. One of them may well be the influence of the large landowners who long held economic and political sway there. But whatever the reason, one thing is certain: it is the woman who comes off worst.
Except in Cuba and Nicaragua, efforts to recognize the specific characteristics of rural men and women have not led to legislation capable of coming to grips with the problems and providing appropriate solutions. Women continue to hold the least privileged position, and in all countries without exception practice has given rise to parallel rules which discriminate against them.
3.1 Rural labour: an informal reality
The social scientists fail to agree on a definition of informal work, though there is fair degree of consensus as to its basic social components: low salaries, low status and irregularity of jobs, the absence of enforceable work contracts, the lack of social security benefits and the difficulties in gaining access to land, to credit and to workers' associations, etc.
Mention has already been made of how the law marginalizes the rural woman; and the fact takes on particular importance where the Labour Code is concerned, since most rural women are involved in the informal sector of the economy and thus are denied any protection under labour laws.
3.2 Labour law and the rural woman
The rural woman is denied legal protection for two main reasons: one, she works without a legally binding contract (the matter was touched on in the preceding pages) and, two, the labour laws fail to take account of the real situation of rural workers in general, and female rural workers in particular. A review of the discriminatory rules, influenced by patriarchal preconception, will bear this out.
3.3 Freedom to work and legal capacity in labour matters
Freedom and capacity in labour matters are two essential factors to recall in examining equality between the sexes before the law. Any imbalance in either right leads to unequal access to the labour courts and to unequal rulings likely to be handed down there. Freedom is the faculty of responsible human beings to act as they see fit, and inevitably infers the absence of subordination. The exercise of freedom has one essential condition: one must be responsible. The legal definition of responsibility is the capacity to perform legal acts; and capacity in this sense may be defined as the ability to be the subject of obligations and of rights, or the ability to perform legally binding acts. Freedom and capacity are both lost if their essential prerequisites are missing, and the most important of these is responsibility.
The main factors limiting responsibility in the Labour Code are age and the effects of the patriarchal ideology, the latter placing the woman in a subordinate position because she is seen as physically and morally weak, and needing man's protection.
Mention has already been made of the interrelationship between the various branches of law and the discriminatory ideology that runs through them. Thus, the legal fiction which equates women with minors merely because they have married is also met with in labour law. Even so, all the Latin-American countries where marital authority is enshrined in the law have a clause allowing married women to enter freely into contracts and to dispose of the salary received through the exercise of their profession or activity. This modicum of freedom is restricted in some countries, however, by laws which entitle the husband to require his wife to give up her job if he considers it to jeopardize the well-being of the children or the care of the home. This is the situation with which married women in Bolivia, Guatemala, some Mexican States and Paraguay have to contend.
In practice, the rural woman, more often than the urban woman, either refuses to accept a job or quits it if her husband or companion thinks she should. Marital authority is custom - in labour matters too - and is still very much the rule where rural women are concerned.
3.4 Women excluded by law from certain types of work
On the premise that they are physically and morally weak, almost all the Codes have provisions that exclude women from certain types of work.
Authority, potestas, once again lies behind these provisions which limit women's right to work on the pretext of this physical and moral weakness and their consequent need of protection. One common discriminatory feature is ever present: women are equated with minors, both as if they were under age and because they are incapable of deciding whether or not to undertake certain types of work which might affect their physical and moral well-being.
The labour laws of several countries prohibit four types of work for women: unhealthy work, underground work and work that is damaging to their physical condition and work that is damaging to their moral condition (the one most often cited here is night work). These laws, however, do not agree on the actual jobs to be ruled out for women or on the advantages of eliminating the relevant provision from the statute book.
Mexico repealed all prohibitive labour provisos from its Labour Code in 1974. Cuba lists the jobs that are not recommended, leaving it to the woman to decide whether or not to take on a given type of work. The criteria used to assess these types of work include intense physical effort, and exposure to radiation, high temperatures, high pressure or toxic substances.
Provisions concerning the handling of fertilizers and disinfectants take a realistic view of the rural woman's situation. They stress protection and hygiene, but do not prohibit women from these tasks. Peru does not have measures prohibiting women from certain work, but it has so many legal rules granting them special benefits regarding the working day, rest periods and compensation, that employers are now reluctant to engage women. In Honduras prohibitive provisos are absent because labour law refers the matter to health legislation, which is silent on the subject. The laws of Nicaragua, Panama and Uruguay do not prohibit adult women from doing night work. Bolivia explicitly treats women as minors and specifically excludes them from jobs that endanger private or public morality, but does not list the jobs, leaving the choice to the employer.
Jobs rated as dangerous or unhealthy vary from country to country, as do the exceptions to the prohibition of night work. Some countries generically ban strenuous or highly dangerous jobs, others list each job and some specifically state that the work must not be damaging or harmful to the woman's physical or moral condition. The laws of Bolivia and Costa Rica are examples of the latter approach. As regards the exceptions to the prohibition of night work, Brazil's labour legislation is worth mentioning in that it lists work in leather factories as one of the exceptions.
This warrants the conclusion that the lack of consistency in the dangerous jobs list and in the exceptions to night work are a disguised "regulation" of the labour market rather than a genuine attempt to protect women. Since men are indeed usually physically stronger than women, it would be more logical for the legislation to provide a list of jobs (as in Cuba) and let the women decide which are too strenuous for them. Without such a list, employees are at the mercy of employers who are free to oblige both men and women to perform tasks that are physically too strenuous. As regards jobs damaging to health, it would be fairer to both men and women to draw up rules obliging employers to provide the safest possible working conditions.
The prohibition of night work has fallen somewhat into disuse with the rapid change in accepted practice that has occurred over the past 20 years, especially in the towns "somewhat", because women do in fact work at night, but without legal protection. The employers take advantage of the fact that the prohibition on their working at night is still in force and pay their women night workers lower wages and offer no social security coverage.
Tradition takes precedence in the countryside. The peasants pay little heed to rules prohibiting this or that, especially those prohibiting night work, as some farm work (milking, for instance) is deemed to fall under this description if it is done before 6 am.
As regards the ban on unhealthy work, there are no figures to illustrate the magnitude of the problem for rural workers. There are indications, however, that women working in flower and fruit exporting firms (in Colombia and Chile, respectively) are being affected by constant exposure to the risks associated with the intensive use of agricultural pesticides.
The general cloudiness of definition here described also applies to the prohibitions on strenuous work. Some countries classify strenuous jobs in terms of the weight to be lifted, others refer to heavy machinery, etc. This ban may be one of the reasons why rural women are denied technical training - a practice which only serves to reinforce the traditional division of labour which favours men for such training. Paradoxically, this division of labour often prevents rural women from doing work associated with technology (driving tractors or other agricultural machinery), the precise aim of which is to make farm work easier.
3.5 Protective legislation concerning maternity
Woman's reproductive is possibly the only area of activity which, in every country, actually merits having protection measures backed by legislation. However, the concept and scope of these measures vary from one country to another. In some countries, they are seen as a duty of society maternity, through which the workforce and society are renewed, being a social function. In others, they represent a gender-based division of labour, whereby, maternity belongs directly to the sphere of reproduction, which is why responsibility for this function has traditionally rested exclusively with the woman and not with the couple or society.
This view of maternity stems from an entrenched family power structure, which allots each family member his or her place within the family and in society. Protectionist rules are therefore seen by the employers as a burden when they have to recruit women workers.
Where the economic burden of maternity lies with society, the State has to find ways to effectively implement the law in the interest of all, rural people and the unemployed included.
Maternity legislation usually grants special privileges to women in their capacity as mothers. Among the most common of these are: the right to pre- and post-natal leave (the number of days varying from country to country and almost always calculated in terms of weeks), the right to full pay during such leave, the employer's obligation to keep the woman's job open during her leave, the right of the mother to nurse her infant during working hours and the right to nursery facilities where the children may be properly cared for.
These privileges are much more likely to be enjoyed by the urban working woman and protected through a formal work contract, but denied the rural woman. There is a close correlation between the work rural women do and rural poverty and black work, and deficient protection from the law. Mention has already been made of the fact that, as a result of the economic changes in rural Latin America in recent years and their consequences on the labour market, more and more women have been forced to take up informal work. This situation enables employers to get round their obligations to working mothers.
Cuba is the only country reviewed with legislation that considers maternity a social function and explicitly protects working mothers, including those without a formal work contract. This means that Cuban rural women's needs are effectively protected. The country also has legal mechanisms, procedures and strategies for making the laws effective. Responsibility for nurseries is shared between the Government and the trade unions, and special solutions have been found for the rural areas: for instance, one mother in a cooperative group will be chosen to look after the children of all the other members.
It is not possible to generalize about the other countries. In Colombia, Costa Rica, Mexico and Uruguay, for instance, nurseries are funded mainly by the State and the private companies, the parents also making a small contribution. In Brazil, nurseries are state-run. In the rural areas of Colombia, the Instituto Colombiano de Bienestar Familiar (ICBF) has replaced nurseries by a substitute home system for children up to five years old: rural families living within a certain radius of each other choose one of the mothers to look after the children while the others are working.^37
(^37 For more information see the summary of the Colombia case study in Annex 1.)
State protection for rural Colombian women offers no other maternal privileges for mothers working in the informal sector. In Chile, following the privatization of the Social Security system by the military government, women workers with formal contracts were denied the right to hospital services if they became pregnant within first month after joining the social security system. In the other countries under review, employers with a certain number of women workers must provide nursery facilities. However, it is easy for employers to avoid meeting this obligation: they simply do not employ the required number of women; and this is a further cause of female unemployment.
So as not to burden themselves with the economic cost of maternity, employers in this second group of countries also resort to a number of illegal expedients among them the practice of requiring women to undergo a gynaecological examination before their appointment is confirmed. In El Salvador, maternal privileges are not always respected, and the same seems to be the case in Paraguay. It must be realized, therefore, that only if maternity is considered a social function will it be possible for all privileges to have equal importance in the spirit of the law and in practice. Full pay during maternity leave, nursery facilities, etc., will thus be the responsibility of society, and society will seek ways and means of enforcing the law and ensuring that it also applies to poor urban and poor rural women, including those without formal contracts.
3.6 Temporary or casual work
The development of capitalist agriculture in Latin America may be said to have begun only after the First World War, when this part of the world became systematically incorporated into the capitalist trading orbit. This came about through systems and mechanisms established by the United States of America, the newly dominant country, and led to phenomena such as the abandonment of the countryside, urbanization, the growth of the agro-export sector and new labour systems. Coffee, cotton, tobacco and, much later, around the 'seventies, other crops such as fruit and flowers, based on the intensive use of modern technology and, of course, new work practices, adjusted to these systems. One of the preferred practices was the recruitment of women as temporary workers, usually without contracts and on piece-work (which usually meant their working a longer day to meet the targets assigned them).^38
(^38 RIQUELME, V. 1987. Asalariadas agrícolas: temporeras en el campo, permanentes en la case. In: CENTRO DE ESTUDIOS DE LA MUJER (CEM). Synópsis de una realidad oculta. Santiago de Chile, Interamericana. pp. 53-60.)
Various studies have shown that women's participation in these intensive cropping systems is directly related to a number of factors such as the intensity and seasonal character of the work, the conditions of employment (a formal contract is always excluded), and the socio-economic background of the female worker.
Most women temporary wage-earners come from landless or smallholder families,^39 a fact which, as noted earlier, directly associates women's work (i.e. work without a contract) with rural poverty. The absence of a written contract also makes the woman worker "invisible" (she is not included in the statistics as verbal contracts do not appear in company staff records).
(^39 LEON DE LEAL, M. 1987. Op. cit. pp.10-12.)
Temporary or periodic contracts are nevertheless specifically provided for in the legislation of several countries, but the relevant laws are inoperative. This is due, on the one hand, to the system of verbal recruitment (this is explicitly authorized in the laws of a number of countries, including El Salvador, Nicaragua and Panama), and to the lack of monitoring in most countries to ensure compliance with the legislation on the temporary recruitment of agricultural workers. On the other hand, even when contracts are drawn up, no one abides by them.
Cuba is once again the exception to these twin expedients denying women protection. In this country contracts are obligatory for temporary work, monitoring is effective and the persons involved enjoy the full range of social benefits and protection. However, even in Cuba, the types of jobs women do are lower-paid ones.
Informal working arrangements victimize men as well as women; and temporary female rural workers are defenseless and denied all the benefits enjoyed by regular workers under law (holidays, social security, the right to nursery facilities and full protection of maternity).
The situation as regards working hours is just as bad. As noted, temporary workers are paid either the minimum wage or on piece rates. Women are usually recruited on a piece-work basis, but have to work longer hours than men. Studies conducted on the Ecuadoran coast region showed a significant difference between men and women in the matter of the hours they work: the men worked a 6½ hour day, and the women up to 14 hours, ^40 - not because they were less productive but because of the domestic responsibilities they shoulder.
(^40 See the studies by MENDEL, J and VALDES, X in 1987.)
All the practical discriminations - wages, the lack of legal protection or social benefits, working hours, etc. endured by the rural women, in particular, in turn produce the de facto legal discrimination whereby the woman is kept on the lowest rung of the rural poverty ladder.
3.7 General remarks on labour law and the practice of a parallel legal system
It has already been shown that Latin America has made little progress in labour legislation to benefit rural workers or in regard to their special types of work. Historical, ethnic and social factors, the type of crops grown, and the degree of mechanization are just some of the countless reasons for this failure.
The labour regulations of most Latin-American countries are specific in providing that there should be no discrimination between men and women. They also distinguish between permanent and temporary workers and cover working hours but do not generally benefit rural workers. Most countries' labour laws contain references to crop and livestock workers, but none, except Cuba's, treats them as the central subject of these selfsame laws.
One thus finds general declarations such as that of the non-discriminatory principle or the categorization of workers as either permanent or temporary/casual. In most countries, when a legal rule refers to a particular case, it is usual for differentials to be established which operate to the detriment of the rural worker. Lower wages in the rural than in the urban sector, a sort of truck system whereby the bosses are allowed to provision their workers (the cost then being deducted from their wages), permission to recruit verbally, and working days longer than the statutory eight hours, are some examples. Where the legislation grants equal rights to rural as well as urban workers, the equality is purely formal. Economic and legal tradition is more discriminatory to the rural than to the urban man, and to the rural woman than to the rural man.
4. Access to productive resources under the general law and agrarian law in particular
Gender-based division of labour, with its allocation of tasks and responsibilities for men and women, is closely linked to access that either sex enjoys to productive resources. With the assigning of reproduction-associated functions to the woman, a family power structure has been established as well, in which the woman is made subordinate to the man in family decision-making and in productive work outside the home.
As explained in Chapter I, reproduction involves more than mere biological reproduction, it also implies the perpetuation of the workforce and of society. Perpetuation of the workforce involves more than mere biological reproduction; it also includes the transmission of values that have to do with work, and with the incorporation of workers into the productive process.
Social reproduction implies the perpetuation of certain methods within the productive process, and of legal and social relations, which include systems of succession, control over resources and the preservation of ideologies through which certain legal relationships that are expressed in customs and, at times, in statutory legislation are maintained. This task is accomplished in the family mainly through the mother. Reproduction of the workforce in the rural sector signifies, among other things, the handing on of agricultural techniques and knowhow. This is usually the job of the father and other male members of the family.
Even though the woman is responsible for almost all reproductive tasks, she has no say in the important decisions. In addition, her productive work is underrated - a state of affairs which has serious practical and economic consequences.
A look at the family as a production unit will confirm the above remarks. Although internal family organization is changing in line with the characteristics and demands of the various production methods, these changes do not affect the family power structure. This means that family cohesion is sustained by ideological supports which have a direct bearing on participation in production and, therefore, on the role each member can play in development. This ideology finds expression in customs observed in the countryside and in the way the law is called in to tackle problems.
What is said here provides a useful premise for examining the legal status of the rural woman in terms of her access to productive resources.
4.1 Access to land
The most usual way for the rural woman in almost all Latin-American countries to gain access to land is through succession or through the allocations made under some countries' Agrarian Reform Laws. Although statistical evidence as to the magnitude of this problem for landless rural women is unavailable, some recent studies maintain that there are sufficient grounds to show that rural woman are systematically denied access to land and direct control over other means of production. This is confirmed by the case studies and country papers presented at the Regional Round Table.
The legal problem of land ownership by rural women is closely bound up with the institution of marital authority, with de facto unions and, above all, with the patriarchal ideology underlying all the areas of law and practice observed, with specific local features, in the various regions.
4.2 Succession in agrarian law
In the chapter on succession it was shown how spouses or companions may gain access to land by inheriting, and how the different rules governing testamentary and intestate succession in the various countries affect the surviving spouse.^41 In intestate succession, all the Latin-American codes allow the surviving spouse to inherit, either as a "legitimate" (i.e. "forced") heir or as beneficiary of the "spouse's share" of the estate. In many cases this consists 'of little more than provision for maintenance, evidence of the need of which has to be produced - this is the situation of childless surviving spouses in Bolivia, Honduras, Uruguay and Colombia.
(^41 See Table 3.)
The situation is different in the case of testamentary succession. In some countries the spouse is absolutely free to dispose of his or her property as he or she sees fit and may exclude family members, including the surviving spouse. This is true of Costa Rica, El Salvador, Guatemala and Mexico, where the testator's only obligation is to leave maintenance for the spouse; in Panama and Uruguay, the testator is bound by the spouse's share rule, i.e. the obligation to leave a sufficient amount for his or her maintenance, but the spouse has to justify the need of such support.^42
(^42 See Table 3.)
The woman companion in a de facto union may inherit where there is no will only in those countries where such unions are legally recognized (Peru is an exception here).
This brief account shows how the woman, usually the poorer of the two partners, gains access to land in this fashion. Because of her precarious situation - she has to find her way through a veritable legal labyrinth crammed with special rules of succession - this is not a particularly efficient way of gaining access to land. Furthermore, in the case of intestate succession, the region's Civil Codes are based on the Code Napoleon, whereby the children share the estate in equal proportions. This is not very serious where large rural properties are concerned but, given the problems of the minifundio and of population growth, clearly the distribution system under the Latin-American Civil Codes has become one of the most effective ways of fragmenting the land into ever smaller parcels.
The situation is worse for the woman in a de facto union, as she is a forced heir only in cases where a female spouse would have inherited anyway and only in countries where these unions are legally recognized. As noted already, a prerequisite in several countries is that there is no impediment to marriage - a condition that often rules out recognition and, therefore, the possibility of inheriting.
As regards succession to land allocated under agrarian legislation, the treatment of married women and partners in consensual unions varies from country to country. For instance, the agrarian law in Paraguay and Venezuela recognizes neither companions' nor married couples' right to inherit or to be allotted land that has been abandoned by the principal allottee. Agrarian law differs from civil law here. In countries such as Colombia, Costa Rica and Uruguay, the Civil Code does not recognize de facto unions, while the agrarian legislation recognizes the spouse's or regular companion's right to inherit the plot allocated under that legislation. The proportion of women gaining access to land has not increased significantly because of this, however. Under the agrarian laws of other countries - Honduras, for instance - the son may be chosen to inherit the land, and a childless woman may be denied the possibility of inheriting the plot allocated to her husband or companion even
though she has worked the land with him.
Because of the requirement in some countries that the heir shall have worked the land personally, plots have been allocated to elder sons even though the women may also have worked them. This stems from the fact that the work a woman does outside the home is considered of secondary importance. Under the rules such as these, adult daughters are excluded if they have brothers. This shows that, in practice, the traditional family structure takes precedence, through the operation of the right of [male] primogeniture, a principle taken over from Spanish Law but not written into Latin America's Civil Codes.
Attention is drawn once again to the highly precarious situation of rural women in de facto unions in many Latin-American countries. This is the most common form of union in the rural areas, and failure to give it legal recognition leaves the woman totally unprotected.^43
(^43 It is reported that in the countryside in some countries most unions are consensual. In other countries marriage appears to be more common in mountain than in coastal areas. Not all countries have statistics on this matter.)
4.3 Other ways in which women gain access to land
Recent studies on women and land tenure have shown that in all these countries women who own land in rural areas belong to the poorest, smallholder or minifundio sector.^44 However, the actual number of women smallholders and how they obtained their land are not known. Many Latin-American women work land to which they have no title, and this is a further complication. Women who own land and women who work land to which they hold no title are usually heads of households. Their number has increased in recent years with the rise in male migration associated with problems of civil strife, guerrilla activities or drug trafficking.
(^44 LEON DE LEAL, M. et al. 1987. Acceso de la mujer a la tierra... Op. cit. pp.10-43.)
As explained in Chapter I, Latin-American Agrarian Reform stemmed from this century's peasant struggles for land, jobs, dignity and the preservation of peasant cultures. In some countries Agrarian Reform was the result of social revolution and, since it involved the abolition of the large estates, its implementation radically changed the system of land ownership. This was the case in Bolivia, Cuba, Chile (at the time of Unidad Popular), Mexico, Nicaragua and Peru.
Of these, only Cuba and Nicaragua have made women the main target of agrarian legislation in recognition of the fact that they are the least privileged among the landless. In all the other countries of the region, the philosophy underlying agrarian reforms stemmed from the Alliance for Progress programme and its principles. These reforms did not seek to introduce fundamental changes in agrarian structures: the family was taken as the production unit, in which men and women had specific roles; the woman responsible for reproduction and the man in charge of production. The man, too, was the head of the household. This was why agrarian reform in several countries assigned the role of head of the household to the man, and why the authorities in charge of enforcing the law even now find it difficult to accept the woman as head of the family group.
However, the fact that more and more frequently women are responsible for the family in rural Latin America has prompted Bolivia, Colombia, Honduras, Peru and Venezuela to give women the opportunity to be accepted as heads of household by introducing the relevant provisions in their legislation. Dominican Republic legislation makes mention of widows and deserted women. Nevertheless, the ideology which made the man the head of the household still persists, and the authorities responsible for enforcing the law still fail to do so.
Women's access to land is extremely limited in all these countries (whether or not they transformed their agrarian systems) except Cuba. A rapid review of the situation in some countries will illustrate this point.
Cuba, whose socio-economic system is based on collective ownership, does not allocate land to private individuals, so that no comparison on the basis of parameters used in the other countries is possible. Private property held by small farmers is transferred through succession, and women have full and equal rights. Women also participate actively in the cooperatives, of which they are joint and several owners.
The Agrarian Reform Act passed in Nicaragua in 1981 took a step new to Latin America: it recognized women as the concern and direct beneficiaries of agrarian policies irrespective of their role within the family. This meant, for instance, that women and their daughters could also join cooperatives. The Act dispensed with the requirement that one had to be a head of household enjoy the benefits of the agrarian reform. It is not yet possible to assess the result of this change. Statistical data obtained in 1984 showed that the number of individual titles granted to men and women still differed significantly.
In other countries such as Mexico, Bolivia and Peru, where agrarian reform changed the land ownership system substantially, the woman has not gained equal access, mainly because the real target of these reforms was the family, and by tradition the man is considered its head. This has meant that the woman has been able to gain access to land only if she is a widow or has been deserted - and has children. A woman without a family has no chance whatsoever.
Although the emphasis of Mexico's Federal Agrarian Reform Act is on economic necessity and not on the traditional concept of the male head of the household, the concept continues to prevail in practice. No more than six percent of women have been allocated land. In a move to assist women, this country instituted Women's Agricultural and Industrial Units (UAIM) to establish crop and livestock farms and rural industries, as a means of setting up farms and rural industries to be run collectively by women over 16 who are not ejido members.^45
(^45 Ejidos are land areas that were distributed to the people under the revolution (1910-1917). These areas were made up of individual allotments consisting of family plots which were to be farmed collectively.)
The land area of a UAIM is the same as that of a "family holding" under the ejido system; and nurseries, sewing and education centres and other services for rural women are to be associated with it. In theory each ejido has a UAIM, but this is not true in practice. Only 50 000 of the 2 000 000 women working in the agricultural sector (i.e. 2.5%) come under the UAIM arrangements. There are several reasons for this: the plots assigned to the women are too small to allow them entry into the production process. Also, UAIMs have no legal status, so that the women have no vote in the general meetings and no access to credit. The Tempoal and Veracruz UAIMs are exceptions to the rule: they joined up with the existing ejido federation and took advantage of this to gain access to credit, and are performing well.
Men and women have not had equal access to land in any country of the region, not even in those where legislation has removed all barriers to land ownership.
This prompts reflection on the power of customary law to act contrary to fair legislation, and demonstrates that the issue of rural women's legal status will only be resolved when the legal rules are accompanied by a series of supplementary measures so that rights may extend beyond the purely legal sphere and claim effective compliance in the processes of socialization, for it is here that rights are acknowledged or denied.
Because, for instance, women are brought up to devote their lives to others, there will be no difficulty in understanding how hard it is for them to recognize and demand their own rights. It will therefore be a long and difficult task to eliminate the ideology which makes women subordinate, given the image women have of themselves, their position within the family structure and the attitude of those who wield power at all levels.
Laws must be accompanied by enforcement regulations and monitoring mechanisms and penalties must be established to deal with those who contravene or fail to implement the rules.
4.4 The rural woman and access to credit
For development in Latin America to proceed on a sound footing rural women must be brought fully into the production process. Even so, the difficulties for this large section of the rural population in gaining access to credit are part and parcel of the problem of access to land and other productive resources. A rapid review of the way rural people, especially the men, obtain credit ^46, may give an idea of the gravity of the problem facing the rural woman.
(^46 GARCIA, A. 1982. Modelos operacionales ... Op. cit. pp.171-180.)
The financial model which all Latin-American countries except Cuba (and Nicaragua during the Sandinista period) have adopted to attract savings and channel investment is based on a capitalism brought in from outside. In general, and in agriculture in particular, this model has made modernization possible, though maintaining the current internationally accepted division of labour and, within this, a gender-based division of labour reflected in both law and practice.
The financial model in question responds to the operational requirements of the economic growth model adopted at the end of the First World War, where economic development does not necessarily imply social development. With the excesses of the import substitution phase and its accompanying industrialization, which funnelled masses of people into the cities, creating megapolis in the process, and the added transnationalization of the economy, a market economy came into being and, with it, the apparatus to provide the needed financing.^47
(^47 LANDAU, G.O. 1980. El BID y el financiamiento del desarrollo en America Latina. Mexico, Comercio Exterior. p. 331. (N° 40).)
Funding institutions, vital to the establishment of government policies to get the market economy under way, sprung up and multiplied. Almost all the countries relied on the expansion of export agriculture to support this model except Chile, Peru and Venezuela, which relied mainly on their mining sector. In any event, the fact that the imported goods needed for the implementation of this model had to be financed with foreign currency obliged state and commercial banks to concentrate their credit resources on export-oriented agriculture.
Rural economies, unprepared for this model, were virtually excluded, even though several countries had set up networks of state-controlled agricultural funding institutions. Small farmers found themselves having to comply with commercial terms of credit. Priority was given to those able to provide mortgage* security. Small farmers, who were not accepted as creditworthy by the banks, continued to rely on the rural moneylenders, thereby ruling out any possibility they might have had of building up savings.
There are no detailed statistics showing how rural women have obtained credit whether from banks or from rural credit networks run by private moneylenders. The legal and actual obstacles to women's access to land already described may give a rough idea of the difficulties women have in obtaining credit. As already noted here, access to land and credit are closely linked. The rural man's situation with regard to credit may be precarious, but certainly not as precarious as the women's.
Access to credit is made even more difficult for the rural woman by the way credit is related to other areas of law embodying discriminatory rules. In the countries where marital authority is a matter of law, a woman cannot offer her assets as security without her husband's permission. In all other countries, marital authority is traditionally observed in the countryside by couples and by those in charge of lending agencies. It would be difficult to find a rural woman who did not ask her husband's or companion's permission to apply for a loan, and many countries often also require the husbands to be joint debtors with their wives.
Different countries have perceived and tackled this problem of women's access to credit in different ways. In Colombia, for instance, a number of institutions involved in agricultural development have set up special divisions to see that more credit is available for rural women. The Colombian Agrarian Reform Institute (Instituto Colombiano de Reforma Agraria - INCORA) deals with credit for women through its Agricultural Fund (rondo Financiero Agrario - FINAGRO). The Integrated Rural Development Fund (rondo de Desarrollo Rural Integrado - DRI) and the Corporation for the Promotion of Support for Associated Enterprises (CORFAS) also provide credit to women. Another specially created institution here is the Rural Credit Fund (Crédito Rural Financiero). Unfortunately, despite calls for the establishment of a system of collateral in these institutions, credit continues to be granted to those able to provide a real-estate guarantee. Nevertheless, Colombia's willingness to
effectively incorporate women into production has found expression in a number of regulations and measures which, despite the obstacles, are bearing fruit.
The National Bank of Cuba runs a credit programme for rural women, but statistics on the number of women beneficiaries and the amount loaned are unavailable. Mexico accepts the possibility of collateral security but authorizes the credit institutions to ask for additional guarantees. Members of Women's Agricultural and Industrial Units are given priority for credit. In practice, however, rural women in Mexico have been unable to obtain credit due to a shortage of funds, the fact that women are poorly-organized, and the lack of credit lines for women anyway. Also, the UAIMs have no legal status - a real impediment. It would appear that Mexican legislation is a greater barrier to women's access to credit than custom.
Ecuador, El Salvador, Honduras, Nicaragua, Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Uruguay and Venezuela do not explicitly single out rural woman for special attention where credit is concerned. The legal situation of these women must vary widely in the countries just mentioned, but the only figures available are for Ecuador, where no more than two percent of National Development Bank loan recipients are women. In Brazil loans go mainly to the large landowners. In Bolivia, women have to show that they are either single or widowed and that they own their land in order to obtain credit. Honduras is the only country where there has been an experiment offering special credit to women, and it was not successful.
Colombia is thus the only one of the countries mentioned to have shown any real concern for the rural woman's credit problem and to have established, as noted earlier, special lines of credit for women in the credit institutions.
This rapid account of the problem of credit illustrates how:
(a) Latin-American rural women do not enjoy the same advantages with regard to credit as rural men, whose situation is also very precarious under the general terms of free market financial policies;
(b) most countries do not have special lines of credit for women. The fact of applying the same conditions to both men and women excludes women, with their special and precarious status, from the credit market. This shows that economic and legal policies cannot be neutral for, even though they may not be intended to discriminate, the mere fact that they fail to take special problems into account is in itself discriminatory;
(c) the lack of statistical data on credit allocations by sex and activity in some countries precludes any accurate diagnosis and the rectification of credit policies there;
(d) the lending institutions' preference for mortgage security continues to be a serious obstacle to rural women's access to credit; and
(e) the unequal legal treatment of women under the various branches of law gives rise to conflicts in interpretation and in the way the law is applied - a situation that operates always to the detriment of women.
4.5 Rural women's access to technical training
Few countries offer technical training programmes geared specifically to rural women, though in Cuba growing numbers of them are participating in technical courses, cooperative members making the most progress here. The female members of isolated rural families, where it has been the custom for training to focus on traditional types of work, are not so lucky. Women's participation in technical training related to productive activities has been good in Nicaragua and Colombia, where a number of rural technical training institutions expressly target women.
In the other countries large numbers of women attend training courses geared to improving their traditional homemaking and handicraft skills, but women are almost totally absent from technical training which would help them to contribute effectively to production and development.
In countries where women do have access to technical training, they nevertheless cannot find jobs. Because of the widely-held prejudice of male technical superiority, women have not often managed to get jobs involving the use of technology in agriculture.
The problem of technical training for rural women is directly related to the commonly conceived scope of such training, and to the resulting course orientation. It is A. García's view (1982) that the aim of rural training should be to place the rural people - individually or collectively squarely within the specific context of their society; to transmit certain theoretical and practical ideas on the nature and operation of production cooperatives; to teach farmers the rational management and use of the natural resources and institutions of their rural environment; and to encourage them to understand and participate in economic, cultural and technical activities designed to transform society.
Forward planning for the benefit of rural women implies an educational process involving both men and women, and geared, first and foremost, to developing a new awareness of women's role in the production and development process. It should also aim at developing women's awareness of the importance of organization, initiative and participation, and include courses in resource management and technology to enable them to catch up with men, with due regard to the special components and characteristics of women's work.
This is all-important, but women's reproductive responsibilities should not be ignored either, for to do so would in itself be discriminatory. If women are to participate effectively in development their workload must be lightened. Men and women must be made aware of the need to share domestic tasks and of how technology can simplify these.
Agrarian law should take these factors into account and confront the problem globally and in a coordinated manner. Legislation establishing strategies and tools to achieve these objectives would gradually improve the rural woman's presently unfavoured status in the area of technical training.
4.6 The rural woman and technical assintance
One of the most important aspects of technical assistance is its role in training. There is a strong link between technical assistance and supervised credit - one of the points of the Alliance for Progress which inspired most Latin-American agrarian reforms.
Technical assistance was to have been provided by extension agents through organizations such as cooperatives and credit unions. In practice, however, it was usually provided by bureaucrats who had a top-down conception of their functions, whereas rural extension should be a highly effective and invaluable form of peasant training. Training was to cover crop and livestock management as well as the organization and planning of farming activities generally. Technology transfer and that of other farmer training techniques are brought into operation through demonstrations which must, of course, be geared in with everyday farming practices. While the service itself and the conditions under which it is offered leave much to be desired, male rural credit recipients have usually been able to benefit. Rural women have not been so lucky. They have been excluded from technical assistance by tradition and because they cannot meet the eligibility requirements. As technical assistance is
closely connected with credit, the fact that women are denied access to land and membership in farmer-type associations means that they are unable to have a share in this production resource on the same terms as men. The only programmes in which Latin-American rural women have usually been able to participate are those designed for homemakers, which do not take account of their productive role.
Even so, women's access to technical assistance is not the same throughout the region. Because their membership in production organizations is high in Cuba and Nicaragua, many women there have benefited from technical assistance. In Colombia, with the special credit lines provided by many credit and development institutions, more women are receiving credit, and this has improved their chances of obtaining technical assistance. Nevertheless, the fact that experts have become increasingly bureaucratized, and that there is a tendency to orient it to activities associated with women's reproductive role, has limited the impact of technical assistance.
4.7 Rural women's membership in organizations
Farmer participation in development through organization is one of the most effective ways of bringing about change in the rural sector. Indeed, almost all countries whose rural development policies include access to credit, training and technical assistance give high priority to farmers' organizations in consideration of their role in production.
Of course, the State is largely influential in deciding how important a role the indigenous organizations, borrower federations, peasant beneficiary associations, cooperatives, etc., are to play in the agricultural sector and how cultural ideology will affect the running of the productive organizations. Nor are all these organizations of equal weight.
The State's views are paramount here, not only as to how it ranks the organizations, but also as to how it conceives the mechanisms to allow them to accomplish their role. The historical, political and socio-economic contexts must be taken into account if these organizations are to become true protagonists in their countries' development. The same holds for women but, given their exclusion from the producers, associations, the appropriate thing would be to address this problem specifically in the law and the way it is enforced via an institutional approach as well.
Colombia's National Association of Peasant and Indigenous Women (ANMUCIC) illustrates what has just been said. Although fairly new (1986) and with a rather small membership so far (30 000), it has succeeded in making its voice heard: it is represented on the board of management of the Agrarian Reform Institute (INCORA), the National Rehabilitation Programme (PNR), the Integrated Rural Development Fund (DRI) and the National Trainee Service (SENA). This would not have been possible without the political will of the Colombian Government.
The State's conception of these organizations and of the importance of women's participation in them is influenced by cultural ideology. For instance, the philosophy underlying the gender-based division of labour acts in most cases as a tacit barrier to women's membership in producers' organizations. Women naturally participate actively in organizations directly linked with "social reproduction". Religious or civic organizations involved in education, health or home economics have a high proportion of women members, but they support the men in production or political organizations only in times of crisis.
There are no laws or regulations that explicitly exclude women from producers' organizations, any exclusion being related rather to the consequences in law of their situation with regard to other productive resources and to tradition. The major obstacle facing women's productive organizations and each of their members may thus be said to be the cultural prejudices surrounding their role in the family and society.
In countries such as Costa Rica, Panama and Uruguay female education indicators are much higher than male^48, but the rate of women's participation and the number of management posts held by women in production organizations fail to reflect this. This raises questions about the assumption made in the case studies and in the 1990 Regional Round Table's discussion paper. Literacy would not appear to modify the parameters defining women's field of activities. If these are to change, education will have to transmit, within the framework of the society in which women live, a number of theoretical concepts about the nature and form of their participation to enable them to have rights on a par with men and to become agents of development and to be seen as such.
(^48 Data submitted at the Regional Round Table, mentioned earlier.)
This is a point to remember in any analysis of the 1990 FAO case studies on women's organizations in five Andean countries.^49 While these studies pointed to significant differences between the countries, stemming from the specific features of their governments' policies with regard to women's production organizations and to cultural and ethnic problems (especially in Peru and Bolivia), there are also similarities concerning constraints and achievements.
(^49 These studies were coordinated by consultant Ofelia Gómez. The following is the list of the consultants and the organizations in which they conducted their studies: Carmen Llanos Vargas and Maria Elena Angeleri: Confederación Nacional de Clubes de Madres de Bolivia (National Confederation of Bolivian Mothers' Clubs); Cecilia Restrepo G.: Asociación Nacional de Mujeres Campesinas Indígenas de Colombia (Colombian National Association of Peasant and Indigenous Women); Rocío Rosero G. and Amparo Armas: Organización de la Union Popular de Mujeres de Loja, Ecuador (Loja Women's Popular Union); Blanca Fernández and Cony Alagón: Federación Departamental de Campesinos del Cusco, Peru (Cusco Peasants' Departmental Federation); and Ana Cecilia Valdez and Jorge A. Márquez: Círculo Femenino Popular de Puesto de Nutrias de Barinas, Venezuela (Puesto de Nutrias de Barinas Women's Club, Venezuela).)
Many of the women's productive organizations in the Andean countries were promoted in response to the governments' agrarian policies. All the case studies showed how difficult it was for women to breach the barrier of the traditional beliefs held by the government officials and the society in which they had to go about their task. For the rural women's organizations this has meant the persistence of the "aid" model: little technical training in production matters, insufficient access to funding institutions and little regard for the organizations' role.
For the members of the women's organization, the problems caused by these rigid traditional beliefs have added to their workload due to their domestic responsibilities. Their lack of schooling and their difficulty in asserting their role was also noted. One major obstacle confronting indigenous women in Bolivia and Peru, especially in the Aymará areas, is that the traditional organizations or farmers' associations do not admit women members.
As for achievements, it was noted that women's organizations were active in their communities and that there was now greater appreciation of for their activities. Women's experience in organizations had helped them to increase their self-esteem, overcome their shyness, develop gender awareness, and improve family relations. There has been a change in their husbands' attitude, and that of the other family members, males included, who now help in the home, making it easier for the women to participate actively in their organizations.
Despite this, most women continue to play a secondary role in production organizations. Although the proportion of women members is higher in Cuba and Nicaragua than in the other countries of the region, not even there do women account for as much as half of the membership or represent the majority on the management boards of these organizations.
As regards exclusively female organizations, only in the above two countries and Colombia and Venezuela have these been successful economically. There have been a few exceptions in Mexico and Uruguay, but in all the other countries women reportedly continue to organize themselves in activities that are largely an extension of their domestic duties - the result of training that takes no account of market requirements or the need for women to play a leading role in development.
<section>4</section>
III. The subordination of women in law: remarks, proposals and strategies for change
1. Recommended changes in the law^50
1.1 Constitutional law
1.2 Civil law
1.3 The family estate
1.4 Labour law
1.5 Agrarian law
2. Recommended strategies to achieve the proposed changes
III. The subordination of women in law: remarks, proposals and strategies for change
The following remarks, and proposals and strategies for amending the laws stem from the foregoing review of rural women's subordination in Latin America and the Caribbean. Some were put forward in the case studies, at the Regional Round Table and in these pages, and may be summed up as follows:
1. The existence of discriminatory laws, the fact that the laws fail to take account of rural women's special situation, and the adherence to paternalistic and male-oriented customs which hinder the implementation of, or fill the gaps in, non-discriminatory legislation, have helped to keep rural women in a subordinate position.
2. In the previous chapter were outlined legal solutions to situations where rural women are subordinate. However, it should be remembered that, as was seen there, the laws in all the countries except Cuba are inconsistent in their treatment of women. This is because there is no reference framework covering all legislative areas with which a gender-based division of labour and its impact on rural women's personal relationships and her relationship to property and, again, on her workload, on how her work is viewed by others and on how she is constrained in her access to productive resources.
3. Any attempt to improve rural women's subordinate status and her poverty - must be backed up with an analysis of the underlying juridical problem if it is the intention to formulate strategies to bring about change and to do so in a comprehensive manner.
4. If the purpose is to improve rural woman's situation in law, then this implies providing not only for her activities as a producer but also for her reproductive role. Achieving balance, in both law and practice, as regards these two roles or spheres of activity entails repealing laws that militate against this purpose. It also entails enacting other rules and enforcement regulations that will ultimately bring about parity between rural men and women. The repealing, amending and enacting will have to take in constitutional, civic, labour and agrarian law. A woman's hours of work will have to be brought into line with those worked by a man; and due allowance must be made for the social function of motherhood; there must be equality in civil rights between the sexes and equality of opportunity of access to production resources.
5. In the attempt to achieve equality for the rural woman before the law the question needs considering as to how effective an unbiased enactment is likely to be, when biased custom and rural people's lack of confidence in the judicial system now militate against such an enactment.
1. Recommended changes in the law^50
(^50 This part of the recommendations is based mainly on those contained in the Regional Round Table's discussion paper and final report and does not necessarily represent FAO's position on the subject.)
1.1 Constitutional law
- It is essential to recommend that governments treat the question of equality between the sexes at Constitutional level. Constitutions should include an express declaration of equal civil, labour and agrarian rights; all secondary rules to the contrary should be repealed and mechanisms facilitating equal access to productive resources for rural men and women should be established.
1.2 Civil law
- De facto unions, with full legal and economic benefits for men and women living together in a stable relationship for a specified time, and the same rights for children born of such unions as for those born of marriage, should be recognized. Also, the absence of any prior marital commitment should no longer be a pre-condition for the recognition of de facto unions in Mexico and Venezuela.
- Marital authority (both explicit and implicit) still prevailing in several Latin-American countries should be abolished. The laws of Bolivia, the Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Guatemala, Nicaragua, Paraguay, and several Mexican states infringing a woman's personal rights and obliging her to obey her husband, to live where he wishes her to live or to give up her job where he considers it necessary, should be repealed, as should the rules in Chile, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, El Salvador, Guatemala and several Mexican states granting the husband the sole or preferential right to administer the conjugal property. Legislation should be introduced to enable husband and wife to hold joint rights and responsibilities. This will be achieved through the establishment, in all the countries, of a jointly administered family estate regime, under which the spouses have equal rights to use, administer and dispose of their joint property.
- The privileges of patria potestas, usually held by the father in the countries where this institution obtains, should be abolished.
- The repeal or amendment of this legislation represents a shift away from the concept of a single head of family to one of joint heads of family.
- The elimination of these rules from positive law* should be accompanied by a review of each country's customary laws, which are often more discriminatory than the written law.
- A serious study on reproductive work should be conducted with a view to drafting new legislation under which women would receive remuneration in the form of an allowance or be incorporated into the social security system in their own right.
- Consideration should be given to enacting Family Codes and special family courts in countries where these do not exist, with a view to simplifying legal procedure in matters concerning women, minors and the family.
- As regards succession, all the countries should include the spouse or companion among the forced heirs. With respect to succession to land allocated under agrarian laws, a provision should be introduced whereby upon the death of the allottee, the land passes to the spouse or companion, whether man or woman.
1.3 The family estate
- It would be useful if the countries having such legislation were to conduct a study to determine the type and number of family estates established and publicize the advantages of this regime. It would be interesting to know how the provisions of the agrarian reform laws concerning succession to estates are applied in practice.
- This institution should be open to the partners of consensual unions as well as to legally constituted families.
- Colombia should take the necessary steps without delay to allow land allottees to adopt the family estate regime. Under current legislation they may either opt for this system or request an individual allocation. It is suggested that incentives be introduced to encourage allottees to opt for the family estate.
- The family estate regime should be introduced in countries where no legislation to this effect exists, as a means of protecting the family's home or source of income.
1.4 Labour law
- All the clauses discriminating explicitly or implicitly against women (even where ostensibly intended to protect them), as well as the rules barring women, especially rural women, from this or that activity, should be repealed.
- A special chapter covering the situation of rural men and women should be introduced into the countries' labour laws. Special rules governing women's reproductive work and aimed, in any event, at achieving equal working conditions for rural men and women should also be established.
- In the "reproductive" area, legislation should be introduced providing for remuneration for domestic work, together with social security benefits for the women.
- Legislation to ensure that all social benefits are accessible to men and women temporary workers should be enacted.
- Legislation should be passed entitling domestic workers to a minimum wage, social security and social services.
- Although the law rules out wage discrimination on the grounds of sex, the practice continues in all the countries reviewed. To ensure that the principle of non-discrimination is observed, express provision should be made for fines as a penalty for contravention of the rules, and monitoring and inspection bodies should be established to ensure compliance.
- One recommendation for all countries concerns the need to facilitate women's membership in trade unions. This is essential if the problems standing in their way here are to be tackled.
- A serious interdisciplinary study should be launched to determine whether the different age requirement for men and women with respect to old-age pensions should be maintained.
- Rules should be drawn up to deal with the sexual abuse and blackmail of women in general, and rural women in particular.
- Legislation should be introduced whereby maternity is considered to be a social function and, thus, the responsibility of society as a whole. Rules should be made to ensure that:
(i) Mothers' or pregnant women's incomes and jobs are guaranteed;
(ii) fathers have the option to take paid leave to look after sick children up to one year old;
(iii) kindergartens or substitute homes are established for children in rural areas;
(iv) special programmes for breast feeding are created for the benefit of rural workers when nursing mothers; and
(v) the benefits provided under the rules protecting maternity are extended to adoptive mothers, rural women workers among them.
- The spouse's right to receive half the working partner's social benefits and, in justifiable circumstances, half the working partner's salary, directly from the employer, should be recognized.
- Parents should be free to decide which of them will care for their child at any time after the birth.
- Given the rise in the number of women heads of household, it would seem appropriate to adopt measures to make it easier for these women to obtain enough income to be able to meet their responsibilities.
- To safeguard the family, it would be appropriate to legislate to enable spouses or regular companions to take their holidays together, even though they may work for different employers. It is also very important to provide for part-time work (and introduce the relevant regulations) - a feasible arrangement in many fields of activity.
- Again with the protection of the family in mind, maternity should be considered a social function, it being in the interest of all to protect the human race. In this connection, it is suggested that laws be enacted to ensure mass-media campaigns aimed at replacing the traditional sexual stereotypes by a more egalitarian concept.
- A serious obstacle to women's incorporation into the workforce is their role as mothers and homemakers and the general belief that the children will be neglected if the mothers work. In order to overcome a widely-felt concern, legislative measures should be taken along the following lines:
(i) Establish and regulate part-time work, particularly in the trade sector where, in some cases, three daily shifts are feasible;
(ii) develop, promote and introduce legislation providing social services so that women can work: for example, schools with all-day supervision, youth centres and other facilities;
(iii) organize inexpensive home help, under contract to the authorities, to lighten the working woman's domestic tasks, particularly those of the women who are heads of household;
(iv) promote community groups where the members would look after the children in turn while the mothers were at work; and
(v) introduce arrangements to enable people to acquire domestic appliances to lighten household tasks.
- Systems should be set up in each country to monitor the implementation of the labour laws, with heavy penalties in the event of non-compliance.
- All the countries, except Cuba and Mexico, should repeal the laws still prevailing in their Labour Codes that consider women weak and therefore incapable of doing certain jobs.
- Women should be free to decide whether or not to undertake night work.
- Women should also be free to decide if a particular type of work is too strenuous for them, rather than be barred a priori from certain activities.
- As regards health-threatening work, it would seem much more appropriate to compel employers to comply with rules guaranteeing men and women healthy working conditions.
1.5 Agrarian law
- Agrarian Law should be included in the curricula of the Faculties of Law and Agriculture so as to encourage research on the subject and thus raise lawyers' and agriculturalists' awareness of the legal problems confronting the rural sector.
- The concept of head of household as a priority requirement for the allocation of land under agrarian reform legislation should be eliminated.
- The spouse or regular companion should be included among the forced heirs for the reallocation of land under agrarian reform laws.
- The rules explicitly or implicitly discriminating against a woman's membership in organizations should be repealed. The only requirement for her to participate should be her direct involvement in work, irrespective of whether she is a landowner or wife of an organization member.
- Legislation expressly stipulating that rural women be included in organizations and provided technical assistance and training should be introduced.
- Environmental legislation should be introduced to ensure, inter alia, adequate control of insecticides and pesticides.
- Agrarian reform laws should be amended to ensure that married women may acquire land independently of their husbands.
- An assessment of the woman's situation with regard to succession to land upon the death of the husband or companion should be made through the compilation of a gender-disaggregated land register which would then be used to justify any necessary legislative amendments.
- The establishment of Agricultural Development Banks granting timely credit at low rates of interest and requiring security other than mortgages should be promoted. Special lines of credit should be set up for women as individuals or as members of production organizations.
- Appropriate teaching manuals should be prepared to help rural women understand current credit rules.
- On the subject of credit laws, it is essential to know how these are being implemented and to pinpoint the obstacles encountered so that any restrictive legislation may be repealed or amended.
- The banking rules of every country, especially those with agricultural banks, should be reviewed and simplified and guides then prepared for rural women and the peasantry in general to facilitate their access to these credit institutions. These guides should be published and accompanied by explanatory courses and translated into local languages when necessary.
2. Recommended strategies to achieve the proposed changes
- An on-going review and assessment of existing legislation and of the real-life situation should be operated in order to determine how the new rules are being applied.
- A casuistic examination should be made, and a list drawn up, of the rulings of the various courts to discern the judicial interpretation being given to the new legal rules.
- A study should be conducted to determine the rural woman's economic and social situation and the impact on her of the agrarian reform process and of labour and social security legislation. In this connection, it would also be necessary to determine the rural woman's awareness of her rights and the gaps in the legislation.
- Surveys should be carried out among rural women to determine their understanding of, and any gaps in, the provisions of the law that apply to them and to identify the specific problems requiring appropriate legislation. This would ensure that any legal reforms or new rules effectively respond to the real situation of the direct beneficiaries.
- A meeting should be held with the women's organizations, coinciding with the sort of survey suggested in the above paragraph, to determine their opinions and actual requirements in all areas, including education, law, technology and health.
- Governments should be urged to establish statistical records to be used for monitoring the social indicators relating to rural women, and to include the gender variable in all studies, projects, programmes and research.
- The State should guarantee rural women's access to formal and informal education, technical training and new technologies.
- The State should support the establishment of, and rural women's membership in, labour or trade unions, cooperatives and other forms of association, and women's integration in their respective countries' political, economic and cultural life, as well as their participation in decision-making at community, municipal, regional, federal state and national levels.
- Agricultural training programmes should be more specifically geared to rural women to bring them more effectively into the development process, since agricultural technical assistance programmes have traditionally been directed to men.
- The countries that have ratified all the international conventions on women's rights and the treaties and agreements stemming from them should see that the contents of these instruments of international law are widely known.
- In addition, efficient monitoring mechanisms and incentives should also be established to ensure that the rules are effectively complied with.
- In order to facilitate women's emancipation, measures to enhance their awareness of, and ability to publicize, their rights should be promoted, as also should projects for training women as instructors within their own local communities. The instruction materials used should include factual information on women's rights, with explanations as to how to exercise them. The training programme should also include topics such as the use of credit and how to obtain the documents needed to secure it, bookkeeping, formalities, and project administration.
- Governments and government agencies should provide legal services for rural women so as to facilitate their access to the courts.
- Institutional arrangements should be established to deal with matters of concern to women in general, and to rural women in particular. In this way the demands, stemming from women's activities and experience within their organizations, from the local level at which the relevant activities take place could be dealt with at central level.
- A change of emphasis in rural education programmes is essential: these must help promote a new attitude toward work associated with women's reproductive role, the need for the sharing of domestic tasks and for both partners' participation in productive work.
<section>5</section>
Annex I - Case studies on Colombia, Cuba, El Salvador, Mexico and Venezuela: an overview
Annex I - Case studies on Colombia, Cuba, El Salvador, Mexico and Venezuela: an overview
I. RURAL WOMEN AND LEGISLATION IN COLOMBIA^51
(^51 Based on the study by ALVEAR VALENZUELA, S. 1990. La Mujer Rural y la legislación en Colombia. Santiago de Chile, FAO. 189 p. Summaries on Chile, Guatemala, Peru and the Dominican Republic, similar to those presented here, appear in FAO, 1987, Mujeres campesinas en America Latina. Desarrollo rural, acceso a la tierra, migraciones, legislación. Santiago de Chile, FAO/RLAC. 266 p.)
The legal situation of the rural woman in this country has improved considerably in recent years. After Cuba and Nicaragua, Colombia is the country with the most legislation on the rural woman and with strategies for incorporating her into development.
However, perhaps because of the lack of a reference framework covering the entire range of problems affecting rural woman, progress has not been equal in all legislative fields. Inconsistencies and gaps in the legislation place women in general, and rural women in particular, in a subordinate position. Also, many laws lack enforcement regulations: by themselves they are a dead letter. Here, as in all the countries of the region, custom is the greatest obstacle to the law having its desired effect.
1. Constitutional Law
No distinction on the grounds of sex is made in any of the provisions of the Constitution.
Citizenship was conferred on women in 1945, but not before 1957, following electoral reform, did they obtain the right to vote and be voted for. Since then, men and women have equal opportunities to exercise three major rights: to vote, to be elected and to assume public office and functions. Article 43 of the revised Political Constitution, approved in July 1991, establishes equal rights and opportunities for men and women and prohibits discrimination against women.
2. Civil Law
None of the rules of the Colombian Civil Code discriminate on the basis of sex, but discrimination most frequently operates because the law is not put into effect. This is often due to people's ignorance of, or failure to exercise, their rights, but sometimes, to the wrongful application of the laws by the authorities, or simply from prejudice, based on customs which impede their implementation.
Marriage Regimes
Marriages may be civil or religious, and both produce civil effects. Act 20 of 1974 approved the reform of the Concordat then in force, replacing Catholic marriage, until then the sole option available, by a choice of religious or civil marriage.^52
(^52 Chapter 2 of the new Constitution (Socio-economic and cultural rights) provides that marriage and all its consequences (age, capacity, responsibilities, rights, separation, dissolution) would henceforth be governed by civil law alone.)
The annulment or dissolution of Catholic marriages falls under the jurisdiction of the ecclesiastical courts and their rulings have civil effects. Civil marriage before a judge is reserved for those who do not wish to enter into a Catholic marriage.^53.
(^53 Under the new Constitution, the civil marriage is in any case compulsory.)
The spouses' property within the marriage is regulated in two ways: one, through the property of conjugal partnership (the most common); and two, through articles of marriage (capitulaciones matrimoniales), which are agreed upon before or after the marriage if the spouses decide to keep their property separate.
Under the property of conjugal partnership regime each spouse is free to administer and dispose of the assets held before and acquired after the marriage. In the event of dissolution of the marriage, a community of jointly held estate is formed for the purpose of liquidation.
The separate property regime also exists. For this to be legally valid, the spouses must enter into the marriage settlements - capitulaciones - mentioned here.
Divorce is possible only for civil marriages, but a civil court judge may grant a legal separation in cases where spouses have been separated for more than two years.^54
(^54 Colombia's revised Constitution provides that the civil effects of all forms of marriage cease with divorce. v future of the children and to administer any property they may have.)
Marital Authority
There is no express legislation covering the woman's person or property. Nevertheless, it is common practice in the countryside for the husband to be the head of the household, and he will administer his wife's assets and have authority over her person.
Patria Potestas
According to the law, this is held by both parents, but it is common in the rural areas for the father to decide on the-future of children and to administer any property they may have.
Succession
The law of succession provides for both testamentary (by virtue of will) and intestate (where there is no will) succession. It is worth noting that intestate succession is not conditioned by sex or primogeniture. However, the institution of the "spouse's portion" obtains in Colombia for spouses who have drawn up marriage settlements. This share corresponds to one quarter of the decedent's assets if there are no legitimate descendants; if there are the widow, or widower will be treated in the same way as the children and receive the same share as one of them.
Family Estate
Under Colombia's Political Constitution the family estate may not be alienated or seized. The relevant enforcement regulations are provided by secondary legislation (Art.50).
Act No. 70 of 1931 authorizes the holding of assets under a family estate for the benefit of minor children; the estate may not be seized, and it may be formed only if there is a clear title to the property. Unfortunately, data on how this legal institution is implemented in the rural sector were unavailable.
De Facto Unions
The courts have had to rule on these situations because of the lack of express regulations on the subject and the large number of couples involved and, further, because a de facto property regime or a kind of work contract could stem from them. ^55
(^55 Act No. 54 of 1990 legalized the de facto union and its property regime. The new Constitution also legalizes such unions.)
As a de facto union is a kind of joint property partnership, the property is liquidated in the event of the death or at the request of either partner: property purchased during the union is divided equally. Should liquidation not be feasible, action may be brought for compensation for all the improvements made to the former companion's dwelling or commercial premises.
Agrarian law definitely recognizes consensual unions, and provides for the allocation of land to the couple, who have the option of managing it jointly or individually. Consensual unions are also recognized for succession purposes. Should one of the allottees die before paying the full purchase price or within the first fifteen years of the allocation, the judge is required to grant joint control of the land to the heirs, including the companion (Agrarian Reform Act). Under labour law, again, the female companion is entitled to receive a pension and a family allowance.
With respect to cooperative legislation, Decree No. 1481 of 1919 stipulates that social insurance, solidarity and welfare services may be extended to parents, spouses, regular companions, children and other relatives as provided for in the cooperative statutes.
3. Labour Law
Generally speaking, labour legislation does not discriminate against women in the matter of their right to work if they so wish.
The rules obliging the owners of agricultural, livestock and forest enterprises to provide accommodation for their workers, and pay due attention to their health and education are very promising in theory, but unfortunately, rarely respected in practice.
Women are discriminated against for certain types of work. For instance, they are forbidden to work at night or do dangerous, health-threatening or excessively strenuous jobs.
To be noted is that relevant prohibition of the Labour Code considers women in the same light as minors under 18, in that the adult woman is afforded the same special protection as they.
The rules protecting maternity cover rural women provided they have a work contract but in practice they are hardly ever implemented. A major problem for rural women is ensuring that their children are looked after while they work. The Instituto de Bienestar Familiar (Family Welfare Institute) is organizing a system of rural substitute homes in an effort to provide a partial solution to this problem.
Temporary work is another area where rural women lack protection, since they do not usually have contracts and are therefore denied the social security benefits they should receive.
A review of the Colombian situation shows that:
(a) Women receive lower wages due to their lack of qualifications or to the type of work they do. More importance has traditionally been attached to men's work; and even when men and women do the same work, it is felt that men should be paid more;
(b) women are often paid on a piece-work basis - a practice that has increased the number of hours they work per day;
(c) women are preferred for temporary jobs;
(d) in addition to their work outside the home, they also have their domestic tasks, without labour-saving appliances or help from other members of the family;
(e) more and more rural women are becoming heads of household and having to assume sole responsibility for the family under more difficult conditions than those facing men in a similar situation; and, finally,
(f) the rural woman wishing to join the economically active population has serious obstacles to contend with if she is to obtain work.
The Colombian rural woman's situation is thus a rather difficult one. Moreover, her work is not very highly considered by society or even by herself. She often wishes or needs to go into the labour market in search of paid work, and therefore should be given the opportunity to do so.
The Family Welfare System
It seemed appropriate to give a brief description here of Colombia's Family Welfare System, for the innovation that it represents in that family welfare is considered a right - a right that may be claimed through a system of services - legal, nutritional and state welfare. The supplying of these needs is now deemed to be a public service.
Funding for the Colombian Family Welfare Institute (ICBF) is provided by, inter alia, the country's public and private companies, all of which contribute 3% of the monthly payroll. As an incentive, the contributions are deductible for income and other tax purposes. The service is available throughout the country.
Special mention should be made of the nursery facilities and substitute homes service which has helped reduce the mothers' workload and, above all, improved the well-being of children and minors .
The substitute homes are a relatively new kind of child care facility, operated by mothers who are chosen by the local authorities and are given due preparation to look after up to 15 minors in their homes, in exchange for a countervailing help (it is not looked on as a salary) in cash and in kind. These substitute homes are being set up in the rural areas to respond to one of the rural working women's most widely-felt needs.
4. Access to Land
Several studies on rural women's access to land have been carried out in this country. They show that women are much less likely than men to acquire land, and, when access is possible, it is to a dwarf holding or on a precarious tenure basis. The reasons for this are both cultural and legal. The main obstacle is cultural in that male farmers are given priority to land because the public authorities in charge of the allocations land think that men are better able to cultivate it.
Where the legal reasons are concerned, the decision to allocate land to the family stepped up land allocations to men, as they were traditionally considered the head and representative of the family group. Under Act No. 30 of 1988, where the purpose was to change this, it is now possible to allocate land to natural persons over 16 and to heads of household. These persons may hold the land individually or jointly with their spouses or regular companions with whom they shared responsibility for the minor children, or with relatives (up to the second degree of consanguinity) in their care. It is still too early to assess the effects of this law and gender-disaggregated statistics are not available.
5. Access to Credit
Rural women's difficulties in gaining access to credit also have to do with their lack of access to land. Many institutions primarily involved in agricultural development have set up special departments in an attempt to increase the flow of credit to rural women, and special lines of credit have been established in institutions such as FINAGRO - Fondo Financiero Agropecuario (the Agricultural Investment Fund), INCORA - Instituto Colombiano de Reforma Agraria (the Colombian Agrarian Reform Institute), DRI - Fondo de Desarrollo Rural Integrado (the Integrated Rural Development Fund), CORFAS Corporatión de Fomento de Apoyo de Empresas Asociadas (Development Corporation for Support to Associated Companies) and Crédito Rural Financiero (Rural Credit Bank).
Statistics on the number of rural women loan beneficiaries and on the proportion of those not offering a mortgage security were not available. In any event, most of these institutions have suggested that security other than real estate, e.g. harvests, the benefits obtained with the loan, or farm tools, should also be accepted. Despite this, long-term credit is still conditional upon the ability to offer mortgage security, and the husband is often asked to be a joint debtor.
As technical assistance is directly related to credit, women's access to it is in a similar proportion here.
6. Access to Technical Training
Although statistical data on the number of rural women beneficiaries were not available, agricultural development-oriented Colombian institutions do provide programmes especially for women: the Ministry of Agriculture/UNICEF, the Colombian Agrarian Reform Institute (INCORA), the National Apprenticeship Service (SENA), the Integrated Rural Development Fund (DRI) and the Integrated Agricultural Technology Transfer Service (SINTAP).
Although rural women now have many more opportunities for training, two problems have been noted: one, large numbers of women fail to take advantage of these opportunities; and two, those who do have difficulty finding work after training. Both problems here are cultural in origin and have nothing to do with legislation.
7. Participation in Organizations
Rural women's participation in economic and farmer organizations has been growing slowly but steadily. The Government has been eager to encourage this trend, opening up opportunities for them to be members of agricultural and credit institutions. Mention should be made of the Asociación Nacional de Mujeres Campesinas e Indígenas de Colombia - ANMUCIC (the National Association of Peasant and Indigenous Women of Colombia) which is represented on the INCORA committee and in agricultural credit institutions such as FINAGRO. The Colombian Government has also accepted women on the Boards of Management of the National Rehabilitation Programme, SENA and DRI, and their participation in the cooperative movement has also increased.
II. RURAL WOMEN AND LEGISLATION IN CUBA ^56
(^56 Based on the study by COLUMBIE MATOS, I. 1989. Situación de la mujer campesina frente a la legislación. El cave de Cuba. La Habana, FAO Consultant's paper. p.115.)
The laws passed since the major political, economic and social changes that have taken place since 1959 have reflected Cuba's new social concerns, among which is equality between the sexes occupies an important place.
The early 'sixties saw the establishment of the Federación de Mujeres Cubanas (the Cuban Women's Federation), a body that was to play a major role in the Cuban women's rights movement.
Through legislation and ways and means of making it effective, the Cuban Government has sought to bring about an integrated approach with a view to achieving equality between men and women, emphasizing the role of women, the family and society. The strategies adopted aim at strengthening the role of the family and stress the need for family members to share domestic duties. To make this possible, the Family Code seeks to harmonize the activities of the family group members so that the domestic workload does not fall on the woman's shoulders alone, at the same time trying to raise fathers' awareness of their responsibility.
1. Constitutional Law
The Cuban Constitution (Article 40) states that all citizens have equal rights and responsibilities. It establishes universal suffrage and grants all citizens, in accordance with their merits and capabilities, the right to hold posts and responsibilities in Government and the Public Administration, and, also, to be eligible for appointment to all ranks of the Revolutionary Armed Forces and Security and Police Forces.
2. Civil Law
Most of the rules pertaining to the family are contained in the Family Code.
Restrictions on legal capacity are found only in positive legislation. They refer to age and physical or mental incapacity, but never to a person's sex or the consequences thereof.
Marriage Regimes
The norm is the property of conjugal partnership, which applies to all legally constituted marriages and to consensual unions, the latter being recognized by the law when they meet the requirements of exclusivity and stability. Divorce is by mutual consent, and the notion of blame has been removed so as not to affect the spouses' attitude to each other after the separation.
Marital Authority
This is nowhere contemplated in the legislation; husband and wife enjoy full equality. However, egalitarian ideas have been slow to spread to the wives of workers in isolated areas, who maintain the traditional view of the woman's role in society. These women are more dependent on their husbands, and sometimes even accept the authority of one of their sons in the absence of their husbands.
Patria Potestas
This is held by the fathers, but the law states that the district attorney's approval is required in order for them to dispose of a minor's property for benefit or out of necessity.
Succession
The surviving spouse has a right to inherit on a par with the other heirs in intestate succession. The notion of "specially protected" heirs exists in testamentary succession: the testator is free to dispose of only half the estate and may not encumber the portion due to the heirs.
Unless the legislation prescribes otherwise, land belonging to small farmers may be inherited only by those who work it personally, i.e. the widow or widower who has lived with the deceased until his or her death, heirs who have no income of their own or are pursuing their studies. In other words, the woman will be entitled to the land because she has worked it personally, in her capacity as widow, or when she has no income or is a student.
De Facto Onions
The de facto union is legally accepted upon judicial decision provided the requirements of exclusivity and stability are met. It then has the same effects as a legally constituted marriage.
The Family Estate
The jointly owned property is protected by law. It may not be alienated, seized or encumbered, but may be transferred where the law so provides. The family dwelling is protected by special legislation governing the right of enjoyment, and under no circumstances may those living in it (the members of a family) be stripped of that right.
3. Labour Law
In a socialist economy work is a right, a duty and an honour. Women have the same labour rights as men. Any differentiation is intended to give them greater protection because of their role in procreation. No jobs are ruled out for women, but some are not recommended.
The woman temporary or seasonal worker in possession of a worker's card is also entitled to paid maternity leave, even when the start of this leave does not coincide with her work cycle. There is also a Working Woman's Maternity Act and a Work Protection and Hygiene Act.
Education for the rural woman was given such priority that by 1961 illiteracy had been eradicated. The National Education System runs primary, secondary and pre-university schools in the rural areas, and schooling is compulsory up to the ninth grade.
In addition to the country's employment policy and the authorities' efforts to ensure women's participation in the labour market, a system of child care institutions has been set up to provide day care for the children of working mothers. Also, women with elderly or infirm parents or retarded children need not stay at home to look after them, as special homes have been created for this purpose.
There are no other regulations covering working women except those mentioned. The reason why there are so few is that women have equal rights.
It is safe to say that the only constraints in present-day Cuban society are erroneous beliefs, vestiges of the past. For instance, women are discouraged from taking up novel technical careers, and their access to management or other posts traditionally considered as being reserved for males is restricted.
4. Access to Land
The Constitution of the Republic proclaims that the State recognizes small farmers' ownership of their land and other production facilities. Small farmers are also entitled to form associations, in the manner prescribed in the legislation, in order to improve agricultural production or obtain credit and State services.
The small farmers' property includes the assets that are part and parcel of agricultural production: land, buildings, installations, facilities and tools, animals, plantations, fruit and other agricultural and forest products.
There has been a shift away from private rural property toward a cooperative system, where farmers form voluntary groups to work the land. The system favours the application of modern technology and a more efficient use of equipment and human resources. According to data provided by the National Small Farmers' Association (ANAP), more than 60% of the land belonging to the peasant sector has been brought under the cooperative system.
5. Access to Credit
The National Bank of Cuba is the institution in charge of granting loans to the cooperatives and small farmers.
The law provides that credit shall be granted to farmers producing a certificate issued by the Ministry of Agriculture showing that they have permanent or temporary possession of the land they habitually work. In other words, credit is granted to the persons in possession of the farm, be they men or women.
The loan security is neither the land nor the production resources (the Agrarian Reform Act stipulates that neither may be seized), but the marketable output, which is in turn guaranteed by the Government as it forms part of the national economic plans.
Private farmers pay a basic interest rate of 6%, and, as an incentive in their case, cooperatives 4%.
6. Access to Technical Assistance and Training
Technical assistance is available to all; and there is no discrimination against women. Rural women's attendance at intermediate and higher level technical courses has increased; and women are said to fill one third of the agricultural technicians' posts. However, lack of understanding and support, or of confidence in their skills, stemming from persisting cultural prejudices, particularly in the countryside, make their integration in these jobs rather difficult.
7. Membership in Organizations
The opportunities open to Cuban rural women include ANAP, a peasant organization, whose members hold 25% and 24% of the posts on the Provincial and Municipal Committees, respectively, as well as the cooperative system (although their membership here has declined as more and more women are opting to further their education). They also participate actively in the Cuban Women's Federation, which has a membership of three million.
III. RURAL WOMEN AND LEGISLATION IN EL SALVADOR^57
(^57 Based on the study by CASTRO DE PINZON, E. 1990. Informe final sobre la situación de la mujer campesina frente a la legislación en El Salvador. San Salvador, an FAO Consultant's Paper. p.130.)
The legal situation of rural women in El Salvador has suffered, among other reasons, because of the long civil war which drove rural men to leave their homes, and led to the development of temporary relationships. The gradual deterioration of the peasant economies and the lack of progress with egalitarian legislation to benefit women have resulted in a situation of de lure and de facto inequality, leaving the Salvadoran rural woman in a legally ill-defined position, which makes it very difficult for her to claim equal civil and labour rights and access to productive resources.
1. Constitutional Law
Article 3 of the Constitution states that all persons are equal before the law. There can be no restrictions on civil rights based on nationality, race, sex or religion. Hereditary jobs and privileges are not recognized. The Constitution grants individual, social and political rights to all Salvadorans without distinction.
2. Civil Law
Some rules discriminate against women. Article 132 of the Civil Code lays down that: spouses shall owe each other fidelity and assistance in all circumstances. The husband shall protect the wife and the wife shall obey the husband. Article 183 provides that the husband may oblige the woman to live with him and follow him wherever he chooses to establish residence. Under this rule, the husband may withhold support and maintenance if the wife refuses to follow him.
Marriage Regimes
The norm is the separate property regime. Provision is made for marriage settlements, but these are not met with in practice. Each spouse therefore retains and administers his or her own property.
Household expenses fall under the conjugal property regime and, in the case of separate administration, responsibility lies first and foremost with the husband.
Marital Authority
The husband has authority over the wife's person. The legislation expressly provides that the woman shall obey her husband and that the husband may oblige the wife to live with and follow him wherever he sets up residence.
Patria Potestas
Parents are equal before the law with respect to family rights and duties.
Succession
There are no restrictions on freedom of disposal of property by will in El Salvador: the spouse or companion may inherit under testamentary succession, but may also remain totally unprovided for, should the testator, using the freedom of disposal provision, decide to exclude him or her. In the case of intestate succession the wife is one of the heirs, but not the companion or the illegitimate children. This has dramatic consequences in a country where most unions are of the consensual kind.
De Facto Unions
This type of union is extremely common in the countryside (where it accounts for 61.7% of all unions), with the result that 70% of rural children are illegitimate. This points up how few women enter into a marriage contract in a country where consensual unions are not recognized by the law. Thus, the poor rural woman finds herself totally unprotected when the union breaks down or in the case of intestate succession and succession to land allocated under agrarian legislation.
Family Estate
Although recognized by the law, there is a general lack of concrete provisions on the family estate and the corresponding rights of succession. The law also fails to stipulate clearly which courts and authorities are to deal with family estate matters, with the result that the law itself is inoperative.
3. Labour Law
Although a number of rights have been won in this field, discrimination against women in general, and rural women in particular, persists both in statute and customary law.
The Labour Code bars young people under 18 and women of any age from unhealthy and dangerous work, but does not consider dangerous agricultural work under the same heading.
Maternity benefits do not extend to women farm workers. Maternal privileges do exist for women working with contracts, but employers disregard the obligation to keep their jobs open for them, and, on returning to work after maternity leave, women often find they have been downgraded. The legislation stipulates that employers shall provide nursery facilities, but makes no provision for the mother's right to breastfeed her child during working hours.
The law states that both men and women may enter into crop and livestock farming and commercial contracts. Most contracts are verbal and there is no discriminatory legislation in any productive sector. However, because legislation and monitoring by the Ministry of Labour are lacking where certain "minor" activities, such as the milking of cows, the threshing of maize, or the feeding of poultry are concerned, women are sometimes prey to injustices, such as being denied the minimum wage and the right to social benefits.
Men and women have equal rights to social security; the insured person's spouse or regular companion is entitled to the same medical services as the insured person.
Although the written labour provisions treat men and women workers equally, there are, in practice, blatant cases of noncompliance and unfair treatment.
4. Access to Land
There are no special rules preventing the rural woman from acquiring land or inputs but, in practice, priority is always given to the husband. Also, as the woman has difficulty in getting work, she cannot rely on her own income to purchase property.
As regards the rural woman's access to land, the Basic Agrarian Reform Act (Decree No. 153) establishes three types of property in El Salvador: cooperative, State and private. In general, the agrarian reform process made it possible for 20% of women to acquire land earmarked for productive projects and to increase their household income. Although the owners are the cooperatives, the women have possession, and receive the profits, and training.
Article 1 of the Act for the Allocation and Transfer of Agricultural Land to the Croppers (Decree No. 207) stipulates that "the State shall purchase real property that is not being worked personally by the owners and allocate it to those effectively working it; it shall furthermore recognize their preemptive right to acquire the ownership and possession of that property". This Act discriminates against widows, and separated and elderly women who are unable to work the land personally. Some 70% of the expropriations concerned women: after the owners had been expropriated, 3 500 individual title deeds were issued to women and 31 500 to men (i.e. women gained access to one tenth of the land available), and of these 3 500, some 2 800 renounced.
Another problem, also related to land tenure, with which the rural women of this country have to contend, is the instability of their marriages or consensual unions due, among other reasons, to the war. The law does not take this reality into account but protects the family group by considering the allocated land as a family asset.
Moreover, despite all the legal instruments and mechanisms available, the agrarian transformation process has failed to meet the needs and aspirations of rural men, and failed even more to incorporate rural women into development. Rather, it has led to urban-rural imbalance, given the injustices committed under the land expropriation scheme and the serious marketing problems that farmers' indebtedness causes.
To conclude, the agrarian reform process has not helped the rural woman gain access to land. In practice, the man is considered head of the household.
5. Access to Credit
The rural woman has very little chance of obtaining this productive resource. Enactments such as the Agricultural Development Bank Act, the Rural Credit Act, the Small Enterprise Investment Fund Act, the National Industrial Development Bank Act, the Central Reserve Bank Economic Development Fund Act, the El Salvador Cooperative Associations General Act and the Act establishing the Salvadoran Agrarian Transformation Institute do not contain discriminatory rules, but they are difficult to implement given the illiteracy rate among women, male chauvinism and the disregard for the rights of the spouse or regular companion, who has worked alongside her partner to purchase farming implements. The civil war that the country is currently going through further aggravates the problem.
Most loans are taken out by men. Of the 2 000 loans granted, only 3% were allocated to women. Besides, access to inputs and credit is dealt with by the family, as a group. A woman's application must also be signed by her husband, as she cannot on her own offer mortgage or collateral security. She may gain access to credit if she is a widow, but priority is usually given to the eldest son. In any case, the woman then has to contend with a long, slow credit application process (which limits her chances since, with her domestic duties and children to look after, she has very little free time) and a general lack of recognition of her role. This is reflected in the fact that only one of the 8 000 loan recipients in 1989 was a woman.
6. Access to Technical Training
The civil war has made it even more difficult for Salvadoran women to obtain technical training. Data on their attendance in courses were unavailable, but the training provided for rural women in this country is usually closely linked to their activities in the reproductive field.
7. Membership in Organizations
Most women participated only in organizations closely connected with their role as homemaker, not as producer.
IV. RURAL WOMEN AND LEGISLATION IN MEXICO^58
(^58 Based on the study by TORRES FALCON, M. 1989. Situación de la mujer campesina frente a la legislación mexicana. An FAO Consultant's paper. p.115.)
The rural woman's status has improved in recent years, especially since the Decade for Women. However, progress in the legal field has not been homogeneous, as marital authority is still the rule in several States. Paternalistic and discriminatory customs clash with the law and sometimes hinder its implementation.
1. Constitutional Law
The Political Constitution of the United Mexican States, promulgated in 1917, establishes full equality for men and women. The same spirit of equality prevails throughout Mexican legislation.
2. Civil Law
Mexico has 31 free, sovereign States, each with its own legislation, into which most have incorporated the Federal District Civil Code and the 1974 Civil Code that provides for the equality in law between men and women. Some, however, such as Agua Calientes, Durango, Nuevo Leon and Sonora, still have discriminatory laws.
The State of Zacatecas enacted Family and Family Procedure Codes in 1983, and there are plans for similar Codes for the States of Chiapas, Sinaloa and Nayarit. The following paragraphs refer to the provisions of the Federal District Civil Code and the Hidalgo State Family Code. Reference is made to the individual State Civil Codes only when their provisions conflict with or differ from those mentioned above.
Marriage Regimes
Upon marriage, the spouses must draw up a settlement establishing the property regime they wish to adopt. The current Code recognizes two regimes: the conjugal property regime (total or partial), and the separate property regime. The Hidalgo Civil Code also recognizes a mixed regime, equivalent to a partial conjugal property regime.
Under the conjugal property regime, the assets are controlled and administered jointly by the spouses, who are also free to amend the regime as they wish. In a partial conjugal property regime, the assets excluded from the estate belong to the spouse who owns them.
The States of Aguas Calientes, Sonora and Oaxaca provide for two types of conjugal property: voluntary and legal. The former is governed by the agreement between the partners, while the latter consists in the creation and administration of a common estate (separate from each spouse's personal property), over which the husband holds sole and full responsibility; the woman may administer it only in special circumstances. If the marriage is dissolved, the guilty party is not entitled to his or her share of the after-acquired property. If the spouses fail to come to an amicable agreement, the property passes to the children, and if there are no children, it is divided proportionally to the amount of assets each spouse brought to the marriage. If the separate property regime is chosen, each spouse retains the ownership and administration of what is his or hers.
When there is agricultural property, the marriage is considered to have been entered into under the separate property regime.
Marital Authority
The husband holds authority over the wife's person in the States of Durango, Aguas Calientes, Sonora, Nueva Leon, Oaxaca, Guanajuato, Michoacán and Tabasco. The law restricts the woman's right to work when the husband thinks this will result in the neglect of the children and the home.
Patria Potestas
The 1974 Civil Code reforms established that parents have equal authority over their children and equal responsibility for their education and the administration of their assets. Husband and wife are also equally responsible for providing for and educating their children and for the size of their family.
Succession
The testator has limited freedom of disposal with respect to maintenance due to men and women alike. The surviving spouse may therefore contest a will if he or she was due maintenance from the testator. The same rules apply to de facto unions, enjoying official recognition as common-law marriage.
Women inherit agrarian rights from their husbands, by virtue of which they become "ejido" members, with the prerogatives and responsibilities that this implies.
De Facto Unions
If the union appears to be permanent (i.e the couple has cohabited for at least five years) it is deemed to be that and produces its effects at law. For it to be recognized as a common-law union, the partners must also be free of legal impediments to contractual marriage.
The 1928 Civil Code, updated in 1974, recognizes for the first time that cohabitation may produce certain legal effects: the right of one partner to be one of the other's heirs, and the right to maintenance and to compensation following the death of a working partner or following a work-related accident.
The Hidalgo Family Code devotes a chapter to cohabitation which it equates with marriage provided that: the man and woman have cohabited peaceably, publicly and continuously for more than five years, are free of marriage ties and have registered their union in the Register of Marriages. The application for registration must include a statement as to the property regime chosen: conjugal, separate or mixed.
The institution of common-law marriages does not appear to be sufficiently well-developed in the State Civil Codes.
As regards rights under the agrarian law, the Federal Agrarian Reform Act empowers the ejido member to designate a successor from among the spouse and the children or, in their default, the person with whom he cohabits more uxorio, provided that intended inheritors are his dependents. In an intestate succession, the person with whom the de cujus cohabited and had children takes second place.
Family Estate
In order to ensure that family members meet their obligation to assist each other, the Civil Code establishes the possibility of drawing up a separate family estate, comprising certain specific items such as the dwelling and, in some cases, a plot of cultivable land. The beneficiaries are the spouse of the person establishing the estate and the persons he or she is obliged to provide for. The assets included in the estate may not be alienated, seized or encumbered. The law also establishes the minimum value of the property and a special procedure for setting up the estate.
Each family may form only one estate. The beneficiaries do not own the property in question, but have the right of enjoyment thereof, are obliged to live in the dwelling and, where applicable, cultivate the plot. A family estate may be established by men or by women. The lawmaker's intention in establishing this institution was to ensure family members a decent living and some measure of economic security. In practice, this has not been realized, and the family estate has remained a purely legal institution for several reasons, namely:
- It is not applicable to ejido members, as they do not own land and, in any case, would be unnecessary, since the legislation gives the same preferential treatment to ejido property;
- it is not applicable, either, to peasants who have applied for and complied with the requirements to obtain land but are still awaiting allocation and, by that token, have no property to include in a family estate; and
- a family estate may be established on small agricultural holdings provided the above conditions are met, but it would lapse if the family stopped cultivating the land for two years. It would also lose the guarantee whereby it may not be appropriated by the government and divided among landless peasants.
The main reason why this institution is not used, however, is that once property becomes part of a family estate it may no longer be used as security for loans.
The Hidalgo Family Code contains an express provision to encourage the establishment of family estates: it grants corporate status to the family, which it recognizes as the holder of rights and obligations. In other words, the family, and not its physical members, becomes the owner of the family estate. The Code also provides that the Government shall sell State-owned land to persons with the legal capacity to establish a family estate. The price and terms of payment will be set in accordance with the family's economic capacity. This provision has not yet been implemented, however.
3. Labour Law
Men and women over 16 and men and women under 16 but over 14 (provided they have permission) are free to enter into contracts.
A woman has full legal capacity, whatever her marital status. In 1974, some of the rules prohibiting women from doing certain jobs were repealed. The protection of maternity has been made a social obligation and the idea of moral protection for the working woman has been abandoned.
The Labour Code comprises a special chapter on agricultural workers (i.e. those habitually engaged in crop, livestock and forestry activities for an employer), completely free of discriminatory rules. Women continue to be discriminated against, in practice, however.
Many rural women do a variety of paid jobs without any protection at law whatever. Temporary jobs are a case in point. They are paid on a piece-work basis and are not usually covered by contract. The rural woman wage-earner works under difficult conditions. She is paid less than the man and works one-time shifts. Her job is usually temporary or paid on a piece-work basis, so she is not considered a worker under the terms of the law and therefore does not receive the corresponding benefits. When the man has too much work, the women helps out with the productive activities, but when it is the reverse, the man does not share the domestic tasks.
Although the woman's economic contribution is extremely important for the peasant economy, this has given her neither the social recognition she deserves nor equality with the man.
4. Access to Land
Agrarian distribution began in the wake of the 1910-1917 Mexican revolution. Its aim was to replace the unproductive large estates by new forms of land tenure: ejidos and communities.
According to the 1971 Federal Agrarian Reform Act, the ejido is the organizational unit designed to meet the community's agricultural requirements through the integrated and rational use of available resources. The ejido has corporate status and its assets may not be alienated, surrendered, seized or transferred.
As regards the individual's capacity in agricultural matters, the Act expressly recognizes equal rights for men and women with respect to the allocation of ejido land units. It nevertheless grants priority to persons with families in their care. Even though the emphasis is on economic need and not on the traditional concept of the male head of household, this concept continues to prevail in practice, which is why there are so few women ejido members (less than 6% in 1981). Also, women usually become ejido members when they inherit the rights from their husbands and not through land redistribution agrarian policies.
One of the constituent elements of the ejido estate is the Women's Industrial Agricultural Unit (UAIM), where the aim, according to the Federal Agrarian Reform Act (Art. 103, 104 and 105) is "the establishment of a crop and livestock farm and agricultural and rural industries, collectively run by women over 16 who are not ejido members". The farm in question should be the same size as a family unit. It does not have corporate status as it is part of the ejido, and cannot, therefore, be used to obtain direct loans.
When land is released to peasant applicants, the ejido is divided so that one portion is allotted to each family. The land to be handed over to the UAIMs (and, according to the law, it must be of the best quality) is chosen at the same time.
All the women ejido members together receive one plot the same size as that allocated to each family, with the result that they can hardly do more than grow vegetables for their own consumption.
Although in theory all the ejidos have a UAIM, in practice this is not so. Besides, these units are a way of confining the women to a small space, exploiting their labour (usually unpaid), and preventing their effective incorporation into the communities' real productive process.
To sum up, Mexican women have little access to land and the little they have is gained through succession.
5. Access to Credit
The 1976 Rural Credit General Act sets out the conditions for participation in and the operation of the official rural credit system. Article 54 expressly recognizes the rural woman as a potential credit beneficiary within the meaning of Article 103 of the Federal Agrarian Reform Act. The latter refers to the incorporation of the UAIMs, and Article 59 establishes the order of priority for loan allocation, placing the rural woman at the top of the list, together with the ejidos, communities, cooperatives and higher-level organizations.
In practice, however, women have not received credit due to the banking institutions' shortage of funds, lack of organization on the part of the women and the fact that too few productive projects have been earmarked for the UAIMs.
6. Participation in Economic and Agricultural Organization.
Rural women's participation in these organizations has not increased significantly. Almost all the programmed are based on a partial perception of the real world of rural women, whom they try to organize from without and from above.
When the women were responsible for finding ways of organizing themselves, the public institutions limited their contribution to supporting community self-management efforts. Better results have been obtained in this way, although the women's motive here is to supplement their husbands' income to meet their household requirements.
V. RURAL WOMEN AND LEGISLATION IN VENEZUELA^59
(^59 Based on the study by YRURETA, G. 1989. Situación de la mujer campesina frente a la legislación, El Caso de Venezuela. Santiago de Chile, FAO Consultant's paper. p.120.)
One aspect of the process of change currently under way in Venezuela is a growing awareness of the leading role to be played by women in development. The Government has signed and ratified numerous international agreements highlighting the need for fairer legislation for women in general, and for rural women in particular. Since 1989, Venezuela has had a Ministry for Women, headed by a minister without portfolio, who is assisted by the Ministry of the Family.
Nevertheless, Venezuelan law does not usually specifically cover the situation of rural women. This "neutral" stance is often a cause of injustice for, although the legislation does not intend to discriminate against women, the fact that it is neutral is, in practice, discriminatory.
1. Constitutional Law
Venezuela's Constitution affirms equality before the law and does not countenance "discrimination whether by race, sex, creed or social condition". It in no way discriminates against women, who may hold any job and public office whatever. By protecting the family it seeks to safeguard marriage and promote the family estate as something that may not be encumbered in any way.
As regards peasant rights, Article 105 guarantees farmers' and landless rural workers' access to land and to the inputs needed to make it productive.
2. Civil Law
The Civil Code contains no discriminatory provisions. On the contrary, it establishes full equality between men and women. All references are to "persons", without distinction of sex. As regards capacity in the married state, husband and wife have the same rights and duties.
The rural woman worker has sufficient capacity to enter into any contractual agreement needed for agricultural work. It is not the law but the prevailing circumstances that prevent her from exercising her rights here.
Marriage Regimes
Couples have a choice of two types of marriage regime. The one that usually applies to all marriages unless the partners stipulate otherwise is the community property regime. The other, the marriage settlement, is less frequently used and requires the spouses to draw up a notarial deed.
Articles 151 and 154 of the Civil Code define the spouses' assets as the property belonging to the husband and wife at the time of the marriage and those acquired by way of grants, succession, bequest or profit during the marriage.
Under the community property regime each spouse may administer his or her property, but both must give their consent to alienate any part of the joint estate. Upon dissolution of a marriage the jointly held assets, i.e. the property purchased during the marriage, the property acquired by the spouses through their respective profession or activity, and the fruits* of the jointly held property, obtained during the marriage are divided equally.
Under the marriage settlement regime, the assets are not brought under a joint estate and each spouse is free to administer and dispose of his or her property. If the marriage is dissolved, each spouse retains what is his or hers.
Marital Authority
There is no specific provision in Venezuelan law for husband's authority over his wife. Spouses are considered equal before the law. However, in the countryside, the husband is by tradition the head of the household and the administrator of his wife's property - and person.
Patria Potestas
The father and mother hold joint responsibility for the care, education and representation of their children, and for the administration of their children's property (Art. 26, 264, 267 and 282 of the Civil Code).
Succession
''Marriage creates rights of succession for the spouse of the deceased, except in the case of a separate property regime and the legal separation of the spouses" (Art. 283 of the Civil Code).
Under the conjugal property regime, the assets are shared equally: one half belongs to the surviving spouse who, together with the children, is also one of the beneficiaries of the other half (belonging to the deceased), which is shared equally among the heirs (Art. 284 of the Civil Code).
Family Estate
The Civil Code provides for this institution, stating that it comprises the main dwelling house, which shall not form part of the estate of the person who establishes it and may not be offered as security to creditors. A family estate may be set up in favour of persons living at the time of its establishment or for the benefit of a given person's future direct descendants." In the event of the dissolution of the marriage, whichever spouse is awarded custody of the children is entitled to the dwelling.
At the same time, the Agrarian Reform Act (Art. 102) provides that the National Agrarian Institute (IAN), may declare all or part of the land allocated under the Act a family estate at the request of the person concerned. This estate may not be alienated, divided, seized or encumbered, and may be excluded from any other preventive or executive judicial measure, except on the grounds of public utility. However, that this legal institution is largely ignored.
De Facto Unions
There is no description of the de facto union in the Civil Code, but reference is made to it in the title dealing with the "joint ownership" (Art. 767): "unless there is evidence to the contrary it shall be assumed that there is joint ownership in cases of a union without marriage, when the woman or, as the case may be, the man shows that the couple has lived together in a permanent relationship, even though the property whose joint ownership it is required to establish may appear in one of their names alone".
Consensual unions are very common in the countryside and many problems have arisen due to the wording of the above Article 767, especially in cases where a separated spouse has brought a claim against the common-law wife of an agrarian reform allottee who has worked and developed the land alongside her partner. In an attempt to solve the problem, the following new wording has been proposed: "joint ownership of agricultural property shall be presumed in all cases of cohabitation without marriage of agrarian reform allottees, provided the woman produces evidence that she has cohabited and worked with the man in cultivating and developing the plot, irrespective of the fact that one of the two may be legally married".
3. Labour Law
1. All the rules contained in the Labour Act and its enforcement regulations apply equally to men and to women, except those provisions which are drawn up specially for women and intended their for protection.
2. The labour laws do contain provisions barring women from certain tasks, but they are not enforced.
3. With respect to the protection of maternity, the law stipulates that a mother shall not lose her job should she fall ill due to pregnancy. In the case of dismissal, it prescribes adequate compensation for the support of the mother and child, provided that the mother is a beneficiary of the compulsory Social Security system. The woman is entitled to an equal wage and the law obliges every establishment employing more than 30 women to provide rooms where mothers may breastfeed their children up to the age of one year.
4. The regulations under the Labour Act classify rural workers as either permanent or temporary/casual. They do not discriminate against women, but establish conditions that are less favourable to the rural than to the urban worker. Female peasants have particularly difficult working conditions, given the variety of jobs they have to do, the fact that modern technology is not often used, and that women wage-labourers and small farmers are very poorly paid. All this discourages and drives women into the towns in search of better opportunities.
The woman is also at a disadvantage vis-à-vis her male counterpart, in that:
(a) in addition to her farming activities she also performs the domestic tasks and looks after the family garden and farmyard, yet her contribution to the productive work goes unrecognized;
(b) employers prefer to recruit men farm workers;
(c) men are the main beneficiaries of land and credit allocations;
(d) the peasant family's agricultural tools are always purchased under the husband's name, which makes it easier for him to put them up as security to obtain credit;
(e) the woman is often paid less than the man for similar work; and
(f) women's training programmes are designed to improve their performance of household duties. The rural working woman is not protected by the Social Security system since it does not accept temporary or casual rural workers as members, and the employers of the few women farm workers who do have permanent jobs do not usually officially register them for such benefits. The rural woman therefore works without social security coverage. Should she become pregnant, she has to work all through her pregnancy and return to work immediately after the birth, without taking the period of rest prescribed for breastfeeding.
Rural women, however, have become increasingly aware of their role and, with the support of Government agrarian reform agencies, have now managed to obtain plots of land and the inputs needed to develop them.
Special women-oriented sub-programmes have also been established to prepare women for, and bring them into, the education system with a view to later incorporating them into the productive process. For instance, the National Agricultural Institute (INAGRO), aware that women are a valuable resource for the production sector, is helping rural women to recognize their potential, find their own solutions to the priority problems in their communities, reassess the role they can and should play and, finally, shake off the distorted image that prevailing cultural patterns project on to them.
4. Access to Land
The Agrarian Reform Act makes no distinctions between men and women where land allocations and credit are concerned, and usually refer to "beneficiaries" or "parents". Things are slightly different in practice, and even if allocations to women have increased over the years, it is desirable that a realistic approach be adopted, to ensure that every woman farmer may hold possession of, and the title deed to, her land and receive sufficient incentives to be able to cultivate it.
As regards succession, the heirs must agree to continue to manage the land, otherwise the National Agrarian Institute (IAN) may order a report and declare the adjudication extinct and transfer the plot to a family member who meets requirements. This rule has not given very satisfactory results for, although it does not distinguish between the death of the man or of the woman, as 75% of the allocations are held by men, the widow will usually be just one among the potential heirs.
It is a common knowledge that women work the land alongside the men even if they are not the allottees. The law should therefore clearly state that the administration of the land falls to the spouse - legitimate or common-law - upon the death of the allottee.
Mention must be made of the institution of "agrarian protection" (amparo agrario), established under the Agrarian Reform Act. Under Article 148 which farmers with an unclear title may apply for permission to remain on (i.e. not to be dispossessed of) the land they cultivate, save where IAN rules otherwise. Once the owner or holder of the right in rem is notified that agrarian protection has been accorded, he or she must immediately turn the land over to the beneficiary and cease the nuisance.
5. Access to Credit
Although the Agricultural Development Bank Act does not have a special programme for them, rural working women have always been granted credit provided they meet the requirements.
The Cooperative Associations General Act supports nonprofit economic activities initiated by members with limited economic resources, thus encouraging the provision of goods and services for production and consumption activities.
Article 9 of the Crop and Livestock Credit Institute (ICAP) Act provides for the granting of loans to persons under 21 who are beneficiaries under programmes sponsored by State-run agricultural agencies.
Few rural women are property owners, so it is difficult for most of them to obtain loans that require pledges of farm machinery, crops or livestock. However, institutions such as IAN and ICAP usually accept a mortgage on the allotment, so that a woman who has been allotted land may seek a loan (and this has prompted the establishment of associations or cooperatives within the ICAP-supported women's groups) but there are limitations in the case of a woman who works land owned by others or on their husbands' allotments. In the latter case they need their husbands' authorization to mortgage the land.
6. Access to Technical Training
The main institutions involved in training programmes for farmers are INAGRO (Agricultural Training Institute), CIARA (Agrarian Reform Training and Applied Research), UEDA (State-Run Agricultural Development Units) and UTODA (Agricultural Development Technical Unit). All come under the Ministry of Agriculture, assisted by IAN. These institutions all have special sub-programmes to prepare women for and bring them into the education system with a view to later incorporating them into the production process.
Despite these institutions' efforts, the results show that most women tend to join traditional programmes dealing with problems directly associated with the home. Very few women gain access to agricultural mechanization, peasant economic organizations or crop or animal husbandry programmes.
The UEDAs' responsibilities include technical assistance and the implementation and monitoring of programmes in the federal agencies.
7. Participation in Production Organizations
One of the Agriculture Ministry's most widely disseminated women's programmes since agrarian reform is the Homemakers' Clubs, where the aim is to encourage rural women with families to form groups and participate in the economic and cultural life of their community. These clubs have work projects specially geared to providing instruction in agricultural, artisanal and homemaking skills. They have a membership of some 300 000 throughout the country, but they all attach secondary importance to farm activities, and the only "agricultural" project under implementation is the home gardens project.
<section>6</section>
Annex II - Glossary of legal terms used in the study
Annex II - Glossary of legal terms used in the study
ABSOLUTE INCAPACITY: Absolute impediment to the exercise of rights and/or the fulfillment of obligations.
ADULT MINORS: Teenagers, usually women over 12 and men over 14. Their status is one of relative incapacity in the eyes of the law, i.e. their acts may have legal force if certain conditions are met, for instance, if authorization is obtained.
CAPACITY OR COMPETENCE: Legal competence to acquire and exercise rights and obligations.
CHATTEL: Movables such as livestock, a car, etc.
COLLATERAL SECURITY: Chattel given as security for a debt. It may be delivered to the creditor or remain in the hands of the debtor.
COMMUNITY PROPERTY REGIME: The system whereby all the property brought to the marriage and all that is subsequently acquired becomes jointly owned. The property is divided equally if the marriage is dissolved.
CONJUGAL PARTNERSHIP REGIME, PROPERTY OF: During the marriage each spouse may freely acquire, administer and alienate his or her own property, both contributing to the support of their common family. If the marriage is dissolved, a community of jointly held estate is formed for the purpose of liquidation and division.
CONSTITUTION: A set of fundamental rules for the governance of an organization such as a State.
CONTRACT: Pact or agreement between two or more parties to do or not to do something. A contract may be legally enforceable.
CUSTOM: Usage or body of habits whereby obligations and rights are created and come to have the legal force of law through repetition and through being handed down from one generation to another.
CUSTOMARY LAW: Body of rules practiced through custom and having the force of law.
DECEDENT: The person from whom, and upon whose death, another derives a right or obligation.
DE FACTO UNION: The voluntary agreement between a man and a woman to achieve aims and perform duties similar to those of marriage without fulfilling the legal requirements of a formal marriage.
EFFECTIVENESS OF THE LAW: The consistency between the conduct the law seeks to secure and the actual conduct of the individuals subject to it.
EMANCIPATION: Act or procedure of freeing a person from patria potestas (q.v.).
EXTRAPATRIMONIAL RIGHT: A right which is subjective and not economically quantifiable.
FAMILY ESTATE: A legal institution whereby a dwelling house or piece of real estate is set aside for the habitation and support of the family. The estate may not be seized or alienated, and is transferred by inheritance. Through this legal institution the family is assured that their property may not be bought or sold and that the family group and its economic well-being are safe.
FORCED HEIRS: Persons who may not be left unprovided for in a succession (typically the spouse and the children).
FRUITS: The gains yielded by a thing that becomes the owner's property. These may relate to prices, lease payments, capital interest, as well as those produced by nature.
HEIRS: Persons who by virtue of testament or by law succeed to all or part of an estate, represented by a body of rights and obligations, upon the death of the owner of that estate.
INALIENABLE: That which by nature or by law may not be disposed of or transferred.
INCOMPETENCE OR INCAPACITY: Lack of ability, for physical, mental or legal reasons, to exercise rights and fulfil obligations.
INHERITANCE LAW: Law governing all that has to do with the transfer of a person's property following his or her death.
INTESTATE SUCCESSION: Succession where there is no will or testament.
JOINT PROPERTY: All the property allocated to the common interests of the marriage.
LEGAL CONFLICT: The situation that arises when two or more rules of positive law that should be enforced simultaneously are incompatible or contradictory and cannot be applied.
LEGAL FICTION: Consists in giving an existence or legal validity to something when in reality it has none.
LEGITIM: That part of an estate over which the testator has no power of disposal if there are forced heirs, the latter being always the children and generally the surviving spouse. Some laws include the parents and other ascendants or descendants.
MARITAL AUTHORITY (POTESTAD MARITAL): The body of rights that the law confers on the husband over the person and/or property of the wife.
MARRIAGE REGIME: The body of rules regulating spouses' personal and property interests between them.
MARRIAGE SETTLEMENT: The property agreement made between the spouses before, or at the time of, marriage. It establishes the marriage regime to be adopted.
MORTGAGE: Security in the form of real estate for the performance of an obligation. The real property in question always remains in the hands of the debtor or mortgagor. Should the obligation not be satisfied, the creditor or mortgagee may exact payment from the proceeds of the sale of the mortgaged property.
OBJECTIVE LAW: Body of general rules governing the exercise of rights and obligations.
PATRIA POTESTAS: Body of rights and duties that the law assigns to on the father or mother over the property and person of the minor children.
PATRIMONIAL RIGHT: A right that is economically quantifiable.
POSITIVE LAW: The law in force; the body of laws that have not been repealed.
PRESCRIPTION: The process whereby a person acquires a right or may free himself from an obligation over a period of time.
PROPERTY: Things that can be of use to the individual and are subject to personal appropriation. Property may take the form of chattel or real estate.
REAL PROPERTY: That which cannot be moved, such as land, mines or buildings.
RELATIVE INCAPACITY: Impediment to the exercise of rights and the fulfillment of obligations. The impediment may be overcome if the requisite authorization is obtained.
SEPARATE PROPERTY REGIME: All the property owned before marriage, and acquired by each spouse during the marriage, remains under separate ownership. If the marriage is dissolved, each spouse retains his or her own property.
STATUTE LAW: The body of rules enacted by the legislation of a State.
SUBJECTIVE LAW: Body of rules giving one the faculty to exercise rights.
SUCCESSION: One of the ways in which one or more living persons may acquire control of property from a deceased person. If this occurs by virtue of a will it is known as testamentary succession. If there is no will the term intestate succession is used.
WILL OR TESTAMENT: A legal act by which a person disposes of all or part of his or her property in contemplation of death.
<section>7</section>
Bibliography
Bibliography
ALMEIDA, V. & MARTINEZ, M. 1978. Reflexiones en torno a la situación de la mujer campesina. In America Indíqena. Mexico, Instituto Indigenista Interamericano. 38(2:273277).
ALVAREZ, L. 1989. El activismo técnico campesino: una experiencia cubana en la comunicación social. Premio PIDCUNESCO/89. La Habana. 5 pp.
ALVAREZ, L. $ STUBBS. 1986. La mujer campesina y la cooperativización agraria en Cuba. La Habana, Siglo XXI. 150 pp.
ALVAREZ, T. 1985. Comentarios a la Constitución Socialista. La Habana, Ciencias Sociales. 30 pp.
ALVEAR VALENZUELA, S. 1987. Situación de la mujer campesina frente a la legislación. Casos de Chile, Guatemala, Peru y República Dominicana. Santiago de Chile, FAO Consultant's paper. Regional Office for Latin America and the Caribbean. 200 pp.
______.1990. La mujer campesina y la legislación en Colombia. Santiago de Chile, FAO Consultant's paper. Regional Office for Latin America and the Caribbean. 89 pp.
ALVER, P. S/F. Recursos y servicios pare la mujer. Perfiles de organizaciones e instituciones. Bogotá, FESCOL. 94 pp.
AMEZQUITA DE ALMEYDA, J. 1989. La reforma de la legislación de familia. Bogota, Documento de la Comisión de Reforma de la Justicia Colombiana. 3 pp.
AMEZQUITA DE ALMEYDA, J. & BOCANEGRA, T. 1979. Legislación colombiana sobre la mujer. Bogota, Comité Colombiano de Cooperación a la CIM, OEA. 165 pp.
ARANDA, X. 1988. El nuevo protagonismo social femenino y sus escenarios en los años ochenta. Santiago de Chile, ECLA. 51 pp. (LC/L.470 CRM.4/8).
ARANDA, S. 1977. La economía venezolana: una integración de su modo de funcionamiento. Bogota, Siglo XVI. 294 pp.
ARAY DE JIMENEZ, V. 1983. Situaciones y Perspectivas de la Mujer Campesina en los Programas de Desarrollo Rural en Venezuela. Santiago de Chile. FAO/RLAC. 36 pp. (RLAC/87/7DERU-7).
ARIAS, M. 1988. Mujeres, sexualidad y fey. Bogotá, Presencia. 458 pp.
ARRIAGADA, I. 1989. Estructura social y situación de la mujer rural. Alqunas proposiciones. Santiago de Chile, ECLA. 67 pp.
ARRIAGADA, I. & NOORDAM, J. 1980. Mujeres rurales latinoamericanas y la division del trabajo. Santiago de Chile, ECLA. 30 pp.
ARIZPE, L. 1986. La mujeres campesinas y la crisis agraria en America Latina. In Estudios sobre la mujer. Problemas teóricos. Mexico. pp. 58-66. (Nueva Antropología No. 30).
ASOCIACION DISTRITAL DE EDUCADORAS. 1987. Leyes y derechos sobre la mujer en Colombia. Bogota, ADE. 38 pp.
ASOCIACION NACIONAL DE AGRICULTORES PEQUEñOS. 1988. III Encuentro de Cooperativas. Informe Central y Documentos. La Habana, ANAP. s.p.
BAENA DE ESPARZA, R. 1982. Considerations sur la division sexuelle du travail. In CENTRE HAITIEN D' INVESTIGATION EN SCIENCES SOCIALES (CHISS) ET UNIVERSITE D'ETAT D'HAITI. La femme rurale en Haiti et dans la Caribe. Traditions et innovations. Port-au-Prince. 300 pp.
BENITEZ, R. & QUILODRAN, J. 1983. La fecundidad rural en Mexico. Mexico, El Colegio de Mexico. 494 pp.
BEOZZO, J. O. 1952. A mulher indigene e a igreja na situaçao esclavista de Brasil Colonial. In CEHILA. A mulher pobre na historia da iqreja latinoamericana. Sao Paulo, Ed. Paulinas. p. 70-93.
BERGOGIO DE BROWER, N. T. & BERTOLDI DE FORUCADE, M.V. 1982. Estudio comparativo de la legislación de los países americanos respecto a la mujer. Washington, OAS. p. 76-155. (Serie Estudios No. 7).
BONILLA DE RAMOS, E. 1981. La mujer y su imagen en los medios. Bogota, CEDE. 183 pp. (Documentos UNIAMDES, 064).
______. 1981. La madre trabajadora. Bogotá, CEDE. 139 pp. (Documento UNIANDES, 066).
______. 1985. Mujer rural colombiana en la decade del 70. Santiago de Chile, ECLA. 99 pp.
BONILLA, E. & VELEZ, E. 1987. Mujer y trabajo en el sector rural colombiano. Bogota, CEDE.
BRITO DE MARTI, E. 1981. Una legislación insuficiente. In FEM. Mexico. 4(16:73-78).
BRINCKERHOFF, M., CASTILLO, V. & GIRLLILIS, J. 1981. Barreras al mundo laboral: el cave de la mujeres casadas en Yucatan. In Revista Mexicana de Sociología. Campesinos y campesinas. Mexico. p. 105-128.
BURGOA, I. 1986. Las garantías individuales. Mexico, Porrúa. 768 pp.
CARRILLO, A. 1981. La Constitución, la Suprema Corte y los derechos humanos. Mexico, Porrúa. 324 pp.
CARRILLO, J. & HERNANDEZ, A. 1985. Mujeres fronterizas en la industria maquiladora. Mexico, Secretaría de Educación Pública, Centro de Estudios Fronterizos del Norte de Mexico. 216 pp.
CARVAJAL, M. & BETANCOURT, B. ANUCIC 1989. In El Fondo de Capacitación Campesina. In MINISTERIO DE AGRICULTURA-UNICEF. Mujer rural. Bogotá, UNICEF. 16 pp.
CASA DE LA MUJER. 1985. Cartilla sobre Derecho de Familial Bogota, FESCOL. 63 pp. (Cartilla No. 1).
CASTRO DE PINZON, E. 1990. Informe final sobre la situación de la mujer campesina frente a la legislación en El Salvador. San Salvador, FAO Consultant's paper. 130 pp.
CASTRO DE PINZON, E. & HERNANDEZ DE ARAUZ, J. 1980. El derecho y los derechos del niño en El Salvador. San Salvador, UNITAR Consultant's paper, Banco Hipotecario. 216 pp.
CASTRO DE PINZON, E., HERNANDEZ DE ARAUZ, J. & OSORIO, P. 1983. La condición jurídica de la mujer. San Salvador. OAS-CIM Consultant's paper. 134 pp.
CASILLAS, A. 1986. La mujer en dos comunidades de emigrantes: Chihuahua. Mexico, Secretaría de Educación Pública. 107 pp.
CECELSKI, E. 1987. La energía y el trabajo de las mujeres en el campo. Crisis, reacciones y soluciones. In Revista Internacional del Trabajo. Geneva, ILO. 2(106 pp.).
ECLA. 1986. El decenio de la mujer en el escenario Latino-americano. Realidades y perspectives. Santiago de Chile. 222 pp.
______. 1987. Las mujeres latino-americanas y la crisis. El impacto en el mercado del trabajo. La Paz. 34 pp.
______. 1988. La mujer ante la legislación. In Cuarta Conferencia Reqional sobre la Integración de la Mujer en el Desarrollo Económico y Social en America Latina y el Caribe. Guatemala. 43 pp.
______. 1988. Mujer, trabajo y crisis. In Cuarta Conferencia Regional sobre la Integración de la Mujer en el Desarrollo Económico y Social en America Latina y el Caribe. Guatemala. 116 pp.
CIM. 1982. Estudio comparativo de la legislación de los países americanos respecto a la mujer. Washington, OAS. 434 pp. (Serie Estudios No. 7).
COLOMBIA. DEPARTAMENTO NACIONAL DE PLANEACION. 1985. Política sobre el papel de la mujer campesina en el desarrollo agropecuario. Bogotá. 17 pp. (Documento DNP-2 109 UEA).
COLUMBIE MATOS, T. 1989. Situación de la mujer campesina frente a la legislación. El cave de Cuba. La Habana, FAO Consultant's paper. Regional Office for Latin America and the Caribbean. 15 pp.
COMITE COLOMBIANO DE COOPERACION A LA CIM. 1979. Legislación colombiana sobre la mujer. Bogota, Centro Nacional de Artes Gráficas-SENA. 165 pp.
CORELESAL. 1987. Situación de la familia salvadoreña. Diagnóstico preliminar. San Salvador. 49 pp. (mimeo).
CORPORACION FONDO DE APOYO DE EMPRESAS ASOCIATIVAS. 1988. Manual de Normas y Procedimientos pare el Proyecto Fondo Rotatorio de Crédito Asociativo para Mujeres Campesinas. Bogotá, CORFAS. 15 pp.
COSTA RICA, MINISTERIO DE CULTURA, JUVENTUD Y DEPORTES. 1981. Proyecto de igualdad de la mujer. San José, Centro Nacional pare el Desarrollo de la Mujer y la Familial 10 pp.
CRUMMET, M. de los A. 1986. Mujer rural y migración en America Latina. Investigación, políticas y perspectives. In León De Leal, M. & Deere, C. Mujer y la política agraria en América Latina. Bogotá, Siglo XXI. p. 209-227.
CUADROS, M. 1989. Problemática de la Mujer Colombiana y su inclusión en los programas de cooperación técnica de UNICEF. Consultant's paper. 217 pp.
CUBA. ASAMBLEA NACIONAL DEL PODER POPULAR. 1987. Estudio sobre aspectos de la legislación en materia civil, de familia, laboral y penal que atañe especialmente a la mujer y al niño. La Habana. 44 pp.
CHANER, E. & SCHMINK, M. 1975. Las mujeres y la modernización: acceso a la tecnología. In La mujer en América Latina. Mexico, Secretaría de Educación Pública. pp. 25-54. (Septentas No. 218).
CHAVEZ, M. 1984. La familia en el Derecho. Derecho de Familia y relaciones jurídicas familiares. México, Porrúa. 505 pp.
DE BARVIERI, T. & DE OLIVEIRA, O. 1986. Nuevos sujetos sociales. La presente política de las mujeres en América Latina. In Estudios sobre la mujer. Problemas teóricos. México. p. 5-30. (Nueva Antropología No. 30).
DE BUEN, N. 1990. El menor en el derecho laboral y en la realidad social. In Revista del menor y la familia. México. 1(131 pp.).
DE SILES, M. E. Bartolina Sisa, Gregoria Apaza. 1981. Dos heroínas indígenas. La Paz, Biblioteca Popular Ultima Hora. 95 pp.
DE VARNHAGEN, F.A. 1952. Historia General do Brasil. Sao Paulo, Melhoramentos. 7a. ed. 2 v.
DEERE, C. 1986. La mujer rural y la política estatal. La experiencia latinoamericana y caribeña de Reforma Agraria. In León De Leal, M. & Deere, C. La mujer y la política agraria en América Latina. Bogotá, Siglo XXI. pp. 187-208.
DIAZ DE LANDA, M. I. & LISTA, C.A. 1982. Legislación sobre Derecho Político. Estudio comparativo de la legislación de los países americanos respecto a la mujer. In CIM. Washington, Secretaría de la OEA. 75 pp. (Serie Estudios No. 7).
DIAZ, L. & MUÑOZ, M. 1978. La mujer asalariada en el sector agrícola. In América Indígena. México, Instituto Indigenista Interamericano. 38(2:327-339).
DIXON-MULLER, R. 1987. Medición de la division del trabajo por sexo en la agricultura del tercer mundo. In Medición de las Actividades Económicas de la Mujer. Chile, ILO. 67 pp.
DUQUE CORREDOR, J. R. 1988. El amparo agrario constitucional. In Temas Agrarios. Caracas, Procuraduría Agraria Nacional. 19(25:45-53).
DOYHARCABAL, S. 1986. Situación jurídica de la mujer en el Derecho Latinoamericano Comparado. In Temas de Derecho. Santiago de Chile, Departamento de Derecho de la Universidad Gabriela Mistral. 1(47-60).
EL SALVADOR, NIPLAN-FNUAP. 1986. Política integral de población de El Salvador. La paternidad responsable uno de los grandes propósitos. San Salvador. 40 pp. (mimeo).
ELU DE LEÑERO, M. 1975. Trabajo de la mujer y fecundidad: especial referencia a México. In La Mujer en América Latina. Mexico, Secretaría de Educación Pública. p. 55-84. (Septentas No. 218).
ESPAÑA. INSTITUTO DE LA MUJER. 1984. Mujer en el desarrollo hispánico. In Encuentro entre Países de Habla Hispana. Madrid, Ministerio de Cultura, 1983. 421 pp.
ERRAZURIZ, O., M. M. 1987. Mujer Campesina: su situación y orientaciones pare políticas. In FAO. Rural Women in Latin America. Santiago de Chile, FAO/RLAC. pp. 215-259.
ESCOBAR, C. 1984. Mujer y organización campesina. Paper prepared at the request of the Ministry of Agriculture. Bogota. 32 pp.
ESPIN GUILLOIS, V. S/F. La Batalla por el ejercicio pleno de la igualdad de la mujer. In Revista Cuba Socialista. 61 pp.
ENCUENTRO NACIONAL DE MUJERES CAMPESINAS. 1984. Recomendaciones formuladas al Gobierno Nacional por los representantes al Primer Encuentro Nacional de Mujeres Campesinas. 10 pp. (mimeo).
ESTATUTOS DE LA FEDERACION CAMPESINA DE VENEZUELA. 1985. Caracas, Venezuela. (mimeo).
FAO. 1980. La condición jurídica de la mujer rural. Limitaciones de la participación económica de la mujer en el desarrollo rural. Rome, FAO. 67 pp. (Documents).
______. 1981. The Peasants ' Charter. The Declaration of Principles and Programme of Action of the World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development. Rome, FAO. 38 pp.
______. 1984. Women in Agriculture. Rome, FAO. 28 pp.
______. 1984. Informe de la Mesa Redonda sobre estrategias de sobrevivencia en economías campesinas. El rol de la mujer: Bogotá, 1983. Santiago de Chile, FAO. 81 pp.
______. 1985. Learning from Rural Women. Rome, FAO. 43 pp.
______. 1986. Capacitación y orientación a distancia. Una política de desarrollo rural. Santiago de Chile. 33 pp. (Serie de Desarrollo Rural No. 3).
______. 1987. Rural Women in Latin America. Rural Development, Access to Land, Migration and Legislation. Santiago de Chile, FAO/RLAC. 266 pp.
______. 1988. Rural Poverty in Latin America and the Caribbean. World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development: Ten Years of Follow-Up, 1979-89. ESH, Rome, Italy. 101 pp.
______. 1990. La situación de la mujer campesina frente a la legislación en nueve países de América Latina. Santiago de Chile, FAO/RLAC. 67 pp. (DERU-35).
______. 1990. Informe de la Mesa Redonda Regional sobre "Búsqueda de Mecanismos Jurídicos que Posibiliten la Participación de la Mujer Rural en el Desarrollo Rural". Santiago de Chile, FAO/RLAC. 54 pp. (DERU-36).
FEDERACION DE MUJERES CUBANAS. 1975. Memorias del II Congreso Nacional de la Federación de Mujeres Cubanas. La Habana, Orbe. 347 pp.
______. 1984. Memorias del III Congreso Nacional de la Federación de Mujeres Cubanas. La Habana, Ciencias Sociales. 247 pp.
______. 1987. Memorias del IV Congreso Nacional de la Federación de Mujeres Cubanas. La Habana, Políticas. 281 pp.
FEDERACION DE MUJERES CUBANAS Y ASOCIACION NACIONAL DE AGRICULTORES PEQUEÑOS. 1988. Plan de medidas emanadas del Primer Activo de Mujeres Campesinas. La Habana, Ed. de la Mujer. 5 pp.
______. 1988. Informe al Primer Activo de Mujeres Campesinas. La Habana, Ed. de la Mujer. 14 pp.
FEDERACION DE MUJERES CUBANAS. 1988. Seminario de difusión y evaluación de las Estrategias de Nairobi orientadas hacia el futuro pare la promoción de la mujer. La Habana, Ed. de la Mujer. 85 pp.
FLORES, C. E. 1983. El paper de la mujer campesina en el desarrollo rural. Bogota, UNIANDES, Centro de Estudios sobre Desarrollo Económico. 218 pp. (Mimeo).
GALINDO, I. 1987. Derecho Civil. Parte general, personas, familia. México, Porrúa. 758 pp.
GALARREGUI, M. E. 1983. Discriminación contra la mujer, resabios existentes en la legislación vigente de América Latina. Propuestas de medidas concretes pare una integración de la mujer en el Decenio de las Naciones Unidas pare la Mujer: igualdad, desarrollo y paz. Santiago de Chile, ECLA. 135 pp.
GARCIA, A. 1982. Modelos operacionales de Reforma Agraria y Desarrollo Rural en América Latina. San José de Costa Rica, IICA. 196 pp.
GARCIA, R. 1987. Estudio del Sistema de Incentivos y Ventajas Comparativas del Sector Agropecuario Venezolano. Trabajo de Investigación de la Asociación Técnicas Agropecuarias S.R.L. Caracas. 1 v.
GERMAIN, A. 1977. Las mujeres pobres rurales: planteamiento para políticas. In Journal of International Affairs. New York, Tr. 30 v.
GONZALEZ, G. 1975. La participación de la mujer en la actividad laboral en México. In La Mujer en América Latina. México, Secretaria de Educación Pública. p. 108-134. (Septentas No. 218).
GUTIERREZ, M. & QUIÑONES, E. 1989. Inventario nacional de proyectos con mujer. Bogotá, UNICEF. 19 pp. (Mimeo).
GUTIERREZ DE PINEDA, V. & VICA DE PINEDA, R. 1988. Honor, familia y sociedad en la estructura patriarcal. Bogotá, Centro Editorial Universidad Nacional de Colombia. 433 pp.
HARRIS, O. 1986. La unidad doméstica como una unidad natural. En Estudios sobre la mujer. Problemas teóricos. México. pp. 199222. (Nueva Antropología No. 30).
HAUSMAN, R. & MARQUEZ, G. 1984. Venezuela: política de estabilización y mercadeo de trabajo. In Revista de Economía de América Latina. Caracas, Banco Central. (No. 13).
HINOJOSA, J. 1983. El ejido en México, análisis jurídico. México, Centro de Estudios Históricos del Agrarismo en México. 223 pp. (Colección Investigadores).
HOLDEN, J. 1982. Mujeres yaquis. México, Fondo de Cultura Económica 370 pp. (Colección Popular).
HUIZER, G. 1981. Movimientos de campesinos y campesinas y su reacción ante la depauperación: dialéctica de la liberación. In Revista Mexicana de Sociología. Campesinos y Campesinas. México. pp. 962.
IBÁÑEZ R., G. 1988. La marginalidad rural: un desafío al desarrollo latinoamericano. Santiago de Chile, FAO/RLAC. 241 pp.
IGLESIAS, N. 1985. La flor más belle de la maquiladora. México, Secretaría de Educación Pública, Centro de Estudios Fronterizos del Norte de México. 166 pp.
INCORA. 1989. Programa de desarrollo de la mujer campesina. Realizaciones Primer Semestre 1989. Bogotá. 9 pp. (mimeo).
INSTITUTO COLOMBIANO AGROPECUARIO. 1984. Memorias de proyecto mujer pare el desarrollo integral de la familia ampesina. Bogotá. 92 pp. (mimeo).
INSTITUTO COLOMBIANO AGROPECUARIO. 1986. Una estrategia de proyectos subregionales de desarrollo rural con énfasis en la mujer campesina. Bogotá. 38 pp. (mimeo).
INSTITUTO COLOMBIANO DE BIENESTAR FAMILIAR. 1975. Qué. es el ICBF. 17 pp. (mimeo).
______. 1987. Hogar y Bienestar. Bogotá. 20 pp. (mimeo).
______. 1989. Programas que adelanta el ICBF a nivel municipal. Bogotá. 19 pp. (mimeo).
KADIYOTU, D. 1985. Women in rural production systems: problems and policies. Paris, UNESCO. 119 pp.
KANDIZOTI, D. 1986. La mujer en los sistemas de producción rural. Barcelona, Ed. del Serbal. 142 pp.
LANDAU, G. O. 1980. El BID y el financiamiento del desarrollo en América Latina. México, Comercio Exterior. 331 pp. (No. 4).
LAYA, A. 1979. Nuestra cause. Caracas, Equipo Editor C.A. 127 pp.
LEON DE LEAL, M. 1986. Política agraria en Colombia y debate sobre políticas para la mujer rural. In LEON DE LEAL, M. & DEERE, C. La mujer y la política aqraria en América Latina. Bogotá, Siglo XXI. p. 43-64.
LEON DE LEAL, M. 1986. Situación de la mujer rural en América Latina y el Caribe. In ISIS Internacional. Mujeres campesinas en América Latina. Santiago de Chile. 6(9-14).
LEON DE LEAL, M. et al. 1987. Acceso de la mujer a la tierra en América Latina. Panorama general y estudios de caves en Honduras y Colombia. In FAO. Mujeres campesinas en América Latina: desarrollo rural. acceso a la tierra. migraciones y leqislación. Santiago de Chile, FAO/RLAC. p. 1-81.
LEON DE LEAL, M. 1987. Colombia, trabajo doméstico y servicio doméstico. Shuler, M. (comp.) Poder y derecho. Estrategias de las mujeres en el Tercer Mundo. Washington, OEF International. p. 333-346.
LEON DE LEAL, M. & DEERE, C. 1979. La mujer rural y el desarrollo del capitalismo en el Agro Colombiano. In Estudios rurales latinoamericanos. 1(2:77-110).
LEON DE LEAL, M. et al. 1980. Mujer y capitalismo agrario. Bogotá, ACEP. 295 pp.
LORETO DE RANGEL, A. 1988. La asistencia jurídica al productor agrario de escasos recursos. In Temas Agrarios. Caracas, Procuraduría Agraria Nacional. 10(25:12-27).
MARTIN ALBA, A. 1987. Compendio de la legislación agraria cubana. In Revista Cubana de Derecho. La Habana, Cuba. 29(16:192).
MARTINEZ, M. & COLUMBIE, T. 1988. Evolución de la protección de la trabajadora cubana. Seminario sobre la participación de la mujer en programas de salud de la comunidad. Salud Ocupacional, febrero de 1988. Santiago de Cuba. 60 pp.
MEILLASSOUX, C. 1987. Mujeres, graneros y capitales. México, Siglo XXI. 235 pp.
MEDRANO, D. 1980. La mujer en la región cafetera del suroeste antioqueño. In LEON DE LEAL, M. Mujer y capitalismo agrario. Bogotá, ACEP.
______. 1984. Agroexportación y trabajo femenino: el cave de las obreras de los cultivos de flores de la Sabana de Bogotá. In IICA. Estudio sobre América Latina. (No. 337).
MENDIETA, L. 1986. El problema agrario de México y la Ley Federal de Reforma Agraria. México, Porrúa.. 667 pp.
MESA REDONDA SOBRE ESTRATEGIAS DE SOBREVIVENCIA EN ECONOMIAS CAMPESINAS: EL ROL DE LA MUJER. Bogotá, 22- 25 noviembre 1983. Informe. Santiago de Chile, FAO/RLAC. 53 pp. (RLAC/84/6-Rev.1).
MEXICO. INSTITUTO NACIONAL DE ESTADISTICA, GEOGRAFIA E INFORMATICA. 1981. Censos agrícola, ganadero y ejidal. 573 pp. (Resumen General 60.).
MEXICO. CAMARA DE DIPUTADOS DEL H. CONGRESO DE LA UNION. 1981. Crónica Parlamentaria de un debate histórico. 490 pp.
MEXICO. COLEGIO DE PROFESORES DE DERECHO CIVIL DE LA UNAM. 1989. Tendencias del Derecho Civil pare el siglo XXI en Cuba. Documento presentado en la Primera Sesión Interamericana de Derecho Civil. México. 27 pp.
MEXICO. PODER EJECUTIVO FEDERAL. Plan Nacional de Desarrollo 1989-1991. 143 pp.
MONTAÑEZ, M. 1989. Organizaciones de base con mujeres en el área rural. Bogotá, Departamento Nacional de Planeación, UNICEF. 104 pp. (mimeo).
MONTES, S. 1980. El Agro Salvadoreño 1973-1980. San Salvador, Departamento de Sociología y Ciencias Políticas de la Universidad Centroamericana José Simeón Cahas. 363 pp.
MOTTA DE CORREA, L. 1980. Transformación de la unidad domeéstica y el trabajo de la mujer campesina en una zona de avanzado desarrollo capitalista. In LEON DE LEAL, M. Mujer y capitalismo agrario. Bogotá, ACEP.
MOUNSEY, J. 1975. Estructura de los grupos domésticos de una comunidad de habla nahuatl de Puebla. México, Instituto Nacional Indigenista. 219 pp.
NEWBOLD DE CHINAS, B. 1975. Mujeres de San Juan. La mujer zapoteca del Istmo en la economía. México, Secretaría de Educación Pública. la. ed. 159 pp. (Colección eptentas).
OAS-CIM. 1980. Seminario interamericano sobre la mujer en la pequeña empresa y su acceso al crédito. Haïtí. 93 pp.
OAS. 1982. Estudio comparativo de la legislación de los países americanos respecto de la mujer. Washington. 434 pp. (CIM No. 7).
OAS-CIM. 1983. Análisis cooperativo de la legislación laboral sobre salas-cunas. Washington. 43 pp.
______. 1984. Comisión Interamericana de Mujeres. Manual de la mujer en la pequeña empresa. Washington. 80 pp.
OCAMPO DE HERRAN, M. 1989. Las mujeres dirigentes. En Prodemocracia. Protagonismo de mujer. Bogotá, Guadalupe. pp. 117-281.
OMEBA. 1984. Derecho Agrario. In Enciclopedia Jurídica Buenos Aires. 6 v.
PALMA, M. 1986. Mujer, mito y sexualidad en Colombia. In Laverde, T. et al. Voces Insurgentes. Bogotá, Guadalupe. p. 239-254.
PATIÑO, A., CAICEDO DE CARDOZO, E. & RANJEZ B., M. 1988. Pobreza y desarrollo en Colombia: su impacto sobre la infancia y la mujer. Bogotá, Guadalupe. 441 pp.
PARTIDO COMUNISTA DE CUBA. 1976. Tesis y Resoluciones del Primer Congreso del Partido Comunista de Cuba. La Habana, DOR del Comité Central del Partido Comunista de Cuba. 673 pp..
______. 1981. Resoluciones aprobadas por el II Congreso del Partido Comunista de Cuba. La Habana, Politicá 184 pp.
PARRA DE ROJAS, M. C. 1988. La ley del trabajo y la mujer venezolana. In Foro Internacional la Mujer y el Futuro. Caracas. 25-28 julio. 11 pp. (mimeo).
PAVON GONZALEZ, R. 1977. El empleo femenino en Cuba. Aspectos económicos, demográficos y socioculturales. La Habana, Ciencias Sociales. 104 pp.
PERAL COLLADO, D. A. 1980. Derecho de familia. La Habana, Pueblo y Educación. 236 pp.
PEREZ SAN VICENTE, G. 1984. A mulher e sua atuaçao durante os primeros cinquenta anos de vida novohispanica. In CEHILA. A mulher pobre na historia da igreja latinoamericana. Sao Paulo, Ed. Paulinas. pp. 138-151.
PINA, R. 1986. Elementos de Derecho Civil Mexicano. México, Porrúa. 404 pp.
PINZON CASTRO, R. 1988. Marco jurídico de la política de desarrollo familiar en El Salvador. San Salvador. 201 pp. (Degree thesis).
PLATA, M. I. & YANUZOVA, M. 1988. Los derechos humanos y la convención sobre la eliminación de sodas las formas de discriminación contra la mujer. Bogotá, Printex Impresores. 189 pp.
PRIETO, P. 1987. El acceso de la mujer a la tierra en Colombia. Bogotá, FAO Consultant's paper. 77 pp. (mimeo).
PRODEMOCRACIA - FUNDACION FRIEDRICH NEUMANN. 1989. Protagonismo de mujer. Bogotá, Guadalupe. 281 pp.
PROYECTO DE CAPACITACION Y ORGANIZACION PARA EL DESARROLLO 1987. RURAL. Asesoría a organizaciones de mujeres campesinas en Tempoal. Experiencias y resultados. Veracruz, México. 84 pp.
RAMOS ESCANDON, M. 1988. Mujer y sociedad novohispana. In ISIS Internacional. Nuestra memoria. nuestro futuro: mujeres e historia. América Latina y el Caribe. Santiago de Chile. 10(2133).
RAPOLD, D. 1986. Movilizaciones femeninas. Un ensayo teórico sobre sus condiciones y orígenes. En Estudios sobre la mujer. Problemas teóricos. México. p. 31-56. (Nueva Antropología No. 30).
REUNION EN MEXICO. HISTORIA DE LA CONFERENCIA MUNDIAL DEL ANO INTERNACIONAL DE LA MUJER. CD. DE MEXICO. 19 June - 2 July 1975. 141 pp.
REUNION REGIONAL DE AMERICA LATINA Y EL CARIBE, PREPARATORIA PARA LA CONFERENCIA MUNDIAL PARA EL EXAMEN Y LA EVALUACION DE LOS LOGROS DEL DECENIO DE LAS NACIONES UNIDAS PARA LA MUJER. IGUALDAD, DESARROLLO Y PAZ. La mujer rural de America Latina: un actor social del último decenio. (19751984). La Habana, ECLA. 51 pp.
REVILLA VERGARA, A. M. 1985. La problemática del fuero privativo agrario y su integración al fuero común. Lima, Universidad Católica. 169 pp. (Degree thesis).
REY DE MARULANDA, N. 1981. El trabajo de la mujer. Bogotá, CEDE. 182 pp. (Documento 063).
______. 1982. Mujeres jefes de hogar Bogotá, UNIANDES, CEDE. 66 pp.
RIVERO LEYVA, A. 1989. La protección social a la población rural en Cuba. Encuentro Interamericano de Derecho Laboral y Seguridad Social. Delegación CETSS, UNJC. La Habana. 21 pp.
ROCHA, L., ACOSTA, A. & GOMEZ, M. 1989. Technical Training and Credit for Women. A right, not a gift. Bogotá, UNICEF-Regional Program Participation of Woman in Development. 41 pp.
RODRIGUEZ DE MUÑOS, C. & ROCA DE SALONEN, E. 1977. El status de la mujer latinoamericana. Ley y costumbres. Medford, Massachusetts, Tufts University. 148 pp.
ROJAS, A. 1989. Nueva legislación cooperativa. Bogotá, Findesarrollo. 164 pp.
ROJINA, R. 1987. Derecho Civil Mexicano. Tomo II. Derecho de Familia México, Porrúa. 305 pp.
SANCHEZ, L. A. 1972. Historia general de América. Santiago de Chile, Ed. Ercilla. 3 v.
SANCHEZ, O. & URIBE, M. 1987. Colombia: Un Programa de Asistencia Legal. En SCHULDER, M. (comp.). 1987. Poder y derecho. Estrategias de las mujeres del Tercer Mundo. Washington, OEF International. p. 318-321.
SANTANA MUJICA, M. 1987. Pobreza y legalidad. Caracas. 16 pp. (mimeo).
SANTIAGO ESPINOZA, E. 1987. Situación legal de la mujer en Cuba. Octava Conferencia de la Asociación de Juristas Americanos. La Habana. 22 pp.
SANTOS, J. E. 1989. Régimen Bancario Colombiano. Bogotá, Legis. 1,388 pp.
SARA-LAFOSSE, V. 1988. Crisis familiar y social en el Perú. Lima, Ministerio de Justicia. 11 pp. (mimeo).
SELVA, B. 1985. Modalidades del trabajo femenino en San Felipe del Agua, Oaxaca. México, Facultad Latinoamericana de Ciencias Sociales. (Serie: Tesis de maestría).
SEMINARIO INTERNACIONAL SOBRE CO-PARTICIPACION DEL HOMBRE Y LA MUJER EN EL DESARROLLO NACIONAL. Mount Carmel, Israel, 10-20 agosto de 1975. 39 pp.
SEMINARIO REGIONAL TRIPARTITA LATINOAMERICANO SOBRE LA MUJER Y EL DESARROLLO RURAL. Pátzcuaro, 24-28 August 1981. México, ILO. 82 pp. (Informes).
SEMINARIO TALLER SOBRE PARTICIPACION DE LA MUJER EN EL DESARROLLO SOCIAL Y ECONOMICO. 1984. La microempresa: una alternativa de participación femenina. San Salvador.
SEMINARIO PARA AMERICA LATINA SOBRE LA MUJER EN EL DESARROLLO. 1989. Santiago de Chile, UNDP/UNFOA/UNICEF. 22 pp.
SLADE, D. 1979. Status marital e identidad sexual. La posición de la mujer en la sociedad campesina mexicana. In HARRIS, O. & YOUNG, K. (comps.). Antropología y feminismo. Barcelona, Anagrama. p. 181-204.
SOTO, O. D. 1988. 270. Aniversario de la Reforma Agraria. In Temas Agrarios. Caracas, Procuraduría Agraria Nacional. 10(26:2123).
SUAREZ, B. 1911. El Código Civil del ano 1860 con sus modificaciones haste el ano 1911. San Salvador. 419 pp.
SZEKELLY, A. 1981. Instrumentos fundamentales de Derecho Internacional Público. Compilación. México, Universidad Autónoma de México, Talleres Fuentes Impresores. 3 v.
THE EUROPE YEAR BOOK. 1987. A World Survey. Rochester, England, Staples Printers Rochester. 2 v.
TORRES FALCON, M. 1989. Situación de la mujer campesina frente a la legislación mexicana. México. FAO Consultant's paper. 115 pp.
UNDP-MAC. UNIFEM. 1989. Proyecto Desarrollo Integral pare la Mujer Rural en Sonsonate. El Salvador. (ELS/87/W01 Boletín Informativo No. 1).
UNESCO-FNUAP-ITCA. 1987. Información demográfica básica. Nueva San Salvador. 12 pp. (ELS/83/P01).
UNICEF. 1988. Análisis de la situación actual de la mujer en El Salvador. San Salvador. 82 pp.
______. 1988. Estado y sociedad civil conjugando esfuerzos en apoyo a la mujer. Informe del Encuentro de Organismos Gubernamentales de América Latina y el Caribe. Caracas, 1517 August 1988. 107 pp.
UNITED NATIONS. 1967. Declaration on the Elimination of Discrimination against Women. (Resolution 2263 XXII. 07 Nov.).
______. 1971. Comisión de la condición jurídica y social de la mujer. La condición jurídica y social de la mujer no casada. Derecho y practica. New York. 110 pp.
______. 1980. World plan of action for the implementation of the objectives of the international women's year. New york.
______. 1980. La mujer latinoamericana en el desarrollo económico y social. Copenhagen, ECLA. 33 pp.
______. S/F. La Tribunal Centro de la Tribuna Internacional de la Mujer. Proyectémonos hacia el futuro. New York. 63 pp.
______. 1983. Conferencia Mundial pare el Examen y la Evaluación de los Logros del Decenio de las Naciones Unidas pare la Mujer. Igualdad, Desarrollo y Paz. 19761985. Cuestionario de las Naciones Unidas pare los Gobiernos. Cuba. 251 pp.
______. 1983. Situación jurídica de la mujer latinoamericana y del Caribe definida según las resoluciones y mandatos del Sistema de las Naciones Unidas. Santiago de Chile, ECLA. 2 v.
______. 1984. La mujer rural en América Latina: un actor social del último decenio (1975-1984). La Habana, ECLA. 51 pp.
______. 1985. Nairobi forward-looking strategies for the Advancement of Women adopted by the World Conference of the United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace. Nairobi, 16-26 July 1985.
______. 1985. Centro de la Tribuna Internacional de la Mujer. La paz es un asunto de mujeres. New York. 40 pp. Boletín Informativo No. 26).
______. 1985. Subdivisión pare el adelanto de la mujer. Vienna, Centro de Desarrollo Social y Asuntos Humanitarios.
______. 1988. Las mujeres en América Latina y el Caribe: entre los cambios y las crisis. ECLA: Cuarta Conferencia sobre la Integración de la Mujer en el Desarrollo Económico y Social de América Latina y el Caribe. Guatemala. 35 pp.
______. DEVELOPMENT FORUM. Landless Farmers. New York. XVI. (Nov.Dee. 1988).
______. 1989. La Tribunal Centro de la Tribuna Internacional de la Mujer. La economía pasa por case. New York. 46 pp. (Boletín Informativo No. 35).
______. 1989. La Tribunal Centro de la Tribuna Internacional de la Mujer. Apropiémonos de los medios masivos de comunicación. New York. 47 pp. (Boletín Informativo No. 36).
URIBE DE ACOSTA, O. 1963. Una voz insurgente. Bogotá, Guadalupe. 383 pp.
VALENZUELA, D. et al. 1986. El papel de la mujer en la economía campesina. El cave de la Séptima Región en Chile. In C.P.U. Estudios Sociales. Santiago de Chile. 2(481:29-75).
VELASQUEZ, M. 1986. Aspectos históricos de la condición sexual de la mujer en Colombia. In LAVERDE, T. et al. Voces Insurgentes. Bogotá, Guadalupe. p. 181-201.
VENEZUELA. INSTITUTO AGRARIO NACIONAL. S/F. GERENCIA DE DESARROLLO AGRARIO. Programa e instituciones de Reforma Agraria. Caracas. 14 pp. (mimeo).
VENEZUELA. MINISTERIO DE AGRICULTURA Y CRIA. DIRECCION SECTORIAL DE DESARROLLO AGRICOLA. 1984. Una técnica de acción social pare mejorar la calidad de vida en el medio rural. Caracas. 27 pp. (mimeo).
VENEZUELA. MINISTERIO DE AGRICULTURA Y CRIA. 1984. Sistema Nacional de asistencia técnica. Caracas. 24 pp. (mimeo).
VENEZUELA. MINISTERIO DE AGRICULTURA Y CRIA. INSTITUTO AGRARIO NACIONAL. 1989. Plan de huertos. Caracas. 99 pp. (mimeo).
VENEZUELA. MINISTERIO DE LA JUENTUD. DIRECCION DE LA FAMILIA. 1984. Jornadas de la evaluación del Decenio de la mujer en Venezuela. Caracas. 22 pp. (mimeo).
VENEZUELA. MINISTERIO DE LA JUVENTUD. OFICINA NACIONAL DE LA MUJER. 1985. Diagnóstico analítico de la situación de la mujer en Venezuela. Caracas. 5 pp. (mimeo).
VENEZUELA. MINISTERIO DE LA JUENTUD. OFICINA NACIONAL DE LA MUJER. 1986. Propuestas pare un Plan de la Mujer en el ienio 87-89. Caracas. 16 pp. (mimeo).
VENEZUELA. MINISTERIO DE LA FAMILIA. OFICINA NACIONAL DE LA MUJER. 1986. Propuestas de la Oficina Nacional de la Mujer al Proyecto de Reforma de la Ley del Trabajo del Dr. Rafael Caldera, presentadas por la Ministra Virginia Celis de Oliva al Congreso Nacional el día 6 de marzo de 1986. Caracas. 34 pp. (mimeo).
VENEZUELA. MINISTERIO DE LA FAMILIA. OFICINA NACIONAL DE LA MUJER. 1987. Documento del Taller de Reforma del Código Penal concerniente a la Familia y a la Mujer en Venezuela. Caracas. 159 pp. (mimeo).
VENEZUELA. MINISTERIO DE LA FAMILIA. 1987. Estereotipos y roles sexuales en Venezuela. Un estudio bibliográfico. Caracas, Nueva Sociedad. 48 pp.
VENEZUELA. MINISTERIO DE LA FAMILIA. DIRECCION SECTORIAL DE PROMOCION DE LA MUJER. 1988. Lineamientos, objetivos y programas. Caracas. 18 pp. (mimeo).
VENEZUELA. MINISTERIO DE LA FAMILIA. DIRECCION SECTORIAL DE PROMOCION DE LA MUJER. 1988. Política Nacional dirigida al desarrollo y promoción de la mujer en Venezuela. Caracas. 28 pp. (mimeo).
VENEZUELA. MINISTERIO DE LA FAMILIA. DIRECCION SECTORIAL DE PROMOCION A LA MUJER. 1988. Indicadores demográficos, sociales y económicos sobre la población femenina en Venezuela. Caracas. 148 pp. (mimeo).
VILLAR, R. 1988. Mujer campesina y organización rural en Colombia. Bogotá, UNIANDES. 133 pp.
VILLARREAL, N. S/F. Nosotras y el municipio. Bogotá, Ministerio de Agricultura-UNICEF, Guadalupe. 30 pp.
______. S/F. Acciones que deben contemplarse pare una propuesta en relación con la mujer rural. Bogotá. 5 pp. (mimeo).
______. 1987. Bases conceptuales pare el trabajo de organización y capacitación de mujeres campesinas. Bogotá. 9 pp. (mimeo).
VILLARREAL, N. 1989. Las organizaciones femeninas. En Prode mocracia. Protagonismo de mujer. Bogotá, Guadalupe. p. 19116.
WATERMAN, P. 1981. Obreros, campesinos, artesanos y madres: hacia un entendimiento de las interrelaciones de la clase trabajadora en las sociedades capitalistas periféricas. IN: Campesino Campesinas. México, Revista Mexicana de Sociología. p. 63-104.
WEINERMAN, C. & MORENO, M. 1986. Hacia un reconocimiento causal de las mujeres trabajadoras. Santiago de Chile, ILPESECLA. 5 pp.
______. 1987. Incorporando los trabajadores agrícolas a los censos poblacionales. In Desarrollo Económico. Buenos Aires, IDES. pp. 347-376.
WITSTEIN, G. 1982. Cambios agrarios recientes en los Andes Venezolanos. In Revista Comercio Exterior. México. 32(6:13 pp.).
YRURETA, G. 1989. Situación de la mujer campesina frente a la legislación. El cave de Venezuela. Santiago de Chile, FAO Consultant's paper. 120 pp.
ZAVALETA, D. 1984. Otorgamiento de crédito a la mujer. In SEMINARIO SOBRE PARTICIPACION DE LA MUJER AL DESARROLLO ECONOMICO Y SOCIAL. San Salvador, CIM-OAS. 13 pp. (mimeo).
ZIMBALIST, M. 1979. Mujer, cultura y sociedad: una visión teórica. In HARRIS, O. & YOUNG, K. (comps.). Antropología y feminismo. Barcelona, Anagrama. p.153-180.
<section>e</section>
Foreword
Foreword
The legal status of rural women in the developing countries is an issue that has been among FAO's concerns ever since the formulation of the Declaration of Principles and Programme of Action of the World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development in the late seventies. More recently, in 1988, the Organization adopted a Plan of Action for the Integration of Women in Development. One of the four spheres of action proposed concerns the legal status of rural women.
This was the context in which the FAO Regional Office for Latin America and the Caribbean, and the Human Resources, Institutions and Agrarian Reform Division at FAO Headquarters in Rome, together undertook a systematic review of the treatment of rural women in constitutional, civil, labour and agrarian law to determine how existing legislation affects or limits their sharing in the development of the region. As part of this effort, nine national-level case studies were conducted and a Round Table on "Legal Mechanisms to facilitate Women's Participation in Rural Development" was held in Santiago, Chile in September 1990. At this Round Table, in-depth reports were presented by 19 countries, and a series of recommendations were put forward for eliminating discrimination against women embodied in the legislation or hallowed by practice when the laws are not in fact enforced.
This book, prepared by Ms. Ruth Baena de Esparza, a lawyer and expert on the subject, presents the historical background to rural women's subordination in law in Latin America and takes a critical look at the situation today. The book also takes up the recommendations and proposals for legislative changes and strategies put forward at the Round Table. Finally, an annex is included containing previously unpublished case studies on Colombia, Cuba, El Salvador, Mexico and Venezuela, together with a glossary of the legal terms used in the study, so that readers unfamiliar with the specialized terminology may find the work easier to understand.
It should be noted, however, that, given the incomplete conceptual overlap of apparently identical terms/expressions between those used in the Civil Law and Common Law countries and given, also, the absence of certain concepts from one or the other system, the terms and expressions used in the translation should be taken as those of common parlance and sufficiently indicative unless otherwise evident from the context.
FAO hopes that this publication will contribute to the debate on women's participation in agricultural and rural development, and draw governments' attention further to the importance of eliminating any and rule of law, or practice, resulting in discrimination against their citizens who are women.
