<title>Extension woman to woman - Training peasant women liaisons to reach peasant women</title>
<section>1</section>
Rural women in Honduras
Rural women in Honduras
Rural people in Honduras constitute almost 61 percent of the total population. They have little access to basic development goods -- food, shelter, potable water, sanitation systems, education, communications, roads, and markets. Eighty percent of all rural people live in poverty. Sixty-six percent of farmers who produce basic grains, the country's staple food, have access to only eight percent of all cultivable land. This 66 percent has, on average, slightly more than one hectare of land to secure a year's supply of basic grains to feed a family with approximately six children, and to produce a surplus for the nation. Peasants cultivate indigenous seed varieties using rudimentary hand tools and some animal traction to prepare, sow, and harvest the land. In need of cash, peasant farmers often sell part of their food crop in order to purchase goods necessary for their family's livelihood or to settle debts, only to buy food at high prices in periods of scarcity.
Paid work opportunities for both rural men and women are minimal, but the situation is even more difficult for rural women. In some regions, women's handicraft production increases their official economic activity rate, but the 1988 census shows an economic activity rate for rural women of 11 percent. This is not to say that women do not work. The traditional gender division of labour hides the actual economic participation rate of rural women. Women's work is even further under-estimated in the agricultural sector because women typically do not consider themselves primarily as agricultural workers. A 1990 comparison of four studies on women's economic participation in the 1980s revealed that 75-79 percent of rural women participate in agricultural production, although this is often seasonal or part-time. This "adjusted" figure includes women's participation in subsistence production in areas that traditionally are under the woman's control -- poultry, pig and goat
production, and vegetable gardening. These activities normally take place close to the home, allowing women to attend to domestic and productive responsibilities at the same time.
The census shows that, of all women who claim to be heads of households in rural areas, 22 percent are involved in economic activity, which is more than twice the rate registered for women who are spouses of a head of household (nine percent). The most recent statistics on rural households headed by single women -- 17.8 percent according to the census under-estimate the actual number of women with dependents who lack a companion. Abandoned women's emigration to urban areas, single mothers who identify their oldest son as the household head, and separated women reincorporated in their parents' households, hide the actual "count" of single mothers.
Trends in rural emigration indicate that women respond differently to rural poverty compared to rural men. They are less likely than men to remain in rural areas. Women make up 49 percent of the rural population and 53 percent of the urban population. Of all rural emigrants, 54 percent are women, of which 64 percent migrate to urban areas. Higher women's emigration is often linked with either temporary or permanent dissolution of households, and the need to earn an income.
Rural women's educational level is equivalent to men's, but both are deficient. Illiteracy is concentrated in rural areas where, according to 1988 statistics, 51 percent of the population is illiterate. The historical trend that discriminated against young girls' education has been rectified in Honduras, according to recent census data. Comparing women to men, slightly more women are literate than men.
The poverty of the rural population is manifested by chronic malnutrition. Multiple births without adequate spacing, and nearly continuous breast feeding have even greater negative consequences for women's health. Depending on the region, illiterate women in rural Honduras have an average of between 6.7 and 8.2 children in their lifetimes, averages which are among the highest in Latin America. Seventy percent of all breast feeding mothers suffer from Vitamin A deficiency, and iron intake is estimated at 40 percent of the recommended level. The rural population suffers from both caloric and protein deficiencies that limit mental and physical growth as well as the capacity for continuous physical activity.
<section>2</section>
Project background
Project background
The "Promotion and Training Programme Women's Incorporation in Rural Development" is part of a 10-year long process of integrating rural women's concerns into development planning and project execution in Honduras, an effort spearheaded by UN organizations and supported primarily by the Government of the Netherlands.
Promotion of women's participation in production began in the 1970s with financial assistance offered by the United Nations System to the National Agrarian Institute of the Government of Honduras, with the goal of strengthening organized peasant groups who have benefitted from Agrarian Reform (called the "Reformed Sector"). Agricultural producers not benefitting from Agrarian Reform (the "Non-Reformed Sector") have been provided with services through the Ministry of Natural Resources; since the 1950s this has included activities for women, although these were primarily directed toward activities in the domestic sphere. In any case, rural development policy in Honduras has been oriented toward production, which was traditionally considered to be "men's" work.
The FAO project evolved out of a joint project of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the FAO.^2 Directed to female members of families in the Reformed Sector, this women-specific project had a budget of $1,095,000 over three years (1983-1986) to implement technical training and develop a rotating credit fund for small productive projects. However, only five percent of the total budget was allocated to training for women.
^2 Project symbol DP/HON/82/007 (1983-86).
The lack of a training component for rural women had a negative impact on the project. First, it allowed women to develop unrealistic expectations of monetary returns that could not be met because of their low level of skills and organizational capacity. Second, despite the modest success of some women's groups in the implementation of productive and marketing activities, the project's overall objectives were not attained. Forfeited loans amounted to 40-60 percent of all loans made, depending on the region. The absence of a good marketing strategy led to market losses that made it impossible to replenish the project's rotating fund.
The specific problems of women in the Reformed Sector were determined to be:
1) a high rate of illiteracy,
2) lack of motivation to assume new roles,
3) little awareness of production alternatives,
4) lack of time to participate in groups due to the demands of household activities.
It became clear that the grassroots women's activities in the UNDP/FAO project were not addressing the basic educational and organizational needs of women. National administrators and international development officials proposed a new project, focused solely on training rural women and sensitizing and training extensionists who worked with those women. The fundamental conviction behind the proposed new project was that economic activities could not take place without prior organization, and that training is a necessary tool for group organization. Supported with US$ 698 500 contributed by the Government of the Netherlands, the new project^3 got underway in February 1986 and its first phase was completed in September 1989. FAO coordinated the project in collaboration with the two government agencies responsible for extension in Honduras -- the National Agrarian Institute and, later, the Ministry of Natural Resources.
^3 Project symbol GCP/HON/013/NET (1986-89), also referred to as "Phase I" of the FAO project.
From the beginning, the FAO project aimed to strengthen rural women's organization, enhance awareness both from the bottom up and from the top down, develop appropriate agricultural training techniques, and train rural women to act as liaisons between the extension system and grassroots women's groups. Six regions were targeted by the project: Comayagua, Copán Choluteca, El Paraíso, Francisco Morazán, Olancho and Santa Barbara.
Four different types of liaisons were trained: 1) Literacy Workers, 2) Housing/Environment Liaisons, 3) Women's Group Organizers, and 4) Food Production Liaisons. The training of rural women was complemented by the simultaneous training of extensionists and other professional staff from the Government extension agencies. Grassroots participation and feedback helped the project to fine-tune its goals and methods, meet the needs of the peasant women and their organizations that were its beneficiaries, and assure project acceptance. This participation has been an important ingredient in success throughout the project.
The project's specific objectives were:
1) to train 200 peasant women, and
2) to train 152 extensionists and other extension staff.
Course content for the 200 rural women trainees included literacy, housing improvements, group organization and project implementation, and food production for improved household nutrition. The training for the 152 extension workers aimed to sensitize them to the situation that rural women confront, and to promote appropriate technology and organizational techniques for the development of social and productive projects to benefit rural women. The expected impact of the activities in the project area was improved capacity on the part of rural women to plan and execute productive and social projects based upon their own and their communities' felt needs.
To address the needs of women in the Non-Reformed Sector and to strengthen training in nutrition, the FAO project requested that, in addition to the National Agrarian Institute, the Ministry of Natural Resources also participate. Administrative complications, however, limited the Ministry's participation to the last of the four training modules.
The lessons learned in the process of project execution, and the need to consolidate groups that had benefited from it, convinced the FAO to support once the project ends support a six-month interim project^4 which would offer continuity while a special FAO/Netherlands Government team developed a full second phase for the project. Phase II^5 would span the period from November 1990 to May 1992, with a budget of US$ 410,380. As can be seen in the Chart, Phase I was oriented towards organizing peasant women into groups, training certain group members as extension liaisons, and sensitizing the extension workers who serve rural women. The objectives of the six-month interim project were to organize credit sources, provide follow-up training for some of the women trained in Phase I, more clearly define the training and role of the most successful class of extension liaisons and peasant promoters, and document Phase II of the project.
^4 Project symbol TCP/HON/0051 (1990), with a budget of $75,000.
^5 Project symbol GCP/HON/015/NET (1990-92).
CHART: OBJECTIVES OF THE DIFFERENT PROJECT PHASES
"PHASE I"
CODE: GCP/HON/013/NET (1986-89)
BUDGET: $698,479
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES:
1. Train a total of 200 persons, mostly women
a) Women's Group Organizers
b) Male and female Literacy Workers
c) Community Food Liaisons
2. Train 152 state extension agents and social promoters
ADDED COMPONENTS:
1. Train women Housing/Environment Liaisons
2. Establish Inputs and Seeds Fund
3. Follow-up training in family poultry production
"INTERIM PROJECT"
CODE: TCP/HON/0051 (1990)
BUDGET: $75,000
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES:
1. Establish pilot credit programme to test family poultry production
2. Re-activate Rotating Fund for Peasant Women (frozen in 1987)
3. Write up Phase II of project
"PHASE II"
CODE: GCP/HON/015/NET (1990-92)
BUDGET: $410,380
SPECIFIC OBJECTIVES:
1. Train 60 new Community Food Liaisons and follow up on previously trained CFLs
2. Train 60 state extensionists and social promoters
3. Establish poultry credit for all groups with CFLs
4. Continue Inputs and Seeds Fund
5. Provide technical assistance for service and productive projects for both subsistence and income generation
6. Establish and document training methodology
7. Support efforts to research and produce intermediate technology for grain mills and water supply
8. Establish network of resources that peasant women can exploit for technical and financial
Phase II, now in progress, is working to consolidate the peasant women's groups, train another 60 women as extension liaisons, provide training for another 60 extensionists, provide further practical training for peasant women, promote the production of intermediate technology for grain mills and water supply, and build a network of technical and financial support to continue beyond the project's end. (See Chart for details.)
<section>3</section>
Training in gender for extensionists
Training in gender for extensionists
Training was conceived as a tool to reshape the attitudes of extension staff towards working with women. The great majority of extensionists held the view that women were suited to household and maternal functions only, and expressed the general attitude that a woman "only knows how to care for children, wash clothes and cook." Thus, for them, women's participation in production and in all activities related to rural development was insignificant. This bias limited women's access to agricultural extension.
The essence of the training was to promote broader acceptance among extension workers of the idea of working with women in rural development programmes and, at a macro level, to strengthen institutional capacity to work with women after project completion. It was considered vital to project success to bring about a change in attitudes within the National Agrarian Institute -- one of two agencies in the country responsible for extension. The Institute had a male production-oriented concept of rural development, few women employees, and only a nascent women's section. The training in gender was essential to guarantee women a minimum of access to extensionists' time.
The most important element of the extensionists' training was the course on "Methodology for Promotion and Organization of Rural Women". Training emphasized the need to: 1) better motivate field personnel to collaborate with women, 2) identify traditional and non-traditional roles of women, and 3) provide feedback to field personnel on their field work. This women-specific approach addressed the structural problems that extensionists and women confront in group organization -- such as the heavy domestic workloads of rural women, and the low priority extensionists often give to women -using dramatizations to enact real-life situations.
Training of extensionists emphasizes the need to better motivate field personnel to collaborate with women.
The four themes of the training were: 1) peasant economy, 2) the gender division of labour, 3) conditions in which women work, and, 4) compatibility of women's roles as workers and mothers.
Training courses were continually subject to adaptation and improvement, but each took a non-threatening, non-"feminist" approach based on traditional Honduran values. Through discussions, case studies, dramatizations and exchange of experiences, participants dedicated five days to changing their previously held conceptions. Begun in 1986, this training continues today in each of the executing agencies under the auspices of the FAO project and other supporting institutions.
<section>4</section>
Extension liaisons
Literacy workers
Housing/environment liaisons
Women's group organizers
Elements of success
Additional constraints
Lessons learned
Extension liaisons
The formation of "extension liaisons" was meant to improve the ability of the extension system to reach rural women by educating women from rural communities to work with grassroots women's groups, thus expanding the scope and quality of the extension services for rural women. In order to be considered as candidates for training, potential liaisons had to be literate. Initially, the project proposed that women needed a sixth-grade education, but within the first six months of execution, expectations had to be lowered because women with this level of education were not to be found.
Women were trained as one of four types of extension liaisons, in four separate training modules:
* Literacy Workers
* Housing/Environment Liaisons
* Women's Group Organizers
* Food Production Liaisons
The most successful module was the fourth, which prepared Food Production Liaisons. The other three training modules suffered from institutional, financial and social constraints that limited their success. However, the fact that the different modules were executed consecutively rather than simultaneously made it possible to apply the lessons learned from the first modules to the later modules. In this way, the so-called "Interim Project" and Phase II of the project were directed toward replicating and documenting the fourth, most successful module -- that of the Food Production Liaison. A description of the four training modules and the subsequent work of the women and men who received the training is given below.
Literacy workers
Learning how to read and write gives higher skill levels and greater personal confidence that in turn enhance democratic group processes and boost participation at the grassroots level. As well, with 50 percent of their members illiterate, women's groups in the project area had difficulty dealing with technical problems that might otherwise have been tackled on a group basis. The FAO project addressed this concern by training 141 Literacy Workers to teach basic math, reading and writing.
Eighty percent of the trainees chosen by the National Agrarian Institute were women. The methodology used for literacy training was developed by the Ministry of Public Education for their national literacy programme.
Some 97 literacy circles were formed between 1986 and 1990 in the project area, but by 1991 only 30 circles were still functioning. More than half of the Literacy Workers never completed their first course. Despite the critical need for literacy training, cultural, personal and institutional problems limited implementation of the plan. Women's participation as Literacy Workers was limited by socio-cultural obstacles. The women were at times denied permission by their fathers or husbands to travel to the villages where they taught. Literacy classes generally were offered in the evenings, and walking through the woods or crossing rivers at night was considered dangerous for women. They did not have the freedom to travel, or the encouragement and support at home to be accompanied by a family member.
After the Literacy Workers were trained and had initiated their teaching activities, lack of follow-up on the part of extensionists in each region also weakened the expected results. Most extensionists did not stay in the villages after dark, since transport was difficult and they were not paid for overtime.
Literacy Workers expected technical support for the development of literacy circles and were also led to believe that they would receive financial support for their activity, including improvements in the teaching site and a token amount of pay for their work. They were disappointed in both expectations. As a result, Literacy Workers did not continue teaching.
Housing/environment liaisons
The Housing/Environment Liaison module was not one of the three modules originally proposed in the project document. Rather, it was proposed in 1988 by the director of the National Agrarian Institute. The director at that time was interested in supporting traditional projects for women as mothers and housewives.
Although the concept was somewhat at odds with the project's objective of changing attitudes about women's multiple roles, the project team agreed to implement the module, recognizing that the overall lack of infrastructure adversely affects women's time availability and family hygiene. Housing in rural areas is typically cramped and unsanitary. Difficult living conditions impede women's participation in group activities.
After their training, the enthusiasm with which the Housing/ Environment Liaisons carried out their work led to demands from grassroots groups that the project could not fulfil. The Liaisons were active within their groups, especially in the construction of improved wood-burning stoves. For stove construction and many other housing improvements, a certain amount of materials had to be purchased -- nails, hammers and tiles, for instance. Without credit, most women could not make even simple improvements.
The improvements that the women considered most important -- building concrete floors, constructing water receptacles and latrines, and improving roofs required construction materials whose costs were prohibitive. The transfer of appropriate technology generated a demand for larger, more comprehensive changes in infrastructure that required credit and construction materials. When the project team recognized that the Housing Liaisons were creating a demand that could not be satisfied, training and follow-up activities were halted. The Housing/Environment Liaisons and their groups lost the motivation to continue home improvement activities, although some have since been able to take advantage of outside support from non-governmental development organizations to implement major improvements in their communities.
Women's group organizers
The Women's Group Organizers module was proposed in order to develop "peasant women activists" among women who belonged to predominately male peasant organizations. These women typically had above-average levels of organizational consciousness, but their access to decision-making within the organizations was usually minimal. The "activism" proposed was intended to promote change in male-dominated peasant organizations and to stimulate demand for extension services in the groups these women led.
The training of the Women's Group Organizers consisted of six one-week courses on the following themes:
1) National Policies
2) Rural Women's Reality
3) Home Economics and Women's Health
4) Administration of Productive Projects
5) Integrated Family and Collective Gardens
6) Project Planning.
The training methodology included talks, demonstrations, action, group dynamics, role-playing, and discussion and problem-solving in small groups. After completing the courses, each woman, depending on her circumstances, committed herself to promoting the formation of 5-20 groups of rural women. The work of these women was to encourage grassroots organization and train group members in appropriate agricultural techniques. The Women's Group Organizers were supported by the project for four months with a 300 Lempira ($75) per month subsidy; after this time the subsidies were supposed to be provided by their peasant organizations.
A number of problems arose among the Women's Group Organizers and the peasant organizations they belonged to that created obstacles to the continuity and sustainability of their work. One of the problems was a lack of conviction and hence a lack of resources from peasant organizations to support the Women's Group Organizers. (The responsibilities of a Women's Group Organizer were equivalent to those of a full-time male peasant organizer who generally received about $150/month for his work, plus expenses.) Second, the drop-out rate among initial trainees was high. And, finally, the Women's Group Organizers' own workload proved to be incompatible with full-time organizing activities, particularly for women heads of household, and personal confrontations at the household level were common. Despite these difficulties, 55 of the original 92 women trained continue in some organized capacity today, although not in that originally designated by the project.
Their job was to encourage grassroots organization and to teach appropriate agricultural techniques.
Elements of success
The "multiplier effect" of the Women's Group Organizer training was very great. Statistics from the National Peasants' Association of Honduras (ANACH - Asociación Nacional de Campesinos de Honduras), for example, show that within 18 months after 17 Women's Group Organizers were trained, they formed 61 new groups with a total membership of 800 women. The Organizers' increased motivation and initial remuneration gave them the willingness, confidence and ability to transfer the knowledge they received through training to numerous groups within their area of influence. These women were also inspired by their previous involvement in peasant organizations.
By offering technical support in villages where extensionists rarely visited, Women's Group Organizers initiated and continued work that would not have been possible otherwise, helping new groups to form and consolidate and to administer their affairs. The women's groups formed enjoyed stability thanks to continuous supervision by their Organizer, rather than having to wait for an extensionist to arrive.
The political impact of the women's training was felt in the household, the community and the peasant organizations. Women's involvement in organizations increased their responsibilities in the public sphere.
Trained peasant women who belonged to predominantly male organizations began to demand increased decision-making power and fought for recognition of their rights. The women of the National Peasants' Union (UNC -- Unión Nacional de Campesinos), for example, formed a block and in 1988 successfully demanded the right to vote within the organization. Female members of ANACH have pushed for greater representation at the regional level, demanding that at least one woman be included in the leadership of each region.
Increased activity often caused personal problems for the women because they were taking on a non-traditional role. After a period of time, though, the positive results of the Organizers' activities transformed village gossip into community respect. Women working as Organizers universally agreed that they initially experienced rejection at home and in the community, but that their struggle to work with the women was worthwhile. Overall, the women, the peasant organizations, and the project's personnel recognize that women's greater presence at all levels within the peasant organizations is a direct result of the training programme.
Additional constraints
The high drop-out rate among trainees, especially at the beginning of the project, was found to be in part the result of trainees' lack of connection to a grassroots base. Often the women chosen by the peasant organizations to participate in training were involved in their organizations at the regional or national level. They were not able or willing to transfer their knowledge to grassroots groups. In these cases, the desired multiplier effect did not materialize.
Lack of funding was the most persistent constraint to successful continuation of the work of the Women's Group Organizers. Each Organizer was supposed to depend on her own peasant organization for a subsidy, or at least to cover travel expenses, after the end of the first four months of project execution. However, predominantly male peasant organizations denied payment to the women Organizers, or paid them half the men's rate. Women's peasant organizations had limited funds to pay the Organizers, having depended on volunteerism in the past; even payment of travel allowances was interminably delayed, and Organizers had to pay transportation and meal costs out of their own pockets.
Payment for work that many consider to be political activism can be controversial, but not for the Women's Group Organizers themselves. Almost one-third are single mothers. They work out of necessity as seamstresses, farmers, or market vendors. Organizing is itself a full-time activity, and productive work cannot be carried out while organizing and attending to grassroots groups on a full-time basis. Without compensation, the women were unable to expand their organizing activities beyond their villages.
The majority of Women's Group Organizers also had to struggle within their families for the right to participate actively as organizers. The women report that their husbands mistreated them, or tried to control them (one man reportedly even left his wife), once they had completed their training and begun organizing. They received neither support nor approval because, in the words of one woman, "I was a different person after the training. I had more confidence, and my husband didn't know what to do with me." After a period of personal struggle within the family, however, most husbands came to recognize the value of their wives' participation and allowed them to leave the house and travel to other villages.
Lessons learned
The three principle lessons derived from the Women's Group Organizer module are: 1) the need for incentives for full-time participation in organizing activities, 2) the desirability of selecting women who are connected to the grassroots in order to achieve the greatest impact, and 3) the need to integrate spouses in women's efforts in order to soften the impact of women's personal changes and their new time commitments. These lessons and others were applied in the final training module, described in the following chapter.
<section>5</section>
A model for success: the food production liaison
The idea behind the training
Research and action - training methodology
Motivate to produce - tools, training and credit for women
Inputs and seeds fund
Poultry credit fund
Rotating fund for peasant women
A model for success: the food production liaison
The idea behind the training
The fourth module, limited to the Departments of Comayagua, Copán and Choluteca, trained peasant women as Food Production Liaisons. This module aimed to improve nutritional levels in the project area, while redressing the lack of attention given to women's economic responsibilities and to the gender division of labour in the countryside. The component was oriented toward supporting women's traditional roles in subsistence agricultural production.
The productive activities of the forerunner FAO/UNDP project in the early 1980s had not been entirely successful, in part because families had to sacrifice their welfare to obtain a profit, when what they really needed were modest investments to improve family consumption. For example, pigs were treated with medicines while families could not afford medical care for their children, and chickens were given imported feed that cost more than the families' corn. The FAO project now proposed to improve subsistence production rather than supporting production for profit. Cultivating indigenous varieties of grains, vegetables and fruits, and breeding indigenous small livestock is common among peasant families who cannot afford expensive inputs required by high-yield crop varieties imported from outside the region or provide animals with special diets and expensive medicines. But these home-grown varieties are minimally productive because normally no steps are taken to control plant
or animal diseases or to improve production. The training proposed to improve women's knowledge of and control over production for consumption and to enhance family survival strategies.
The project proposed to improve productivity and knowledge to meet subsistence needs, rather than to generate profit.
Increased subsistence production is of paramount importance in the project area. Though impacts on family consumption have not been measured, it appears that the increase in family consumption of poultry products, vegetables and fruits since implementation of this phase has been highly significant. The improved diet also represents a real economic benefit.
This module adapted many of the elements of the Women's Group Organizer module, but changed those that had not worked. For example, greater care was taken in selecting participants for the courses than had been the case in the previous three modules. After staff from both the National Agrarian Institute and the Ministry of Natural Resources had identified potential trainees and beneficiary groups, they asked each women's group to make the final decision on who would represent them and receive the Food Production Liaison training.
Once a woman was chosen by her group (in one case, a man was selected), the local extension agent met with the potential trainee and her spouse or father to discuss the commitment involved in training, the responsibility she would have in her community after training, and how much time the activities would require. The spouse or father had to agree to the woman's commitment before she could participate in training. This integrated family approach -- learned the hard way through the experience of the Women's Group Organizers -- bore fruit in the long run. All Food Production Liaisons have received strong support from their spouses who even help with home or agricultural activities when the women are working on group activities.
One regional office of the Ministry of Natural Resources developed a procedure that has been adapted for universal use. The regional office began to build women's groups in areas with little organizational strength, and then trained a Food Production Liaison for each group within one year of commencement of organizational activities. In many cases during this phase, the project team also followed up on grassroots groups that the Women's Group Organizers had formed one to two years earlier.
Apart from the involvement of husbands or fathers, the selection criteria for the Food Production Liaisons are less rigid than was the case of the Women's Group Organizers. The women are required to have completed third grade (or at least to have sufficient reading and writing skills to take notes), and to be willing and able to travel to training sessions and dedicate time to their groups. Because the women trained as Food Production Liaisons have little or no previous training in peasant organization and have rarely been out of their communities, their level of training, experience and organizational development is lower than that of the Women's Group Organizers. This has not necessarily been a negative factor. The minimal selection criteria have allowed for greater participation and have promoted the development of new leaders from the grassroots level.
The responsibilities of the Food Production Liaison are also fewer. Her commitment extends only to the women's groups in her home village, and she does not have to travel except to attend training sessions once a month over a period of six months
The objective of the training is to provide each Liaison with useful information on subsistence farming, and to motivate her to transfer that knowledge to her group through a "teach by example" method. The Liaison cultivates a demonstration vegetable and fruit garden, either on a collective basis or at her own home, using materials provided by the project and by her family. The "teach by example" method was developed to change attitudes and habits among the members of each group, motivating group members to start their own gardens.
Training content for the first Food Production Liaisons consisted of four, five-day courses on the following themes:
1) Family and Nutrition - awareness raising around the problem of malnutrition and the importance of women's participation in family nutrition efforts.
2) Nutrition and Diet - the importance of a balanced diet; the preparation, conservation, and storage of traditional and nontraditional foods; and the importance of agricultural production for family consumption.
3) Integrated Family Gardens - techniques for vegetable and fruit gardens including appropriate produce for the region; production techniques including preparation of organic fertilizer; soil conservation; edible parts of vegetables; planning local resources to develop the demonstration garden; and promotion of vegetable gardens in the community.
4) Small Animal Husbandry - introduction of techniques to help solve basic problems in small livestock production, especially pigs and poultry; community analysis of animal production; construction of pig sties and chicken coops; selection of breeding stock; feeding habits; prevention and control of common diseases; vaccination and control of parasites; work plan in the community.
The use of minimum criteria to select peasant women trainees has allowed for greater participation and the development of new grassroots leaders.
The first two courses drew upon women's traditional roles as a means of encouraging participation. The importance of combining the traditional with the innovative cannot be overemphasized, especially for women with little self-confidence or experience in community organization.
After the first two years of training, the project directors recognized that the "graduates" of the Food Production Liaison module needed to enhance their skills, especially in group organization. The project team adapted two training topics from the Women's Group Organizer module:
5) Organization and Group Leadership
6) Project Analysis and Planning.
In the end, the Food Production Liaisons have come to receive almost the same training as the Women's Group Organizers. The Food Production Liaisons, however, engage in supervised and disciplined field practice after their formal training is completed.
Organic Fertilizer: New Name for an Old Method
The appropriate technology and low-cost agricultural methods that the FAO has promoted in peasant women's training for subsistence agriculture are easily understood by Honduran peasants. Natural techniques for pest control soil conservation and soil preparation have been used since the time of the Mayas. However, this knowledge is not consistently transferred over generations, and many people have lost the knowledge of techniques that their grandparents once used. Such is the case with organic fertilizer.
Most refuse from peasant families is biodegradable and often under-utilized. With a little organization and ingenuity, Food Production Liaisons have been able to promote the use of organic fertilizer heaps. Participants are taught to layer any and all types of plant refuse in a corner of their yard and to cover it with cut grass. The rapid decomposition of organic matter in tropical zones allows the use of this natural fertilizer within 2-4 months.
Another useful but less accessible organic fertilizer is dried cow manure. Making a "tea" from manure can help stretch a limited quantity, and the liquid can be applied directly to the plant base rather mixing it into the soil.
One ingenious Liaison built a raised chicken coop with a mud brick floor below. Droppings from her 20 chickens fall onto rice husks scattered under the coop, creating a rich fertilizer mix in four months' time.
Research and action - training methodology
The methodology of training for Food Production Liaisons involves lecture, small group discussion, supervised practical work in the community, and demonstration. As part of their training, the women also travel to other areas of the country to learn appropriate agricultural techniques. But the most important training technique -- one that strengthens women's analytical and organizational skills -- is that of research before and action after. This technique has contributed to the success of the Food Production Liaison module.
At the end of each course, each participant receives a work guide to help her conduct a study in her home group or community. The knowledge acquired -- through survey, analysis, or observation -- is applied in the subsequent course in the development of a work plan that the women will then implement.
In the course on Family and Nutrition, the trainees perform two types of studies. First, they research the nutritional status of young children who are sons and daughters of the members of their women's groups. They use a calibrated bracelet to measure the size of each child's forearm and then count the number of normal, at-risk and malnourished children. Second, they ask the women in their group about the family diet, recording all the information they acquire. (See Annex for guides.)
In the subsequent course on Diet and Nutrition, the results of the nutrition studies are discussed. Learning about the critical situation in their communities motivates the women to act. They are asked to plan and present a demonstration for their women's groups on one of the units of the Diet and Nutrition course, and to report on the activity in the following course.
Also, after the Diet and Nutrition course, participants are asked to record the characteristics of their community and its women members in order to determine what resources are available to support family garden activities. This baseline survey seeks to discover what public and private organizations operate in the zone that could offer aid or assistance; what projects local women are currently participating in; and. at an individual level, the size of each family plot, access to water, types of food currently being produced, number and type of animals kept at home and common diseases that affect them. Upon return to class for the next course on Integrated Family Gardens, each participant uses her baseline study to discuss problems with the other participants and to propose a plan of action for developing family and collective gardens.
As part of this plan, the women are expected to promote the use of organic fertilizer in their communities. They are taught simple techniques for preparing the fertilizer and are given a guideline to establish the quantity and type of organic fertilizer to be produced, and the number of group members it will benefit.
In the Small Livestock Husbandry course, the women use the same baseline study to plan and execute a project that will prevent or control the most common diseases among small livestock and increase the number of small livestock in the community.
The practical work for the course on Organization and Leadership includes making a list of all local organizations, their resources and their responsibilities. For the Project Analysis and Planning course, the trainees elaborate a plan, complete with feasibility study, for a service or productive project that improves the quality of life for women's group members and their families.
This "research and action" training technique sharpens analytical skills and offers an opportunity for reflection so that the women can then propose their own ideas and act on them in their groups.
Motivate to produce - tools, training and credit for women
From the beginning, the analyses of the Food Production Liaison trainees have indicated a need for financial support to initiate the envisaged activities. In response, the project team proposed two unique credit funds to motivate and mobilize women's groups.
The participants propose a plan of action for developing family and collective gardens.
Inputs and seeds fund
In order to support women's interest in family gardening and strengthen women's groups, in 1989 the project proposed an Inputs and Seeds Fund to provide seeds, rudimentary tools for gardening and minimal chemical inputs to combat otherwise uncontrollable pest damage. The project also distributed several pesticide hand-sprayers, each to be shared by 34 groups. In order to keep credit burdens to a minimum in a pilot programme whose success was not assured, these one-time, in-kind loans were 50 percent subsidized. In other words, individuals were only obliged to repay 50 percent of the value of the materials they received. However, the groups also committed themselves to repaying the other 50 percent at no interest. Each group's payments went into a local fund under the name of the group, with three signatories, to develop a resource for future community projects. The Inputs and Seeds Fund initially totaled 20,000 Lempiras (about US$ 4,000).
To complement the credit for family garden production, one of the follow-up courses for Food Production Liaisons covered integrated pest management -- a method for recognizing pest outbreaks and plant diseases in garden crops, and treating them with natural pesticides produced from local materials. Each Food Production Liaison received technical support for vegetable gardens, distributed materials, offered advice on land preparation and sowing methods, and worked with her group and the local extension agent to develop a payback scheme for the Inputs and Seeds Fund loans.
Poultry credit fund
When a drought led to vegetable and fruit garden failure in southern Honduras, the project team proposed credit and follow-up technical training for family poultry production. In 1990 a pilot credit programme was established for five Food Production Liaisons and their groups. Demonstrations included vaccination and prevention of common poultry diseases, breeding and selection, lessons on how to grow worms to be used as chicken feed and construction of chicken coops. A total one-time credit of 20,000 Lempiras was extended at no interest for the poultry projects proposed by the five groups. Each group's credit was based on individual credit needs as elaborated m a plan presented by the Liaison and the extension agent who worked with her. Some 59 individuals received about 340 Lempiras each to cover the costs of chicken coop construction and purchase of chicks, roosters and hens. These individual loans are guaranteed by the groups. The repayment timetable was set by each
groupe,^6 and regular repayments are being deposited in a community fund, similar to the arrangement under the Inputs and Seeds Fund.
^6 The flexibility of credit repayment allows group independence and establishes fiscal responsibility, rather than having the project play the role of moneylender or bank. One group in Comayagua decided to pay back 15 lempiras per person monthly, and has already repaid the loan. Another group in Copán that received credit in 1990 has set up payments once a year in December during the coffee and tobacco harvest -- when family income is highest.
The combined training and credit for poultry production is now being extended to all past and future Food Production Liaisons. Greater productive capacity with less risk and quicker profit has brought the Poultry Credit Fund into great demand. It has been recognized as one of the most viable activities for strengthening and stabilizing grassroots groups.
Rotating fund for peasant women
The impacts of the FAO project cannot be dissociated from a third credit source, the Rotating Fund for Peasant Women, begun in 1983 through UNDP. The Fund had been frozen in 1987, but was reactivated in February 1990 under the control of the National Agricultural Development Bank. The Rotating Fund now offers loans at a subsidized five percent annual interest rate for projects proposed by women's groups, with priority given to projects with women who have benefitted from the FAO training. The Fund has already experienced a relatively higher payback rate than that which resulted from loans extended before 1987.
As was seen in the early Housing/Environment Liaison and Women's Group Organizer modules, the lack of access to funds for production and social projects either limited or stopped organizational activity. Project credit offered through the Food Production Liaisons was critical to the work with groups. Although the Rotating Fund was not an activity of the FAO project, the project did promote its reactivation, coordinate meetings of the new credit committee and train representatives of peasant women's organizations on how to propose projects for loan applications.
Phase II of the project, now underway, was developed by a team of FAO and Dutch Women in Development experts with contributions from the project team. It seeks to consolidate both the grassroots groups and the methodology used to train the Food Production Liaisons for effective work in their villages. Organizational and project planning components have been incorporated in the training programme of all Food Production Liaisons, and has been extended to the earliest trainees, in order to develop their capacity for autonomous critical thinking. Also planned is a grassroots application of "gender sensitization", to help women's groups perceive and discuss issues that specifically affect them. In addition, practical educational materials are being developed to help the Food Production Liaisons transfer their skills in appropriate agricultural production techniques.
<section>6</section>
Training at work: community food liaisons in the villages
Women and wells
A special case - a male peasant women's liaison
A sampling of results
Training at work: community food liaisons in the villages
Women and wells
The group "Maria Elena Bolivar," in the Valley of Comayagua, is named after a peasant woman who fought for land through the Agrarian Reform. Fifteen women formed this group in 1987 with the help of a Women's Group Organizer. The women live on the outskirts of the mid-size city Comayagua, and their husbands belong to a cooperative that produces basic grains. Aside from the land worked collectively, each family is allotted one tenth of a hectare to produce food, although this is not their property.
When the Food Production Liaison for the Maria Elena Bolivar group began her training, none of the women in the village had ever cultivated the land surrounding their houses. A lack of water for irrigation limited agricultural activity. However, the Liaison came back from training with the idea of building a well with which she and others could irrigate gardens. She proposed the idea to the extension agency, which agreed to experiment with a new pump technology recently developed by its Appropriate Technology Division. The Liaison and her husband bought materials and dug a well. The pump was installed for a trial period of one year. Built like a see-saw, the pump required two people to operate it, pushing themselves up and down to pump the water out through a hose. Once the Liaison and her family had access to water, they were able to plant a garden.
The women in the group were enthusiastic about the well and pump arrangement. Four more women had the capital to invest in their own wells, which the others could access for a user's fee.
The appropriate technology has proven to be successful, and the pilot testing period is over. Now group members have to pay for the pumps they obtain from the extension agency, and some women are thinking of applying for a loan for that purpose.
With the wells in place, seven of the members now are able to cultivate their parcels of land with beets, carrots, onions, squash, cabbage and fruit trees. The women first made their own organic fertilizer. Then they prepared the soil and, with support from the Inputs and Seeds Fund, planted vegetables and fruit trees. They paid back half of their loan to a local community fund under the terms of the Inputs and Seeds Fund loan programme. The women continue to purchase seeds and inputs from the diminishing fund, paying back only 50 percent of the principal. For the more productive women in the group, the once-a-year harvest has paid off well. Because few people produce vegetables in the area, these women have been able to sell in the nearby urban market and make a good profit.
The extension agent in the region is highly motivated and always attends to the women when they have problems with agricultural or poultry production. He helped them to procure the pumps and has also promoted fish farming with the African species Talapia, bred in the Government's extension pond. The families buy the minnows for a few cents each, and then tend them in rudimentary fish ponds until they are large enough to eat.
The Food Production Liaison in this women's group has successfully demonstrated agricultural activities and motivated many of the women in the group to dig wells, prepare organic fertilizers and cultivate vegetables. However, the poorer women in the group continue to have limited access to water because they do not have the labour power or the capita! to make or buy the bricks, concrete and sand needed for a well. Research on technology for water access is now being developed as part of the project's second phase. It is hoped that this research, together with the credit available for poultry production, will eventually allow all the women in the group to fully benefit from the productive activities promoted by the Food Production Liaison.
A special case - a male peasant women's liaison
In the remote mountain community of Santa Fé, along the border between the Departments of Intibucá and Comayagua, a small women's committee was established when a Women's Group Organizer visited the area in 1986 and convinced the men's cooperative affiliated to ALCONH (Alianza Campesina de Organizaciones Nacionales de Honduras) to support a women's committee. She promoted and organized productive activities with the group and acquired credit for family pig production during the first year. However, when she married in 1987, her husband did not allow her to continue organizing and the group fell into inactivity.
When the Food Production Liaison module was begun in 1988, the project team approached the women's committee in Santa Fé to ask them to choose a candidate for training. Of the 12 active members, only two were literate, but neither wanted to leave home every month for the one-week training courses. Therefore, the women chose the husband of the committee president, a serious 38-year-old who was active in the men's cooperative. The project team decided to accept the challenge of incorporating a man in the training, in order to respect the decision of the women of Santa Fé and to document the novel experience.
The families buy minnows bred in the state extension pond for a few cents each, and tend them until they are large enough to eat.
The Liaison conscientiously carried out his practical work, giving talks on nutrition and promoting the cultivation of family gardens with both women and men in the community. At first the women did not show interest and the men constantly teased him, saying that he should wear a dress. In the face of these difficulties, the Liaison developed a plan to stimulate productive activity. Seeing that there was no irrigation system, he proposed to the project that it support the purchase of plastic tubing to direct water from a nearby stream to the family gardens. With the Inputs and Seeds Fund and the plastic tubing, the women's group now had everything they needed to get started with family gardens. Once activity began, the community's attitude towards the Liaison changed radically -- especially among the men. All 12 women continue today with their individual vegetable gardens, even though they no longer receive credit from the project.
Since 1988, the Santa Fé women's committee has also tackled the high rate of malnutrition in their community. With the produce from collective vegetable and soy bean production, they run a feeding programme for the community's children. By 1990, there were no children suffering from malnutrition, and only two were found to be at risk.
The community then applied for an 8,500 Lempira ($1,700) loan from the reactivated Rotating Fund for Peasant Women to establish a community store that would bring profit to the women's group and provide a service to the community. The village of 53 families is a three hours' walk from the nearest road and has no access to stores to buy basic goods such as soap, salt, coffee, and other dry goods. In the past, families had to travel for an entire day in order to buy provisions.
The Santa Fé Food Production Liaison is now paid a subsidy by the extension agency to work full time at organizing activities both with the women's committee and the men's cooperative. He also obtained aid from the Government of Spain to begin a pilot project for coffee and potato production, and for the construction of a community centre. If it were not for the contacts he developed during training, the Liaison would not have known about the Spanish agency. With the training and practice he received in community project planning, he was able to present his community's needs and solicit support.
Even with these successes, there is still much work to be done. The two women's group leaders in Santa Fé are older widows who are also members of the men's cooperative. The other women participate little and often defer to the men's cooperative for decisions. The Food Production Liaison says that he cannot include a "gender awareness" component in the training he gives because he is not a woman and cannot fully understand women's conditions -- notwithstanding his good effort in the face of jokes from other men.
A sampling of results
Whereas women who were trained as Women's Group Organizers were strongest in the area of group formation, the Food Production Liaisons are strongest in consolidation of groups. The Food Production Liaison's smaller time commitment, her permanent presence as a member of her grassroots group, and her commitment to transferring her knowledge through "show and tell" projects, are features that ensured group continuity and activity.
The trained Liaisons have new perceptions and feelings as a result of their training and work in the community. One older woman claimed, "We women before were humble, but now we have confidence. Before we were good for the house, only for the house, and now we are good for more. We know about production, and my husband consults with me."
Another woman said, "The people respect me now, although I have had to struggle so that they recognize that I have knowledge that can help them. "
Liaisons often become leaders of their groups. Through their knowledge and promotion of activities, they act as promoters of the group from the inside. They ease the overloaded work schedule of some of the state extension staff who can now concentrate more on support, training, and extension rather than on motivation, promotion, and organization.
The improvement in women's lives has been more than monetary. The traditional monetary concept of economic impact is too restrictive in the subsistence economy of rural Honduras, where needs are not defined, nor necessarily fulfilled, by access to monetary income.
This is not to say that income has not been generated or that there is no local market. In fact, in almost all groups, some women have sold their produce to neighbors in the village or, on rare occasions, in nearby villages or towns. Some individuals have sufficient resources and production to establish a steady business -- as is the case of a group member who has become the "egg lady" in La Pintada, Santa Barbara; or a woman in El Sitio, Comayagua, who paid for her dental work with a bumper chile crop. Others have such a need for cash that they sell products that could be consumed by their families, like the single mother of eight in Santa Luz who sells all her garden produce in order to buy corn and beans for her young children. But the first priority for Food Production Liaisons and group members is improved consumption; marketing their produce is a secondary concern.
Some have sufficient production to establish a steady business, like that of the "egg lady" of La Pintada, Santa Barbara.
The success of the first agricultural cycle stimulated many groups to continue vegetable and fruit production by either sowing seeds from the previous year or buying seed with their community fund built with repay-meets on the Inputs and Seeds Fund loan programme. This resulted in at least 274 vegetable and fruit gardens in the second cycle, increasing the variety of food consumed, improving diets, and generating income for those with abundant harvests. These home gardens increase both the quantity and quality of the family diet, adding foods such as chile, onions and tomatoes. Families eat much better for at least six months out of the year, consuming vegetables that they could not have afforded if they had to buy them.
Members of the women's groups have also shown an interest in community gardens. Since the first agricultural cycle, many groups have purchased seeds and inputs using either the community fund or their own contributions. Produce from the collective garden, the groups report, goes to feed the children in the local kindergarten or is distributed equally among members of the group. One group in Santa Luz particularly enjoyed group gardening because it offered them time away from the house and moments together to discuss personal and community problems.
In one mountain village in Comayagua, a pilot intervention decreased the number of malnourished children by 90 percent. The Food Production Liaison first measured child malnutrition and proposed nutrition and diet training. A community garden was then developed whose produce was used to feed the children.^7
^7 The community's success was especially significant because Santa Fé did not have access to any food supplement program from other organizations. Of the other 11 groups questioned, five had active food supplement programs for malnourished children, but none recorded the success rate of Santa Fé.
Women continue to express even greater interest in poultry production. With relatively less risk and greater returns, poultry production assures family consumption of eggs and an occasional chicken. With luck, vaccinations and appropriate supervision, a woman can multiply her chickens in two months and have sufficient production for sale and consumption. The production problems associated with vegetable and fruit gardens are greater, with higher risks of pest infestation and greater needs for purchased inputs. Drought and flooding also decrease yields, as do poor soil quality and vandalism. Production lasts only six months, and the daily time invested is significant.
Of 88 Food Production Liaisons initially trained, 60 continue to be active in their communities. Some 60 new Liaisons are currently being trained. The fairly high attrition rate (30 percent) has been due to several factors. First, the selection process in some cases was inconsistent: at times the extension agent did not secure the husband's or father's permission, or the group president showed favoritism and selected an inappropriate candidate. Women's home and child-care responsibilities, as well as out-migration, have further raised the attrition rate. At times women did not have the 10 Lempiras ($2.00) to pay for bus fares to attend the training sessions, even though these were reimbursed later. In three cases, groups reportedly disintegrated due to conflicts either among group leaders or between the Liaison and the group.
The Food Production Liaison module has improved qualitative aspects of rural women's lives and has contributed quantitative benefits in terms of increased food production. The impact of outside influences on the project's success -- credit funds, international development organizations' support for other activities, and continued project activity -- cannot be measured. The subsidies and low-interest credit for subsistence production and service projects have been a source of motivation for group activities and vital to follow-up.
At the same time, the training of human resources within the women's groups has been a dynamic factor in defining needs, attracting outside support, and soliciting credit. The participation, independence and relative sustainability that the Food Production Liaison model generates have increased group cohesion and formed new leaders.
Efforts to refine the training methodology and content are revealing a need for still more comprehensive content -- like that of the Women's Group Organizer module -- to ensure long-term success for the grassroots groups.
In each community, Liaisons have had to struggle for acceptance and respect. Their solid skills hold them in good stead once they find support to promote productive activities, but the real challenge is to sustain their work in the long run. Each community is different, experiencing unique successes as well as unique problems. Group consolidation is a long and difficult process since it requires change in attitudes and practices that have been established over a lifetime and date back over generations.
<section>7</section>
Learning from experience
Lessons from the training modules
Lessons from project execution
Constraints in the future
Turnover of extension staff
Access to credit
Structural constraints
Learning from experience
In evaluating the degree to which the project objectives were attained, it can be shown globally that the lessons learned in each activity served to modify and improve subsequent activities. In fact, this evolutionary aspect of the project as a whole may be the single most important factor in its ultimate success. As obstacles were encountered, the project team worked with the trainees and women's groups to understand the problems and propose solutions. By discarding elements that did not work and focusing on those that did, the Food Production Liaison model emerged. The activities of Phase I and the "Interim Project" have now been completed and, in quantitative terms, outputs have surpassed the original goals. With 200 women peasants scheduled to receive training before 1990, 375 were actually trained. With 152 state extension workers and social promoters originally scheduled to receive training, more than 300 have benefitted. Credits to develop family gardens and poultry
production have been pilot-tested and proven to stimulate interest and increase motivation, nutritional levels and incomes. Organizational strengthening at the grassroots has had a positive effect by building new leadership and increasing community development activity in the areas covered by the project.
Lessons from the training modules
With the Literacy Workers module, the lesson learned was that motivation and follow-up were vital to sustainable literacy activities. Many Literacy Workers stopped promoting their literacy circles after learning that they would not receive a subsidy. Just as important as the false expectations raised was the absence of much-needed technical follow-up and field visits from extension staff. Literacy circles fell apart when there was no one available to observe and support group activities or to distribute materials.
In the case of the Housing/Environment Liaisons, where the project team made the decision to halt training before the total number of targeted women had been trained, the women and the team learned that without appropriate resources -- either credit or materials -- women's plans were frustrated and activities either slowed down or paralyzed.
In the Women's Group Organizer module, the participatory process used to select participants and design training content and methodology was a lesson in patience, diplomacy and hard work for everyone involved. If the project team and the peasant organizations had not gone through this process and reached an agreement, inter-organizational disputes could have blocked implementation, or content and methodology might have been inappropriate for the groups' interests. Secondly, this module also taught the peasant organizations and the project team the importance of training women who are already connected to a base group, even if their educational or organizational capabilities are lower than desirable. Women without those grassroots connections have little or no commitment to passing on their knowledge and thereby multiplying the effect of their training. Third, this module reinforced the idea that full-time organizing work is not feasible without some type of motivation,
either monetary or material. The full-time responsibility of the Women's Group Organizers was not compatible with their domestic and productive responsibilities and, since the average women's group was unable to support its Organizer, a high drop-out rate was the result.
The fourth module, which trained women as Food Production Liaisons, also encountered constraints, despite important improvements over the preceding modules. Two important lessons from previous modules were confirmed in this module. One is the need to supervise the selection of participants in order to ensure a multiplier effect in each Liaison's group once her training is completed. The second is the need to involve the family in each woman's commitment to training and leadership activities.
Lessons from project execution
Lessons learned and assimilated in the execution of the project allowed its continued activity and ultimately contributed to its success. Chief among these is the need for participation, coordination, and flexibility in project execution and evolution. The flexibility of the FAO project allowed for an expansion of activities in order to address the needs of the women as these became clear. Unexpected activities of the project included: provision of credit for small livestock and agricultural subsistence production, follow-up training for productive activities, and FAO's financial support to the National Agrarian Institute for the hiring of a nutritionist to develop a participatory detection and treatment programme for child malnutrition among the families of all the women's groups.
The women's groups have grown and changed over the course of the project. Some groups have sought credit through the extension agencies or from the Rotating Fund for Peasant Women in order to initiate social and productive projects in addition to their subsistence activities. Some of the activities women have become involved in include the purchase of a motorized corn mill, planting of soy beans for soy milk nutrition programmes, bread-making and marketing to generate group funds, and establishment of community stores.
The women sponsor productive activities that reflect the traditional gender division labour of a farm household, but at the same time their status has changed. They are involved in the improvement of the quality of life for their families and their communities, and are respected for their roles.
Constraints in the future
During its first four years, the project encountered institutional problems in peasant organizations and state extension agencies, as well as cultural and economic problems in grassroots consolidation. Today the project's second phase is oriented towards refining and strengthening the training methodology for extension workers, women trainees and women's groups. Obstacles persist that could complicate or diminish the impact of the project. These constraints on future success are institutional, economic and structural.
Turnover of extension staff
The continuous turnover of personnel in Government extension agencies because of poor pay and difficult working conditions diminishes the effect of training on the field staff. Only 30 percent of the present staff of the National Agrarian Institute and less than 10 percent of the staff of the Ministry of Natural Resources have received training to work with rural women. Cutbacks in state expenditures due to structural adjustment policies also reduce the number of extensionists and social promoters who work with the grassroots groups.
Access to credit
Women's access to credit also will be limited in the future. The Inputs and Seeds Fund and the Poultry Fund provide one-time loans. Special community funds developed by women using the Inputs and Seeds Fund were employed for the first couple of years, but drought and other problems have made it difficult for the women to replenish the capital in these funds. The community funds generated from the Poultry Credit Fund will have to be treated with care by the women's groups in order to ensure that this Fund does not become decapitalized. As for the low-interest, preferential credit through the Rotating Fund for Peasant Women, the working capital has diminished over the years because of the large number of unrecovered loans issued in the early 1980s. Furthermore, charging only five percent annual interest reduces the real value of the fund over time, especially when the national economy is experiencing a much higher annual inflation rate. Once these various loan funds have dried
up, women's groups will have to apply for credit under normal market conditions, increasing their financial responsibility and risk. Even through special programmes for low-income borrowers, current interest rates are higher than 30 percent, so rural women may have to avoid borrowing for social projects that do not offer monetary returns.
Structural constraints
Structural constraints that could limit the success of the project in the future include the lack of rights for land access for single women under the Agrarian Reform Law, and the rapid decrease in peasant families' buying power as a result of structural adjustment policies implemented since 1990.
First, the Agrarian Reform Law allows only widows to be direct beneficiaries of Agrarian Reform. Thus, widowed mothers who have never married their companions, or single mothers abandoned by their companions, cannot benefit. With little or no access to land, women without companions often do not have even the space for a vegetable garden. With-out full equality under the law, landless women who participate in groups involved in agricultural production will be discriminated against in the long run.
It takes many years to develop personal and organizational skills and to train grassroots leaders. The tools that rural Honduran women have acquired under the FAO project have opened the door to individual growth and created group strength, solidarity and capability among thousands of rural women. Future sustainability and success of the women's activities depend on future access to economic resources. National economic conditions that make life harder inflation, cutting of subsidies, reduction of services, personnel reductions in government agencies -- also affect women's group and individual activities. If any one of these problems becomes a major obstacle to the realization of women's activities, a project that has supported change from dependency and poverty to autonomy and self-sufficiency could see its major potential contributions truncated.
It takes many years to build grassroots leaders.
<section>8</section>
Conclusions
Conclusions
Prior to the 1980s, rural development programmes oriented toward women tended to focus exclusively on their roles as household managers. Thus, they typically included activities such as improving the efficiency of women's domestic tasks in areas of child care, nutrition, food preparation and conservation, and hygiene. Women's roles as producers and resource managers were seldom addressed. Nevertheless, on the other extreme, in the 1980s some projects have tended to focus on women exclusively as producers, failing to recognize that the relationship between women's multiple roles conditions their performance in each of these roles, creating both opportunities and constraints.
The project under discussion contains many of the elements of the traditional "home economics" development approach, promoting activities within the traditional gender division of labour, organizing work within or close to the home, directing benefits to individual families as well as to the community, and emphasizing training for nutrition and family diet. The specific activities developed under this rubric were household maintenance, food preparation and conservation, and attention to children's and women's malnutrition. The training of the Food Production Liaison and the other Liaisons motivated women as mothers and caretakers.
Numerous other activities, though, led to women's personal growth and greater involvement in home and community decision-making. These include: handling of credit for subsistence projects; leadership and organization training; experience in group dynamics for self-management; greater physical mobility for peasant women; veterinary and agricultural extension skills; control and use of simple agricultural tools; access to training and materials useful for implementing productive projects; and practice in community surveys and project development.
What do these non-traditional activities bring to women? They offer concrete knowledge of plant and animal husbandry, critical thinking that permits them to analyze community problems and propose solutions and, of course, personal growth. At an individual level, the trained Liaison gains recognition and status when her organizational work bears positive results. The hoped-for multiplier effect also improves family welfare, improves the status of the women and of their groups, and generates increased production for family consumption as well as income.
Despite the inclusion of traditional activities, then, this training is not traditional. Instead, the project identified women's primary needs before working to overcome constraints to women's participation. The combination of skills and knowledge taught to the Food Production Liaison, who in turn transferred these to her group, was a catalyst for other types of participation. Evidence abounds that women's participation through their traditional roles has motivated many women's groups to participate in non-traditional activities production of coffee and coffee seedlings, marketing basic grains, collective production of soybeans, red beans, rice and corn, production and sale of dried cashew fruit and cashew nuts, and cultivation of annatto.
The Food Production Liaison training module, which is meant to organize and mobilize women using a combination of traditional and nontraditional components, enjoys acceptance from all corners -- among women, their husbands and state extensionists. The relative lack of conflict around the women's training makes it an attractive means to deliver development goods.
Analyzing the results of the project through the lens of the FAO Plan of Action for the Integration of Women in Development, the training activities have had a positive impact on the women trained and their groups, the communities where they live, and the state institutions from which they receive extension support.
The economic and social conditions of women have improved as a result of the project. Women's groups have established a variety of social and productive projects that increase household consumption, improve family nutrition, save women's time, or increase household income.
The civil status of the participants has been positively affected. The rural communities have come to respect the work of the Community Food Liaisons for their contribution to community development, and the women's husbands have lent their solid support.
State extensionists and social promoters have come to respect the work of the women who have lightened the extension workload and changed the work orientation of field staff from one of organization and promotion to one of supervision and support.
Women's power in their households, communities and organizations has increased, leading to greater involvement in decision-making. They have gained skills in appropriate agricultural techniques and organization, and have acquired confidence and new attitudes. They are consulted on and propose solutions for agricultural production techniques and problems. They have increased their profile and that of the women's groups in their communities. The women's groups participate in the village decision-making process.
As a result of pressure from the Women's Group Organizers, male-dominated peasant organizations have been increasing the number of women in decision-making positions, giving the women the right to vote and addressing women's issues, such as including the demand for women's right to land in their platforms for legislative change.
The four training modules were all successful to some degree, although the activities of the women trained through the first three modules have either slowed down or ceased. The problems they confronted -unrealistic expectations, insufficient training and follow-up, inadequate project resources, lack of access to credit, limitations of peasant organizations, and social and cultural constraints -- paved the way for the implementation of a successful fourth module, the training of Food Production Liaisons. Although the training of the Food Production Liaisons is directed towards nutrition and home production, the module incorporates non-traditional skills and activities to catalyze growth and transformation. Phase II of the project is now consolidating the women's groups and refining the teaching methodology in order to ensure follow-up even after the project has been completed.
The project "Promotion and Training of Women for their Incorporation in Rural Development" has completed and surpassed its initial direct objectives of training rural women and extension agents who work with women. In 1986 Phase I proposed to train:
* 200 peasant women, and
* 152 field staff.
By the end of the project in 1989, it had succeeded in training:
* 288 peasant women and 30 peasant men in four distinct types of training, and
* more than 300 field staff in a "Methodology of Promotion and Organization of Rural Women" as well as other skills to work with women.
The Interim Project in 1990:
* provided follow-up training to 60 peasant women,
* established a Pilot Poultry Fund
* facilitated the reactivation of the National Agricultural Bank's Rotating Fund for women,
* supported an initiative to finance the Food Production Liaison module in three additional regions,
* wrote a methodological guide to help implement the Food Production Liaison module,
* Worked with a nutrition consultant in the National Agrarian Institute to establish participatory methods to detect and treat malnutrition, and
* established the project strategy for Phase II, incorporating the lessons learned from the previous four years of project implementation.
Overall, more than 7,000 people indirectly benefitted from this phase of the FAO training project in Honduras by participating in groups and organizations that were directly in contact with the trained peasant women.
Phase II of the project aims to:
* train 60 new Food Production Liaisons,
* consolidate the grassroots work of 60 previously trained Food
Production Liaisons,
* train 60 state extensionists and other extension staff,
* institutionalize the methodology to assure its continued use,
* establish a system of monitoring and evaluation, and
* promote technical assistance and development of intermediate technology for social and productive projects at the group level.
The project has had sufficient resources to confront the obstacles encountered along the way. It has been able to establish credit funds, pay transport costs and initiate pilot activities. Once the project ends, the question of sustainability begins. At that time, women's access to credit and the institutional support of the two state institutions that have been involved will be crucial to group stability and sustained activity. in the second decade of the United Nations' work with women in Honduras, the Food Production Liaison model will be measured by its success in developing support for concrete activities that directly improve the welfare of peasant women and their communities.
<section>9</section>
Acronyms
Acronyms
ALCONH
Alianza Campesina de Organizaciones Nacionales de Honduras (Peasant Alliance of National Organizations of Honduras)
ANACH/ ANAMUC
Associación Nacional de Campesinos de Honduras/ Associación Nacional de Mujeres Campesinas (National Association of Honduran Peasants/National Association of Peasant Women)
BANADESA
Banco Nacional de Desarrollo Agrícola (National Agricultural Development Bank)
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
FEHMUC
Féderación Hondurena de Mujeres Campesinas (Honduran Féderation of Peasant Women)
INA
Instituto Nacional Agrario (National Agrarian Institute)
UNC
Union Nacional Campesino (National Peasant Union)
UNDP
United Nations Development Programme
<title>Extension woman to woman - Training peasant women liaisons to reach peasant women</title>
Selected bibliography on women in Honduras
Selected bibliography on women in Honduras
Bidegain, Gabriel. 1991. "Perfil Sociodemográfico de Honduras." Unidad de Docencia e Investigación en Población, Facultad de Ciencias Económicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de Honduras. Documento de Trabajo #27. February. Tegucigalpa. 41 pp.
Flores, Manuel and Nancy Leiva. 1989. "La Relación entre las Mujeres en el Desarrollo Agrícola y los Aspectos Demográficos en Honduras." Universidad Nacional Autónoma de Honduras, Facultad de Ciencias Económicas y Unidad de Docencia e Investigación en Población. Limited distribution.
Food and Agriculture Organization. 1990. "Guía pare la Capacitación de la Productora Enlace." Report for FAO, TCP/HON/0051. Working Paper #2. Tegucigalpa. November. 26 pp.
Fordham, Miriam. 1982. "Women's Economic Strategies in Southern Honduras." Paper presented at the Annual Meetings of the American Anthropological Association. Washington, DC. December.
Garcia, Anal 1986. Informe Técnico: La Organización Campesina Femenina en la Reforma Agraria en Honduras. FAO, GCP/HON/013/NET. Tegucigalpa. July.
García, Ana Isabel and Enrique Gomariz. 1989. Mujeres Centroamericanas: Tomo 1: Tendencias Estructurales. Facultad Latinomericana de Ciencias Sociales, Consejo Superior Universitario de Centroamérica, Universidad pare la Paz. San José, Costa Rica.
Honduras. Ministry of Public Health. 1989. Epidemiology and Family Health Survey. Coordinated with Association for Family Planning in Honduras, Management Sciences for Health, and Family Health International. May. Tegucigalpa.
Howard-Borjas, Patricia. 1989. "Evolución de la participación femenina y la discriminación en la fuerza de trabajo hondureña: implicaciones pare políticas y programas de empleo". Documento de Trabajo. Proyectos SECPLAN/OIT/FNUAP (Políticas de Población y Empleo) y SECPLAN/OIT/FNUAP (Programas de Empleo). Tegucigalpa. Febrero.
Howard-Borjas, Patricia. 1990. "Empleo y pobreza rural en Honduras, con un enfoque especial en la mujer". Documento de Trabajo. Proyectos SECPLAN/OIT/FNUAP (Political de Poblacion y Empleo) y SECPLAN/OIT/FNUAP (Programas de Empleo). Tegucigalpa.
Hernandez, Orlando, and Melba Zuniga. 1989. "La mujer (pobre) y la crisis económica: el cave de Honduras". Unidad de Servicios de Apoyo pare Fomentar la Participación de la Mujer Hondureña. Draft. Tegucigalpa, Honduras.
Kuhn, Jacqueline. 1990. "La mujer Hondureña marginada: un acercamiento a su problemática." Servicio Holandés de Cooperación Técnica y Social. September. Tegucigalpa.
López de Mazier, Armida. 1990. "La Mujer Hondureña en Cifras." Unidad de Docencia e Investigación en Población, Facultad de Ciencias Económicas, Universidad Nacional Autónoma de Honduras. Documento de Trabajo #1. May. Tegucigalpa. 15 pp.
Stonich, Susan. 1989. "The Dynamics of Social Processes and Environmental Destruction: A Central American Case Study", Population and Development Review Volume 15, Number 2. June.
United Nations Children's Fund. 1990. Children in Honduras. Secretaría de Planificación, Coordinación y Presupuesto, Gobierno de Honduras. September. Guatemala.
Zúñiga, Melba Luz, Maria Celina Kawas Castillo, and Michael E. Conroy. 1982. "Ingreso, Gasto, Barrio y Familia: Estrategias de los Pobladores de Barrios de Ingresos Bajos en Tegucigalpa". Asesores pare el Desarrollo. Tegucigalpa, Honduras.
<title>Extension woman to woman - Training peasant women liaisons to reach peasant women</title>
<section>1</section>
Annex: practical guides
Annex: practical guides
Annex 1.1 Practical Guide to be Completed before Nutrition and Diet Course
NUTRITIONAL STATUS OF CHILDREN UNDER SIX
Using the bracelets made in the Family and Nutrition module, evaluate the nutritional status of the children in the community.
Instructions
Take the child's arm and bend it.
Determine the middle point between the elbow and the shoulder.
Wrap the bracelet around the arm in the middle and cheek the colour.
If it's red, the child is malnourished. .
If it's yellow, the child is in danger of malnourishment
If it's green, the child is normal.
Write down the information.
Add up all the children, separating them by nutritional status. For example:
Malnourished
At risk
Normal
All children
CHART TO MAKE NUTRITIONAL EVALUATION FOR CHILDREN 0 - 6 YEARS
NAME
AGE
NUTRITIONAL STATUS
Annex 1.2 Practical Guide to be Completed before [Nutrition and Diet Course
FOOD SITUATION IN THE COMMUNITY
Determine what foods are available in your community and what foods people eat.
Instructions
1. Remember that people are very sensitive about answering questions.
2. Register information very carefully with an X for each food eaten.
3. Analyse the information based on the three basic groups of food:
Energy food
Food that helps us grow
Food that helps us think
CHART TO SEE WHAT FOODS PEOPLE EAT. IF THE PERSON IN THE FAMILY EATS THE FOOD, MARK AN X IN THE COLUMN. FILL OUT' A FORM FOR EACH FAMILY YOU VISIT.
FOOD
MOTHER
FATHER
CHILDREN
1. BEANS
2. RICE
3. CORN TORTILLAS
4. FRUIT
5. EGGS
6. MILK
7. TOMATOES, ONIONS
8. GREEN VEGETABLES
9. CHICKEN
Annex 1.3 Practical Guide to be Completed before Integrated Family Gardens and Small Livestock Husbandry Courses
GENERAL INFORMATION
Name of the Community Food Liaison:______________________________________
Region:______________________________________________________________
Name of Group:________________________________________________________
Affiliation to Peasant Organization:_________________________________________
Location:_____________________________________________________________
Village
City
Department
All projects that the Group is presently in:____________________________________
Type of productive project that the Group is involved in: ________________________
Amount of Loan:________________________________________________________
Amount of Donations:____________________________________________________
Amount of Group's Resources:_____________________________________________
Total Amount Financed:__________________________________________________
How much does the Group owe?___________________________________________
Names Group Members
Size of Family Plot
Width Length
Where is water located?
Inside Outside Distance
What crops are the woman and the family cultivating?
Domestic Animals
Chicken Pigs
List the public and private institutions that work in your community:
Animals lost last year:
# Chickens died
of what?
# Pigs dies
of what?
Other animals
# died
of what?
What could have prevented death?
Annex 1.4 Practical Guide to Plan Actions in the Community after the Integrated Family Gardens Course
PLANNING TO DEVELOP ORGANIC FERTILIZER
Name of Community Food Liaison:
Name of Group:_____________________________________________________________
Location:___________________________________________________________________
Village
City
Department
1. What objectives does the group have in developing organic fertilizer?
2. How many compost heaps do you plan on developing in your group, what kind, in how much time, and with how many members?
Annex 1.5 Practical Guide to Plan Actions in the Community after the Small Livestock Husbandry Course
FORMAT TO PRESENT A PROJECT ON SMALL LIVESTOCK FOR FAMILY PRODUCTION
Date:___________________________________________________________
Name of Community Food Liaison:___________________________________
Name of Group:___________________________________________________
Location:_________________________________________________________
Village
City
Department
1. What are the problems that the members have encountered raising small livestock?
2. What are the concrete objectives that the group hopes to achieve? In how much time does the group want to achieve these objectives?
3. To fulfil the objectives you have described in question 2, write down numbers, such as total chickens you want to vaccinate in each family, the diseases you want to control, total chicks hatched, etcetera.
4. Fill out the following chart to help you define the activities you want to develop, when you want to do them, how you plan on doing them, and what resources you will use.
ACTIVITIES
BEGINNING DATE
ENDING DATE
RESOURCES VILLAGE OTHER
PERSON RESPONSIBLE
Annex 1.6 Practical Guide to be completed before Organization and Leadership Course
RESEARCH ON THE RESOURCES THAT SUPPORT WOMEN'S PARTICIPATION
INSTITUTION OR ORGANIZATION
SERVICES THAT THEY OFFER
<section>e</section>
Preface
Preface
In 1988 the Council of the U.N. Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) unanimously adopted guidelines for the Organization to ensure that women's concerns are incorporated in all its activities. This Plan of Action for Integration of Women in Development recognizes that women already make a crucial contribution to agricultural production. It is dedicated to enhancing their participation through projects and programmes that systematically bring women into the mainstream of development activities and national life. The Plan addresses the condition of women in four spheres -- 1) civil status, 2) economic, 3) social and 4) decision-making. The long-term objectives of the Plan are to improve women's legal status; increase their access to and control of resources for greater production and productivity; integrate nutrition, education, and social activities into production-oriented endeavors; and to train women in skills that increase their participation and bargaining power in
local and national institutions.
In its approach, the FAO recognizes the need for women-specific projects that focus on women in agricultural development, but also promotes mainstreaming, that is, the integration of gender concerns and women participants in all relevant FAO projects and activities.
This booklet is one of a series of publications produced by the Women in Agricultural Production and Rural Development Service of the FAO. The series is directed to a general audience of development practitioners, policy-makers, and other people concerned with rural development, with the aim of presenting successful models of development work and generating discussion around strategies for continued grassroots work with rural women.
The FAO-coordinated projects executed in Honduras from 1986-1992^1 represent a successful experience in training both peasant women and extension staff. The project has improved the capacity of the Government's extension system to reach rural women with information and technical assistance, and has led to quality-of-life improvements for rural women and their communities. The project is being implemented by various organizations at the national level and the training model developed has been adopted by the country's two state extension agencies for their work with rural women. Although the success of the project is specific to Honduras, the constraints encountered and the solutions developed can serve as a guide for other projects that work with rural women.
^1 Phase I of "Promotion and Training Programme for Women's Incorporation in Rural Development" was completed in 1989. An interim Technical Cooperation Project in 1990 provided continuity between Phase I and Phase II of the project. Phase II is due to be completed in 1992. Originally known as the "Peasant Promotion and Training Programme for Women's Incorporation in the Productive Process", the project was renamed to reflect women's multiple roles in the rural economy.
The training offered helps redefine women's roles in their communities and families and offers them real skills that they can apply in agricultural production. The project offers a relatively non-conflictive approach to increasing women's access to and control over development resources, by strengthening women's organizations, teaching techniques in agricultural production and small livestock husbandry, improving the family's diet, and, in some cases, increasing women's income.
One of the aims of the case study is to illustrate how a development project can have a dynamic life when it is designed to include both formal and real flexibility -- in short, room to grow and benefit from initial mistakes. The reader will see that the project underwent numerous modifications as it's staff confronted the specificity of women's daily realities. Each training module was examined after completion in order to discover where the problems lay and what had been successful. This work was done through long discussions with the peasant women trainees, and contributed to the design of the modules that followed. This iterative process of critique led to a very promising model which is the core of the project today.
This case study was prepared by Susan Fleck, consultant to FAO's Women in Agricultural Production and Rural Development Service. Thanks is owed for their assistance to the staff of the National Agrarian Institute and the Ministry of Natural Resources of the Government of Honduras, to project director Haydée de Martinez, and to the women's groups and trained extension liaisons who shared their experiences and hopes with willingness, honesty and hospitality. Thanks is also owed to Sharon Cowan, editor, and to Susan Fleck, who provided the photographs.
H. Meliczek
Officer-in-Charge
Human Resources, Institutions and Agrarian Reform Division
