<title>Social and economic incentives for smallholder tree growing</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
Even as millions of hectares of tropical forest are lost each year and large numbers of reforestation efforts have failed, there are smallholder farmers in the world who, for years, have grown and managed their own trees on a sustainable basis. For those involved in community forestry, why farmers plant trees is every bit as important as why they do not.
This study by natural resource economist Peter A. Dewees of the Food Studies Group of Queen Elizabeth House, Oxford University, is the result of research which was undertaken to explore the rationale for smallholder tree growing in its historical and socio-cultural context in Kenya. Although much of the study focuses on tree-growing activities in Murang'a District in the Central Province in that country, many of the observations and conclusions are relevant to other parts of Kenya, and there are certainly parallels to other parts of Africa as well.
Both casual observation and land use inventories provide strong evidence that trees continue to have an important role as one smallholder land use option in many high potential agricultural zones in Kenya. In some cases, farmers grow trees to meet the demand for construction poles, charcoal and fuelwood, and in response to other market forces. Trees are also cultivated to demarcate boundaries or to shade crops such as tea or coffee. Tree cultivation, it would seem, which requires less labour and less capital investment than other types of crops, has emerged as an important income-producing land use option for the smallholder.
Still, there remains the question of why farmers maintain trees on land that could be used for the cultivation of other crops which could potentially generate a substantially higher income. Central to this discussion of tree planting in Kenya is the interlinkage of issues such as land tenure, capital accumulation and labour use. Several of the most common tree cultivation and management practices are the long-term outcome of these three closely related issues. Other practices have been adopted either as a result of relatively recent interventions, such as the introduction of black wattle during the first half of this century, or are due to the evolution of traditional tree management practices.
Dr. Dewees concludes his study by examining some of the issues of relevance to planners and developers in their efforts to encourage farmers to grow more trees. First, he suggests that tree planting innovations must be placed in a context which takes into account local farmer ability and traditional knowledge. Second, it is important to recognize that tree growing is a viable option especially when labour and capital constraints limit agricultural development. And third, existing controls on tree cultivation and management must involve the local population and be more consistent. If farm production of trees is to be encouraged, farmers must be assured that they - rather than the Government or local administration - will reap the benefits.
The research for this study was supported with funds provided primarily by the Rockefeller Foundation through the Oxford Forestry Institute's Smallholder Incentives for Tree Growing Research Project. Additional funding was provided by the Research Committee of the World Bank, the Overseas Development Administration and by Oxford University. The publication of this Case Study was funded by the multi-donor Forests, Trees and People Trust Fund, which is devoted to increasing the sustainability of women and men's livelihoods through self-help management of tree and forest resources. Within the FAO Forestry Department, the activities and publications of the Programme are coordinated by Marilyn W. Hoskins, Senior Community Forestry Officer, in the Forestry Policy and Planning Division.
<section>2</section>
Executive Summary
This report seeks to provide a better understanding of the economic framework of smallholder agriculture in Kenya, particularly in relation to tree growing management and practices. Although much of the report focuses on tree-growing activities in the Murang'a District, a high potential agricultural zone in the Central Province of Kenya, many of the observations and conclusions are relevant to other parts of the country.
Both casual observation and land use inventories provide strong evidence that trees have an important role as one of many smallholder land use options in many high potential agricultural zones in Kenya. In some cases, farmers grow trees to meet the demand for construction poles, charcoal and fuelwood and in response to other market forces. Trees are also cultivated to demarcate boundaries or to shade other crops such as tea or coffee.
Still, there remains the question of why farmers maintain trees on land that could be used for the cultivation of other crops which could potentially generate a substantially higher income. Central to this discussion of tree planting in Kenya is the interlinkage of issues such as land tenure, capital accumulation and labour use. Several of the most common tree cultivation and management practices are the long-term outcome of these closely related issues. Others have been adopted either as a result of relatively recent interventions or are due to the evolution of traditional tree management practices.
Chapter 1 explores the current state of knowledge about the extent of tree growing in high potential areas of Kenya. Chapter 2 examines how rural capital and labour constraints may account for the widespread adoption of different tree growing practices.
In the pre-colonial economy, farm labour was a controlled by kinship ties and was a responsibility of the sub-clan. Many labour tasks and cropping patterns were also gender related. Major changes in farm labour use were brought about during the colonial area as the Colonial Administration fixed forest boundaries and as European settlement limited the land available for expansion.
During the same period, many Africans - mostly male - were forced to seek wage employment on large agricultural plantations or in urban areas in order to pay their taxes. With the emergence of this migrant and wage labour force, less labour was available to work on small rural holdings. Trees, such as black wattle, filled the niche created by rural labour shortages and provided an income during times of need.
Constraints on capital also provided an impetus for tree growing. Formal credit mechanisms for smallholders are a recent phenomenon dating from the 1960s. Even today, commercial lending to farmers remains at an all time low and there are few credit sources to support labour activities. Thus tree cultivation, which requires less labour and less capital investment than other types of crops, has emerged as an important income-producing land use option for the smallholder.
Chapters 3 and 4 explore the evolution of the traditional land tenure system in the Murang'a District and the resulting changes in the relationship between land tenure and tree tenure.
There are strong traditions of tree cultivation and management in Kikuyu tribal areas of Kenya (such as Murang'a District). Trees were used to demarcate boundaries, were cultivated in protected forests for use as fuelwood and were preserved as sacred groves for the site of ritual ceremonies
Traditional law in many parts of Kenya, distinguished between rights of control of land and rights of use and access. As a result in pre-colonial times, rights of tree ownership and exploitation could be held separately.
In the earliest Kikuyu settlements, land acquisition was based on the rights of first use, by the exercise of hunting and trapping rights. These rights were strengthened by forest clearance and cultivation and belonged to families with lineage rights. However land could be lent to people outside the sub-clan for cultivation or tenancy. Land lending and tenancy arrangements were also inherited.
European settlement brought increasing pressures on the traditional land tenure system. Under the villagization programme mounted during the 1952 State of Emergency, over 100,000 people who had lived on small homesteads were forcibly moved to large villages. This removal from smallholdings on which they held traditional rights, permitted the Colonial Administration to consolidate holdings which over generations had been fragmented into separate plots.
Consolidation provided the basis for major land reform legislation that became the foundation for the 1963 Registered Land Act. Under its terms, customary land rights were no longer valid. With respect to tree tenure, trees as well as all things growing on the land, became the property of the registered landowner. The effects of the legislation were most profoundly felt by the landless who lost many of the rights of access to land they once had under traditional law.
Chapter 5 describes the importance of black wattle production during the first half of this century. Africans were excluded from producing cash crops and the returns from food crops were low. Wattle, valued for the high tannin content of its bark, became a major export crop for Kenya and an important source of income and political power in many Kikuyu areas. Although wattle continues to be grown in parts of Murang'a District, its role in the smallholder economy declined during the State of Emergency. With the removal of controls on smallholder coffee and tea production, wattle lost its value as a cash crop.
The concluding chapter examines some of the challenges facing planners and developers in their efforts to encourage farmers to grow more trees. First of all, tree planting innovations must be placed in a context which takes into account local farmer ability and knowledge. It is also evident that tree growing is one result of labour and capital constraints limiting agricultural development. If these constraints are effectively addressed, there will be less of an incentive for farmers to grow trees. Finally, existing controls on tree cultivation and management must be more consistent. If farm production of trees is to be encouraged, farmers must be assured that they - not the Government nor the local administration -will reap the benefits.
<section>3</section>
Chapter 1: Introduction
1.1 Trees on farms in Kenya
1.2 Scope of this study
1.1 Trees on farms in Kenya
Simple observation in many high potential agricultural areas of Kenya would inform the casual observer that trees - protected, cultivated and managed - have assumed an important place as one of many smallholder land use options. The observation poses some interesting problems for our conventional view of peasant agriculture. It is not as if farmers have nothing else to do with their land. Population pressures in many areas of Kenya have become extreme. It is in precisely these areas - where pressures on agricultural land are greatest - that the proportionate area of land used for growing trees increases so substantially. In the face of these types of pressures, and because cash returns for trees are relatively low, there must be strong reasons why farmers grow trees rather than other potentially more profitable crops.
The rural afforestation efforts of the government, aid agencies and local organizations in Kenya have seldom taken account of the extent of existing tree growing activities. Even when they have, project design and implementation have been hampered by a lack of information about why farmers have undertaken these types of activities on their own. In particular, the relationships between land use, capital, labour, and land ownership with respect to tree growing are not well-understood.
The Extent of Tree Growing Activities
Important gains in improving our understanding about the role of trees on farms in Kenya have been made with the recent collection of inventory information about trees in smallholder agriculture. These land use studies, typically of areas with high population densities and heavy intensities of agricultural land use, have suggested that planted and managed trees and shrubs usually cover between 5 and 10 percent of the area of agricultural land. While arid and semi-arid lands are increasingly important as areas of new settlement, they pose special problems for tree growing which are beyond the scope of this case study. On average, over 20 percent of the total high potential agricultural land area has been used for growing trees, or has otherwise been left under natural woody cover.
Although planted tree species are predominantly introduced varieties, such as Grevillea robusta, Eucalyptus sp. or Acacia mearnsii, a number of indigenous species such as Markhamia sp. Croton sp., and Sesbania sesban also feature in farmers' range of choices. The dominant species vary from district to district in Kenya. For example, in Kakamega District, in Western Kenya bordering Lake Victoria (see Fig 1), woodlots are almost always dominated by Eucalvptus saligna while in Murang'a District in Central Kenya, they are dominated by Acacia mearnsii. These contiguous, non-linear, and usually monospecific tree management units may be extremely small, with 10 trees or so, but are more commonly around 200 m² in area. Hedges -contiguous, linear, and also usually monospecific tree management units - are frequently composed of Cupressus lusitanica. They are usually planted in the first instance, but as they grow to maturity, may come to include other species established as a result
of natural regeneration. In some areas, although there is little completely untouched woodland remaining, there are large areas of natural vegetation which have been highly modified, for instance in bush/fallow systems (Bradley and Kuyper 1985).
Figure 1.1 Administrative divisions and the location of the study area in Kenya
The importance of tree cultivation and management as part of the farming system becomes somewhat clearer when other agricultural land uses are considered. Table 1.1 and Figure 1.2 summarize the results of a land use inventory for Murang'a District which shows the extent of tree protection, cultivation, and management compared land uses. Although the predominance of particular crops in this district is mostly limited by the agroclimate, the predominance of trees does not seem to be so constrained. While smallholder coffee, for instance, accounts for anywhere between 0.1 and 13 percent of the land area depending on the agro-ecological zone, woody cover (planted trees, woodlands, bushland and so on) accounts for at least 15 percent and as much as 35 percent of the total agricultural land area across all zones.
TABLE 1: LAND USES IN MURANG'A DISTRICT IN 1988
AGROECOLOGICAL ZONE
Forest/ Upper Tea Zone
Lower Tea/Upper Coffee Zone
Lower Coffee/ Maize Zone
Middle Maize/ Estate Zone
Lower Maize Zone
New Settlement Zone
District Averages & Totals
Average population density per grouping (persons per m²)
Average elevation (metres)
TYPE OF LAND USE
PERCENTAGE OF TOTAL LAND AREA SUPPORTING EACH LAND USE
SMALLHOLDER AGRICULTURE
Maize and maize intercrops
Smallholder coffee
Smallholder tea
Subtotal, Smallholder Agriculture
PLANTATION AGRICULTURE
Sisal
Pineapple
Estate coffee
Subtotal Plantation Agriculture
Total Smallholder/
Plantation Agriculture
HEDGES & WINDROWS
Natural tree hedges
Clipped hedges
Other hedges
Planted windrows
Subtotal, Hedges & Windrows
SCATTERED & ISOLATED TREE COVER
Fruit trees
Trees in crops
Trees around buildings
Trees in bush
Trees in open grassland
Trees in hedgerows
Subtotal, Scattered & Isolated Trees
ORCHARDS & WOODLOTS
Orchards
Woodlots
Subtotal, Orchards & Woodlots
Total, Planted or Cultivated Trees
FORESTS, BUSH & WOODLOTS
Indigenous forest
Bush or woodland
Riparian strips
Subtotal, Forest, Bush or Woodlands
Total, All Tree Cover
GRAND TOTAL:
Agriculture & Tree Cover
Some features of land use described in Table 1.1 challenge accepted ideas. While it is often argued that population growth and agricultural intensification are incompatible with the conservation and management of tree cover, the Kenya experience suggests that this is not always the case. Even in the most heavily populated areas, trees continue to be an important feature of land use. Also interesting is the gradual transition in the type of woody biomass which predominates as population pressures increase. Natural forest and bushland is cleared as agricultural development is intensified, but replanting follows, apparently using trees that are much more productive than the forests and bush they replaced.
Figure 1.2 Land use in Murang'a District in 1988
There have been a few efforts which have attempted to assess the impact of tree growing on the smallholder economy or why trees have assumed such an important role. A number of these attempts have focused on cultural attitudes toward trees, such as gender restrictions on tree planting in Kakamaga (Chavangi 1987). In Murang'a, district, household characteristics (farm size, household composition, cropping patterns and so on) have been closely related to patterns of tree cultivation and management (Bradley and Ngugi 1986). Cowen's fascinating history of wattle production in Central Province (Cowen 1978) provides important perspectives on the growth and spread of this tree planting practice, but does not address the question of why wattle continues to be maintained as a land use practice in the face of more lucrative land use alternatives in the Post-Independence economy.
A few studies have sought to explore the economic rationale for farmer tree growing in Kenya. Ongugo's study in South Nyanza, (Western Kenya) for example, focussed on economic resource allocation in the cultivation of tobacco, maize, and fuelwood (Ongugo 1985). Lubega's study of agroforestry systems in dryland areas of Machakos District (Central Kenya) explored the potential economic impacts of alley cropping on maize production (Lubega 1987).
The rationale for tree planting
A number of relatively straightforward conclusions can be drawn about different tree growing strategies. It can be assumed, for instance, that farmers have planted eucalyptus woodlots in response to growing demands for construction poles. Black wattle woodlots in turn, probably indicate that there are markets for wattle bark, and that there may be charcoal and fuelwood markets in addition to household, subsistence demand.
Other tree cultivation practices have little to do with these types of market opportunities. The predominance of hedges and windrows, for instance, is largely accounted for by considerations other than economics (although quite often trees are planted that can eventually be harvested and sold). Tree planting practices such as the intercropping of Sesbania sesban with maize are undertaken as part of soil improvement and management strategies. Shade trees are also highly valued.
If the extent of income-generating tree planting practices is considered, however, the argument that they evolved as a result of "market forces" tells us little. There remains the question of why resource-constrained farmers use their land for the cultivation and management of trees instead of other crops. Although an intensively managed 1 ha woodlot of eucalyptus or black wattle can provide a net income of around KSh 1,000 to 2,000 per year, a hectare of maize can generate an income of KSh 4,000 to 5,000 per year. Coffee can generate around twice this, and tea. twice as much again (World Bank 1986). Maintaining land under tree cover in the face of these alternative ways of generating income seems something of a contradiction.
Preliminary interviews with farmers in Western Kenya suggest that some of our perceptions of the smallholder economy were entirely wrong. It is generally believed that there are serious problems of unemployment in Kenya, (Republic of Kenya 1986) and that with a population growing at an astonishing rate of nearly 4 percent in some areas, (one of the highest in the world) these problems will become much worse. Farmers in Western Kenya however indicated that labour supplies were severely limited and that tree growing was seen as a labour-extensive means of alleviating these constraints. It can be argued that trees may be emerging as the cash crop of the rural poor.
<section>4</section>
1.2 Scope of this study
Objectives and Methods
This study, as well as other studies that were undertaken to provide household-level information about the relationship between tree growing and the rural economy, is intended to address two sets of questions. First, how does tree growing, as a labour-extensive cash cropping activity, complement urban wage employment as a strategy for overcoming problems with capital, land and labour markets? Do trees ease or intensify land use constraints imposed by labour migration? Secondly, does tree growing, an activity that requires low levels of capital input, have any particular advantage as a use for land in situations where limited credit sources have made it difficult for farmers to plant other more capital-intensive cash crops?
Several approaches have been used to address these questions. This study summarizes some of the descriptive information, as well as information from the historical record, in an attempt to describe the evolution of labour markets and land tenure systems and their impact on tree growing. It reviews, as well, traditional tree cultivation and management practices and the pricing and policies which brought about changes in land use that affected particular types of tree growing practices.
Most of this work has been carried out in the high potential agricultural zone of Murang'a District in Central Province of Kenya. Figure 1.1 above shows the location of Murang'a District. The district is in the middle of Kikuyu country and much of the discussion in this study is specific to the economic setting, land use practices, and historical and cultural processes that dominate in these areas, and that are in some ways unique to the Kikuyu. Many of the observations are however also of relevance to other parts of the country.
<section>5</section>
Chapter 2: The changing rural capital and labour markets
2.1 Labour use in smallholder agriculture
2.2 Capital transactions in smallholder agriculture
2.3 Smallholder responses to constrained labour and capital supplies
2.4 Conclusion: Tree growing and factor markets
End notes
2.1 Labour use in smallholder agriculture
Labour transactions in the traditional economy
A number of features of the rural economy are of particular relevance to farmer tree growing. They are mainly concerned with the ways in which land and labour are used within the Kikuyu agricultural economy. Some of the more common tree planting practices - particularly boundary planting and woodlots - are outcomes of historical processes.
Labour in the pre-colonial Kikuyu economy was largely controlled by kinship ties and responsibilities within the mbari (sub-clan), the most important unit of social organization.
One of the chief obligations of a man to his wife (or wives) was to provide her with fields for cultivation, which meant he had the task of clearing the bush and of hoeing it with the digging stick to make it ready for the harrow (Leakey 1977). Subsequent cultivation and harvesting responsibilities rested with the man's wife, but if it was needed, particularly during times of illness or incapacitation, additional labour could be drawn from the man's other wives. Communal labour (ngwatio) was organized if a household had insufficient labour to carry out an agricultural task. Groups of three to ten women, not necessarily related, would work from day to day on each others plots. (Cowen and Murage undated). Contemporary derivatives of this type of communal labour continue to exist today.
The only system which bore any resemblance to wage labour per se was the work party (wira). When labour was needed to complete a large task, such as digging or weeding, as many as 80 people would be enlisted for assistance by the individual concerned. He or she was obligated to provide beer, at least, and often provided food as well.
Significant changes in labour use were brought about in Kikuyu areas between 1900 and 1910 as the boundaries of the forest were fixed by the Colonial Administration and as the pace of the take-over of lands for European settlement accelerated. It wasn't so much that the Kikuyu lost land (although they clearly had), but that the process of European settlement limited further expansion. In many areas, the man's labour tasks of land clearance and hoeing were no longer as vital because expansion had stopped. The limits clearly disrupted traditional agricultural practices. The chief forest offences registered by the Forest Department in 1909 were for "making new gardens and enlarging old ones" in the newly reserved forests (FD 1909).
The emergence of the migrant and wage labour economy
Subsequent to these events the migrant labour economy developed. The first "hut taxes" (East Africa Hut Tax Ordinance 1903) and the later Poll Tax (Native Hut and Poll Tax Ordinance 1910) were partly intended to coerce Africans, who would not otherwise have sought wage employment, into finding jobs in plantation agriculture or in urban areas in order to be able to pay their taxes (Kitching 1980, van Zawanenberg 1975, Stichter 1982). Opportunities for wage employment in smallholder agriculture were nearly non-existent whereas the rapidly-expanding white settler economy was dependent on these labour supplies for agricultural expansion and development.
The development of wage labour markets in smallholder agriculture dates from around 1915 (in Nyeri District). Existing forms of labour organization - household labour, communal labour, and work parties - were not sufficient given the emerging class of traders, teachers, and artisans. This class of peasant elite introduced crops such as English potatoes and wheat which were far more labour-intensive than traditional maize, millet, and bean crops. Men were employed for heavy digging and women were employed for planting, weeding and harvesting. Labour supplies expanded greatly in the early 1930s; but plantation agriculture still competed with smallholder agriculture for labour and both became more or less dependent on migrant labour (Cowen and Murage undated).
Labour migration and landlessness
By the mid-1930s, nearly 30,000 ha of high potential agricultural land in Kikuyu areas had been taken for European cultivation. Advocates for European settlement argued that this land did not actually belong to the Kikuyu in the first place; that they had replaced the Ndorobo, and that the rights of individual Kikuyu had never amounted to ownership. Over a relatively short period of time, a large number of Africans found themselves without land use or tenancy rights. A system of "squatting" (reported as early as 1904) allowed Africans to farm plots on European farms in exchange for a fixed amount of labour (Government of the United Kingdom 1955).
Squatting was not dissimilar from the traditional practice amongst the Kikuyu of land borrowing - the ahoi system - which allowed individuals to cultivate underutilized land in return for gifts to the person with hereditary cultivation rights. Under the ahoi system, tenancy was not assured, as land could be redeemed by the original rightholder if it was needed. The process of European seizure, closure of the forests to agricultural expansion and consequent increasing land scarcity, led to cancellation of many of these land lending agreements and created a new landless class amongst the Kikuyu. Many -former ahoi tenants settled on European farms as squatters.
In 1918, the Administration legislated that squatters had to be contracted as labourers for 180 days per year for a small wage and the right to live and cultivate plots on European farms. Later changes prohibited squatters from keeping stock, limited cultivation to two acres per family, and increased the labour requirement to 270 days per year (Kanogo 1987). In the mid-1940s, as their numbers burgeoned, a move to evict squatters from European farms and force them to the Reserves, gathered momentum. By then, most squatters had lost any cultivation rights they may have had as ahoi tenants or as rightholders in the Reserves. Their eviction from settler farms created a huge class of landless unemployed, and their absorption into the Reserves created enormous problems.
In 1952, African protest against the Colonial Administration came to a head with widespread destruction of settlers property and murder, especially of Africans perceived to be loyal to the government. The government response to this was to declare a state of emergency. Leading Kenyan nationalists were arrested and a "villagization programme" begun in which the widespread rural communities were forced to live in fortified compounds with a strict night curfew.
During this villagization programme and subsequently during the land consolidation process in the early 1960s it was assumed that the landless, or near landless, could provide wage employment for smallholder agriculture. The relationship between agricultural employee and employer had little traditional precedent in Kikuyu areas, although reciprocal labour arrangements were (and remain) relatively common. The very small formal labour markets in smallholder areas were clearly not able to absorb the increasing mass of unemployed and consequently the migrant labour economy grew.
At the present time, rural agriculture can support only a small wage labour market. Fewer than 10 percent of smallholder labour inputs are provided by hired labour. Of these hired labourers, between 50 and 75 percent are landless or near-landless (Collier and Lal 1986). In a survey of labour requirements for the tea industry in Embu District, over 90 percent of tea pluckers did not have land of their own, but plucked tea primarily on holdings of relatives (Technoserve 1987).
Labour, crops and gender
Labour use and cropping patterns were closely linked to cultural norms of social responsibility. As mentioned above, land clearing and the first digging of the soil were the responsibility of a man to his wife. Most other labour tasks were the responsibility of women. Women's crops were generally labour intensive seasonal ones "sprouting foods" such as cereals and legumes, while men's crops were generally labour extensive perennial crops or "digging foods" such as yams, taro, cassava, and bananas. Men's crops were also more commonly famine foods (Fisher 1954). The gender links had important implications for contemporary patterns of labour use and may account in part for the predominance of subsistence crops in areas where male labour migration has skewed the labour supply.
Most of the Colonial Government's labour ordinances, and the system of taxation resulted primarily in male labour migration. Much of the legislation was drafted under the assumption that there was idle male labour in the reserves. Some conceded that the encouragement of African men to seek wage employment would pose serious problems for the women and children by increasing their labour load.
With the emergence and development of the market economy, and the relatively higher wages that could be earned in cities and on plantations, gender related patterns of labour use and distribution became entrenched. In Murang'a District, the transition in gender-specific patterns of rural labour availability seems to have taken place between 1924 and 1948. The 1924 census for the district reported a ratio of women to men in the "working age range" of 0.89 to 1 (KNA undated: DC/FH/6/1). The 1948 census, however reported the ratio had increased to around 1.4 to 1 (KNA 1950:DC/FH5/1).
Fig. 2.1 Women and children collecting fuelwood from the Nyandarua Forests, around 1905
Photo: Consolata Fathers, Turin
Trees, with their perennial nature (particularly black wattle which later became an extremely important cash crop), played a similar role as earlier traditional perennial crops. While wattle was not a man's crop (Fisher undated: 231, 241), both perennial crop planting and participation in the migrant labour economy were somewhat gender-specific making wattle the ideal crop for filling a particular niche: wattle could be planted on holdings when men sought wage employment elsewhere providing a source of income during times of environmental or economic stress.
Labour migration in contemporary Kenya
Labour migration continues to be a dominant feature of the rural economy, placing heavy constraints on smallholder agriculture. The Integrated Rural Surveys (particularly IRS1) found that nationally, 20 percent of landowners of smallholdings lived away from the holding and were not in charge of day-to-day decisions about its operation (Republic of Kenya 1977). Men remain the main participants in the migrant labour economy.
Even if men have chosen not to seek employment out of their area, they may not be willing to work on their smallholding, preferring wage employment in local businesses or engagement in their consultative roles as elders in the community. In some areas children, formerly an abundant source of labour, are not widely available to work on farms because they are in school. One outcome of all this movement has been labour shortages in smallholder agriculture.
Where land endowments per household are large or where the family operates several parcels that are widely dispersed as a result of inheritance or purchase, the supervision of hired labour to farm the entire holding efficiently can present problems. In these cases, the real cost of hired labour (because of its relative inefficiency due to a lack of supervision) may be so high as to encourage the development of labour-extensive types of cultivation.
Alternative labour strategies
In the face of these constraints, traditional labour use has changed in order to deal with seasonal shortages and more effectively use the available resources. The participation of women in rural associations in Murang'a District has provided a number of important alternatives to the conventional approach toward labour use (Thomas 1988). Women's collective participation in labour activities, similar to that of the men, is undertaken for income generation, to provide labour during periods of peak demand, or to otherwise ease labour constraints. In Weithaga location, women's associations often work as groups in seasonal wage employment for one morning a week - weeding, mulching, picking coffee, or carrying out other tasks. Income from collective employment is used to support the group's activities, or can be tapped through a revolving credit fund (Thomas 1988). During illness, women's group members can be called on to work on the ill member's farm and expect such support in
return in the future if needed.
2.2 Capital transactions in smallholder agriculture
Traditional capital transactions
In pre-colonial Kenya, capital accumulation primarily involved the accumulation of livestock. Cattle, sheep and goats were clearly important for milk, meat and skins, but also had exchange value. Livestock could be exchanged for food crops, land, utilitarian objects such as spears, hoes, baskets and shields, and formed the basis for bridewealth (Kitching 1980).
Information about traditional credit arrangements amongst the Kikuyu is extremely sparse. Probably the most widespread arrangement involved the redeemable sale of land for the generation of capital. Redeemable land sales were initiated by the seller, and were generally undertaken to obtain livestock to pay bridewealth or compensation for death or injury. The purchaser (muguri) of the land had full cultivation and building rights, in exchange for the agreed upon livestock. The seller's land would be returned upon repayment of an equivalent number of livestock to the purchaser at either party's request.
Informal credit arrangements
Until the mid-1950s, there were few formal mechanisms for channeling capital into the smallholder agricultural sector. Even if they had existed, controls and regulations discouraged individuals who might have wanted to do so. No debt, for instance, could be incurred by an African from a non-African in excess of £10 unless permission to become indebted had been granted by a Provincial or District Commissioner (Government of the United Kingdom 1955).
These restrictions channelled demand for credit into informal systems which flourished long after Independence. These include: kinship credit, merchant credit, money lending, mutual savings societies, and the redeemable sale of crops or capital assets.
Kinship credit may take the form of small loans for farm purchases or for school fees or other expenses. There may be no implicit understanding that these loans must be paid back at some rate of interest or over a particular time period - or at all - but there is the understanding that the creditor may freely ask for a similar loan in return sometime in the future. Merchant credit is relatively common as well (Von Pischke 1977). The amount of credit outstanding amongst surveyed shopkeepers in Nyeri and Machakos Districts was reported to be around 15 percent of average monthly sales. Money lending by merchants and others appears to be relatively uncommon and is largely limited to the Asian community.
Mutual savings and credit are generally a feature of rural women's associations (although they may involve men as well) and may complement other group ventures such as communal labour activities. Monthly contributions to the society are pooled, and given to a different member every month. In two locations of Murang'a District, around 50 such associations each raise and distribute around the equivalent of US$ 500 per year (Thomas 1988). In aggregate, the sums become quite substantial.
Another type of informal credit is the redeemable sale of crops or other assets. Amongst the traditional antecedents was the redeemable land sale. Sales are redeemable when the seller may reverse the transaction (Von Pischke 1977). Though these types of transactions appear to be relatively uncommon where marketing arrangements are well-established or where crops sales occur regularly, they appear with greater frequency for commodities that are irregularly sold.
Wattle and eucalyptus trees are sometimes redeemably sold in Murang'a District. Under this type of arrangement, payment at current market prices would be advanced against standing trees when they were young, giving the buyer the right to harvest them whenever he wished - usually 7 or 8 years later. The seller could buy back the standing trees at any time, at current market prices for an agreed upon product mix (in the case of wattle, for charcoal, bark, building poles or fence posts).
Several entrepreneurs in Kiambu District have attempted to further refine redeemable sale. A number of agreements have been made with wattle producers that they will continue to maintain their woodlots in exchange for annual payments. In most cases, annual payments have eliminated the redeemable feature of the sale. The entrepreneurs had hoped that higher charcoal prices would make their investment worthwhile but the outcome of their initiative is unclear.
When options for the development of formal credit mechanisms were being considered in the early 1950s, trees were recognized as a possible form of security against loans. Wattle bark prices reached historic highs between 1948 and 1952, prompting a local committee in Fort Hall (Murang'a) District to note that "in high wattle areas a man's potential profit from the sale of his wattle bark could be considered to guarantee his loan" (Colony and Protectorate of Kenya 1929a).
Formal credit mechanisms
Formal mechanisms for channelling credit to smallholders are a recent phenomenon in Kenya mostly dating from the mid- to late 1960s. The primary sources of smallholder credit are through agricultural marketing and processing cooperatives. Farmers are allowed to buy inputs against future sales of their crops to the cooperative. There are few mechanisms for channelling credit specifically to support labour activities.
Commercial lending for smallholder agriculture is at an historic low. The gap between the ceiling rates which commercial banks are allowed to charge for loans, and the rate at which they are able to obtain capital from the Central Bank has steadily decreased. This has caused a shift in most commercial banks' lending portfolios away from agriculture and towards urban and industrial investment. Lending portfolios in agriculture have shifted away from smallholder agriculture in favour of larger-scale agro-industrial investments.
2.3 Smallholder responses to constrained labour and capital supplies
Historical and cultural processes have greatly contributed to the evolution and functioning of labour and capital markets in Kenya. Current patterns of labour migration owe much to the institutionalization of labour and wage processes.
In Kenya, when population pressures are low and labour is consequently relatively scarce, larger holdings are used primarily for growing labour-intensive cash crops, and smaller holdings are used for land-intensive food crops which yield low returns to both land and labour (Republic of Kenya 1977).
These types of patterns of labour use are in part a risk management strategy. One way of reducing risk is to ensure the household grows at least some food crops, eliminating exposure to the possibility that cash crops will fail to generate enough income to purchase food. The combination of uncertain prices and uncertain availability make subsistence cultivation a rational choice for those with little land, even though it reduces returns to household labour. Additionally, labour-intensive cash crops generally have long gestation periods. Coffee usually takes four years to yield, while tea is not fully mature for 11 years. Labour-intensive crops pose serious problems for smallholder cash-flow because they defer consumption and because they require heavy investment and recurrent costs.
These constraints could be partly overcome if there were financial available for smallholders to expand their area under cultivation either through purchase or tenancy, if capital were available to hire additional labour, and if smallholder labour markets operated in a way that could allow households to specialize in labour-intensive crops. At present however, only around a tenth of smallholder labour inputs are supplied by the market, and the efficiency of hired labour compared with household labour is quite low. Tenancy and land sales are almost entirely absent; Integrated Rural Study 1 (IRS1) indicated that the total area of rented smallholder farming land accounted for less than 1 percent of all smallholder farming land. Access to credit is restricted to a small minority of smallholders (Collier end Lal 1986).
The lack of access to credit for smallholders accounts in part for the focus on food crop production on the smallest holdings: farmers are unable to afford the heavy investment costs in say, coffee or tea, much less the high recurrent costs for fertilizers and other inputs.
One of the most attractive alternatives for those without access to credit or capital is urban wage employment. Because off-farm income is usually generated by household members who live elsewhere, and because of the inefficiency and difficulty of supervising hired labour to replace household labour, this strategy may cause difficulties because of the labour constraints it can introduce.
2.4 Conclusion: Tree growing and factor markets
Within this context we can introduce several ideas about why farmers grow trees. Tree cultivation and management require far less labour than other types of crop production. Where there are markets for different types of tree products - in Kenya these include building timbers, charcoal, bark (for tanning extracts), fence posts, pulpwood (for the paper mill at Webuye), and fuelwood - returns to labour can be quite high. A Senior Agricultural Officer in Central Province noted in the early 1940s, that the labour-extensive nature of black wattle largely accounted for its rapid adoption as a cash crop. People had found out that wattle trees
... grow quickly while they are sleeping, so that it is an easy way to get money. They plant the wattle, tend it for a year or so, then go away to Nairobi and find work for some years and know when they return that their 'bank' has grown to be worth many shillings without the owner doing much work. (KNA 1941: AGR14/343)
Investments required for tree growing can be quite small, and consist primarily of labour for site preparation and planting. Seedlings can be grown by households in small, on-farm nurseries, with very low labour costs for seed collection and bed preparation. In Kisii District, it has been reported that most farmers plant trees every two or three years, and that 65 percent of their seedling stock comes from either their own tree nurseries or from their neighbour's. Another 10 percent of seedling stock is bought in local markets. The balance - 25 percent - is obtained from "official" Forest Department nurseries (Kuyper and Bradley 1985).
Seedlings for cash crops such as tea or coffee, on the other hand, can be quite costly and beyond the reach of the poorest farmers. In addition to sometimes large investment costs, there are usually heavy recurrent costs for fertilizers and fungicides for cash crops. To grow trees as a cash crop requires neither the heavy investment nor the recurrent costs.
Perennial tree crops such as black wattle, may also be playing a role similar to earlier traditional perennial crops. The planting of perennial crops as well as participation in the migrant labour economy are both somewhat gender-specific. Trees are in many ways the ideal crop for filling a particular role within the farm economy: wattle could be planted on holdings when men sought wage employment off the farm and could provide a source of income during times of environmental or economic stress.
Finally, trees can provide a flexible source of household income in the absence of alternative sources of capital because they can be harvested when they are most needed -to provide school fees, dowry, to purchase food in times of scarcity, and for other basic needs. The timing of harvesting is quite flexible: when cash is most needed, when the markets are right, or when labour is freed up from other farming activities. For households that consume most of their marginal output, or that otherwise have too little capital to pursue alternative savings strategies, tree cultivation and management provides a sort of on-farm revolving savings/credit mechanism which can be withdrawn as capital when needed.
End notes
1. The Kikuyu are divided into nine clans (muhiriga) each descended from one of the nine daughters of the ancestral parents of the Kikuyu. The mbari, or sub-clan, was a more important unit of social organization. Members of the mbari lived for the most part on their own land unit.
<section>6</section>
Chapter 3: The evolution of Kikuyu land tenure
3.1 Trees and land tenure
3.2 The sub-clan holding (gìthaka) as the basic land unit
3.3 Changing tenure and land use systems
3.4 Changes in land tenure and their impact on tree tenure
3.5 Summary: Changes in land tenure and the impacts of consolidation
3.1 Trees and land tenure
Tree cultivation and management in Kenya can only be understood within the context of land tenure. Land tenure systems in Murang'a had been in a state of change long before the Colonial Administration sought to limit the dynamics of the process. The Administration's adamant support for a static system of traditional land tenure sought to institutionalize what David Throup called the "moral economy of 'Merrie Africa' "(Throup 1987:4) rooted, in the Colonial mind, in a mythical, egalitarian past. Over the last 50 years, the traditional system of communal tenure has eventually evolved into a system of private tenure but one which incorporates the community trust obligations inherent in indigenous law (Okoth-Ogendo 1987).
Traditional law in many areas of Kenya generally recognized a distinction between rights of control of land (which are usually held by a lineage authority) and rights of use and access (often determined by the needs of individual members of a community). Because of this distinction, in pre-Colonial times, rights of private land ownership by a single individual - ownership of the land and everything on it were not generally a feature of traditional law. That is, in traditional tenure systems, rights of tree ownership and exploitation could be held separately. In English law (which provided the basis for much of the land tenure legislation of the late 1950s and early 1960s) trees are considered part of the land; the control of things on the land, such as trees, cannot be vested in someone other than in the landowner (Onalo 1986).
Early settlement in Murang'a
Murang'a is, roughly speaking, in the centre of Kikuyu country although the Kikuyu are relatively recent occupants who settled there in the sixteenth century (Muriuki 1974). They emerged as a group which shared common agro-ecological survival strategies, developed in part as a result of their movement from arid and semi-arid areas into the high potential agricultural areas on the eastern slopes of the Aberdare mountains.
The centre of Kikuyu country is traditionally associated with the area around the town of Gakuyu of Murang'a District. Gakuyu is a form of the name for the mukuyu tree from which the name Gìkuyu (or Kikuyu) is also derived (Kenyatta 1938). Another site, Mukurwe wa Gathanga, is named after another tree (Albizia sp.), and is where, we are told, God appeared to the man, Gìkuyu, and allotted him all the land south and west of Mount Kenya to the edge of the forest. The site was the location where Gìkuyu, and Mumbi, his wife, made their home and raised their nine daughters who became the forbearers of the nine Kikuyu clans. Few trees, in any society, have such important cultural associations as these two have for the Kikuyu.
Fig. 3.1 Muringa (Cordia africana) and Mugumo (Ficus thonnongii) trees growing together at the site of Mukurwe wa Gathanga in Murang'a District
Photo: Dewees
Sub-clan boundaries, and subsequent political and economic divisions, were largely dependent on the physical geography. Much of Kikuyu land, particularly in Murang'a, is characterized by a series of ridges and deep river gorges running from west to east. This extensive system of ridges and valleys strongly influenced patterns of settlement and the emergence of systems of land tenure. Ridges, for the most part, tended to be cleared and cultivated first, and became the basis for the holdings of a sub-clan (mbari) which could trace its origins to a common male ancestor.
Kikuyu agricultural expansion had long been limited by periodic wars with the Maasai. A forest belt acted as a buffer between the Maasai and the Kikuyu, concealing a series of fortified Kikuyu villages. European intervention put an end to Maasai and Kikuyu raids, and as a result the buffer forests were no longer needed. Between 1900 and 1910 there was a period of intensive forest clearance and cultivation by the Kikuyu.
Fig. 3.2 Fortified Kikuyu Forest Village in the Nyandarua Forests, 1909.
Photo: Consolata Fathers, Turin
Provincial Commissioner S.L. Hinde estimated that during this period, the Aberdare forests were being cleared at a rate of a half mile a year (Government of the United Kingdom 1909). Hutchins speculated that between the early 1890s and 1909, around 350 square miles of forests on the slopes of the Aberdares had been cleared (FD 1909/1910:5). The demarcation of Forest Reserve boundaries, well underway in 1910, put an end to further clearance and expansion of Kikuyu areas. The Administration's land policy put limits on Kikuyu settlement practices and systems of land tenure that were. quite, fundamentally, expansionist.
3.2 The sub-clan holding (gìthaka) as the basic land unit
Origins of the sub-clan land holding
Acquisition of land in the earliest Kikuyu settlements was based on the rights of first use, defined originally by the exercise of hunting and trapping rights. As described by a Kikuyu elder in the late 1920s:
In those days we did not cultivate so much as we do now. A man trapped animals and his hunting area became his Ngundu [land claim]. His descendants became his clan. Each father had his own hunting area where he set his traps and he would show the boundaries of it to his sons... In the course of time by a natural process the Estate breaks up and each branch of the family gets control of its own Estate... [They] still recognize the eldest son of the eldest branch as the head of the family. (Colony and Protectorate of Kenya 1929a:8).
Hunting rights were strengthened by forest clearance and cultivation. The basic land unit was known as the sub-clan holding (gìthaka) or estate. (Technically, as it refers to uncleared bushland, its basis is in hunting rather than in cultivating traditions.) It was reported in the late 1920)s that most sub-clan holdings ranged in size from about 20 ha to nearly 2,500 ha although they generally were between 80 and 120 ha in size (Colony and Protectorate of Kenya 1929a:9).
Tenancy and the sub-clan holding
Cultivation rights of the sub-clan holding belonged to families with lineage rights, and were held in perpetuity. People without lineage rights could obtain temporary rights of cultivation to sub-clan lands through redeemable sales, from land lending and tenancy (discussed in Chapter 2).
Land lending to people outside the sub-clan took several forms. A muhoi or tenant, for instance, could be lent land for cultivation, usually on the basis of friendship. Subject to the approval of the sub-clan leader (muramati), these rights could be granted. In certain circumstances, the rights of a tenant could be passed from generation to generation. Although no rent per se featured in this type of tenancy agreement, occasional gifts were expected.
The cultivation of the sub-clan holding was the clearest means of retaining land tenure rights. In the event that lineage rightholders were not able to fully cultivate the sub-clan holding, temporary tenants would be sought to clear and cultivate underutilized land. As land became more scarce and labour more abundant, these tenancy arrangements became less common and were often cancelled. Although in principle a temporary tenant still held lineage rights to his own sub-clan land, in practice it was very difficult to return and regain cultivation rights. Occasionally, a temporary tenant might become a resident tenant (muthami) who was allowed the right to cultivate and to build a homestead.
Fig. 3.3 Gathering of Kikuyu elders at a Beer Fest (Tuthu Village, 1908)
Photo: Consolata Fathers, Turin
So within the system of traditional Kikuyu land tenure, there were precedents for tenancy and land lending arrangements. Resident tenancy allowed the building of a homestead, while land lending expressly prohibited it. Land lending thus encouraged the formation of a class of non-resident farm labourers, but it was dependent in part on there being holdings which could not be successfully cultivated by the right holder. Resident tenancy and land lending arrangements could be inherited. Rights of use were distributed to male descendants of the first owner, while a non-distributed right of control was held by the eldest son of the senior branch of the sub-clan or family who was its trustee (or muramati).
Pressures on the system
Until the time of European settlement, the sub-clan land holding system was reasonably secure. It continued to function in varying degrees in Central Province as late as the mid-1970s, although most traditional rights were extinguished during the period of land consolidation and registration in the early 1960s. The earliest pressures on the system became evident when the Colonial Administration attempted to resolve disputes involving customary law and land tenure - something it did not fundamentally understand. In 1914, for instance, it was argued that the Crown's responsibility was to develop "a system of tenure for natives...giving them real and definite rights to the land" (Colony and Protectorate of Kenya 1929a:63) - as if these rights did not already exist. Later, however, the 1929 report of the Committee on Native Land Tenure in Kikuyu Province recommended that customary laws be accepted as the basis for Kikuyu land tenure and that specific practices regarding the
demarcation of holdings - which involved the planting of trees on farm boundaries -be included as rules under the pending Native Lands Trust Ordinance. Draft rules were prepared but never enacted (Fazan undated).
Any possibility for allowing a system of private land tenure for Africans was greatly resisted by the Government (Ainsworth undated: 497). The 1932 Kenya Land Commission had recommended that tenure systems in Kenya "be progressively guided in the direction of private tenure, proceeding through the group and family towards the individual holding. "(Government of the United Kingdom 1934). Largely because of the strength of European settler opinion, the recommendation was ignored. Instead, it was legislated that native tenure systems not be modified. This meant that customary tenure, however the Colonial Administration chose to define it, was to guide the resolution of land disputes. Customary tenure in Kikuyu areas, however, had never been static, but was itself derived from a body of precedents and practices that evolved as new pressures presented themselves. By locking customary tenure practices in place, there were increased pressures on the native tenure system. Land
disputes were inevitable.
The Administration was particularly opposed to the rise of capitalism which would accelerate if private tenure were granted (Throup 1987:63). But privatization was taking place anyway. By the early 1930s, the difference between communal and individual tenure was, in many areas of Kikuyu country, mostly semantic. Inherited exploitation rights, although there may have been communal obligations associated with them, would seldom be revoked by the sub-clan leader, whose power had decreased with time. The establishment of permanent crops or plots of trees was also an important mechanism for asserting individual, rather than communal. rights of ownership (Colony and Protectorate of Kenya 1929a:39).
Accompanying the emergence of "private" land rights was the breakdown of the system that granted tenancy rights and, particularly, allowed these rights to be inherited. By the late 1940s, extensive land litigation was common between sub-clan members and third or fourth generation descendants of the original tenants with whom the tenancy agreements had been made. The considerable time which had passed made it extremely difficult to resolve the litigation. Because of the uncertainty of tenure, it was argued that tenants would be hesitant to make long-term improvements in the holding (Simmance 1961: 75- 81).
In 1948 the Fort Hall Law Panel, comprised of chiefs, councillors, and court presidents of the District, initiated reforms to make some types of land transactions, particularly land that had been acquired through redeemable sale agreements (aguri), no longer redeemable. The move to scrap land redemption and tenant eviction practices gained momentum in the early 1950s. The problem of insecure tenure was large. In the mid-1950s, it was estimated that between 10 and 50 percent of the total land in Murang'a District was still, technically, redeemable.
3.3 Changing tenure and land use systems
Villagization and the Emergency
The 1952 State of Emergency, called in response to the growing civil turmoil that would eventually lead to Independence, had a far-reaching impact on land tenure. One of the measures mounted during the Emergency was "villagization." Originally the programme was intended to isolate Mau Mau fighters in the forests from material and food supplies that were being provided by their sympathisers. The programme also provided protection for Kikuyus who remained loyal to the Government and who could be more easily guarded in these armed and barricaded sites. Others saw it as an opportunity for providing central educational, agricultural and health services.
The villagization programme introduced unprecedented forms of social organization. Families that had formerly lived on isolated homesteads with 10 to 20 other individuals were forcibly moved into villages with an average of 1200 residents. By 1956, 272 villages had been established in Kiambu District, 235 in Murang'a District, and 169 in Nyeri District (Thurston 1987:85).
As a result of the Emergency, over 100,000 people were moved to the Reserves from towns and from European farms where they had farmed as squatters. In every sense, these were displaced persons who had no connection with the Reserves as they had often been working as squatters for several generations. They too were placed in villages and were given plots. Their return often created suspicion and resentment amongst the long-time residents of the Reserves. The villages provided everyone with a twentieth of a hectare (around 500m²) and was partly an attempt to solve the problem of squatter landlessness. Those who had land use rights were allowed to continue cultivating their holdings. Those who had no land except for their 500m² plot were expected to seek wage labour on the larger holdings. There was, however, neither the capital nor the means of production to support a class of wage labourers (Sorrenson 1987:147).
Consolidation of fragmented holdings of agriculture
Villagization was closely linked with land tenure reform, particularly the consolidation of fragmented holdings. From the times of earliest settlement in Kikuyu country, landholdings became progressively and extensively fragmented. Most households had several distinct and geographically separate plots within the sub-clan holding. This was partly because of the inheritance of exploitation rights, which basically meant that lineage holdings would become progressively smaller over time. When land holdings became too small given family size (usually when a man married another wife) the man would try to obtain rights to another plot for cultivation. The new plots were seldom contiguous with plots the household was already cultivating. Fragmentation was also a product of the system of land lending and redeemable sale which encouraged tenant farmers to cultivate fragmented sub-clan lands.
One result of fragmentation was that, by cultivating different plots spread over several agro-ecological zones, farmers could spread out their environmental risks. In the event of drought, for instance, crops on a few plots would fail, but not all of them would fail. The cultivation of multiple plots could also even out seasonal patterns of labour demand because cultivation and harvesting tasks could be staggered, depending on where the plots were located. Fragmentation as an unwitting, though adaptive, land use made tremendous sense in areas of huge agro-ecological variability like Murang'a. Even so, the Administration consistently chose to ignore these types of benefits. The arguments against fragmentation were usually based on the notion that it was detrimental to agricultural practices: fragmentation hindered modernization, it generated inefficiencies in the use of factors of production, and it would be costly to change (McPherson 1983:10, Binns 1950:15).
The extent of fragmentation varied widely. In Kiambu, for instance, it was reported that one farmer held a total of four hectares made up of 20 plots within a radius of 14 miles (Homan and Sands undated :5). The record was probably in Murang'a though, where district reports noted that one man had 108 fragments spread over 17Ha (KNA 1958). The norm in Murang'a was probably that a single farmer would have around five or six holdings totalling around two hectares. Households which held only one plot were the exception.
Consolidation was thought to be the key to an agricultural revolution in Kenya, and the granting of individual title was seen as a mechanism for channelling loan funds, and other resources, to smallholder agriculture. It particularly affected land and labour use patterns. In economic terms, its impact is surprisingly often understated; few efforts have been mounted to evaluate the effects of consolidation on agricultural production specifically, and on the rural economy in general.
Momentum for change gathered from around 1950, with the appointment of Roger Swynnerton as an Assistant Director for Agriculture. In 1953, the Swynnerton plan made consolidation a key feature of agricultural development in Kenya. Consolidation, however, could not have been accomplished without the Emergency (Swynnerton undated). Villagization removed people from the land which meant that the Administration could initiate consolidation without the problem of having to deal with established homesteads. Secondly, consolidation was seen as a mechanism for rewarding loyalists with economic patronage.
Fig. 3.4 Land consolidation committee meeting (Thuita, late 1950s)
Photo: Ministry of Agriculture
Consolidation was carried out in blocks of between 800 and 1,600 ha, about the size of a sublocation. Redemption of every plot of land from the temporary purchasers (aguri) was a prerequisite to consolidation (Wilson 1956:146). Generally, the objective was to include a proportion of arable, cash-crop and grazing land within each consolidated holding. The extent of existing cash crops and other improvements was recorded so that compensation for permanent improvements could be paid by the new owner.
The smallest holdings were grouped around villages and larger holdings were sited beyond these (Pedraza 1956:85). The landless were given plots in villages, from where they were expected to seek wage labour in agriculture or to become shopkeepers and artisans. Consolidated holdings generally ran in strips from ridges to valleys giving a right holder a range (albeit limited) of agro-ecological conditions and soils in which to farm (Wilson 1956:149). Consolidation was followed up by boundary marking and farm planning. Basic farm layouts were made for all farms as soon as they were consolidated. They included recommendations to cultivate food crops on land with a slope of less than 20 percent, to cultivate grass or trees on land with a slope of greater than 35 percent, and to cultivate permanent crops on slopes between 20 and 35 percent (Brown 1962:297). Farmers who requested it could benefit from more detailed farm layouts. By 1961, detailed plans had been prepared for around
18 percent of the holdings in Murang'a District (and 10 and 21 percent of the holdings, respectively, in Kiambu and Nyeri Districts) (Brown 1962:284).
Despite the proliferation of farm plans, the Colonial Department of Agriculture was inexperienced when it came to smallholder farming.
Despite the fact that the whole purpose of agriculture is to produce, you will not find production. Agriculture is limited to the production of terraces. There are no decent crops to grow on them.... There are a few beautiful to look at smallholdings, which have cost the earth to make. They are surrounded by miles of barbed wire and are good as show places for VIPs. They are not, however, economic. (Thompson undated:9)
There was no legal basis for consolidation, nor were consolidated holdings recognized in law. Consequently, the Administration imposed a moratorium on all land cases, and drafted and passed legislation that provided for consolidation, the registration of titles and inheritance. The outcome was the Native Lands Registration Ordinance of 1959 which, for the first time, legalized private land ownership in the Reserves.
That legislation formed the basis for the legislation that now comprises the accepted body of land law. The 1963 Registered Land Act (Cap. 300) is the primary legal instrument controlling land transactions. Under its terms, customary land rights were extinguished in areas which had been consolidated and registered, as in virtually all of the high potential agricultural areas (Allot 1988[II]:2). Rights of control and rights of access or use were equated with ownership rights. Land is consequently inherited by the sons of each house of a rightholders' wives. For instance, if a man with three wives died, the land was split equally into three; each third was then split equally amongst the sons within each line. Women had rights of use, by marriage, but were unable to inherit land.
Agricultural contexts
African agriculture had, for the most part, been ignored by the Colonial Administration. At the urging of the European settler community, most Africans were prevented from growing any of the better paying export crops. By the mid 1940s, African agriculture was in a fairly bad state. It was seriously undercapitalized and development in the Reserves had come to a virtual standstill. Still clinging to the notion that the problem was linked to the growth of "individualism" and the soil degradation which had allegedly resulted, the Administration embarked on a massive programme of communally-based soil conservation that relied on reviving the traditional use of communal labour supervised and controlled by tribal elders.
One of the few cash crops which Africans in Murang'a were actively encouraged to grow was black wattle. It was introduced into the district around 1902 and had a major social, economic and political impact on the area. (Black wattle is discussed in detail in Chapter Five.)
The Administration did, however, recognize a serious need for land reform. Norman Humphrey, for instance, argued that parts of Kikuyu country were completely unable to provide even a subsistence standard of living, and that each household needed a minimum of around 4.8 ha, in comparison with the 2.6 ha of land the average household had access to at the time. Humphrey proposed a massive programme of resettlement, recommending that "14,000 families must come off the land as soon as possible." What Humphrey and others had chosen to ignore in their calculations of land requirements in Reserve areas was the potential for cash cropping (Humphrey 1945a:10 and 1945b:52).
The reversal of policies toward communal development began around 1947 after the breakdown of the soil conservation programme. That year, the Director of Agriculture announced that the European coffee growers had abandoned their objections to smallholder coffee production, provided that it was adequately supervised and cultivated away from European farms. Two years later, the Tea Growers' Association abandoned their objections to smallholder tea production (Thurston 1987:30-31).
3.4 Changes in land tenure and their impact on tree tenure
The Registered Land Act (Cap.300) of 1963 specified that, for holdings registered under the act, customary law would no longer apply. The result was that rights of control, and rights of use both became vested in the landowner, rather than in lineage authority or lineage right holder. The legislation introduced important changes affecting tree tenure. Trees, as well as "all things growing on the land...and other things permanently affixed to the land" were the property of the registered landowner. Rights of control, then, were vested in the landowner, rather than in a lineage authority, and it would be up to the landowner to determine if an individual could use the trees growing there. The effects of the legislation, like much of the land-related legislation of the 1950s and early 1960s, were most profoundly felt by the landless, who may have had rights of use to trees growing on sub-clan land guaranteed to them by the sub-clan leader, but who lost these rights as sub-clan
land was registered in the names of private land owners.
Sub-clan lineage land use right holders (who were probably less likely to need other tree-use rights on sub-clan lands) lost exploitation rights to communal tree resources as well. Landed farmers, however, were far more able to respond to the tree scarcities brought about by consolidation and registration than were the landless. Farmers who might otherwise have relied on sub-clan trees for timber and fuelwood supplies, but who no longer had access to them, were able instead to grow trees on their own consolidated holdings. Indeed, they were already doing so from the 1940s, as real physical scarcities of trees were developing both on right holders' lands and on communal lands.
Controls on tree planting
While the impression given might be that farmers are freely able to plant and harvest trees as they choose, this is not exactly the case. Several pieces of legislation place some controls on tree planting and other land uses and bear mention here. These are the Chief's Authority Act (Cap.128), the Agricultural (Basic Land Usage) Rules and the Agricultural Act (Cap.318) from which they were derived.
The Chief's Authority Act was first introduced in the 1920s as the Administration sought to develop a framework of local government. The chiefs were widely enlisted in the Government's various agricultural campaigns, and in the process were empowered to regulate a wide range of land uses.
The current Chief's Authority Act is extremely wide ranging. Chiefs are able to require,
...persons to plant any specified crops for the support of themselves and their families when the area concerned is suffering from or threatened with a shortage of foodstuffs.
The Act also allows a chief to prohibit grazing in areas that are being rehabilitated or have been planted with fodder crops. Finally, it also gives chiefs the power to employ compulsory labour in the event of natural catastrophies or other emergencies, and for "the conservation of natural resources" (a euphemism for compulsory tree planting and soil conservation work).
With regard to tree harvesting, Section 10 of the Act specifies that,
Any chief may from time to time issue orders to be obeyed by the persons residing or being within the local limits of his jurisdiction for...[the purposes of ] regulating the cutting of timber and prohibiting the wasteful destruction of trees...or for any other purpose appointed by the Minister in writing. [emphasis added]
This last provision gives broad authority to chiefs to enforce any land use practice which the Government wishes to introduce.
The provisions of the Chief's Act are strengthened by the Agricultural Act and the Agricultural (Basic Land Usage) Rules which empower the Minister to require afforestation reforestation. The Agricultural Act also makes provision for the regulation of the planting of cash crops such as coffee and tea. These crops can neither be planted nor taken out without a permit.
The Land Usage Rules also regulate hillside cultivation. They prohibit the cuffing of trees and the grazing of livestock on hills with slopes of greater than 35 percent. They empower Agricultural Officers to prohibit cultivation on land that is greater than 20 percent slope, and to require soil conservation measures on any cultivated land between 12 percent and 35 percent in slope.
There is no consistency whatsoever in the extent to which controls on farmer tree growing are enforced. Chiefs may require a farmer to obtain a license before trees can be harvested in exchange for a payment of one form or another. In some areas, this requirement has acted as a disincentive to plant trees because there is no assurance that the trees can be harvested. Indeed, the general practice of requiring licences to plant or harvest particular crops acts as a disincentive to alter patterns of land use in response to changing economic conditions.
Rules and regulations about tree planting are introduced and enforced with great irregularity and as it becomes politically expedient to do so. In 1985, for instance, eucalyptus came under heavy attack in Parliament following the head-of-state's vocal concern about the possible negative impact of these trees on the environment. A ban on the planting of gum trees was very nearly introduced. Since then, the discussion about eucalyptus has been greatly tempered in part, because of growing recognition of the economic value of the tree to the rural economy.
More generally however, potential problems with the authorities are reduced by the discrete harvesting and management of trees. Trees are sometimes harvested and managed individually or in small blocks, rather than as an even-aged group: if a few poles are harvested from a woodlot and sold, no one really notices, if the woodlot is entirely cleared, there may be problems. Where permits are not generally required, it is more common to see entire stands of trees or windrows felled at the same time.
3.5 Summary: Changes in land tenure and the impacts of consolidation
Patterns of land use, defined as a result of the farm planning exercises that followed consolidation, are easily recognized in current land use practices. Villagization and consolidation also clustered smaller holdings around villages.
Consolidation strengthened the African middle peasantry, but largely at the expense of the landless. The people whose position was most seriously damaged by consolidation were the tenants (temporary and resident) and those making redeemable land purchases (muguri). As plots were consolidated, land lending and tenancy arrangements were cancelled and land sales were redeemed. While it was assumed that the landless would form a labouring class engaged in employment on larger holdings or in villages, these opportunities were not extensive enough (Sorrenson 1967:221).
Patterns of labour organization were radically changed as well. The process freed up enormous amounts of household labour, formerly used for the cultivation of fragmented holdings. No analysts of the economics of smallholder agriculture in post-independent Kenya have ever assessed (or even speculated upon) the dramatically changed patterns of labour use resulting from consolidation. A reliance on labour-extensive land uses (or tenancy arrangements) to keep distant holdings productive was simply no longer necessary. The fact that household labour became more available partly disproved the hypothesis, that consolidated holdings would provide good opportunities for employment of the landless.
The shift in patterns of labour availability was accompanied by shifts in patterns of land use. In Murang'a District prior to consolidation the dominant cash crop was black wattle. As labour was freed up by consolidation, there was no longer the need to cultivate fragmented holdings with labour extensive crops like trees. This created an overwhelmingly positive environment for the introduction of other cash crops such as coffee and tea. Consolidation, the Swynnerton Plan, and the liberalization of agricultural policies in the Reserves brought about large increases in income from smallholder agriculture. However, the immediate benefits were not evenly distributed and if consolidation could be judged to have been a failure, it was in this respect.
Finally, consolidation greatly changed the relationship between the rights of control of land and rights of use. Contemporary land tenure practices no longer assured people of customary rights of access to trees growing on sub-clan lands. Tree resources which could be managed and utilized on a communal basis were no longer accessible to people who may have needed them. The long-term impacts of this change are related to the widespread cultivation and management of trees on private lands, where rights of ownership and control are one and the same.
<section>7</section>
Chapter 4: Tree cultivation and management practices
4.1 Tree tenure
4.2 Trees as boundary markers
4.3 Protected forests and woodlands
4.4 Other tree management practices
4.5 Summary: Trees as part of traditional land use practices
Land tenure processes have long been closely associated with tree cultivation and management practices. In some cases, tree production was the primary objective. In other instances, cultivation was more concerned with traditional land tenure practices such as boundary demarcation. Forest cover was also used to protect and fortify villages. At the household-level, trees and woody biomass served similar purposes of protection and boundary demarcation and was also used for livestock management. Finally, trees played a vital role in religious practices and were an abundant source of medicines and food (Gachathi 1990).
4.1 Tree tenure
As with other features of the sub-clan land holding system, rights of use to naturally-growing trees on a right holder's plot belonged to him and to his household, while rights of use to trees on unallocated portions of the sub-clan holding belonged to the sub-clan as a whole. Permission to fell these trees had to be obtained from the sub-clan leader, but as long as unallocated bushland remained, there were few supply problems.
In Murang'a and Nyeri Districts, a person who obtained land through redeemable sale (muguri) had no right to cut down the trees on the plot. Trees were actually inventoried at the time of the sale, and if the muguri wished to cut any of them, they had to be purchased from the original owner. Sometimes he was allowed to cut them as gifts. The cutting of trees without payment or permission, however, was an offense for which fines were assessed. New trees which grew up after the time of the sale belonged to the muguri, and he could do with them as he wished. Similar conditions applied to temporary and resident tenants; they were not able to cut down existing trees. In Kiambu, when land was sold outright, the trees growing on the plot were always included in the sale (Colony and Protectorate of Kenya 1929a:28-29).
A Case Study from Murang'a District, Kenya
Planted trees belonged to whomever planted them, as long as they held some sort of cultivation right. When land lending or tenancy agreements were cancelled, or when land was redeemed, rights to planted trees were relinquished (although the trees could be disposed of until the time the lineage right holder regained possession) (Ainsworth undated:501). Even by the late 1920s, the ownership of wattle woodlots or other permanent crops was posing problems for the tenure system because the crop owners were not necessarily the land owners (Fazan undated).
Similarly, coppiced production belonged to whomever held cultivation rights. A number of trees were particularly appreciated for their coppicing qualities, and were planted as timber species. These included muuu (Markhamia hildebrandtii) and mukuhakuha (Macaranga kilimandscharica) which were both profusely coppicing timber species. Coppiced trees would be allowed to grow on cultivated land, as well as in hedges and windrows. The Routledges, amongst the earliest of the social scientists to carry out ethnographic studies of the Kikuyu in Nyeri, reported that they commonly observed coppiced stems up to 20 feet in height on farmland (Routledge and Routledge 1910:39).
4.2 Trees as boundary markers
Demarcation of the sub-clan land boundary
Trees were commonly used to demarcate the boundaries of sub-clan lands. They were actually a departure from the norm but later came to be preferred because they provided greater visibility. Certainly as population pressures increased in Murang'a and other parts of Kikuyu country, tree planting around boundaries became the accepted practice.
The customary method of marking out sub-clan land boundaries involved the planting of the Pajama Lily (Crinum kirkii) by the hereditary sub-clan right holder or by representatives of the sub-clan who held lineage rights to it. The 1929 Committee on Native Land Tenure in Kikuyu Province noted that boundaries in Murang'a and Nyeri were not fully marked in the days when the sub-clan land holding was a hunting area, but that they were sufficiently well-established to allow for proper marking when the occasion arose (Colony and Protectorate of Kenya 1929a:19). Natural features such as streams, prominent trees, game pits, and so on served as boundary markers in the meantime.
The marking out of sub-clan land boundaries was done as cultivation became widespread. It was often the result of land disputes, but was also undertaken simply as a means of preventing future conflicts. It was to be done in the presence of witnesses and representatives of the sub-clan which owned the land adjacent to the plot in question. Witnesses would be asked to bring large numbers of the Pajama Lily, which could only be removed from already well-established boundaries by senior elders. A specific ceremony accompanied the marking and involved the ritual slaughter of a ram at the sub-clan land boundary at which also bundles of leaves of the muthakwa bush (Vernonia auriculifera) were used. In some areas. large stones would be buried where the lilies were planted. In the event that the lilies died out over time, boundary disputes could be resolved by using the stones (Fazan undated). There was little fear that a person would willfully destroy boundary plants, as the Kikuyu
believed that such a person would die almost immediately (Leakey 1977:108).
Fig. 4.1 Pajama Lily (Crinum kirkii) as a boundary marker (Kiambu District, late 1950s)
Photo: Ministry of Agriculture
Pajama Lily plantings along sub-clan land boundaries were seldom in continuous strips. Rather, lilies would be planted at irregular intervals, and it would not always be immediately clear that they were contiguous with boundaries (Kenyatta undated:433) Before death the lineage right holder or the sub-clan leader would show the boundaries to his heirs in the presence of elders and other witnesses. In this way, lineage rights were passed from generation to generation (Fazan undated).
While the Pajama Lily was the usual boundary marker, a number of trees and bushes were accepted as substitutes. The planting of trees became considerably more common as the need for clearer boundaries to sub-clan land became evident. Trees were planted at irregular intervals, as well as in what would now be called windrows and hedges. This process was apparently well underway by the time of European settlement. The Routledges wrote about sub-clan land holdings in 1910:
The boundary of the estate.... was indicated by the planting of trees in line, by regular hedges, and by boundary stones sunk deep out of site.... The countryside presents the appearance of large allotments or of small fields divided by hedges. (Routledge and Routledge 1910:6,39).
Trees which were used as sub-clan land boundaries included mugumo (Ficus natalensis), (Kenyatta undated:433) mwatha (Synadenium compactum) (Wangana undated: 185), muiri (Prunus africanum), mukawa (Carissa edulis) (Fazan undated), and muringa (Cordia africana). With the exception of P.africanum and C.edulis, these trees could be propagated from cuttings which made boundary demarcation fairly easy. They were also easy to identify. F.natalensis, for instance, is still widely recognized as a fast-growing tree. It was often the site of important ceremonies. If it could be prevented, F.natalensis was never allowed to naturally regenerate. If a tree of this species was found growing somewhere, one inevitably had to assume that it had been planted for some reason.
Other boundary trees were also easy to spot. S.compactum is distinctive for its red leaves and latex. P.africanum is a tall tree with numerous medicinal properties and has extremely hard timber which was used for mortars, pestles and farm implements. C.edulis is one of a number of thorny species that can form a dense hedge. It is used mainly for boundaries to household plots and for cattle enclosures. C.africana, a tall timber tree, has profuse white flowers, and is valued for shade, timber, and its medicinal properties.
S.H. Fazan, the District Commissioner for Kiambu in the early 1930s, noted that in some instances, the boundary of the sub-clan holding would be marked by coppiced and pollarded tree stumps rather than by planted trees,
... that is to say they cut off the tree itself and leave the bushy growth to spring from the root. I saw several of these, and in one place they have the general appearance of having been planted in a row. (Fazan undated:960)
The Forest Department, wittingly or not, adopted the practice of boundary demarcation with trees. In 1933, it was reported that the boundaries to the Forest Reserves were being demarcated "by cut or ploughed lines, marked by posts, or exotic trees planted at intervals." (FD 1933). The planting of Reserve boundaries with exotic trees by the Colonial government must certainly have held some significance to the Kikuyu who had always used their own trees for marking out their own boundaries.
The customary demarcation of sub-clan lands with Pajama Lilies and with trees was first widely discussed during the hearings before the Kenya Land Commission in 1933. The Commission frequently asked European witnesses whether or not they had ever noticed boundaries planted with the lily. The reply was invariably that the lilies were reasonably common, but that they were seldom found planted in straight lines as if they were marking out boundaries (Leakey undated:857, Ainsworth undated:497,508). Because of this, the Commission basically refused to settle the many pending land cases which involved European farms on the basis of lily boundary markers, even though the Administration had earlier explicitly recognized this feature of traditional land tenure (Colony and Protectorate of Kenya 1929). The irregular planting of lilies along boundaries was perhaps the biggest difficulty in establishing land claims in the face of colonial settlement.
Additionally, land disputes had become far more common, particularly after the Kenya Land Commission had made it clear that land would not be available for the future settlement of Africans. Tree planting along boundaries assumed new importance as a means of unequivocally identifying the limits of a right holder's land. The ceremony of marking out sub-clan land boundaries with Pajama Lilies died out over time, but the practice of demarcation remained and was encouraged by the Colonial Administration. The 1929 Report of the Committee on Land Tenure in Kikuyu Province, for instance, made a series of recommendations for including boundary marking practices in rules proposed under the Native Lands Trust Ordinance (Fazan undated). The report recommended:
...that only Mugumu trees and Pajama Lilies should be used for marking the boundaries of a Githaka...; [that] it should be made unlawful for [them] to be planted in lines in any place other than on a Githaka boundary; [and that] it should be lawful for any native authority to issue orders that any Mugumu trees or Pajama Lilies which may be found to have been planted in lines in any place other than a recognized Githaka boundary be removed.
The Chief Native Commissioner, G.V. Maxwell, incorporated the recommendations in a set of draft rules, which also specified that it would be an offense to plant F.natalensis and Pajama lilies on any boundary which was not a sub-clan boundary (Fazan undated). This basically meant that where homestead (as opposed to sub-clan) boundaries were to be demarcated, other species would have to be used. Of course the outcome of enclosure of the type envisaged by Maxwell and others would have been some sort of agreement that Africans could privately own land, and this was simply not acceptable either to the Colonial authorities or to the European farmers whose position depended on their monopoly land-owning rights. Not surprisingly, the Committee's recommendations were never implemented. It would take another 25 years before Africans could privately own land and before hedges had any sort of legal standing.
Boundary demarcation with exotic trees gradually became the norm. Trees such as eucalyptus and black wattle were sometimes planted in rows by themselves or in conjunction with indigenous trees over the spots where Pajama Lilies had originally been planted (Wangana undated: 185, Karanja undated: 145).
Boundary demarcation was a critical part of the consolidation and registration process. Ultimately, hedges became a legal requirement for land registration. The Land Consolidation Act (Cap.283), for instance, notes that,
The Demarcation Officer may order any landowner...to demarcate his land, and for the purpose of such demarcation, to erect or plant...such boundary markers as the said officer may direct.
The reasoning was primarily that they were visible from the air, and could be used for mapping out consolidated holdings from aerial photographs (Wright 1956:39). Because of the speed with which it was deemed necessary to map out and register the plots, it was desired as well that hedges were fast growing.
Trees on other boundaries
Tree planting practices for demarcating sub-clan land boundaries were different from the practices that were adopted for marking other boundaries. It is important to also distinguish between boundary demarcation practices and functional or protective hedge establishment practices (Leakey 1977:1286-1354).
Sub-divisions within the sub-clan land holding were often marked out. The species which predominated in these boundaries were usually utilitarian in nature. Muuu (M.hildebrandtii), for instance, was commonly planted along the boundaries of sub-clan land holding subdivisions. It is an obvious tree with bright yellow flowers, but is especially useful in that it coppices easily and can be cropped many times for pole wood. It easily regenerates from cuttings. Mukungugu (C.zimmermannii) shares these characteristics. Young trees of this species are still frequently found in many shambas where they are used to support climbing plants. Old sub-clan land holding subdivisions can still be identified where these trees, which grow as high as 20 metres, are found.
Around fortified villages near the border of Kikuyu country, it was common practice to fell trees and bushes into a barrier, and then to encourage thorny plants to grow around it or noxious creepers to climb over it to make the barrier impenetrable. Plants such as mutanda mbogo (Pterolobium stellatum), muyuyu (Chaetacme aristata), muuti (Aspilia spp.), and mukawa (Carissa edulis) were used to create these barriers.
Fig. 4.2 Entrance to a fortified Kikuyu village Murang'a District, around 1907.
Photo: Consolata Fathers Turin
Hedges would usually be planted around homesteads. Inevitably, there was some specific utility to the planted hedge - for medicinal uses, as a famine food, for fodder, or for food. Muthakwa wa aathi (Crassocephalum mannii), the leaves of which have medicinal value, falls into this category and is still one of the most frequently found indigenous hedge species in Kikuyu country, particularly in Kiambu District. Other hedge species include mutigoya (Plectranthus barbatus) whose leaves are used to help ripen bananas. Mutbage (Caesalpinia decapetala) is native to Mauritius, but has been in Kenya for a long time and is widely planted as a hedge.
Within the homestead, Muhndahnda (Trimeria tropica) and mutkandu (Lantana sp. or Lippia sp.) were commonly planted as boundaries between huts. The former was primarily used for making household implements. The berries of the latter were used as a famine food.
A frequent assumption on the part of the Colonial Administration was that enclosures of these types were an outcome of Kikuyu contact with European farming (Government of the United Kingdom 1955:24). In fact, others who noted the presence of these enclosures during the earliest stages of European settlement, particularly Leakey and the Routledges, confirm that these practices were in place long before Africans were exposed to Europeans.
4.3 Protected forests and woodlands
Timber reserves
Timber and fuelwood needs were met from a combination of sources: planted trees or trees which were naturally growing on plots and trees on unallocated sub-clan land. Leakey noted that the sub-clan would sometimes explicitly protect good forest stands for the long-term and sustainable production of timber (Leakey 1977:123). The Routledges similarly confirmed the presence of small copses which had been preserved for timber production and which could not be used without permission and until payment had been made to a chief, or to the sub-clan elders (Routledge and Routledge 1910:39).
The Karura Forest Reserve, as well as City Park in Nairobi were originally traditional forest reserve areas. As late as 1904, the Karura forest was recognized as one of the few remaining stands that acted as a buffer between the Maasai and the Kikuyu (Battiscombe undated:411). It was gazetted as a Reserve in 1912. There are several traditional (and now gazetted) reserve forests remaining in Murang'a District, such as the Marimira Forest, as well as numerous small forested parcels of obscure origins and with unclear tenure and use rights.
The Murang'a Local Native Council took the concept of the traditional forest reserve one step further and claimed in testimony before the Land Commission in
1933 that "the whole of the forest reserve was reserved by Kikuyu for the purpose of obtaining trees for building, for herding, and for firewood for the present and future generations." (Fort Hall Local Native Council undated:119).
Without any doubt, government reservation of large areas of forests conflicted with the sub-clan's traditional rights of control. The process of creating Forest Reserves, in itself, destroyed any traditional control the sub-clan may have had over the largest chunks of forests. As soon as it became clear that forests were being placed under Forest Department control, the tendency was to overexploit the remaining pockets of woodlands.
The Colonial Administration recognized two types of forests. Forest Reserves, under the control of the Forest Department and Native Reserve Forests, which were technically under the control of Local Native Councils, but which in practice were often managed by the Forest Department. Under the Native Lands Trust Ordinance, any lands in Native Reserves could be gazetted as Native Reserve Forests on the recommendation of the Native Lands Trust Board, even in the face of local opposition. By the time of the Kenya Land Commission, many of the remaining pockets of woodlands had disappeared and "in many reserves...there [was] little left to preserve." (FD 1933:21) In Machakos District, for instance, it was noted that by 1935, any forests had long ago been destroyed (FD 1935: 35).
The reservation of forests within the Native Reserves caused difficulties because it changed the controlling authority from the sub-clan to the Local Native Council, which had little traditional authority. The Forest Department claimed that opposition would generally disappear
"... when local people are reassured that the forests still to belong to them, and that their old privileges of honey collection, gathering dead and fallen fuel and forest fruits, etc., will not be interfered with so long as they do no harm to the forests, and that finally they will receive any profits that accrue." (FD 1934:21).
It was an obvious contradiction for the Forest Department to claim that traditional rights of access would be recognized in the absence of a traditional authority with rights of control.
Sacred groves
The other category of woodland that was preserved by the sub-clan were sacred groves. These were quite small clusters of trees, usually dominated by a mugumu (Ficus natalensis) or a mukuyu (Ficus sycomorus) tree, which were the sites of rituals and ceremonies. The extent of these sites is uncertain, but they were believed to be fairly widespread. They had very strong religious and cultural associations.
Trees had their own spirits. Leakey maintained that when an area of forest had been cleared for cultivation, a number of big trees would be left standing at intervals. Such trees were called murema kiriti (the trees that resisted the cutting of the forest) and these trees became the dwelling places of the spirits of all the trees that had been felled. The murema kiriti were not normally felled, but in the event that they became old and were in danger of falling or needed to be felled for timber, a ceremony would be carried out in order to ask the resident spirits to move their abode. In the event an old tree was felled, a young tree would be planted to replace it (FD 1934:1117-1118).
As a result of the Kenya Land Commission, there had been an offer to relocate some of the Kiambu Kikuyu on to land belonging to the Nyeri Kikuyu. Senior Chief Koinange wa Mbiyu, writing in a letter, objected to the Governor General, H.M. Brooke-Popham:
"We can never agree to the Kiambu people to take land of Nyeri people. Furthermore, a large bulk of African people still retain their ancient religious rites and belief that to be removed from their trees, ceremonies and graves of their ancestors is to be suddenly torn in their spiritual body. (Quoted in Brooke-Popham 1939).
A sacred tree, standing alone or in a grove, was chosen as the site for clan and sub-clan ceremonies and sacrifices. They were not permanent fixtures, but were only associated with the ruling generation of the clan or sub-clan. A sacred F.natalensis or F.sycomorus tree only had this status for the duration that a particular age grade was in control. It would be uprooted upon the appointment of a new ruling age grade, and a new F.natalensis would be chosen in its place. These trees had to have been planted, but not necessarily by someone in the age grade nor at the time of the appointment of the new ruling age grade. Generally, preference was given to a F.natalensis which was parasitic on another tree (Leakey 1977:1078-1089).
Fig. 4.3 Sacred tree, probably a variety of Ficus. (Murang'a District, 1910)
Photo: Consolata Fathers, Turin
<section>8</section>
4.4 Other tree management practices
Hedges and windrows
The planting of hedges and windrows in Murang'a District and in many other areas remains common. The preferred species in high rainfall areas include an exotic species of cypress (Cupressus lusitanica), as well as mubage (Caesalpinia decapetala), mukawa (Carissa edulis), kaiaba (Dovyalis caffra), and mutundu (Croton macrostachyus). In lower rainfall parts of the district, the dominant species is kariaria (Euphorbia tirucalli). Hedges are often allowed to become windrows. The three dominant windrow species are cypress, mubariiti (Grevillea robusta), and mukinduri (Croton megalocarpus).
Cypress is very commonly managed as a "multi-story hedge." Every 3 metres or so along a tightly-clipped hedge, a stem will be left untrimmed, and will grow into a full-sized tree. In some parts of Kikuyu country, these stems are side-pruned. The branches are used for fuelwood, or are sometimes used to make furniture, or small farm structures such as cattle enclosures and fences. Side pruning also increases the light that is available to crops. The stems are occasionally felled by pitsawyers who convert them into sawn timber. Cypress is usually only planted in rows; individual stems are seldom planted, except occasionally for shade around households.
Cupressus lusitanica was first introduced in Kenya sometime before 1920, although the exact date is uncertain. The planting of cypress on farms in Murang'a and other Kikuyu areas for saw logs was first noted by the Forest Department in the mid-1940s when the practice was reportedly quite widespread. Plantings apparently conflicted with other land uses that were deemed to be more important, and the Department noted that the widespread planting of cypress "may not be such a desirable development as it appears unless such planting is confined mainly to the steeper hillsides." (FD 1944:7)
Cypress is especially easy to regenerate. On-farm nurseries are believed to account for the bulk of new plantings, although it is still one of the major species grown in Forest Department nurseries and sold to farmers. The Department sells at heavily subsidized prices, although seedlings are often resold at much higher prices.
The two other tree species that are most common on or near smallholders' lands are Mubariiti (Grevillea robusta) and Mukinduri (Croton megalocarpus). G.robusta is occasionally grown and managed in windrows much like cypress and is used for both fuelwood and timber and for small farm structures. Unlike cypress, how ever, it is often planted in and around fields as well as in woodlots. It was originally introduced as a shade tree for coffee plantations (and is discussed below in this context). C.megalocarpus is a fast-growing species with a high, twisted canopy. It is unsuitable for building timber, but is occasionally harvested for woodfuel. It doesn't compete too heavily with crops. It is maintained primarily for its amenity value.
Fig. 4.4 Boundary planting of Cypress (Cupressus lusitanica) Murang'a District, 1990.
Photo: Dewees
Block plantings
Contiguous blocks of trees are sometimes planted over large areas. It has been estimated that there are around 6,000 hectares of woodlots in Murang'a District, and that aggregate woodlot areas in high potential zones of Kenya total around 80,000 ha (World Bank 1987:14). The effect of block plantings on the rural economy is poorly understood, but the impact must be considerable. The primary block planting species are black wattle (Acacia mearnsii), the dominant woodlot species in Murang'a District, and eucalyptus. There are also small block plantings of G.robusta in some areas, but these are more commonly planted in fields and in windrows.
Trees and livestock management
Livestock ownership, the main means of exchange amongst the Kikuyu, generally involved some form of tree cultivation and management. Cattle enclosures were a basic feature of the homestead. Enclosures were generally reinforced with cuttings from fast growing species such as F.natalensis. murigono (Clerodendrum johnstonii), and muhuti (Erythrina abyssinica) which eventually formed living fences. In the 1940s, an Assistant Agricultural Officer, L.A. Elmer noted the predominance of mutura (Solanum aculeastrum or S.marginatum) which was used in living fences for Kikuyu cattle enclosures. He recommended that European farmers adopt these species as alternatives to expensive wire fencing and described in great detail how to propagate and plant them out (Elmer 1944). The wood of mubiru muiru (Vangueria linearisepala) was also used in cattle enclosures, but it was seldom planted as a living hedge.
There were fairly sophisticated strategies of stall-feeding that increased productivity and limited disease. C.zimmermannii. sometimes planted to demarcate the boundaries of the homestead, was also planted in the main courtyard and was used to suspend fodder for goats and sheep, protecting it from contamination. Stall-fed animals rarely, if ever, suffered from intestinal worms. Usually, small huts would be used for keeping stall-fed animals, and the animals would rarely leave them until they were ready for slaughter. They were prized for their fat content, which would be used for cooking and for preparing skins (Lyne Watt 1942: 109).
The most common sources of livestock fodder were sweet potato vines. During times of famine, a number of species were used as alternatives. These were generally climbing bindweeds and creepers, called rather generically ihurura (Ipomea sp. and Glycine sp.). There were just a few tree species that were used for fodder. These included muheregendi (Grewia similis) which made very good goat food, and muhethu (Trema orientalis).
Tree replacement
A final tree planting practice which bears mention was tree replacement. Trees often had negative and positive features which might have been associated with an event that had taken place in the vicinity or which might have been a function of the species and its relationship to spirits and to magic. The ficus F.natalensis was a tree with particularly strong associations, both positive and negative. They were generally chosen by diviners as sacred trees for the sub-clan, though only specific trees served this function. Sub-clan ceremonies and sacrifices were held by these trees and persons accused of crimes could seek sanctuary at the foot of a sacred tree. F.natalensis trees only had positive associations if they were planted. Naturally-sprouted seedlings were uprooted and a tree with a positive association would be planted in its place.
These trees and woody shrubs were generally muthakwa (Vernonia auriculifera) easily recognizable because of its deep purple flowers, mukenia (Lantana trifolia) or mukeu (Dombeya sp.). They were commonly used as sacred trees for household ceremonies and sacrifices. V.auriculifera was the most common of these. It was widely-used in all manner of ceremonies and was associated with "good" magic. It was specifically planted as a replacement tree under three circumstances: to replace uprooted F.natalensis trees; to replace a tree that had been cut down to make a cattle trough; and to replace a tree that had been used by someone for hanging themselves. Lantana trifolia was planted for the same reasons as V.auriculifera. but in addition it would be planted in place of a sugar cane plant that had flowered and been uprooted, or in place of a banana tree that had been slashed in anger with a knife. Dombeya sp was less frequently planted than these other species, but was still
recognized as a "good" tree (Leakey 1977:1313-1314;1343-1344 and 1347).
Shade and other trees
Brief mention should be made of a number of other trees of economic value. The two other most frequently found trees on farms in Central Province are Grevillea robusta and eucalyptus. Grevillea first became popular in Kenya as a coffee and tea shade tree. Young coffee and tea seedlings require protection from the sun, and also benefit from protection from wind (Warren 1941:16). Grevillea, as a fast growing tree which is relatively easy to regenerate, filled that role. It was adopted by coffee planters from the very earliest days of the industry in Kenya and by 1910 the Forest Department had started planting it in mixed stands with cypress. In the 1940s, it was widely recommended as a timber tree for planting at altitudes below 2,000 metres, while cypress was recommended for higher altitudes (Graham 1945:133).
Fig. 4.5 Grevillea robustainterplanted with smallholder coffee and heavily side pruned.
Photo: Dewees
The tree has a wide range of other uses. Leaf litter is widely used in locally-developed green manure agroforestry systems in Central Province. The wood is appreciated as a fuel because it dries quickly. Much like on-farm cypress tree management, the branches are usually heavily pruned for fuel and the construction of small farm buildings.
The practice of planting trees with tea and coffee came into question in the 1960s. Research carried out at the East African Agriculture and Forestry Research Organization (EAAFRO) suggested that reduced windspeeds in tea estates increased the temperature extremes, resulting in higher temperatures during the day and lower temperatures during the night (Ripley undated:80).
Grevillea has long been associated with a high incidence of the root-rot Armillariamellea in coffee and tea (Wallace 1935 and FD 1924:22). This fact, coupled with the findings of EAAFRO, has brought the tree into some disfavour amongst commercial coffee and tea growers, but it remains extremely popular amongst smallholders in many areas.
Eucalyptus was first widely promoted in Central Province in the 1930s, but it never became as popular there as it did in Western Kenya as a farm tree. It was introduced as a fast-growing pole and fuelwood tree. In other areas, it was widely planted to provide fuelwood for the railways. Generally, however, eucalyptus trees have a, far more limited range of values than trees like grevillea, wattle, or cypress even though growth is much faster. The most common species planted on farms are E.grandis and E.saligna, as well as related hybrids which have developed over the many years these trees have been cultivated. In drier areas, E.camaldulensis predominates.
Fig. 4.6 Smallholder-grown eucalyptus timber, split and stacked by the roadside for sale as fuelwood
Photo: Dewees
One of the eucalyptus tree's advantages was that it could be planted on swampy or water-logged soils, and would tend to dry them out and make them suitable for cultivation. Generally, E.robusta was preferred for this role. One of the Kikuyu names for eucalyptus, munyua maai, literally means "the drinker of water". The agricultural extension services have tried, without much success, to discourage the planting of the trees because of their alleged impacts on stream flows.
4.5 Summary: Trees as part of traditional land use practices
There are strong traditions of tree cultivation and management in Kikuyu areas of Kenya. Boundary demarcation with trees was a particularly common practice, both for marking off boundaries of the sub-clan land holding as well as for marking off divisions of the sub-clan land and divisions within the household. Trees were planted as living hedges around livestock enclosures, and were incorporated into village fortifications. Trees had both positive and negative magical and spiritual associations, and several species were widely planted because of their "good" characteristics. Timber production largely came from trees that were protected in sub-clan controlled forest reserves, from farm trees, or from trees that had been left standing on farmlands after the forest had been cleared.
It is unlikely that the guarantees of private tree ownership per se, actually encouraged farmers to plant more trees. In fact, the ownership of planted trees had long been guaranteed by customary law. Planted trees always belonged to whomever planted them, but only as long as they held some sort of cultivation rights. The Registered Land Act increased the security of these rights, and it was this security which likely had a greater impact on the farmer's interest in tree planting and in making other improvements to the land. Finally, changing patterns of land tenure and the wholesale governmental reservation of large stands of forests probably strengthened the tendency to use trees for boundary demarcation, but jeopardized traditional forest management and reservation practices.
<section>9</section>
Chapter 5: The case of black wattle
5.1 The introduction of black wattle
5.2 The political economy of early wattle production
5.3 Soil conservation and wattle in the 1940s
5.4 Consolidation and the post-independence wattle economy
5.5 Current wattle planting practices
End notes
Black wattle (Acacia meansii) is a species indigenous to Australia and is widely grown in a number of countries because of the high tannin content in its bark which is processed into tanning extracts. This was not, however, what brought about its introduction as a farm tree in Kenya.
5.1 The introduction of black wattle
It is likely that black wattle was first introduced into Kenya by the Reverend Stuart Watt, an early missionary, who brought wattle, eucalyptus and grevillea seeds from Australia where he had lived before coming to Kenya in 1885 (Stuart Watt undated) (Trzebinski 1985:23, Maxon 1980:34-35). Black wattle was introduced into Murang'a District in 1898. During the time of the great famine of 1898, a mercenary, merchant and adventurer named John Boyes settled in Murang'a. Boyes acquired some wattle seed from a seed merchant and planted it on a plot he had been given by Karuri (KNA 1933: AGR/4/526). The plot was eventually given to a Catholic mission.
By 1919, around 4,000 ha of wattle plantations had been established on European farms, and a factory was built in Njoro to process the bark from these plantations (Huxley 1935:167). The 1919 Economic Commission which was set up to explore commercial opportunities for the colony noted with regard to wattle that "the industry requires very little labour and its prospects are excellent." (Government of the United Kingdom 1919).
The Administration first began actively encouraging farmers in Nyeri District to plant wattle and eucalyptus trees around 1911, and later in Murang'a from 1917 (Cowen 1978:61,69). At first, the Administration's objective was to reduce pressures on the indigenous forests for fuelwood and building timber which had greatly increased since the demarcation of the boundaries of the Forest Reserves on the eastern slopes of the Aberdares between 1900 and 1910. A push by the Administration to encourage the planting of trees on farms began in earnest in 1921, but was widely resisted.
By the late 1920's, the situation had radically changed when wattle was being widely planted as a response to the bark trade. As noted in two Forestry Department Annual Reports.
"In Kikuyu, small black wattle plantations are numerous and in more accessible areas, their increase has been encouraged by the trade in wattle bark." (FD 1928:18)
"There is no organized planting, but the planting of black wattle is extending rapidly and thousands of small wattle clumps are quite rapidly changing the appearance of many parts of the Reserve." (FD 1930:16)
Within a few years, the Forest Department claimed that "the afforestation problem had been solved" in Kikuyu Province¹.
There was limited rapacity to process the bark at this early stage in the development of the industry, and most of it was exported. Extracting factories were opened in Limuru and Thika in the early 1930s. The Limuru facilities were largely dependent on wattle produced by European farmers, while the Thika factories were almost entirely dependent on smallholder production. In order to ensure that the facilities in Limuru and Thika had sufficient bark to operate, a vigorous marketing network was established. Increased access to markets for bark, which accompanied the establishment of these factories, greatly contributed to the popularity of wattle as a smallholder crop. The Native Affairs Department reported that in 1935 the total area under wattle had nearly doubled since the previous year (from 18,000 ha to 40,000 ha) and that there were plans to add another 20,000 ha the following year (Native Affairs Department 1935:100, Kitching 1980:64). By 1937, it was estimated that
there were nearly 18,000 ha of wattle in Murang'a District alone (compared with 9,700 ha in Nyeri and 6,100 ha in Kiambu).
Fig. 5. 1 Black wattle (Acacia mearnsii) woodlot.
Photo: Dewees
There were three major periods of intensive wattle development in Kenya which corresponded with periods of rising market prices for tanning extracts: from 1921 to 1929, in 1935, and in the late 1940s. Although the earliest campaigns were directed at a relatively small class of educated elite, later programmes were much farther reaching and introduced wattle to the widest possible economic range of farmers. Wattle production came to be concentrated on the holdings of the middle peasantry, primarily because it produced a broad range of household commodities (fuelwood, charcoal, building poles, wood for the construction of farm buildings and cattle enclosures, and so on) while generating income for the household at the same time (Cowen 1978:190-191).
5.2 The political economy of early wattle production
Wattle production in the late 1920s was especially profitable. Africans were excluded from the production of other cash crops, and returns to food crops such as maize and potatoes were, by comparison, quite low. In 1934, the Nyeri District Commissioner J.W. Pease noted that
...at the moment, the price of a tonne of chopped wattle bark is about the same as the price of a tonne of native maize. If this continues I shall anticipate a much greater increase than 50 percent in land under wattle in this district; it might easily be doubled in the next 10 years (Pease undated:1061).
The situation remained very much the same until the late 1950s.
The emergence of wattle as a cash crop in Kikuyu areas had a number of immediate and long-term impacts. When wattle was first cultivated in Murang'a, in the 1920s, it was most widely adopted by chiefs (who were compelled to plant it by the Administration) and by the emerging class of relatively educated elite Africans who had gone to mission schools and who had jobs as school teachers or as clerks, traders, or businessmen (Cowen 1978:72-75). From its very beginnings as a cash crop in Central Province, wattle was grown primarily by absentee sub-clan right holders.
Fig. 5.2 Wattle bark stacked for drying, Thika.
Photo: Dewees
The need for labour to strip and plant wattle contributed to the introduction of new forms of labour organization. The chiefs were able to use compulsory labour to strip bark from their trees, retaining profits from the sale of the bark and timber for themselves. For the educated elite, however, with no access to compulsory labour, existing forms of labour organization - primarily communal labour as well as work groups - were not able to provide enough labour inputs for wattle cultivation. As a result, they became dependent on an emerging wage labouring class for wattle woodlot cultivation and management (Cowen and Murage undated:41).
Wattle enabled sub-clan right holders to maintain their rights to sub-clan land, as absentee land users, without being dependent on temporary or resident tenants or on redeemable land sales to cultivate their plots. Tenants, on the other hand, could more firmly establish long-term rights to land on which they had planted permanent crops. The emergence of wattle as a permanent cash crop brought about a round of litigation as right holders sought to evict their tenants, and as tenants, in effect, sought to ensure their long-term rights of use, de jure.²
By the late 1940s, wattle production had been adopted by a broad spectrum of farmers, on the smallest holdings to the largest. Many of the processes - land litigation, development of small businesses and shops, urban employment, and so on which had characterized the earliest stage became much more widespread. Between 1945 and 1955, the production of wattle extract more than tripled and had become the colony's largest source of earnings from exports to the United States (Cowen 1978:265).
Part of the appeal of wattle was also that it generated income while freeing household labour to develop businesses elsewhere. As Cowen has suggested, during those lengthy periods when landowners... were engaged in wage employment outside of the reserve, the irregular seasonal application of labour permitted the production of wattle without the continuous presence of labour power (Cowen 1978: 191).
At the same time, expanded peasant production of wattle, and the labour strategies which accompanied it, reduced the supplies of wage labour which this class had formerly provided and which were necessary to strip the trees. Felling and stripping tasks were undertaken by household labour in the absence of wage labourers. By the early 1950s (before the villagization programme), women had largely become responsible for stripping the bark from household wattle woodlots although men were responsible for felling.
Wattle also contributed to the development of political processes in Central Province during the late 1940s. The ability to articulate disaffection rested with those who were educated and with those who had economic power, rather than with the Administration-controlled chiefs. These were frequently wattle growers. A number of wattle producers' societies were formed, such as the Central Province Wattle Growers' and Producers' Association, the Wattle Bark and Native Produce Cooperative Society, and the Murang'a Wattle Growers and Sellers Association and they developed close working links with political organizations such as the Kenya African Union (KAU). The Kenya Fuel and Bark Supplies Company, formed around 1945, negotiated the purchase of a building in Nairobi, Kiburi House, (unheard of at the time for an African-owned company) that eventually housed the offices of the KAU as well as most of the trade unions which had existed before the Emergency. Kenyatta maintained
offices there as well. It still houses the headquarters of the Kenya Union of Domestic, Hotels, Educational Institutions, Hospitals, and Allied Workers Union (Ngugi 1988:24).
The Administration associated the development of the wattle industry with political movements of one form or another. These were in turn associated with the growth of "individualism" and the demise of Sir Philip Mitchell's vision of a communal Africa. One response was the introduction of fairly strict controls on the trading of bark, introduced by the Marketing of Native Produce Ordinance of 1935. Licensing was coupled with strict quota arrangements which, at least in theory, limited the income any single producer or trader could make from the sale of waffle bark. In practice, both trading licenses and quotas were widely circumvented.³
5.3 Soil conservation and wattle in the 1940s
In some respects, black wattle is an ideal agroforestry species because it can be easily incorporated into farming systems, it is nitrogen-fixing, it produces wood-based products for the household, it is easily grown and can generate income from the sale of bark. The Administration mounted all of these arguments in favour of waffle during its planting programmes (Lick undated:55).
Fig. 5.3 Stacking of wattle logs for burning into charcoal. Murang'a District, 1989
Photo: Dewees
However, the Administration's concerns about the growth of individualism in the Reserves took form in its soil conservation programmes of the mid-1940s and wattle became a target. Arguments against wattle were generally made in the context of the soil conservation debate. These arguments posed some interesting contradictions. In the mid-1930s, the Department of Agriculture recommended that "all cultivated land should be planted under wattle to prevent declines in fertility." (KNA 1934: AGR/4/525). By the mid-1940s however, Norman Humphrey, whose opinions on the state of African agriculture bore tremendous weight, noted that
experience showed that under certain conditions wattle, far from improving the soil, can become a potent factor in increasing soil erosion. As a result steps have been taken to lessen the acreage under this crop, whilst greater control of self-sown plantations, all too often overcrowded and neglected, will have to be ensured if wattle is to take its rightful place in the farming economy (Humphrey 1945:25).
5.4 Consolidation and the post-independence wattle economy
The bottom line, however, was that wattle was frustrating the Administration's efforts to strengthen tribal authority within some sort of communal framework because of its role in income generation and differentiation, and because it enabled individuals to embark on land litigation often at the expense of this authority. From around 1940, the Department of Agriculture, rather than arguing for improved general management practices, campaigned against the planting of wattle on slopes greater that 15 percent. Considering the ridge-valley topography of the most heavily settled areas of Central Province, the Department's campaign affected most of these areas.
By this time, however, other income-generating land use opportunities, such as pasture development, were possible, and waffle production in many areas was abandoned. Farmers who felled their wattle woodlots the late 1940s were able to greatly benefit because of peak post-war tanning extract prices. They contributed to the "individualism" which the Administration so greatly feared.
The abandonment of wattle cultivation on a large-scale was precipitated by the Emergency. The creation of a large number of Emergency villages resulted in the clearance of large areas of wattle for building timber and for village fortifications. The trade in waffle bark became concentrated in the hands of loyalists who were the only persons able to get trading licenses and they greatly benefited.
As a result of consolidation and the Swynnerton Plan, wattle lost favour as a cash crop. Land reform made wattle less appealing. It guaranteed private land ownership, reducing the threats of litigation while eliminating customary tenancy arrangements. Consolidation changed patterns of labour organization by freeing up household labour that had formerly been used to cultivate dispersed fields. Finally, the removal of controls on the smallholder production of coffee and tea and other cash crops presented an entirely new set of income-generating strategies with which wattle could only compete with some difficulty..
Although there were early efforts to incorporate wattle into farm planning exercises, nothing came of them. The price of wattle extract fell sharply between 1955 and 1960, and a strong case for continued or expanded plantings could simply not be made. Between 1951 and 1962, African production of bark fell from 74 percent of the total to 36 percent (Colony and Protectorate of Kenya 1962). The balance of production shifted from smallholders, to estates operated by the tannin extract companies.
Even after prices slumped however, wattle was still widely grown, but not necessarily for bark. In Nyeri in the mid-1950s, for instance, trees were cut in large quantities for poles, but the bark was not being stripped from them (KNA 1955: AGR/4/343). Most estate producers would have gone out of business had they been dependent on bark production alone. Stems can be harvested, at virtually any rotation length. The decision to harvest at any particular time during the growth cycle will depend on the household's need for capital or wood-based products like fencing or building material, as well as on the prevailing prices for charcoal, fuelwood, building poles, and stakes and on access to alternative supplies of capital. All of these factors were acting to divert bark supplies from the tannin factories. At the same time, the presence of a huge range of possible uses for wattle ensured that it remained a popular on-farm tree.
5.5 Current wattle planting practices
Where wattle has been cleared in Central Province, land has largely been used for the planting of coffee, tea and for pasture development. Between 1957 and 1968, the area under smallholder coffee in Central Province increased from just under 5,000 ha to around 40,000 ha (Thurston 1987:132, Kitching 1980:318). In comparison, the area under smallholder tea (which had not been planted prior to around 1959) increased to around 10,000 ha in Murang'a District by 1985 (Kenya Tea Development Authority Annual Report 1985). Wattle still accounts for around 6,000 ha of agricultural land in Murang'a. In some areas, it covers as much as 20 percent of farmland. There are still a number of very large woodlots in the district -some as large as 15 ha.
End notes
1. FD 1932, p.16. In the same breath, however, it was noted that the "inculcation into the natives of an interest in tree planting makes only slow progress." This is an interesting and fundamental contradiction which is as common today. It is widely acknowledged that farmers have planted many trees on their farms, but it is still claimed that farmers know little about the subject, are unable to plant enough trees to meet their needs, and must be taught to do so and provided seedlings by the extension services.
2. Wattle was nowhere as popular a farm crop as in Kikuyu areas. At the same time as wattle was being promoted in the 1930s, a programme involving the widespread distribution of eucalyptus seedlings was underway in Kisii and North Kavirondo (Kakamega) District. Like wattle, eucalyptus provided a fast-growing source of construction timber and fuelwood at a time when the Forest Department was restricting access to the natural forests (Kitching, 1980: 102).
3. See also, KNA AGR/4/220, 21 August 1945, memorandum from G.J. Gollop, Assistant Agricultural Officer, Kiambu to the acting Senior Agricultural Officer, Kiambu, "Wattle Rules and Marketing, 1942-46".
<section>a</section>
Chapter 6: Conclusion: Tree growing and the rural economy in Kenya
Trees in high potential agricultural areas of Kenya occupy a significant land area. Land use inventories have suggested that planted and managed trees usually cover between 5 and 10 percent of agricultural land. On average, over 20 percent of the total high potential, smallholder agricultural land area has been used for growing trees, or has otherwise been left under natural woody cover. Even when other forms of land use could generate substantially higher levels of household income, the planting and management of trees has remained an important form of land use. This is in part an outcome of problems with agricultural labour supplies. Though other land uses may be more lucrative, labour for smallholder agriculture has become constrained and farmers are not able to cultivate other crops because of the much higher levels of labour use that would be required.
Central to the question of why trees are a common form of land use is why agricultural labour has become constrained in the first place, in the face of burgeoning urban sector unemployment and a phenomenal population growth rate. The answer is partly related to long-term policies which have favoured the development of a migrant labour economy -policies that date to the earliest days of Colonial settlement and that sought to mobilize labour for work on European farms.
Labour constraints could be somewhat alleviated if capital were available so that farmers could hire wage labourers to help cultivate other cash crops. However, capital for this specific use is seldom available through formal lending mechanisms, though it can sometimes be generated through informal mechanisms: kinship credit, moneylending, mutual savings societies, or the redeemable sale of crops or capital assets. One outcome of a limited access to capital is the development of alternative forms of labour organization (often derivatives of traditional labour practices) to provide farm labour during periods of peak demand. The most common of these strategies is labour sharing.
For the most part however, capital is generated through employment in the formal sector -a process encouraged by the inertia of pre-Independence labour policies which favour labour migration as a means of supplying workers to urban areas and plantations. Household labour migrates to these areas to generate capital which, remitted to the farm, can be used for hiring agricultural wage labour or for other farm inputs. As a result, household labour becomes increasingly scarce, and hired labour to replace it is much more expensive because of the difficulty of supervision and its relative inefficiency.
The household has responded in part by modifying its patterns of labour use - and consequently its patterns of land use - so that less farm labour is actually needed. Partly by growing subsistence crops, households can reduce their labour demands while reducing their exposure to the risk that income from cash crops will be insufficient to meet their subsistence needs. In Kikuyu areas, subsistence crops were traditionally women's crops; they have emerged as a dominant land use in areas where male labour migration has skewed the labour supply picture. Perennial crops, on the other hand, were traditionally crops which were cultivated by men and were also famine foods: arrow root, cassava, bananas, and so on. The absence of male labour, because of the migrant labour economy, meant that there was an important niche for a labour extensive perennial crop that could also generate income in times of need.
Around the time colonial labour policies really began to bite, black wattle emerged as an important cash crop. Though it was introduced originally to meet subsistence demands for wood that could no longer be met from the forests, its bark could be sold for processing into tanning extracts. Before independence, it was nearly the only cash crop which Africans were allowed to grow. Its adoption meant that a household could plant its plot with trees, allowing male labour to go off to cities and plantations in search of waged employment. Wattle served other purposes as well which helped to account for its huge popularity. These were primarily related to the insecurity of traditional land tenure in Kikuyu areas.
Within the system of traditional Kikuyu land tenure, land use rights were inherited through the male lineage. Rights of control remained with the sub-clan's lineage authority. Use rights could be borrowed and lent, in which case the person cultivating the land was not allowed to live there. Land could also be lent through a sort of tenancy agreement that did allow the tenant to live on the land. It could also be temporarily "sold" so that the seller could generate income for bridewealth or for other needs. The sale would be cancelled upon the return of the original selling price. The proliferation of land lending agreements, which were entered into to maintain the land use rights of the original rightholder, fostered the creation of a class of landless agricultural labourers who were not allowed to live on the land they had borrowed.
The outcome of these inheritable tenancy and sale arrangements was that the land use rights of the original rightholder became open to debate after several generations. When the Kikuyu agricultural frontier was closed to further expansion after around 1905, tenancy and land lending arrangements were increasingly cancelled. This in part contributed to landlessness, but also fostered the development of the migrant labour economy, as these people often sought employment either as squatters on European farms or in urban areas.
Wattle became popular during the 1930s because the planting of permanent crops could more firmly establish land use rights. Permanent crops belonged to whomever planted them, and they tended to reinforce long-term cultivation and use rights, regardless of how these rights might have been acquired. If a rightholder was unable to cultivate all of his fragmented plots, his alternative was to rely on some sort of tenancy arrangement, or to plant plots with permanent crops like wattle. While tenancy arrangements could technically be cancelled, with the general breakdown in customary systems of land tenure, rightholders were more inclined to plant their plots with wattle. The wholesale cancellation of tenancy and land lending agreements in the 1930s and 1940s was accompanied by a huge increase in the area planted under black wattle.
Wattle was also important because it generated income so that rightholders and tenants could mount land litigation to recover, or to gain use rights, to additional land. It also provided income for the development of small businesses in Central Province. The ability to articulate disaffection rested with those who were educated and with those who had accumulated capital, such as wattle growers. Wattle producers developed close working links with anti-Government political organizations. Although the Government had earlier strongly encouraged wattle growing in reserve areas, by the mid-1940s, it mounted a vigorous campaign against it, rooted in the notion that it was contributing to economic differentiation, land tenure insecurity, and, ultimately, to the African vision of independence from their colonial masters.
Social and economic disaffection in Kenya brought about serious unrest, eventually resulting in the 1952 State of Emergency. Land tenure reforms in the late 1950s through the mid-1960s, an outcome of the State of Emergency, sought to strengthen the African middle peasantry, though often at the expense of the landless. A key aspect of these reforms involved the cancellation of land lending agreements, the consolidation of fragmented holdings, and land registration - processes that conferred private land ownership rights upon Africans. Consolidation and registration lessened the importance of wattle as a means of strengthening land use rights. Coupled with declining prices for bark in the mid-1960s and new opportunities for smallholder cash crop development, huge areas of waffle were cleared by the late 1960s and planted under coffee and tea.
At the same time, the consolidation process capitalized on traditional tree planting practices by requiring that consolidated holdings be demarcated with planted trees. This was a long-term outcome of accepted customary land tenure practices that involved the planting of specific trees along the boundaries of sub-clan lands as well as the planting of subdivisions within these holdings.
Land tenure reform introduced important changes affecting tree tenure. In customary law, whomever planted a tree (provided they had some sort of cultivation right) was its owner. With land reform, trees became the property of the registered land owner. The effects of land reform on tree tenure were mostly profoundly felt by the landless, who may have had rights of use to trees growing on sub-clan lands, but who lost these rights as land was registered in the names of private land owners.
It is unlikely that guarantees of private tree ownership by themselves, a result of land tenure reform, actually encouraged people to grow more trees. Ownership of planted trees had long been guaranteed by customary law. Planted trees always belonged to whomever planted them but only as long as they held some sort of cultivation rights. Land tenure reform increased the security of these rights. It is this security that had a greater impact on farmers' interest in tree planting and in making other improvements to the land.
In contemporary Kenya, limited controls on tree cultivation and management are supposed to be enforced through the Chief's Authority Act and the Agricultural Act. There is, however, no consistency in the extent to which these controls are enforced. In some areas, chiefs may require a farmer to obtain a license before trees can be harvested, and this has acted as a disincentive to plant trees because there is no assurance that they can be harvested for the benefit of the person who planted them. As a result, trees are sometimes harvested or managed individually or in small blocks, rather than in even-aged stands.
Over the last 15 years or so, there have been numerous publicly-supported or aid-financed efforts to encourage farmers in Kenya to grow more trees. These efforts have seldom taken into account the extent of existing farmer tree growing activities. Plans for future efforts have the same disregard for the obvious and widespread local knowledge and awareness about tree growing. The challenge for planners and development agencies alike is threefold.
First, it is critically important that efforts to introduce tree planting innovations are put into a context which more accurately reflects local farmer ability and knowledge. Conventional approaches to rural forestry extension have been expensive and ineffective, particularly in the light of what farmers have been able to accomplish in the absence of these types of inputs.
Secondly, tree growing is one result of problems in the rural economy that limit agricultural development. If these problems are effectively addressed, trees will become a less common feature of the farming landscape. If farm trees are to continue to provide the range of benefits they have in the past, there is a clear need to diversify the tree planting strategies that have been undertaken in the areas of least agricultural diversity. For instance, if problems with labour and capital markets are reduced in tea growing areas, the planting of tea at the expense of tree cover, will be accompanied by an increasing scarcity of wood products to meet both subsistence and market demands.
Finally, the long-term security of rights to trees and their products has been affected by externally imposed controls on planting and harvesting. An assurance that benefits and income from the farm production of tree products will accrue to the farmer and not to the Government or the local administration, will be essential before there can be any hope that farm trees will meet the many demands that will be placed on them in the future.
<section>b</section>
Glossary
This glossary contains the most frequently used Kikuyu and Swahili words used in this report. Definitions are from a number of sources, primarily Benson's Kikuyu-English Dictionary, but also from Leakey's The Southern Kikuyu before 1903. Botanical descriptions are from Leakey's botanical appendix to The Southern Kikuyu... and from Norman Gachathi's excellent Kikuyu Botanical Dictionary of Plant Names and Uses as well as from information collected from key informants. Words in this Glossary are in Kikuyu, unless otherwise noted.
aguri
Plural of muguri.
ahoi
Plural of muhoi
athami
Plural of muthami.
Gikuyu
Name of the mythical male forbearer of the Kikuyu, to whom God gave all the land south and east of the Nyandarua mountains. Married to Mumbi, who bore nine daughters who were the mothers of the nine Kikuyu clans. Also sometimes used in place of Kikuyu which is the orthographically incorrect, but commonly used, form of Gikuyu.
githaka
sub-clan (mbari) land holding. Originally meaning uncultivated bush, the holding was based on rights of first-use, and were derived from hunting, rather than from agricultural traditions.
gitoka
The Pajama Lily (Crinum kirkii) which was used to demarcate the boundaries of the githaka. The dark flowering variety which was preferred for demarcation was called gitoka kiru.
ihurura
A general term for various plant species which vine and twine. Often these were vines of the genus Ipomea and were used as goat and sheep fodder.
ithimbi
Plural of githumbi.
itoka
Plural of gitoka.
kaiaba
Dovyalis caffra. Also called kei apple and often used for hedging. Usually impenetrable because it is very thorny.
kariaria
Euphorbia tirucalli. Also called Finger Euphorbia, which is often used for hedging in arid and semi-arid lands. Easily propagated from cuttings. Has a thick latex which is highly toxic, and particularly noxious to livestock.
Kikuyu
Orthographically incorrect name for Gikuyu, referring variously to the language or people or to the mythical tribal forbearer.
Kiinuini
Early Kikuyu name for Nairobi, referring to "the place where there are many miinu (Cassia didymobotrya) trees.
mbari
Sub-clan of one of the nine Kikuyu clans.
Mbuyuni
Swahili place name for the town where the baobab (Adansonia digitata) was growing.
mubage
Caesalpinia decapetala. Also called Mauritius Thorn. A native of Asia, but naturalized in East Africa. Used for hedging around homesteads.
mubariiti
Grevillea robusta. Also called Silky Oak and in Kikuyu, mukima. Native of Australia, but widely planted in fields. Prolific producer of mulch. Is often sidepruned to limit light competition and for fuelwood or small construction timber.
mubiru muiru
Vangueria linearisepala. A small tree, the wood of which was often used for constructing cattle enclosures. The berries are edible.
mugumo muguri
Ficus thonningii. Sacred tree, widely distributed. Easily regenerated from cuttings but seldom found naturally growing. Naturally regenerating trees were often uprooted and replanted with other trees or bushes. Trees would be planted to mark sacred groves.
mugumo
Purchaser of land in a redeemable land sale. Usually, land would be sold for livestock for bridewealth or to pay off debts. The land could be redeemed by returning the original number of livestock to the muguri.
muheregendi
Grewia similis. Tree used for constructing granaries. Also produced very good fodder.
muhethu
Trema orientalis Saplings of this tree were used for building rafters. Leaves were used as fodder.
muhindahinda
Trimeria tropica. Often planted between huts of a homestead as a living fence.
muhoi
Tenant with cultivation rights on mbari holdings. Not allowed to construct a homestead and had to live elsewhere. Land was temporarily lent to a muhoi. The arrangement could be inherited and could be cancelled by the original rightholder. Ahoi arrangements were most common when land was abundant and labour to cultivate it, and so to establish permanent tenure, was scarce.
muhuti
Erythrina abyssinica. Cuttings of this tree were commonly planted to reinforce the cattle enclosures and to make living fences.
muigoya
Plectranthus barbatus. Often grown as a hedge, the leaves were used for ripening bananas.
muiri
Prunus africanum. Tall timber tree.
mukandu
Lantana or Lippia sp. Grown as hedges. Lantana was introduced with colonization, while Lippia is indigenous. Branches of both were commonly used for the construction of small buildings and for fencing.
mukawa
Carissa edulis. Bush used for fencing around fortified villages. Is very thorny but with edible berries.
mukenia
Lantana sp. See mukandu. A "good" tree planted in the place of naturally generating mugumo trees.
mukeu
Dombeya sp. Saplings of this tree were favoured for timber cross beams. Good timber for beehives. A "good" tree, planted in place of naturally generating mugumo trees.
mukinduri
Croton megalocarpus. Very common tree planted on field boundaries. Produces good fuelwood and has a high canopy that allows light to pass through, limiting crop competition. Often managed as a tightly pruned hedge.
muluhakuha
Macaranga kilimandscharica. Timber tree used for building poles.
mukungugu
Commiphora zimmermannii. Cuttings of this tree were used to mark boundaries within a githaka. Also commonly planted in the centre of a courtyard to support fodder for goats and sheep.
Mukurwewa Gathanga
"The sandy place where the Albizia grows" also variously translated as "the building place." Traditionally held to be the place in Murang'a District where God gave Gikuyu all the land south and East of the Nyandarua mountains.
mukuyu
Ficus sycomorus. Sacred tree from which the name Gikuyu is derived. Munyua maai Kikuyu name for Eucalyptus. Literally translated, in means "the drinker of water."
muramati
Lineage authority with rights of control over sub-clan lands. The eldest son of the eldest son...
murema
Trees which were left after an area had been cleared for cultivation
kiriti
to become the dwelling place of the spirits of the trees which had been felled. Literally, "the trees which resisted" the felling of the forests.
murigono
Clerodendrum johnstonii. Branches of this shrub were used for constructing cattle enclosures. Also used as stakes for training yam vines.
muringa
Cordia africana. Large timber tree covered with white flowers. Cuttings of this tree were used for marking githaka boundaries.
mutanda
Pterolobium stellatum. Bush used for living fences
mbogo
around fortified villages.
muthakwa
Vernonia auriculifera. Bush with many ritual uses. A "good" tree used for replacing naturally generating mugumo trees.
muthakwa wa
Crassocephalum mannii. Shrub commonly planted around
athi
homesteads and field boundaries. Propagated by cuttings, the leaves are used for treating gall sickness in cattle.
muthami
Tenant with cultivation rights on mbari land. Similar to a muhoi except that a muthami was allowed to construct a homestead. A muhoi had to live elsewhere. Tenancy rights could be inherited, but could also be cancelled by the original rightholder.
mutundu
Croton macrostachyus. Common boundary tree and sometimes managed as a hedge. Naturally regeneration was reportedly prolific on burnt-over sites.
mutura
Solanum aculeastrum. Bush planted as a living fence.
muuti
Aspilia spp. Noxious shrub planted around fortified villages.
muuu
Markhamia hildebrandtii. Freely coppicing timber tree used to mark subdivisions of the githaka.
muyuyu
Chaetacme aristata. Shrub planted around fortified villages.
mwatha
Synadenium compactum. Tree used for boundary demarcation. Has bright red leaves and white latex.
ngundu
Name for a sub-clans holdings, similar to githaka but in less common usage.
ngwatio
Form of labour organization involving reciprocal labour use during times of peak labour demand.
Nyandarua
Proper name for the Aberdare Mountains, which form the western boundaries of what were traditionally Kikuyu lands.
rugongo
A ridge lying between two rivers in Kikuyu country. Ridges were often formally recognized territorial units sharing similar social obligations.
shamba
Swahili for a smallholding.
wira
Used to describe large work parties which would be convened on particular holdings to complete big tasks such as digging. The person whose land was being attended to would be required to provide beer, at least, and sometimes food as well.
<section>c</section>
A note on sources, abbreviations and photographs
The following are private papers held in the Rhodes House Collection of the University of Oxford, and which are noted in the footnotes by their Rhodes House classification.
W.H. Thompson
(Mss.Afr.s.839)
S.H. Fazan
(Mss.Afr.s.1153)
A.W. Horner
(Mss.Afr.s.1685)
MacGregor Ross
(Mss.Afr.s.1178)
F.D. Homan
(Mss.Afr.s.1267)
J.A. Stuart Watt
(Mss.Afr.s.391)
V. Liversage
(Mss.Afr.s.510)
T.C. Colchester
(Mss.Afr.s.742)
R.J.M. Swynnerton
(Mss.Afr.s.1426)
A. Creech Jones
(Mss.Brit.Emp.s.332)
T.G. Askwith
(Mss.Afr.s. 1 170)
J.H. Crompton
(Mss.Afr.s.496)
Kenya Ministry of Legal Affairs, Opinions file
(Mss.Afr.s.1554)
Photos on the following pages were taken by the author: 24, 53, 54, 57, 60, 63, and 64.
Photos on the following pages are reproduced with the kind permission of the Consolata Fathers and are from their archives in Turin: 9, 12, 14, 25, 44, 45 and 47.
The photos on the pages 35 and 40 were reproduced from an anonymously written and undated cyclostyled report I found in the Ministry of Agriculture library titled, History and Customs Relative to the Settlement of Kiambu. I would date it to around 1955 or so.
The photograph on page 55 is from the frontispiece to John Boyes' book, John Boyes, King of the Wa-Kikuyu. The copyright is held by the Bodleian Library, Oxford.
<section>d</section>
Bibliography
Ainsworth, J. 1920?. KLC [I] Kenya Land Commission Volume I, Nairobi, Kenya
Allott, A.N. (ed.). 1968. Restatement of African law (volumes I and II). Sweet and Maxwell, London, UK.
Askwith T.G. (undated) Private paper Rhodes House Collection (Mss.Afr.s.1170) University of Oxford.
Battiscombe. 1920?. KLC [I] Kenya Land Commission Volume I, Nairobi, Kenya
Binkley, C.S. and Perez-Garcia, J. 1988. The application of household production models to smallholder forestry in developing countries. World Bank, Washington, D.C., USA (unpublished).
Binns, B. 1950. Consolidation of fragmented agricultural holdings. FAO Agricultural Study No. 11., FAO, Rome, Italy.
Boyes, J. 1911. John Boyes. King of the Wa-Kikuyu. Methuen, London, UK.
Bradley, P.N. and Kuyper, J.B.H. 1985. Woody biomass survey of Kakamega District. Beijer Institute, Nairobi, Kenya (unpublished).
Bradley, P.N. and Ngugi, A.W. 1986. Agroforestry. soil conservation. and woodfuel in Murang'a District. (Part II). Beijer Institute, Nairobi, Kenya (unpublished).
Brooke-Popham, H.M. 1939. Letter from Senior Chief Koinage wa Mbiyu 5/7/39 Private paper Rhodes House Collection (Mss.Brit.Emp.s.839) University of Oxford, Oxford, U.K.
Brown, L.H. 1957. Development and farm planning in the African areas of Kenya. East African Agricultural Journal. October: 67-73.
Brown, L.H. 1962. Land consolidation and better farming in Kenya. Empire Journal of Experimental Agriculture 30(120):277-285.
Bullock, R.A. 1974. Subsistence to cash: Economic change in rural Kiambu., Cashiers d'Etudes Africaines 56[XIV(4)].
Chavangi, N.A. 1987. Agroforestry potentials and land tenure issues in Western Kenya. In: Raintree, J.B. (ed.). 1987. Land. Trees and Tenure. Proceedings of an international workshop on tenure issues in Agroforestry, ICRAF and the Land Tenure Centre. May 27-31 1985, Nairobi, Kenya.
Clayton, E.S. 1961. Economic and technical optima in peasant agriculture, Journal of Agricultural Economics. 14(3):337-347.
Colchester T.C. (undated) Private paper Rhodes House Collection (Mss.Afr.s.742) University of Oxford, Oxford, U.K.
Collier, P. and Lal, D.1986. Labour and poverty in Kenya 1900-1980. Clarendon Press, Oxford, UK.
Cowen, M.P. 1978. Capital and household production: the case of wattle in Kenya's central province. 1903 - 1964. PhD dissertation, University of Cambridge, Cambridge, UK (unpublished).
Cowen, M.P. and Murage, F. Undated. Notes on agricultural wage labour In Kenya locations. Institute for Development Studies, University of Nairobi, Nairobi, Kenya.
Creech Jones A. (undated) Private paper Rhodes House Collection (Mss.Brit.Emp.s.332) University of Oxford, Oxford, U.K.
Crompton J.H. (undated) Private paper Rhodes House Collection (Mss.Afr.s.496) University of Oxford, Oxford, U.K.
Dewees, P.A. 1988. The impact of rural capital and labour availability on smallholder tree growing in Kenya (unpublished).
Elmer, L.A. 1944. Two useful hedge plants for high country. East African Agricultural Journal. January: 162-165.
Fazan S.H. (undated) Private paper Rhodes House Collection (Mss.Afr.s.1153) University of Oxford.
Fazan, S.H. 1920. KLC [I] Kenya Land Commission Volume I, Nairobi, Kenya
ED 1909 to 1935 Forest Department Annual Reports Nairobi, Kenya.
Fisher, J. 1964. The anatomy of Kikuyu domesticity and husbandry. Department of Technical Cooperation.
Fisher, J. Undated. Notes on the Kikuyu. unpublished. See also KNADC/FH3/1.
Fort Hall Local Native Council. 1920?. KLC [I] Kenya Land Commission Volume I, Nairobi, Kenya.
Gachathi, F.N. 1990. Kikuyu botanical dictionary of plant names and uses. Kenya Forest Research Institute. Nairobi, Kenya.
Geertz, C. 1962. The rotating credit association: a 'middle rung' in development. Economic Development and Cultural Change. 10(2):241-263.
Graham, R.M. 1945. Notes on the growing of cypress timber on farms. East African Agricultural Journal. January: 132-139.
Homan F.D. (undated) Private paper Rhodes House Collection (Mss.Afr.s.1267) University of Oxford, Oxford, U.K.
Homan, F.D. 1963. Succession to registered land in the African areas of Kenya. Journal of Local Administration Overseas 2(1):49-54.
Homan, F.D. and Sands, R.A. Undated. Land tenure reform and agricultural development in the African lands of Kenya. (Unpublished). (see also Rhodes House Private Paper (MSS.Afr.s.1267) University of Oxford, U.K.)
Homer A.W. (undated) Private paper Rhodes House Collection (Mss.Afr.s.1685) University of Oxford, Oxford, U.K.
Hughes, O.E.B. 1955. Villages in the Kikuyu country, Journal of African Administration 7(4): 170-174.
Humphrey, N. 1945a. Thoughts on the foundations of future prosperity in the Kikuyu lands. In The Kikuyu Lands. Government Printer, Nairobi, Kenya.
Humphrey, N. 1945b. The relationship of population to the land in south Nyeri. In The Kikuyu Lands. Government Printer, Nairobi, Kenya.
Huxley, E. 1935. White man's country: Lord Delamere and the making of Kenya. Chatto and Windus, London, UK.
Kanogo, T. 1987. Squatters and the roots of Mau Mau. James Currey, Nairobi, Kenya
Karanja, P. 1920?. KLC [I] Kenya Land Commission Volume I, Nairobi, Kenya.
Kenya Land Commission. (KLC) Report Nairobi, Kenya.
Kenya Ministry of Legal Affairs, Opinions file (undated) Private paper Rhodes House Collection (Mss.Afr.s.1554) University of Oxford, Oxford, U.K.
Kenya, colony and protectorate of (1929a). Native land tenure in Kikuyu Province: Report of Committee. Nairobi, Kenya.
Kenya colony and protectorate of (1929b). Report of the Agricultural Commission.
Kenya, colony and protectorate of (1947). The agrarian problem in Kenya. Report by Sir P. Mitchell. Government Printer, Nairobi, Kenya.
Kenya, colony and protectorate of (1950). Report of Committee on Agricultural Credit for Africans. Government Printer, Nairobi, Kenya.
Kenya, colony and protectorate of (1962). Agriculture Gazeteer of Kenya. Government Printer, Nairobi, Kenya.
Kenya, republic of (1977). Integrated rural survey I. 1974-75. Central Bureau of Statistics, Nairobi, Kenya.
Kenya, republic of (1983). Integrated rural surveys. II-IV. Central Bureau of Statistics, Nairobi, Kenya.
Kenya, republic of (1986). Economic management for renewed growth. Sessional paper no. 1. 1986. Government Printer, Nairobi, Kenya.
Kenya, republic of (1989). Development plan. 1989-1993. Government Printer, Nairobi, Kenya.
Kenya, republic of. Statistical abstracts. 1959-1988. Government Printer, Nairobi, Kenya.
Kenyatta, J. 1920? KLC [I] Kenya Land Commission Volume I, Nairobi, Kenya
Kenyatta, J. 1938. Facing Mount Kenya: the tribal life of the Gikuyu, Secker and Warburg, London, UK.
Kitching, G. 1980. Class and economic change in Kenya. Yale University Press, New Haven, Connecticut, USA.
KNA 1933 Letter 31 July from J. Boyes to W.G. Leckie (Agricultural Officer Kikuyu Province). Kenya. National Archives AGR/4/526 Nairobi, Kenya.
KNA 1934 Memo 7 May from Deputy Director of Agriculture to Agricultural Officer Central Province. Kenya. National Archives AGR/4/525 Nairobi, Kenya.
KNA 1941 Wattle, General 1937-1957: 'Should Black Wattle Trees be Grown in Kikuyu Country? Kenya National Archives AGR/4/343 Nairobi, Kenya.
KNA 1950 Fort Hall District, Kenya: A Preliminary Examination of Land and Population Problems Kenya National Archives DC/FH5/1 Nairobi, Kenya.
KNA 1955 Memo 3 November from Nyeri District Asst. Agricultural Officer to the Director of Agriculture Kenya. National Archives AGR/4/343 Nairobi, Kenya.
KNA 1958 Fort Hall Annual Report Kenya. National Archives Nairobi, Kenya.
KNA undated History of Fort Hall from 1888-1944. Kenya. National Archives DC/FM/6/1 Nairobi, Kenya.
Kuyper, J.B.H. and Bradley, P.N. 1985. Woodfuel and agroforestry in Kisii District. Beijer Institute, Nairobi, Kenya (unpublished).
Lambert, H.E. and Wyn Harris, P. 1945. Memorandum on policy in regard to land tenure in the native lands. In The Kikuyu Lands. Government Printer, Nairobi, Kenya.
Leakey, H. 1920?. KLC [I] Kenya Land Commission Volume I, Nairobi, Kenya
Leakey, L.S.B. 1977. The southern Kikuyu before 1903. Academic Press, London, UK.
Lick, W.G. 1941?. The growing of wattle and production of wattle bark in Kenya. East African Agricultural Journal. July: 51 -62.
Leys, C. 1975. Underdevelopment in Kenya. the political economy of neo-colonialism Heinemann, London, UK.
Little, K. 1973. African women in towns. Cambridge University Press, London, UK.
Liversage V. (undated) Private paper Rhodes House Collection (Mss.Afr.s.510) University of Oxford, Oxford, U.K.
Lubega, A.M. 1987. Economic feasibility of rural projects in semi-arid areas of developing countries: a case study of agroforestry in Kenya. PhD dissertation, State University of New York, Syracuse, New York, USA (unpublished).
Lugard, F.D. 1923. The dual mandate in British tropical Africa. William Blackwood and Sons, London, UK.
Lyne Watt, W. 1942. Stall-feeding of goats and sheep by the Kikuyu tribe, Kenya. East African Agricultural Journal. October: 109-111.
MacGregor Ross (undated) Private paper Rhodes House Collection (Mss.Afr.s.1178) University of Oxford.
Maher, C. 1941. The people and the land: some problems. Part I. East African Agricultural Journal. October: 63-67.
Maher, C. 1942. African labour on the farm in Kenya colony. East African Agricultural Journal. April: 228-235.
Maxon, R.M. 1980. John Ainsworth and the making of Kenya.. University Press of America, Lanham, Maryland, USA.
McPherson, M.F. 1983. Land fragmentation in agriculture: adverse? beneficial? and for whom? Development Discussion Paper No. 145. Harvard Institute for International Development Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, USA.
Muriuki, G. 1974. A history of the Kikuyu 1500-1900. Oxford University Press, Nairobi, Kenya.
Native Affairs Department. 1935 Annual Report Nairobi, Kenya.
Ngugi, P. 1988 "Don't let the name mislead you" Daily Nation 29 June 1988 Nairobi, Kenya
Okoth-Ogendo, H.W.O. 1987. Tenure of trees or tenure of lands. In Raintree, J.B. (ed.). 1987. Land, trees and tenure. Proceedings of an international workshop on tenure issues in agroforestry. ICRAF and the Land Tenure Centre 27-31, May 1985, Nairobi, Kenya.
Onalo, P.L. 1986. Land law and conveyancing in Kenya. Heineman, Nairobi, Kenya.
Ongugo, P.O. 1985. Optimization of fuelwood production for rural development with special reference to tobacco growing farmers (South Nyanza. Kenya. MSc thesis, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland (unpublished).
Pease, J.W. 1920?. KLC [I] Kenya Land Commission Volume I, Nairobi, Kenya
Pedraza, J. 1956. Land consolidation in the Kikuyu areas of Kenya. Journal of African Administration. 8(2):82-87.
Pollard, E., Hooper, M.D., and Moore, N.W. 1974. Hedges. Collins, London, UK.
Rice, J.H. 1947. Soil conservation organization in Fort Hall District as adapted from the indigenous 'ngwatio' system. East African Agricultural Journal. April: 200-201.
Ripley, E.A. (undated) Effects of shade and shelter on the microclimate of tea. East African Agricultural Journal July: 67-80.
Routledge, W.S. and Routledge, K. 1910. With a prehistoric people: the Akikuyu of British East Africa. Edward Arnold, London, UK.
Simmance, A.J.F. 1961. Land redemption among the Fort Hall Kikuyu. Journal of African Law. 5(2):75-81.
Sorrenson, M.P.K. 1967. Land reform in Kikuyu country: A study in government policy. Oxford University Press, Nairobi, Kenya.
Stichter, S. 1982. Migrant labour in Kenya.: capitalism and African response. 1895-1975. Longman, Harlow (Essex), UK.
Stuart Watt J.A. (undated) Private paper Rhodes House Collection (Mss.Afr.s.391) University of Oxford, Oxford, U.K.
Swynnerton R.J.M. (undated) Private paper Rhodes House Collection (Mss.Afr.s.1426) University of Oxford, Oxford, U.K.
Technoserve, Inc. 1987. Analysis of Tea Pluckers and Labour Requirements in the Smallholder Tea Sector Technoserve, Nairobi, Kenya (unpublished).
Thomas, B.P. 1985. Politics. participation and poverty: development through self-help in Kenya. Westview Press, Boulder, Colorado, USA.
Thomas, B.P. 1988. Household strategies for adaptation and change: participation in Kenyan rural women's associations. Africa. 58(4):401421.
Thompson W.H. (undated) Private paper Rhodes House Collection (Mss.Afr.s.839) University of Oxford, Oxford, U.K.
Throup, D.W. 1987. Economic and social origins of Mau Mau. James Currey, Nairobi, Kenya.
Thurston, A. 1987. Smallholder agriculture in colonial Kenya: the official mind and the Swynnerton Plan. Cambridge, African Studies Centre, U.K.
Trzebinski, E. 1985. The Kenya pioneers. Heineman, London, U.K.
United Kingdom, Government of the (1909). Report on the Forests of British East Africa, Parliamentary Report. Cmd.4723.
United Kingdom, government of the (1919). East Africa Protectorate. Economic Commission Final Report. Part 1.
United Kingdom, government of the (1934a), Kenya Land Commission: evidence and memorandum (three volumes). Colonial No. 91.
United Kingdom, government of the (1934b), Kenya. Land Commission: summary of conclusions reached by His Majesty's Government. Cmd.4580.
United Kingdom, government of the (1955), East Africa Royal Commission. 1953-1955: Report. Cmd.9475.
Van Zwanenberg, R.M.A. 1975. Colonial capitalism and labour in Kenya. 1919-1939. East African Literature Bureau, Nairobi, Kenya.
Von Pischke, J.D. 1977. The political economy of farm credit in Kenya. PhD dissertation. University of Glasgow, Glasgow, Scotland. (unpublished).
Wallace, G.B. 1935. Armillaria root rot in East Africa. East African Agricultural Journal. November: 182-192.
Wangana, L. 1920. KLC [I] Kenya Land Commission Volume I, Nairobi, Kenya
Warren, G.H. 1941. Shelterbelts. East African Agricultural Journal. July: 8-19.
Wasow, B. 1981. The working age sex ratio and job search migration in Kenya. Journal of Developing Areas 15:435-444.
Wilson, R.G. 1956. Land consolidation in the Fort Hall District of Kenya. Journal of African Administration. 8(3):144-151.
World Bank. 1986. Kenya. agricultural inputs survey. World Bank, Washington, D.C., USA.
World Bank. 1987. Kenya. forestry subsector review. World Bank, Washington, D.C.,
USA.
Wright, J.W. 1956. Reference marks in land settlement Journal of African Administration VIII(1):3845.
COMMUNITY FORESTRY PUBLICATIONS
Community Forestry Notes
1. Household food security and forestry: an analysis of socio-economic issues
2. Participatory assessment, monitoring and evaluation in community forestry
3. Rapid appraisal
4. Herders' decision-making in natural resources management in arid and semi-arid Africa
5. Rapid appraisal of tree and land tenure
6. The major significance of 'minor' forest products: the local use and value of forests in the West African humid forest zone
7. Community forestry: ten years in review
8. Shifting cultivators: local technical knowledge and natural resource management in the humid tropics
9. Socio-economic attributes of trees and tree planting practices
10. A framework for analyzing institutional incentives in community forestry
Community Forestry Field Manuals
1. Guidelines for planning, monitoring and evaluating cookstove programmes
2. The community's toolbox - the idea, methods and tools for participatory assessment, monitoring and evaluation in community forestry
3. Guidelines for integrating nutrition concerns into forestry projects
Community Forestry Case Studies
1. Case studies of farm forestry and wasteland development in Gujarat, India
2. Forestland for the people: a village forest project in northeast Thailand
3. Women's role in dynamic forest-based small scale enterprises - case studies on uppage and lacquerware from India
4. Case studies in forest-based small scale enterprises in Asia - rattan, matchmaking and handicrafts
5. Social and economic incentives for smallholder tree growing · A case study from Murang'a District, Kenya
Charcoal in northeast Thailand: rapid rural appraisal of a wood-based small-scale enterprise
Community forestry: lessons from case studies in Asia and the Pacific region
