<title>Women, households and change</title>
Edited by
Eleonora Masini and Susan Stratigos
UNITED NATIONS UNIVERSITY PRESS
ã The United Nations University, 1991
The views expressed in this publication are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the United Nations University.
United Nations University Press
The United Nations University, Toho Seimei Building, 15-1 Shibuya 2-chome,
Shibuya-ku, Tokyo 150, Japan
Tel.: (03)3499-2811
Fax: (03)3499-2828
Telex: J25442
Cable: UNATUNIV TOKYO
Typeset by Asco Trade Typesetting Limited, Hong Kong
Printed by Permanent Typesetting and Printing Co. Ltd., Hong Kong
Cover design by Tsuneo Taniuchi
HGA-3/UNUP-766
ISBN 92-808-0766-5
United Nations Sales No. E.91.III.A.3
04500 P
The United Nations University (UNU) is an organ of the United Nations established by the General Assembly in 1972 to be an international community of scholars engaged in research, advanced training, and the dissemination of knowledge related to the pressing global problems of human survival, development, and welfare. Its activities focus mainly on peace and conflict resolution, development in a changing world, and science and technology in relation to human welfare. The University operates through a worldwide network of research and post-graduate training centres, with its planning and co-ordinating headquarters in Tokyo, Japan
The United Nations University Press, the publishing division of the UNU, publishes scholarly books and periodicals in the social sciences, humanities, and pure and applied natural sciences related to the University's research.
<section>Note to the reader from the UNU</section>
Analysis of the impact of macro-events on women and the role of women in determining changes in the household is important for a better understanding of society. In conducting such an analysis, the adoption of the life-course approach, both in retrospective and perspective terms, is particularly useful to identify changing relationships among individuals within the same household and the long-term implications that these changes have on the structure of society.
On this basis, the Household, Gender, and Age Project of the United Nations University conducted between 1983 and 1988 a series of case-studies in Colombia, Brazil, Argentina, Chile, Kenya, China, and Sri Lanka. After introducing the genesis of the HGA project, its research activities, and the methodology adopted, this volume presents a synthesis of the results of the project research.
Acknowledgement
The United Nations University is grateful to the Division for the Advancement of Women, United Nations Office at Vienna, for its editorial contributions that have helped to make possible the publication of this volume.
<section>Foreword</section>
This book is the fruit of an innovative project designed to expand the boundaries of our understanding of women's contribution to development and the obstacles they face to participating and receiving full benefit from it. It began as part of the Household, Gender and Age programme of the United Nations University, under the leadership of Eleonora Masini. A series of consultations initiated by Elise Boulding took place in Tokyo in 1979, Oslo in 1980, and Dartmouth, New Hampshire, in 1981. These were followed up by Eleonora Masini in meetings in Rome in 1981 and 1982. By this time the fundamental framework and focus of the research was established and in 1982 attention turned to identifying locations and researchers in different regions. This led to a series of national studies based on a common motivation and methodology. The studies varied according to the resources available and the specific problems, but they were linked by a common purpose and for that reason represent
comparative research at its best.
The Division for the Advancement of Women of the United Nations Office at Vienna joined the project in its final stages. During a visit to Vienna at the cud of 1989 Elise Boulding suggested that assistance was needed to prepare the case-studies for publication and more popular dissemination. The question of the impact of change on women and households was one that the Division was researching more thoroughly as part of its policy analysis work in the context of the implementation of the Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies for the Advancement of Women, so it had experience to contribute to the project Using resources of the Trust Fund for the Monitoring, Review, and Appraisal of the Strategies the Division provided the services of consultant Susan Stratigos to edit the material and assist with the Division's chapter.
The study itself deals in an innovative way with some of the key microeconomic and micro-social aspects of advancement of women: the sharing of responsibilities and power within the household, the cumulative effect of both discrimination and its elimination on cohorts of women. By both its findings and its methodology, it should open Up new areas for thought, research, and action in the effort to achieve equality and equity between women and men.
HEITOR GURGULINO DE SOUZA
Rector, UNU
MARGARET JOAN ANSTEE
Director-General, UNOV
<section>Prologue</section>
In a moment of truth back in 1979, three women from Europe, Africa and North America, sitting on a Programme Advisory Committee established by the Rector of the United Nations University (UNU), suddenly realized that the research programme they were discussing - dealing with pressing world problems of human and social development, natural resources, and food security- was almost completely gender-blind. Even though we were into the fifth year of the United Nations International Women's Decade and the concept of women's participation was supposed to be built into all development research, the proposals before us all assumed a male labour force. You find what you look for, and these researchers were not looking for women.
Wenche Barth Eide of Norway, Frede Chale of Kenya, and I wondered how a more differentiated perception of women and men as agents of change with different but overlapping roles, responsibilities, and contributions could be inserted into development models. We thought in terms of relating macro-phenomena to the micro-realities of daily life. We sought a perspective that could make women visible, yet not repel those who reject the idea that women should be the focus of special studies. The answer was the household. Here, in all its cultural diversity, is the primary living unit of human beings, where the species is reproduced and nurtured, the base from which individuals participate in the whole range of tasks that shape and change a community and a society. Looking at people in households means seeing each member as an individual, a source of reproduction and production, of resistance to change and of change. It means seeing men and women, children and old people in relation
to their community as well as in relation to each other. With this concept of the household-in-community as an ecosystem, the Household, Gender, and Age Project was born.
There was understandable resistance among feminist researchers to using this framework to study women. They saw the danger of stereotyping women as homemakers, but others also recognized it as a potential source of new insights into women's part in modernization. Rector Soedjatmoko of the saw the possibilities, and with his support the project went forward.
The most significant aspect of gender differentiation is women's procreative role, which makes the female life-course much more complex than the male. Once men reach adulthood, their roles do not change much except through seniority, but women's roles change from decade to decade in shifting patterns of production and reproduction. Both the life-course analysis and the time-budget components of the research described in this book arose from the need to penetrate the character of gender-differentiated role sets in relation to the overall process of development.
So began the long search for a satisfactory theoretical framework and appropriate methodologies, for colleagues and research teams. The goals as the initiating group saw them were, first, to create models that would set new standards for gender sensitivity in all development research in the UNU, the entire United Nations system, and the academic community generally, and, second, to provide material that would change the way policy-makers approached development planning by providing a more realistic picture of the people and resources involved. In an ideal society, there would be a substantial overlap between male and female roles and real equality in decision-making in the household and the community. An important part of this study was to uncover actual patterns of participation and decision-making in the household.
In fact the practical goals of the project were quite modest, but they continued to focus on helping policy-makers. However, real life does not fall into neat categories, and the difficulties of international comparative research arc enormous. The results are not earth-shattering, but they provide very substantial food for thought. What follows are my reflections, as an interested outsider who participated in the birth of the project, on the findings of the studies reported in this book.
Because modernization and development imply change, the reader will be expecting change. What is striking in reading these studies is the impression that although much of the edifice of development has been erected on the backs of women living at the lowest economic Ievels, these women themselves experience little change in their own lives, except for the worse.
The power of historical tradition, including the domination associated with patriarchy, appears again and again in these studies. In Kenya, the patriarchal inheritance and social system force dispossessed women and their dependants from their rural villages to the plantations, where the proportion of female-headed households is therefore above the national figure. The administrative staff there frankly admitted that these households provide the bulk of the stable labour force: men emigrate to the city, unwilling to accept the low pay, bad housing, and substandard working conditions. The women stay on, in desperation, in order to feed their children. In Sri Lanka, women who have the courage to migrate to the Middle East as domestic workers in order to help their families may come home to find that husbands and kin have frittered away their hard-earned savings. There may be little left for the woman if she cannot control her own earnings. In China, too, though there arc new
job and income opportunities, women nevertheless feel that it is proper for men to decide what is to be done with family resources.
One constant in the lives of all these women is domination of men as fathers, husbands, employers, and authority figures in the community. This patriarchy is not linked to any particular political or economic form, nor to any specific social class. It persists in the great variety of national settings covered hi these reports. Patriarchy may not be impermeable, but it is certainly highly resistant to the many factors of change operating in the societies studied. Internal, urban, and international migration changes the circumstances of women's lives drastically and requires new strategies and new skills, but male dominance in the household and at work remains untouched. Industrialization and technological change leave women trapped at the bottom of the skill ladder. Demographic transition may change the socio-economic profile of a country, but poor women, rural and urban alike, still have large families. Whether women are poor or rich, whatever autonomy they have operates
within a patriarchal frame.
Many of the advances we associate with modernization - education, better jobs, fertility control - go primarily to middle- and upper-class women. The great difference between their experiences, on the one hand, and lower-class women on the other is particularly striking in the Colombian study, though it certainly pertains to the other countries too. Increased educational opportunities appear to benefit them more. They are of little use to poorer girls if they are kept at home to contribute to the family's subsistence, or "voluntarily" drop out of school because the pressure of domestic responsibilities is too great. On the other hand, the evidence from these studies is mixed, and it may be that better-educated women have fewer job opportunities. Both push and pull factors keep them at home in domestic roles instead, a phenomenon that has also been observed in Europe and North America in various phases of industrialization. The newly generated factory jobs for women, whether
in Argentina or Sri Lanka, are not necessarily linked to educational levels and they may go to the less educated, least skilled women. The pay frequently keeps them close to, or even below, the subsistence level they were at before.
In situations of such complexity, the importance of cohort studies to reveal real changes in the lives of people over time cannot be overestimated. Each of these research projects identified women from two or sometimes three different birth cohorts or groups born at a certain time. The experiences of women now in their childbearing years are different to those their mothers had. While class differentiations are still strong, younger women as a group have a little more education, better family planning, and a greater variety of jobs than their mothers. They have lost their rural roots; they may not have extended families to fall back on; and they lack the wider experience of the hidden economy that rural women traditionally have, but they arc doing the they can with what they have available.
The old story of women's double workload comes through in every study. By separating remunerated work from the home, modernization makes it more difficult to combine childbearing, child-rearing, and domestic maintenance with it. Since reproduction and domestic maintenance must continue in any case, employment outside the home frequently doubles the working hours of women. All the time-budget data in the studies show this. The little extra domestic labour contributed by men hardly makes a dent in that female burden. At least in the working classes, leisure is a male, not a female, phenomenon.
Women learn new skills. Whether in resettled villages or in migrant streams, by applying modern technologies or expanding craft opportunities, women are finding new ways to generate income. However, much of this activity is in the informal or hidden economy, so it is not reflected in official statistics. Nor do the economic rewards bear much relationship to the skill or ingenuity involved.
Many of the women in these studies have resettled in semi-urban or urban areas and so lost the support of extended family structures. This makes the double load doubly hard, since there are no reserves of help to cope with child care or illness and other misfortunes. Nor do the new channels of communication that arc supposed to come with modernization work for them. There may be jobs, but they don't know how to find them. There may be services, but they don't know about them.
Women's horizons arc widening, but some of the evidence may disappoint the idealists. Consumerism rears its unattractive head whenever there is cash beyond the subsistence level. There seems to be little interest in education for its own sake, school drop-out rates are high even in the absence of economic pressures, and the Chinese researchers are probably not the only ones who found that young literate women were reading romances, not newspapers. Yet it was heartening to find an interest in voluntary organizations and community issues among some Sri Lankan women. Perhaps further research might find more of this in the other countries studied.
I have already commented on the slowness of change in the lives of the women studied in contrast to the magnitude of the macro-level changes taking place in each society. In considering the future, it is very important to take account of the different stocks of knowledge available to older and younger women. I-or example, the traditional knowledge stock of rural societies, ranging from the use of plants, herbs, and healing practices to kitchen-gardening and food-processing and the production of tools and articles for household use, is not necessarily at the disposal of young urban women today. Nor are the community support systems of rural societies available to them. New knowledge stocks can grow up, as studies of urban kitchen-gardening in third-world cities show, and comparable mutual aid structures can also develop, but this takes time and energy that the hard-pressed urban poor may not have. If third-world societies are to develop their full social and economic
potential, attention must be paid to the maldistribution of resources that leaves women too exhausted and overworked to participate in shaping the conditions of their lives and the lives of their families and communities.
What are the needs that emerge from these studies? I would not put more formal education for women first, although that is important, as the results indicate that education relates only loosely to job opportunities. Rather, I would make improved wages and working conditions and the availability of child care a priority; then skill training, and community-based adult education activities along the lines of the Paolo Freire model of conscientization, which could help retrieve and adapt rural knowledge stocks to urban settings. It could also make women more aware of possibilities and of themselves as agents of change and co-shapers of their lives and their communities. Increased levels of formal education for women should be in addition to, not in place of, these other priorities. Additional schooling will only improve the quality of life of women and the societies they live in when basic standards of living are such that they are able to take advantage of it. While education
is statistically associated with more effective family planning, it is not actually a prerequisite for fertility control. Throughout the ages, women without the benefit of literacy have controlled family size according to their perception of social needs.
The way different generations have managed to sustain and reproduce life under conditions of rapid social change compels our respect for the strength, versatility, and resourcefulness of women. These studies also reveal the pressures modernizing societies put on one institution - the household - and one gender-women. We now lament failed development. What has failed is a set of attitudes and structures built by men and maintained with the help of women, which prevent women from being equal partners in development. With more resources available to women, and a more equitable distribution of workloads between men and women, the development story would read very differently. While the failures have been more severe in the third world, the problems underlying them are to be found on all continents. The picture that emerges of women living at the poverty level in the countries in this project is not so different from that revealed in studies of low-income female-headed households
in industrialized countries, like that recently carried out in Colorado, where I live.
More research is needed on the hidden needs of women and the hidden resources that women represent. We need more women and men planners and policy-makers sensitized to these resources and needs. The original goals of the Household, Gender, and Age Project will be fulfilled if further research takes gender into account and thus presents a more complete picture of what is happening to people as third-world countries struggle with development imbalances, and if international, national, and private-sector planners recognize gender differences in their programmes.
Of course, this project does not stand alone here. It was developed in co operation with the United Nations International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women (INSTRAW), and with the advice of women scholars in a number of countries who are working in complementary ways on the problems addressed here. Yet the growing number of non-governmental women's networks, United Nations special units, and government programmes focused on women in development have not yet had sufficient impact on mainstream research and planning.
The weight of history is against basic changes in the role and status of women and it will take unremitting efforts to integrate women more fully into decision-making everywhere. The researchers who conducted these studies were themselves subject to the pressure of inadequate resources, and are to be commended for having persevered under conditions that would have overcome less hardy students of society. The rigidity of formal academic requirements meant that some of the most talented local investigators were not eligible for training programmes designed to empower third-world women to conduct their own research. Each national research group worked as best it could within its particular constraints, with the resources at hand. The documentation they have produced on the life-course of the hundreds of women studied will have value far beyond the reports in this book. This study is just the beginning.
To all the women and men whose work has gone into the collection and processing of the data on which these reports are based, I say thank you! To all who read these reports I ask: what are the next steps?
ELISE BOULDING
Dartmouth College Professor Emerita of Sociology
<section>The household, gender, and age project</section>
Eleonora Barbieri Masini
Co-ordinator, United Nations University Household, Gender, and Age Project
There has been considerable analysis of the many technological and social changes of the last 30 years at the global, regional, or national level. There have also been numerous case-studies on specific women's issues in different parts of the world, especially since the United Nations World Conference on Women in Mexico City in 1975. However, very little has been done to analyse the nature of the changes that have occurred at the level of individuals or of micro-units like the primary living unit, the household. Only very rarely has there been any in-depth study of households, and yet the changes that occur there may have a strong influence on the attitudes, behaviour, and aspirations of its members.
Over the last couple of decades, the whole world has been affected, albeit in different ways, by a number of trends that have been part of the global historical process. These trends may be classified in a number of ways. For example, there have been significant demographic changes characterized by a sharp drop in fertility rates with a consequent ageing of the population in developed countries, and an increasing and increasingly young population in many of the developing nations. There have been economic trends related to the globalization of world markets. Politically, decisions taken in one part of the world have come to have immediate repercussions on other parts of it. These macro-trends are in turn interconnected and influence each other in ways which shape the complexity of contemporary socio-economic reality.
Considerable attention has been paid to these macro-trends and their mutual influence at the global level. Much has been written and spoken about their current or future development. In the United States, for example, a study entitled GLOBAL 2000 was conducted at the end of the 1970s. The World Bank has done a number of studies on the future of different regions, and there have been numerous national future-oriented studies on agriculture and food production, energy, and other specific topics, as well as on clusters of interconnected themes.
Micro-analysis of specific events or situations has also been developed in both industrialized and developing countries by intergovernmental organizations such as the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), the United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (Unesco), the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), and other interested agencies. What appeared to be lacking at the beginning of the 1980s was the nexus between the two levels: the influence of the macro-event, for example population change, on the micro-level, the individual or small community. Still less attention had been paid to the impact of such changes on the household, even though, as the primary living unit, its own internal changes have a considerable impact on the larger community and indeed on society as a whole.
The purpose of the Household, Gender, and Age project (HGA), initiated in the early 1980s by the United Nations University (UNU), was precisely this: to establish the nexus between macro-level historical events and the micro-level of the household. The project developed from a series of meetings held in Tokyo in 1979, Oslo in 1980, and Dartmouth and Rome in 1981. These consultations sought to develop research perspectives that would capture the relationships between societal and individual change over time, with special emphasis on the role of women in the development of a given community or society. In early 1982 the group met again in Rome and the basic elements of a methodological framework and the initial focus of the research were established.
The basic motivation of the project was born out of analysis of historical processes and the need to understand both the dynamics of their impact on individuals, particularly women, and households, and the influence that the latter in turn have on macro-level events.
Conceptually, the three components of the HGA project were set out in its very name. They were defined at a meeting in Addis Ababa in 1983 at which they were established as the common starting-point for all parts of the project. The household, in all its different cultural connotations, is the primary social living unit. In it are encapsulated a cluster of activities of people who live together most of the time and provide mutual physical, socio-psychological, and developmental support and functions within the broader organization and environment of the community. Gender was selected as an analytical device for looking at the world and considering individuals both within and outside the household; the emphasis was on the role of women. Age was incorporated as a means of re-examining traditional categories with particular reference to the social and economic implications of birth-cohorts, of generations, and of the gap between them. An indication of the conceptualizations
revised on the basis of the completed research appears at the end of this chapter.
Anticipating the diverse cultural connotations of these key concepts in the different countries studied, the project set down some guiding principles for the interpretation of the household. The household was not only defined in the conventional way, that is by co-residence, but also in terms of the kinship, monetary, or other obligations of non-resident members to the basic co-residential unit.
An initial topology the household was constructed as a working hypothesis and this was used by almost all the researchers, though with varying emphases. It was based on the location of the household, income categories, the dwelling in terms of physical space - not only as a place of residence, but also, where applicable, as a production unit - the headship and composition of the household, and the internal power structure, in terms of gender and age, in relation to its productive and reproductive functions. In fact, as will be shown, the results of the field-work modified some of the general assumptions about household form and function.
In order to analyse changing relationships within the household and between the household and the rest of society, the project focused particularly on the roles, activities, and status of women in their domestic, cultural, and community contexts. In other words, the project analysed the lives of women in different age-cohorts, both within and outside the household, in order to obtain not only information about their present situation but also their perceptions of their past and the future.
It was hoped to provide a fuller understanding of development processes by taking the role of gender and age into account. In many cases, this approach brought important policy implications to light. The research shows how women are affected by change, but it also shows how they affect change.
The main focus of the country investigations of which the project was composed varied according to the different problems, socio-economic conditions, and cultural background in each location. However, the impact of development projects on the socio-economic and cultural organization of the household and women's changing labour-force participation rates, and the interconnected issues of sexuality, fertility, and family-planning, were examined in every study, especially in relation to work, education, and domestic power structures. Particular attention was paid to the implications of migration in those countries where this was a significant factor. The effects of economic, technological, and ecological change were other major considerations.
The HGA project sought to understand the impact of macro-events on the women and households, to bring women's participation in social change into focus, and to indicate to decision-makers how this participation could be enhanced by policies designed to support households and women in the present and the future. The primary target group was national decision-makers involved in development planning, labour issues, all levels of education, and health and nutrition.
The other target group was international decision-makers, whether in the various United Nations specialized agencies or other organizations involved in development. Although women's participation in the labour force and political issues has come to attract the attention of more researchers in recent years, little account has been taken of changes in the lives of women and households, especially at the deeper psycho-sociological levels which affect and arc affected by macro-changes. Information about these emerges quite clearly from research on the lives of women in relation to the household and its other members.
Each study came up with suggestions for concrete action, either spontaneously or at the request of UNU. There is clearly much to be done, and it is important that the UNU and other academic bodies should bring such issues to the forefront, demonstrating the linkages between what is happening and what can or should be done by governments and other decision-making bodies on the basis of a clearer understanding of the interrelated aspects of various changes.
The life-course approach was chosen as the most suitable for capturing the impact of macro-changes on women and the household and the long-term implications that such changes have for the structure of society. The methodology, described in detail by David Kertzer in the second chapter, facilitates the measurement of changes that occur among groups of people, in this case women in the same age-cohort, in relation to specific events in each country. The researchers found that linking macro-events to what had happened to the individuals in their households was a useful way of helping even those women with very little education to recall what had happened in the course of their lives and to reconstruct their own histories, as they looked back and related each year of their life to events in the wider environment. This approach can also provide an indication of the possible attitudes and behaviour of the next generation, and even of structural changes in response to macro-events,
although this was rarely accomplished in the HGA project. However, it was sometimes possible to take the aspirations of younger women as seen through the eyes of their mothers as an indirect indication of possible behaviour, although, as future studies show, trends also have alternatives, and these may be overlooked without a thorough knowledge of local conditions that might contradict general patterns (Masini, 1986).
The life-course methodology is a long-term approach which is both retrospective and prospective. It is therefore able to depict the roles, activities, and status of an individual in relation to changing social, cultural, and economic circumstances. It is based on the premise that developmental change occurs from birth until death; that ageing consists of interrelated biological, psychological, and social processes; and that the life-course of any individual is affected by macro-level social, environmental, and historical change.
In line with these conceptualizations of individual and social processes, the project linked important events in the life of individual members of each household schooling, entry into the labour force, marriage, childbirth, migration, divorce, or bereavement - with historical events that produced different situations and status for them. In other words it connected micro-level change with macro-level events.
The dynamic life-course approach requires the collection of a great deal of material, particularly longitudinal life-history data which is more difficult to analyse than cross-sectional data. In order to overcome this technical problem, whenever possible the project used a special computer programme known as the CASA, a database management system specifically developed for the analysis of life-history data like that collected by the HGA study (Kertzer and Karweit, 1985). Qualitative material was also gathered through intensive personal interviews and time-budget surveys carried out with a small proportion of the sample.
The life-history and time-budget approaches are both very time-consuming, but they have the advantage of arriving at a deeper understanding of the lives of women who are not accustomed to describing their personal histories. Compared to the long perspective of the life-histories, time-budgets survey a brief period, as they are used to record the amount of time devoted to various activities on certain days. Although the reliability and validity of time-budget data are very much linked to the manner in which they are collected, they can be useful indicators of social, gender, and age differences, of the direction of change, and of the ways in which the demands of various activities are balanced. The use of the time-budget approach varied widely in the different country studies. Considerable data was collected in China and in Brazil, for example, and only a little in Colombia and Kenya, though it was nevertheless very illuminating.
The project benefited from the participation of women who already had research experience in their own countries (Carmen Elisa Flórez in Colombia, Neuma Aguiar in Brazil, Isabel Vial in Chile, and Myrtle Perera in Sri Lanka), as well as others who were familiar with the problems of women in their countries but had not necessarily carried out research in this field (Sun Hejun in China and Kavetsa Adagala in Kenya). All had organizational skills, a great advantage in the very difficult situations they had to face at times. None had had experience of the life-course methodology, but most were very happy to apply it. Indeed, a willingness to learn new research skills was a basic requirement for the project. When the researchers met in Addis Ababa in 1983 to discuss ways and means of capturing the dynamics of these macro- and micro-level changes, they were thus already indirectly reinforcing the capacity of women as agents of change.
The project was greatly assisted by strong support from various institutions, particularly the Centro de Estudios Sobre Desarrollo Económico (CEDE) in Colombia, the Marga Institute in Sri Lanka, and the All-China Women's Federation, which made its extensive network of organizations and their local groups available. The level of interest shown in the countries themselves was a very important factor, especially in Colombia, Chile, and China, and one which has positive implications for the impact of the results.
The principal hypothesis of the project was that among the many rapid changes in the world today, there are some that affect women in a specific way. However, as their impact is mingled with other changes, it may not be immediately or clearly visible. It was decided to identify examples of macro-changes in each country over the last 10 to 20 years and to use the life-course approach to examine personal histories in relation to these large-scale events in order to ascertain how women had been affected by them. The women were grouped in age-cohorts, the time-spans of which were determined according to the nature of the macro-events. Each research team decided which events were deemed important in its own country, but could also be relevant in other countries. Some of these events were global, others more regional, and others still strictly national.
Demographic transition (a change from high to low birth- and death-rates) was the macro-change chosen for the HGA project in Colombia, for this is a change which, albeit in different ways and in different stages, is occurring throughout the world. Both urban and rural areas were taken into consideration. The demographic transition there started in the 1960s when fertility rates declined; mortality rates had already started to fall in the 1930s. The total fertility rate represents the number of births a woman is likely to have had by the end of her reproductive period (between 19 and 49 years of age). In the urban area this decreased from 7.04 in 1960-1964 to 3.6 in 1980 - a drop of almost 50 per cent in less than 20 years. Of course, this is an extreme case, paralleled among developing countries only by Cuba and Singapore, but demographic transition has none the less been a global trend over the last two decades.
This drop in the number of births was an important phenomenon in both the urban and the rural districts (although there was a 12-year time-lag between its occurrence in the two areas) because of the resultant changes in the age structure of the population. The HGA research focused on how those affected work, family formation and size, and the spacing of children. In fact the consequences of demographic transition were visible not only in Colombia, which concentrated on this specific macro-event, but also indirectly in the other studies.
Environmental changes, though often global, of course differ from one region and area to another. The introduction of large hydro-electric irrigation schemes in Sri Lanka provided the example of an environmental macro-event. These schemes clearly have a strong impact on the lives of women and on the formation and transformation of households. They affect agricultural techniques and work patterns, nutritional habits, and, whether directly or indirectly, health. Indeed, the research shows that they can even affect religious practices related to the cycles of nature.
Then there are socio-economic macro-events. The recent exodus of Sri Lankan women from low-income groups was part of the broad phenomenon of global migration, although its immediate impact was regional and local. A tradition of migration was undoubtedly part of the colonial legacy in the region: male and female workers have been migrating from the subcontinent to the Middle East since the 1930s and 1940s. This migration had been mostly confined to the educated classes, but significant numbers of poor people started moving from Sri Lanka and Thailand to Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, and Kuwait after the oil boom of 1973. By 1983, approximately 200,000 Thais and the same number of Sri Lankans, including a significant proportion of women, had migrated to take up jobs there.
The implementation of development projects provides numerous examples of socio-economic macro-events which clearly have an impact on the lives of women. Though not global phenomena, for they are generally related to developing countries, they are a good illustration of the way in which schemes or projects- for example, the government's Model Village Settlements Scheme in Sri Lanka - affect every aspect of the environmental, social, and economic life of households.
Another type of macro-event can be defined as both economic and political. These are usually considered national, insofar as they vary widely from one country to the other because of obvious differences in particular situations; yet in a sense they are also global, since similar patterns and events occur around the world. As elsewhere, the studies show that the effectiveness of macro-level policies may not be achieved without attention to constraints at the micro-level. In spite of the steps taken to advance the schooling of girls in almost every country, for example, extra domestic duties, cultural influences, or lack of employment opportunities to motivate them still limited their access and attainments in many places.
An extremely important type of macro-event, which can be considered global at one level but highly diversified at another, is technological change, which has of course had an impact on all the other phenomena, especially in the last 30 years. The HGA project chose national examples that have affected women in many different ways. It analysed the situation of female workers in textiles, an industry of particular importance in developing nations, and selected Petrópolis in Brazil and San Martin in Argentina as the sites of specific studies. It examined another interesting example of the effect of technological change on the lives of women in developing countries through the introduction of the Free Trade Zone in Sri Lanka. Both these situations were born out of economic policies and technological change.
Hence, although they were diverse, all the macro-events selected had an impact on households and the lives of women which was analysed by each research team within the framework of their own country.
It was important to establish the impact of macro-events on women of different ages. The women were divided into two or three different age-groups, depending on the local situation. A birth-cohort (generally referred to as a cohort) is a group of people born in the same period, and each study used cohorts to examine the way the effects of change may have varied from generation to generation. It is interesting to note that although every effort was made to use cohorts for comparison in all the studies, cultural differences often demanded variation in their form and definition. For example, in relation to demographic transition in Colombia, the researchers decided to look simultaneously at households with women of reproductive age who were at the peak of their fertility before and after the demographic transition. Hence in the urban areas the cohorts consisted of women who were at the peak of their fertility in 1960-1964 - and who therefore were between 45 and 49 years of age
when the study began in 1984 - and women who were at the peak of fertility after the transition, who were between 25 and 29 at the beginning of the study. Because the demographic transition began later in country areas, there was a difference in the rural age-cohorts, since the group that was at the peak of fertility before the transition there (1968-1969) was between 40 and 45 at the time of the study in 1985, while women who were at the peak of their fertility in 1980 (after the drop in the fertility rate) were between 20 and 24 in 1985. This is an example of cohort selection in relation to macro-events that have different time-spans and effects in different places.
A comparison between the two cohorts was made by analysing the effects of demographic transition on the process of family formation and extension, on labour organization and participation, on power relations within the household, and on women's perceptions and attitudes. In this way the cohort study was able to show both the similarities and the differences in the effects of the macro-event at various times in the urban and the rural environments.
Cohorts were not chosen for the study of textile workers in Brazil and Argentina because the sample was not big enough. There women were divided into two groups, those over and those under the age of 30, which was the average age of the male and female textile workers, and a distinction was made between employment in the modern or the traditional sectors of the industry as the main differentiating factor between the groups.
In Chile, the cohorts were 15-32 and 39-65 years old. Events were classified in relation to the ages of the women, as in the other projects, but in this case independently of the calendar year in which the event took place. The life-course approach was used, but the historical event was not chosen. The work situation of the women was central to the study and the workers were classified and subdivided, as in Colombia, into three income strata. In the rural area of Colombia income stratification had to be established a posterior) because of obsolete data. In fact, although per capita and household income levels were considered in all the studies, stratification by income was a particularly important component of the methodology in Colombia and Chile.
In China, the project looked at the effects of the major national political changes of the last 40 years in Sichuan and Jiangsu provinces. Three cohorts of women were studied: those who were at the peak of their fertility in 1952 at the time of the land reform, and so were between 55 and 66 in 1986; women at the peak of fertility in 1979, at the time of the economic reform; and women who were at this point in 1986, and so were between 17 and 27. The cohorts thus correspond to the national economic and political macro-events which began with the birth of the modern China in 1949.
In Sri Lanka, the macro-events chosen - migration to West Asia for employment, work in the Free Trade Zone, the Model Village Scheme, and the irrigation scheme around the Mahawali river- were more diverse and the research was carried out in six different locations. It was decided to involve all women over 18 in the selected households. They were subdivided into three age-groups: 19-39, 40-55, and 60 and over, a classification related to the specific.
The choice of the cohort is very important as it is the basis of the data from which information is extracted. The optimum situation is therefore one in which recent and reliable census data are available. Data collection was indeed more rigorous in areas where a good and relatively recent census available, as in Chile, China, and urban Colombia. In Sri Lanka, it was necessary to collect data on an ad hoc basis in order to accommodate the considerable degree of differentiation between the locations. Although this created difficulties in combining data, at the same time it provided a very rich set of indicators of change in the lives of women and households. In Kenya, data were collected by a general survey, whereas in Argentina and Brazil the researchers had to rely on information provided by firms and trade unions.
It is important to stress that a dynamic approach like the life-course methodology has to mould itself around existing local conditions or what data can realistically be collected in a given situation. It proved itself to be a flexible instrument capable of overcoming difficulties. Such adaptability is increasingly necessary in a rapidly changing world situation in which there is extensive variation, for example between and within different developing countries and regions. The life-course approach can be considered a first step in the search for the more responsive research instruments the social sciences need to try to understand what is happening at all levels quickly, for through the life-course matrix it captures changes over time. Moreover, it is easy to use, even where literacy is low. Therefore, although some of the findings may not be based on perfect data or optimum situations, they are valuable as indicators and as indications of the need for more appropriate
research techniques.
It is particularly important to be able to study the impact of local, regional, national, or international events and trends on women. So little is really known about their everyday lives, especially in relation to macro-events which, though well-known in themselves, have an impact at the micro-level that is often scarcely recognized.
The aim of this research was precisely that: to enhance understanding of changes occurring in different contexts and to identify comparative elements in regional or even global trends. Each of the country studies focused on a particular point of change. The historical analysis developed from this, making the basic concept of the life-course approach viable in different contexts. The studies provide clear examples of both diverse situations and the flexibility of the approach.
The main urban areas studied in the project were Bogota in Colombia, San Martin in Argentina, Petrópolis in Brazil, and Santiago in Chile. Colombia has been characterized by a phenomenon typical of Latin America in the post-Second World War period: rapid urbanization with migration from rural to urban areas. However, contrary to what happened in other countries in the region, this urban concentration was not confined to one town but occurred in different centres. Indeed, the rate of urbanization in Bogota was lower than in other cities. Since 1980, the rate of population growth in urban areas has tended to diminish because of the drop in fertility and the stabilization of the rhythm of migration. Labour force participation is around 53 per cent, with a high rate of female participation (41 per cent of the economically active population).
Migration and urbanization were not important issues in Petrópolis in Brazil, small town where the majority of the population has been involved in the textile industry since the end of the nineteenth century. Many of the recent economic and political changes in Brazil have had a sharp impact on this industrial sector. The introduction of new equipment in that country between 1970 and 1975 produced both a spurt in productivity and a decline in employment. Output subsequently started to decrease, and although the drop in employment remained constant, female participation rates diminished. This situation was reversed between 1975 and 1980, when the modernized firms changed their attitude towards women. Initially, men were preferred for work with the modern equipment. Later, young inexperienced female workers were employed at lower rates as unskilled labour.
The textile industry is one of the oldest in Argentina, too. In San Martin it was possible to identify three historical periods which corresponded to macroeconomic processes and influenced industrial structure and employment patterns. There was an initial period of industrialization accompanied by the expansion of domestic markets, the introduction of protectionist policies, and the development of a strong working class, particularly in the greater Buenos Aires area. This period ended with the political changes of the mid-1970s. In 1976 the government imposed a different socio-economic model and new technologies were introduced. This was a time of great change: the economy was opened by reduced customs duties, currency revaluation, and various financial reforms. The manufacturing, textile, and clothing industries suffered greatly from international competition in this period. Economic recovery began in 1983 with the introduction of new political and economic policies and
Argentina's return to democracy.
In terms of production and employment, the textile industry expanded, particularly in the city and province of Buenos Aires, up until 1965, although most of the industry concentrated in San Martin, an agricultural area that was gradually industrialized. Historically the textile industry has always absorbed a significant amount of female labour, and was chosen by the researchers because it has been part of the local environment for a long time and also because it continues to employ a lot of women. In fact, contrary to what has happened in other places, there has been no drop in the number of women working in the industry.
The Chilean research focused on the participation of women in the labour force, which has generally changed little in the course of this century. As in other Latin American countries, economic growth has been much slower than in the developed world, while the population has continued to increase much faster, although this trend is now showing signs of decreasing: Chile's rate of population growth is below that of other developing countries and of other Latin American countries with a similar per capita income, and it has a low population density, with about 11.3 million inhabitants in an area of 741,767 square kilometres.
The study examined the evolution of women's workforce behaviour in the city of Santiago, concentrating on the supply rather than the demand for female labour in order to arrive at a better understanding of women's situation and behaviour. Increasing female participation in the labour force there shows certain similarities to the situation in developed countries, where it had also been rising. Greater access to family planning and decreased fertility, and increases in divorce, separation, and consensual unions, are all factors which, coupled with industrialization and urbanization, have had a considerable impact on women's employment there as elsewhere, but the Chilean situation is clearly considerably different in many ways from that of the other countries in the study.
There was also great diversity between and within the rural areas studied. In Sri Lanka, they were characterized by great socio-cultural heterogeneity. Most of the people were Sinhalese Buddhists, but there were also Tamils, who were generally Hindus, Muslims, and multi-ethnic Christians. Diversity was therefore a very important aspect of the research. The traditional social structure based on the extended family and many of the other elements of the former socio-economic systems were changing in different ways, but the patriarchal system continued to prevail. Regional disparities continued to exist, and the behavioural changes directed by, for example, the new agriculture- divorced from old rituals and gender stereotypes - or by increasing employment opportunities for women have not necessarily led to new perceptions of and attitudes towards women's role. Indeed, sometimes the women felt compelled to take up new functions like migration or local waged work as an extension
of their caring role.
In pre-liberation China, women were mainly employed in domestic activities, part-time family agricultural work, and handicrafts. The status of women changed after 1949, particularly as a result of land reform in the early 1950s when women got their share of land, even though production was collective. In 19781979 there were further important economic reforms and the Household Contract Responsibility System was introduced. Once a contracted amount had been sold to the state, farmers were now allowed to keep surplus production for their personal use or sale. Rural businesses started to develop and townships began to process their produce. Village and township enterprises in industry, trade, transport, building, and the services developed rapidly. The situation of women improved considerably, as they now had a wider choice of occupations and greater freedom to take decisions about them on the basis of age, physical ability, and skills.
The Kenya research project was the first there to focus specifically on issues concerning women and households on tea and coffee plantations. Tea and coffee are two of Kenya's main cash crops and most important exports. They are produced in large-scale plantations that were started at the beginning of this century. The colonial government encouraged settlers to satisfy the growing demand for the products in Great Britain and the dispossessed peasants often became part of the plantation labour force, as in Sri Lanka. The household played a very important role in compensating for imbalances which developed during the transition from one system to the other. Women were required to supplement this workforce, but they were still responsible for domestic work in the household. Independence came in 1963, but the land issue remains crucial.
The research focused on the role of the household as a unit integrated into the contemporary plantation economy. There has been no satisfactory land reform since independence, and no solution to the problem of the landless who continue to be marginalized both in society and in the production process. This is particularly apparent on the plantations, which are the last resort of many of those employed there; but for women who have no rights to land to support themselves and their children, living and working in the plantations may be their only option. Some go back to their original communities in their old age, still landless and still marginalized.
The broader socio-economic context was considered in all the studies, which also included differentiation between the genders and ethnic groups. The studies highlight some similarities, for example between modernization in Sri Lanka and China, and different areas of women's work in Chile and Argentina. There are also regional similarities, like imbalance between urban and rural areas in Latin America and Asia. By considering these differences and similarities between the various areas studied and their historical backgrounds it may be possible to identify some common elements in the processes and results of change.
As researchers in the social sciences know only too well, field-work often shows that theories are not always borne out in practice, especially in development studies. The analysis presented here suggests that changes in households and in women's behaviour in response to macro-events in their broader socioeconomic environment are more gradual than might have been expected. It seems, for example, that changes in the power structure within households and in the domestic division of labour take place much more slowly in developing countries than other changes related to the participation of women in the labour force. On the other hand, the participation of women in the labour force in these countries frequently seems to follow rules that had been thought obsolete. In some circumstances, for instance, women who have less education and training in sophisticated skills may find it easier to get jobs, as the studies in Sri Lanka and Brazil suggest. Moreover, even in periods of very
rapid technological change, forces and patterns of behaviour that are geared to long-established market laws and marginalization factors continue to operate.
Nor is the level and pace of change in their lives necessarily related to women's knowledge and perception of it. Frequently an awareness of changing conditions occurs much earlier than the actual changes in behaviour. For example, although women in the different countries studied, from Colombia to Kenya, are surprisingly well informed about the different kinds of contraceptives available, in fact they may or may not use them themselves for socio-cultural or economic reasons.
The general conclusion might perhaps be that although changes at the micro-level are much slower than those at the macro-level, they produce results that are far more long-lasting and have a more profound impact once they have taken place. Moreover, these micro-level changes in turn affect macro-events, as in the case of Colombia's demographic transition. Secondly, while it is recognized that broad trends and macro-events interact and influence each other, this is also true at the micro-level. Thus, for example, it is useless to implement education programmes if they are not accompanied by other changes at the local level that will enable individuals to take advantage of them. Change must be reinforced and maintained by social structures. It is also essential to consider the overall environment in order to understand what change is really occurring and how individuals and households can benefit from appropriate support during this economic process.
It is clear, for example from the Kenyan study, that it may be a long time before the impact of macro-events is felt; historical factors may continue to have a strong influence for many generations. The consequences of the colonial system in Kenya are still affecting women; the changes that followed independence have had little impact on those who still have to migrate from the north-west of Kenya to the plantation areas. The social structure on the plantations reflects the interaction of colonial practice and contemporary economic conditions: the men come and go, while the women stay working there, the mainstay of the labour force, because as de facto or frequently de jure heads of household they remain there so they can provide for themselves and their families. Yet the main aspiration of the women around 40 was to return to their home villages. Even the students from the University of Nairobi who acted as interviewers for the project had been unaware of the living
conditions of these women, and of the extent to which these conditions had remained unchanged.
Another point which emerged was that stereotypes and conventional wisdom are frequently accepted without a careful examination of local situations. In Colombia, for example, urban migration was thought to have had a considerable effect on women, but closer investigation and the results of the field-work showed, surprisingly, that in fact it has not had a marked effect on either family formation or size. In Brazil, after an initial period of employing men to use new machinery, young unskilled women were more sought after by the textile industry, which throws doubt on the commonly held belief that industrialization requires people with certain skills. In China, although the Household Responsibility System led to diversification and more non-agricultural job opportunities, in the rural areas in Sichuan province the number of women who devoted themselves to full-time housework actually rose after the reforms. There were several reasons for this, the most important being that
most of the scarce new jobs were for men. Moreover, when seasonal or heavy construction work called the men away, the women had to run the household at home.
The conceptualization of the three component parts of the project - household, gender, and age - was maintained in all field-work. It was much more difficult to establish a typology of households. The nuclear family indeed appeared to be the trend towards which most of the households in Colombia, Brazil, Argentina, and Sri Lanka were heading. At the same time, however, the extended family, in different forms, was still strong in the rural areas of Colombia, Sri Lanka, China, and Kenya. Some specific indications of households made up of co-resident members of the same generation appeared in China and in Kenya. The importance of co-residence seemed to have emerged more strongly. In the initial stages of the study it was thought that non-resident family members were often more important participants in the household than the field-work subsequently showed them to be.
The project suggests that decision-makers arc frequently not fully aware of women's actual needs and of the practical impact of macro-changes on households. Governments and development agencies often seem to lack the preliminary research necessary to identify existing or emerging needs. All too often these are established theoretically, or on the basis of past knowledge or accepted wisdom. Textile workers chosen because they are unskilled, working women everywhere who lack support systems, and women like those in Sri Lanka who lose control of their income or their assets because they lack appropriate experience and services are all in situations where the results of development and change could have been modified or magnified had they been accompanied by supportive programmes.
Even those national and international development agencies already committed to the interests of women need more accessible, concise, non-academic, and understandable reports prepared locally by those as close as possible to the people concerned. A misinterpretation of real needs can often be traced to a dearth of good reporting, be it oral or written. The audio-visual component of the HGA project was an important way of letting decision-makers actually see the results of the field-work and the need to accelerate the decision-making process. Time can be of great importance: slow decisions sometimes defeat the purposes of development projects.
The researchers who had been involved in the field-work also prepared a training videotape to help others who find themselves having to address a range of issues in different cultural contexts. Indeed, the HGA study re-emphasizes the importance of training. The closer the researchers worked to the problems and needs of women and households, the more the necessity for training to render these needs more visible became apparent. This is particularly important in working with such value-loaded elements of human life as the family, childbearing and rearing, and the care of the elderly. The HGA project has confirmed the value of women being trained to study these and other fundamental social issues in their own countries, and in so doing it has brought some quite unexpected results to light.
The training component of the study, which was initiated at the Population Center of the University of Chicago, continued for four years, mainly at the Centro de Estudios sobre Desarrollo Económico at the Universidad de los Andes in Colombia. The 32 women trainees, mostly postgraduate students, and most of them younger than people from developing countries usually are when they are able to participate professionally in international projects, appear to have gained a great deal from it. Approximately 90 per cent of them secured excellent jobs with universities, research institutes, or government bodies in their home countries. But the benefits were not solely processional in this sense: the cross-cultural interchange between them, which was carefully monitored in both Chicago and Bogota, was of the greatest value. Women researchers from Africa, Asia, and Latin America studied together for a period of time in such a way that they were able to understand each other's problems
in an atmosphere of true South-South co-operation. In so doing they were also able to reach a better understanding of the issues related to women and households in their own countries. They were able to establish contacts with individuals and networks in other countries and so gain access to a different body of knowledge and experience that can inform their own work.
As co-ordinator of the project, I learned a great deal about development as it actually occurs in the different countries, and about the involvement of women in this process. This kind of role would seem to be one to which a truly international university like the UNU is ideally suited.
In conclusion, it must be repeated that the interests of women still require much investigation and stronger support. There is a need for concrete action that goes beyond the formal statements heard nationally and internationally. Certainly, there is now a more widespread sensitivity and activity related to women's issues, but as yet even women themselves are not always fully aware of what may really be in their best interests. Although much has been written and said about women in development, there is still too little general awareness of their real situation at every level of this process and of the socio-psychological impact of change on them.
References
Kertzer, David, and Nancy Karweit. 1985. Data Management for Life Course Family Research. Unpublished MS.
<section>Household and gender in a life-course perspective</section>
David Kertzer
Department of Sociology and Anthropology, Bowdoin Brunswick, Maine, United States of America
One of the major developments in social science research over the past two decades has been the shift away from static approaches towards perspectives and methods that can shed light on the true flux of life. Of course, social change has long been a principal focus of social science. What is new is the increased attention to the interplay between the larger, societal forces of change and the actual experiences of people. Social scientists are moving away from simple models of "before" and "after" from traditional to modern, from pre-industrial to industrial, from rural to urban towards much more subtle formulations of how people's lifes are lived and how the course of their lives may vary as a result of macro-level developments.
The life-course perspective which arose from a confluence of movements in sociology and psychology in the 1960s subsequently came to involve economists, anthropologists, historians, and others. It looks at the distinctive series of roles and experiences through which the individual passes as she or he ages from birth to death and inquires into the impact of various changes on these patterns. Moreover, it asks how people's reactions to change affect larger societal forces which in turn influence the course of social change. In short, the perspective calls attention not only to the ways in which people's lives are influenced by broad economic, political, social, and cultural developments, but also to how the collective impact of individuals' reactions to these changes affects the course of subsequent change at the macro-level.
The Household, Gender, and Age (HGA) project of the United Nations University was designed as an attempt to provide better information on just how the many macro-level changes taking place in the developing countries of the world are affecting individuals in their family environment. The emphasis was on the experience of women, whose lives have often been little understood by the technicians and politicians most closely involved in development policy decisions.
Given these goals, the selection of a life-course approach to provide a common methodological framework for the individual country research projects made much sense. The life-course approach provides a sophisticated framework for empirical research without forcing specific, substantive questions on researchers whose regional and national settings may be very different. Hence, the individual researchers were able to formulate their own specific questions according to their local situation while still sharing a common, broader perspective on the relationship of macro-level change to the domestic situation of women. The life-course approach also encouraged the use of a wide range of data collection techniques and analysis, ranging from traditional life-history and other qualitative approaches to some of the most advanced and newly developed methods of longitudinal data-gathering and statistical analysis.
By assuring a dual research focus - the macro-forces affecting women's lives and the changing ways in which those lives are actually being lived - the life-course perspective provides a firm basis for understanding the human consequences of development. As the HGA researchers have so richly documented, many of these consequences are unintended, and some have been disastrous.
One of the major advantages of a life-course approach is the key it provides to understanding the various consequences of social change at different stages of a person's life. All too often development specialists and social scientists speak of the impact of macro-level changes as though everyone in a community equally were affected regardless of gender, age, or situation. However, the point of the life-course which the individual has reached when a change is introduced may have profound implications for the effect of that change on that person. This is obvious in the case of introducing a new school, for example, as this will presumably directly affect youngsters more than the others in a community. Virtually all types of externally induced changes are like this The result is that reference to positive versus negative changes are often misleading, since some changes may have positive implications for those at a certain point in their life-course and negative implications
for those at other points.
A final reason for adopting a life-course perspective in the HGA project was that it provides valuable insights on domestic group processes, the "H" of the HGA. The household is not a monolithic unit, despite the fact that planners and social scientists often speak of it as such. Rather, the household should be understood as the continuously changing product of the interaction of the group of individuals of whom it is comprised. Interests vary: those of the male head of household may differ from his wife's; in a polygynous household, the interests of the various wives may differ from one another; the interests of the oldest child may differ from that of younger siblings. The life-course perspective brings this to light, showing the actual complexity of interacting human lives that lies behind the misleading unity of the household label.
The essence of a life-course approach lies in the continuous interplay between social change and the life-course of individuals. People begin their lives in one historical period distinguished by a characteristic set of cultural norms and perceptions and institutional arrangements, and, as they age, these larger forces change. Individuals begin to develop ideas of normative family behaviour and the proper trajectory of their lives at an early age, but when they come to face life later it may be in a society very different from the one from which these ideas and norms first sprung. For example, they develop their ideas of what the life of a grandparent is like and what the relations between grandparents and their children and grandchildren are like when they arc children, yet when they later become grandparents themselves they may be living in a very different society, where being a grandparent could have a very different significance (Riley, 1985).
A life-course approach implies the notion of a society that is structured by age. That is, roles in a society differ by age, so that one can imagine a society that is structured by age in much the same way as it is structured by class and gender. Each society has its own cultural timetable for the appropriate progress of the individual through the life-course. There are social pressures which encourage individuals to make transitions between roles (for example, from unmarried to married) at points that arc defined as culturally appropriate (Hagestad and Neugarten, 1985).
Scholars have long been interested in the life-cycle, the sequences of roles through which the individual passes from birth to death. However, there has been an unfortunate tendency to look at the range of current life-stages - infancy, childhood, adolescence, young adulthood, and so on - and assume that together they represent the stages of life through which any individual in the society passes. As a life-course perspective stresses, this would be true only in the case of a society that was entirely unchanging. Since no current societies arc known to fall into this category, this means that we cannot generalize from the synchronic description of individual life-stages to characterize the pattern of roles and experiences through which any individual (or any cohort) passes over the life-course. The life-course approach, then, puts a sense of change and history into life-cycle research.
A central concept in life-course analysis is the cohort or group of individuals who enter a given system or a given status at a particular time. A marriage cohort, for example, refers to all those who got married in a certain period. A birth cohort, which is the grouping used in this study, consists of all those who were born in the same time-span. Since different cohorts encounter different segments of time as they proceed through their lives, each is affected differently by historical change. One of the major aims of life-course research is to determine how changes are reflected in the way different cohorts age, and how the characteristics of different cohorts (their size, for example) may bring about historical changes (Riley et al., 1972).
This does not mean, however, that cohorts should be seen as homogeneous units. Cohort analysis involves not only comparison between different cohorts, but also the examination of variation within each cohort. Since members of the same cohort have different characteristics, they may be affected differently by the same historical change. For example, the introduction of mandatory elementary education may have a greater effect on women farmers or small traders, who depend on the labour of their young children, than on elite women, who do not. As this example indicates, changes affecting one cohort (in this case children at the time elementary education becomes compulsory) can have important implications for the life-course pattern of other cohorts (in this case, the mothers of these children). Similarly, wage-labour opportunities for young men may have a major impact on the status of the elderly, whose control over their juniors may be diminished. This linkage between cohorts
is a major focus of lie-course research.
Life-course analysis introduces a historical perspective into the study of how people live from birth to death. When looking at the household - one of the primary links of social organization - the life-course approach forces us to see the real dynamism of people's lives and to avoid the reification of academic analytical categories. The constellation of people who compose any household is the result of several different factors, including cultural norms about what is an appropriate place to live, demographic variables such as the survival of parents, number of siblings, children, and grandchildren, and economic factors, like the advantages of housing large numbers of related adults together where the household is also the productive unit. Any individual's co-residential experiences are the result of the interaction of these different forces, which themselves are influenced by larger sources of historical change. Cultural norms regarding polygyny, for example, may change
over time; decreasing mortality and changes in fertility and migration affect the demographic component of household composition; and changes in the economy lead to different pressures on households, which has a bearing on the advantages or disadvantages of large, complex family households.
A well-entrenched sociological approach to the study of the domestic living unit focuses on the developmental cycle of households, often identified with the family cycle. A major problem with the family-cycle approach is that in concentrating on how household units change over time, it often loses sight of what happens to individuals. For example, a family-cycle model may focus on the cycle involving the death of the elder generation and the passing on of the household to the eldest son. But what of the daughters and the younger sons? And what of those who had only daughters and no sons, or those whose parents died when they were young children? In short, the family-cycle approach tends to yield a picture of uniformity that is rarely found in practice (Kertzer, 1986).
By focusing on the actual experiences of individuals from birth to death, the life-course approach allows the research to capture the full diversity of their co-residence in households. It provides a better position to examine the impact of various changes such as those introduced by development schemes - on people's domestic lives. This cannot be done by simply following household units: it is necessary to look at the history of every individual over time, examining the choices he or she made and the changing economic, demographic, environmental, and cultural forces that influenced the person's decisions and experiences.
The life-course approach to co-residence is especially useful for studying in developing countries, where the Western notions commonly built into family-cycle models are least appropriate. This is most notable in the many cases where polygyny is a cultural norm, for family-cycle research is based almost entirely on the assumption of a simple marital dyed: a single husband with a single wife. Using a life-course approach to co-residence it is possible to follow the co-residential experiences of each individual in whatever kind of household she or he lives.
A life-course approach provides a broad framework for the study of how women's lives and family relations generally have changed in the third world. By focusing attention on the interrelationship between the individual and the ever-changing society, it avoids the pitfalls of examining only macro-level phenomena (such as economic development per se) on the one hand, or, on the other, the particular experiences of the individual unrelated to the broader societal context. Moreover, unlike a simple life-history approach, it provides a means for aggregating the experiences of individuals to test propositions about the nature of the change that is taking place.
While the life-course approach provided a common framework for HGA researchers working in different countries, it did not constrain them to limit their specific substantive focus. Rather, each team could identify developmental and other issues important in their particular societal context and use a life-course framework to design their study of them. The issues differed widely from country to country, but what unites the various studies of the HGA project is, on the one hand, a common interest in how larger societal changes influence the lives of women in their domestic context, and, on the other, the use of a life-course perspective to provide a common means for determining the nature of these changes and their implications.
The studies are also characterized by the multiple levels of comparison that are built into a life-course approach. These involve comparison between cohorts and between communities. The latter is, of course, a standard method in social science. For example, in the original Chinese report there were two levels of geographically based comparison. The first involved comparison between an area (in Sichuan province) that is less industrially and commercially developed than another (in Jiangsu province). The second involved comparisons within each area between larger, more centrally located communities and those that are smaller and more remote.
The distinctive feature of the comparisons in the HGA studies, though, is the use of cohort comparisons in addition to those geographically based. In order to trace the path of changes in people's lives, each national study involved selecting specified younger and older cohorts and comparing their life-trajectories. Such comparisons show how the life-courses of successive cohorts have varied as they have experienced change at different stages.
The method of cohort comparison employed in the HGA studies can be illustrated by reference to figure 1, which provides a hypothetical example of a comparative study of three birth cohorts. The movement of historical time is represented from left to right, with the passage of years shown at the bottom of the figure. The oldest cohort is cohort 1, the members of which were born around 1920, and whose last members are expected to die around 1995, when they are 75. The middle cohort, cohort 2, represents those born 20 years later, around 1940, while the youngest cohort, cohort 3, was born around 1960. The details of the cohort comparison method are simplified here for ease of explanation. Actual studies involve more broadly defined cohorts, for example, those born over a five- or ten-year period. Moreover, the more recent cohorts might be expected to have a longer life-span than the older cohorts.
As the members of each cohort age, they pass from one stage of their life-course to a successive stage. For convenience, four general life-stages have been distinguished: child (0-16), young adult (17-39), mature adult (40-59) and old age (over 60). Of course, life-stages are themselves culturally defined and not biologically fixed; indeed, a common theme in life-course research is the question of how a people divide up the life-course (Keith, 1985; Kertzer and Keith, 1984). The four divisions found in figure 1 are therefore not to be interpreted as cross-culturally valid categories, but simply as a convenient device for explaining the cohort comparison method. At any given date, members of different cohorts are of different ages. Examples of such dates are by vertical lines in figure 1. For instance, by following the vertical line from 1970, it is clear that members of cohort I were mature adults, members of cohort 2 were young adults, and members of cohort 3 were children
in that year A historical event affects members of the different cohorts at different stages of their lives and so potentially has a different effect on each of them. For example, a general famine in 1970 might have led to malnutrition and increased disease and mortality for all cohorts. This would be a period effect, affecting all cohorts in the same way. However, such a historical event would also be likely to have different long-term implications for the various cohorts. For instance, malnutrition at an early age may lead to a higher incidence of certain disabilities later in life with the result that the old-age experience of cohort 3 after the year 2000 would be different from the old-age experiences of cohort 1 in the 1980s and 1990s. This would represent a cohort effect.
In life-course studies, the focus is on how cohorts differ from one another as a result of historical change. If there were no change, presumably the experience of cohort I would be identical to that of cohorts 2 and 3. Their childhood and young adult experiences would all be the same, despite the fact that they took place in different periods. It was just such an assumption of an unchanging society that allowed earlier anthropologists and others to write studies of the life-cycle in traditional societies divided into chapters on infancy, childhood, marriage, and old age. However, it is clear that such an assumption can no longer apply to any society. It is not possible to generalize on various life-stages in such a simple way, since the same life-stage differs from one cohort to another.
Moving from this rather general theoretical level to considering how the HGA researchers could put this method into practice shows that what may seem to be a straightforward conceptual framework encounters complexities when it comes to the research itself. Consider, for example, a comparison between a group of women who are in their fifties and a group of women in their thirties. If the findings suggest that the older women were more oriented to family life than the younger women, who spent more time in labour outside the household, it might be tempting to conclude that this represents a life-course pattern and that young women go through a period of involvement in the outside labour force which they leave as they grow older. In fact, many earlier analysts made just such assumptions.
However, there are other possible interpretations of these findings which would acknowledge historical change in life-course patterns and hence different experiences for different cohorts. If, for example, a textile factory favouring young female workers had been established in the community in recent years, it could be that the pattern of extra-domestic labour for young women is new, and that the women in the older cohort never passed through such a stage. The life-course approach is sensitive to these important differences of interpretation and is designed to distinguish between such competing explanations of life-course patterns.
Cohort comparison, then, is comparing segments of the life-course which are experienced by different cohorts in different historical periods. For example, returning to figure 1 to examine the course of women's lives as young adults would involve investigating the experiences of cohort 1 in the period 1937-1960 and comparing it with the experiences of cohort 2 in 1957-1980 and cohort 3 beginning in 1977. This would reveal the results of historical change in this phase of the life-course of all the women concerned.
It should now be evident that a lie-course approach requires longitudinal data, that is, information on individuals over time, beginning at their birth and ideally continuing on until they die. This contrasts with most social research, which has relied heavily on collecting cross-sectional data on a population at a certain point in time. This is the typical approach in most survey research. The need for longitudinal data in life-course research places heavy demands on the researcher.
There are a variety of ways in which life-course data can be gathered. It can be collected through archive-based studies that use governmental, church, family, or other organizational records to reconstruct the lives of individuals. It can be done through prospective or panel studies that begin at a certain date and then continually return to the subject population to follow them as they age. Thirdly, there are retrospective studies that take place at a certain point in time but try to elicit information from individuals on their entire life-course from birth to the date of the interview. In the HGA, the last of these alternatives was adopted, since in many settings sufficient historical records for the first approach were not available, while the second approach would require a commitment to a multi-year (if not multi-decade) study which would take a long time to produce results and which, in any case, would require a massive budget.
The design adopted by the HGA resulted in the use of a common instrument in most of the component projects. This was a life-course matrix that was based on retrospective information on various dimensions of the lives of those interviewed, such as marriage, work, education, co-residence, and fertility. In a work history, for example, the person would be asked when she first went to work and what kind of job it was. She would then be asked the date or her age when she left that job and the reason she did so, followed by questions about her next job. Her work history, then, would consist of the dated series of jobs she held from the time she began work to the present.
The vertical dotted line in figure I represents a date (1985) for the collection of such retrospective life-course data. Note that the data collected for cohort 1 are much more complete than those gathered for cohort 2, which, in turn, are fuller than data gathered for the youngest cohort, cohort 3. In fact, the members of cohort 3 are only about 25 years old at the time of the interview, and so nothing can be known about their mature adult or older years, and it is impossible to compare all three cohorts for this portion of the life-course. It is possible to compare all three cohorts' childhood experiences, analysing historical differences and their causes, and it is also possible to compare the early years of young adulthood of all three cohorts. However, a study of mature adulthood is limited to a two-way comparison of cohorts 1 and 2.
One other methodological note to be kept in mind in conducting retrospective life-history research concerns the problem of selectivity bias. The older the members of the cohort being interviewed, the more likely they arc to be a highly selective subset of the original cohort. This is because survival to old age is not randomly distributed among members of a cohort, but is linked to a variety of factors in earlier life. For example, interviewing all living members of cohort 1 in 1985 means interviewing those who had survived to age 65. This could well be a minority of all those who had been original cohort members in 1920, since most of them might have died. Therefore any picture of the childhood experiences of cohort l based entirely on the retrospective reports of those members who were interviewed in 1985 is likely to reach erroneous conclusions if there is no allowance for selectivity bias.
To give an extreme example, imagine a society with no historical change, with each cohort following the same path and having the same characteristics over the life-course as every other cohort. Imagine, though, that half the population is poor and has high infant and childhood mortality rates. This half also has different kinds of early life-course experiences, for example more time in the labour force, than the richer half. Comparing the older cohort to the younger cohort on the basis of retrospective reports of what the youth of each was like would lead to the conclusion that the two cohorts had very different experiences, even though, in fact, there were no differences at all. Since few of the poorer people would have survived to be interviewed at 65, the picture of the childhood of the older cohort would be based largely on the experiences of the wealthy half of the population. There is no space here to go into the details of how such problems need to be handled.
However, the problem of selectivity bias must be carefully dealt with in any analysis of retrospective data.
One of the valuable aspects of the life-course approach in the context of the HGA project is that it called for both qualitative and quantitative data. This, too, is reflected in the different individual country projects. While the life-history matrix described above calls for quantitative data, the interpretation of life-course experiences benefits greatly from supplementary qualitative information. Three kinds of approach - open-ended survey questions, participant observation, and life-histories are particularly useful here.
Open-ended survey questions complement close-ended questions on most surveys. By providing an opportunity for the person to respond in her own terms to a broad area of inquiry, such questions allow the researcher greater insight into how people perceive their own lives. They also suggest causal chains that the researcher might not have previously considered, some of which might subsequently be through more close-ended questioning of a broader sample.
Possibilities for participant observation varied from project to project, but it was possible to some degree in virtually all of them. Sharing the daily life experiences of the people in the study provides a richer understanding of their lives. Direct observations of behaviour lead to questions that might not otherwise arise, and observation also allows the researcher to distinguish between what people claim happens in certain situations and what in fact actually happens. More generally, sharing the daily lives of those concerned leads to greater acceptance by the local people and results in better-quality data, including those obtained through the administration of the more formal research instruments.
All of the HGA projects collected some intensive life-histories. In general, an attempt was made to collect life-histories from individuals representing different cohorts and different subgroups in each country study. Such information not only provides richer detail about the course of people's lives, but also allows for people's own interpretation of their lives and of the historical events that affected them. In the end, the best life-course analysis is often the one that can blend these various instruments to describe people's changing lives, to identify the factors that have led to the changes, and to discover the ways in which these changes are viewed by the people themselves.
Although the individual country studies vary in their emphasis on qualitative versus quantitative data, all of them did collect systematic quantitative data on life-course processes. While these data provide many advantages over simple survey-style cross-sectional data, their analysis does introduce new complexities associated with their longitudinal nature. Fortunately, the statistical analysis of longitudinal data has been one of the areas in the social sciences most actively developed in recent years, especially in relation to sociology and economics. Treatment of the technical issues involved in event-history analysis and other forms of statistical analysis for life-course data is beyond the scope of this chapter. However, the reader is referred to such works as Tuma and Hannan (1984), Allison (1984), and Kalbfleisch and Prentice (1980) for a presentation of many of the relevant statistical methods. Dennis P. Hogan, professor of sociology at Pennsylvania State
University, served as principal consultant on analytical methods for the HGA project.
The use of quantitative life-course data also introduces complexities in data management. Event-history data, like that gathered for the HGA projects, entail collecting information on all relevant events like births, marriage and marriage dissolution, new jobs, and unemployment for each individual in the study throughout her life-course, that is, from birth to the time of the interview. This leads to a form of data very different from that found in typical cross-sectional studies. The typical survey, for example, consists of a set of questions, each of which has a list of possible responses. The resulting data set has a regular rectangular form: each variable occupies a certain column or columns, and each person contributes a single record to the database.
Event histories, on the other hand, do not have this simple structure. This is partly due to the fact that the lives of some people are more eventful than others. Person A may have had 20 different jobs while person B has never been in the workforce. At the same time, person A may never have been married, while person B has been married and divorced four times. To deal with an event-history database as if it were a cross-sectional database would require allowing, for each such variable as jobs and marriage, as many occurrences as are found in the life of the person with the most such events (the most jobs, the most marriages, and so on). The result would be an enormous database consisting very largely of blanks. If, for example, just one out of 1,000 respondents had had 40 different jobs, there would have to be space in each of the 1,000 records for information on 40 jobs, even though most people had had no more than three.
The solution adopted by many of the HGA projects was a computer database management system devised by Nancy Karweit, a sociologist at the Centre for Social Organization of Schools at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore. The nature of this system is described in Karweit and Kertzer (1986). It involves dividing the life-course data into different domains (marriage, fertility, employment, and schooling, for example) and providing a separate record for every single event occurring to a person in each domain. Hence a person who married three times would have three marriage records, while a person who never married would have none. More than a way of simply economizing space in the data file, this system, known as CASA, provides a means for retrieving data to capture life-course processes and to permit statistical analysis. Versions of CASA have been prepared to run on both mainframe and IBM-compatible microcomputers.
With the tremendous changes that have been taking place in the developing countries of the world, interest has inevitably gone beyond broader questions of economic development, demographic change, and political revolution to the question of what these macro-forces mean to the people, to individuals. In looking at how lives have been changed by these historical developments, it is necessary to move beyond conventional sociological models which seek to ferret out relationships between variables (such as occupation and fertility) in a system that is assumed to be unchanging. A life-course perspective concentrates on the link between the larger field of economic, political, demographic, and institutional change on the one hand and the lives of individuals on the other. It avoids analyses which ignore the actual life experience of individuals and also goes well beyond micro-level studies that fail to relate the lives of individuals to the changing constellation of macro-forces
that mould individual lives and lead to different patterns of experience for successive cohorts.
Life-course study represents a blending of old and new methods, of quantitative and qualitative instruments. These projects focused on the lives of women, but the life-course approach meant that their lives could only be validly seen in terms of the broader social context - as represented in marriage and kinship relationships, for example - that included men as well as women. While focusing much on how larger social and economic factors have altered the lives of women in their household setting, the life-course approach also reveals how individual women have responded creatively to these external pressures in fashioning satisfactory lives for themselves and their families. These innovations, introduced from below, in turn influence the course that younger women will follow later, thus having an impact on the course of economic development and the path of social change.
References
Allison, Paul D. 1984. Event History Analysis. Sage, Beverly Hills, Calif.
Hagestad, Gunhild O., and Bernice L. Neugarten. 1985. Age and the Life Course. In: Robert H. Binstock and Ethel Shanas, eds., Handbook of Aging and the Social Sciences. 2nd ed. Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York.
Kalbfleisch, John D., and Ross L. Prentice. 1980. The Statistical Analysis of Failure Time Data. Wiley, New York.
Karweit, Nancy, and David 1. Kertzer. 1986. A Life Course Approach to Co-residence for Life Course Family Research. In: David 1. Kertzer, ed., Family Relations in Life Course Perspective. Current Perspectives on Aging and the Life Cycle, vol. 2. JAI Press, Greenwich, Conn.
Keith, Jennie. 1985. Age in Anthropological Research. In: Robert H. Binstock and Ethel Shanas, eds., Handbook of Aging and the Social Sciences. 2nd ed. Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York.
Kertzer, David 1. 1986. A Life Course Approach to Co-residence. In: David 1. Kertzer, ed., Family Relations in Life Course Perspective. Current Perspectives on Aging and the Life Cycle, vol. 1. JAI Press, Greenwich, Conn.
Kertzer, David 1., and Jennie Keith, eds. 1984. Age and Anthropological Theory. Cornell University Press, Ithaca, N.Y.
Riley, Matilda White. 1985. Age Strata in Social Systems. In: Robert H. Binstock and Ethel Shanas, eds., Handbook of Aging and the Social Sciences. 2nd ed. Van Nostrand Reinhold, New York.
Riley, Matilda White, Marilyn Johnson, and Anne Foner. 1972. Aging and Society. Sociology of Age Stratification, vol. 3. Russell Sage Foundation, New York.
Tuma, Nancy B., and Michael T. Hannan. 1984. Social Dynamics: Models and Methods. Academic Press, Orlando, Fla.
<section>Women and households in a changing world</section>
Division for the Advancement of Women, United Nations Office at Vienna
<section>Perspectives</section>
The goal of development is material and non-material betterment for all people. Development implies change, but changes which do not ensure that the household, the basic social unit, and all individuals who are part of it share in this betterment are not development. It is therefore essential to assess development by looking at changes that affect the household.
Households are constituted as a means of meeting the basic material and nonmaterial needs of their members. The way they function is obviously affected by their different forms, internal organization, and external relationships. Changes in the structure of the household brought about by broader social and economic policies and events may affect its ability to meet these needs - which may themselves be altered and to maintain its underlying values, especially in periods of rapid change.
In their capacity as carers and domestic managers women play a very important role in enabling the household to adapt to change. Research has clearly shown that their coping strategies have been a major factor in adjustment in the face of the economic crises of the past decade. Indeed, economic and social change cannot be properly understood unless more is known about the situation of women, their role in households, and the impact of change on them. Tracing this impact through its effect on women offers important insights into the way the primary living unit works and highlights points at which intervention to support it might be necessary.
The problems faced by women in every region may vary more in degree than in kind. Whether in the European Community or Latin America, technological innovation and economic adjustment policies often displace women from the workforce. Households in every region may need more than one income in order to achieve an acceptable standard of living, but women's ability to join the labour force will be affected by the number of children they have, the domestic obligations they are expected to undertake, and the availability of social supports like dependent care facilities and health and family-planning services. Inequitably shared domestic responsibilities and the constraints of male-dominated systems inhibit women's participation in many of the benefits of change in every part of the world. Macro-level economic, political, social, and cultural changes affect the form and functioning of households everywhere. They inevitably alter the pattern of relationships within the household
and its relationship with the rest of the society. Conversely, the accumulated response of households to this impact can be a major influence on the direction of change.
The household is thus a sensitive point of intervention for the implementation of positive change. As the micro-unit of reproduction, production, consumption, and socialization, it is not only where the real effect of macro-level policies can be best assessed - it may hold a key to their success. This is where the gender relations and social stereotypes that influence macro-level events are worked out in practical terms; where the flow and allocation of resources can determine levels of consumption, savings and investment, and labour-force participation which are crucial to economic growth; where the extent of its dependence on the scarce resources of the state will be based on its capacity to meet its members' needs.
<section>Measurements and methodologies</section>
It is not always easy to understand these changes and their impact. This is partly due to problems of measurement, and partly because of the concepts used to determine what is important and therefore should be measured. It is well known that the most commonly used indicators of development are based on productivity. The output of domestic units, like a farm or a shop, and of those household members who work in the formal economy, is included in this. The labour input, remunerated or unremunerated, involved in this production is also counted. However, other aspects of the household economy - unpaid domestic work and services, for example- are not included; nor are activities in the informal sector. While the household is sometimes used as a unit for measuring consumption and distribution, estimates of average household income are made by mathematical computation (dividing total national income by the number of households), which hides the variations between and within
households and does nothing to challenge the assumption that economic changes and policies are gender-neutral.
The work done at the national and international level during the United Nations Decade for Women (1976-1985) alerted people in all regions to the fact that policies based on data that did not take gender into account obscured the current needs and future potential of women. Their economic inputs in non-remunerated domestic or subsistence activities and the informal economic sector were overlooked. Aggregate labour-force figures hid the fact that women were usually clustered in the lowest-paid sectors or industries and that their overall prospects and pay were lower than those of their male counterparts. Failure to recognize the economic value and extraordinary extent of unpaid domestic and community services led to insensitive and ineffective policies and programmes and reinforced women's lower status in the household and in society. This raised two questions: what should be measured if women's economic participation is to be understood, and how does one obtain the
information necessary to do this? It was not by chance that the need for statistics, indicators, and other empirical data disaggregated by gender permeated the Nairobi Forward-looking Strategies for the Advancement of Women that were adopted at the end of the Decade.
In spite of the considerable conceptual and practical difficulties, there had already been important improvements in relevant definitions and measurement techniques. In 1982 the Thirteenth International Conference of Labour Statisticians adopted a recommendation for measuring the labour force in such a way that women's participation can be seen and assessed. Within the United Nations system proper, the International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women (INSTRAW) and the United Nations Statistical Office (UNSO) began a programme of training and research to develop statistics and indicators specifically concerned with the situation of women. By 1985, INSTRAW and the International Labour Organisation (ILO) were able to bring out a global statistical survey of women's economic activity by country and by region. Modifications of the international classification systems on which the collection and presentation of data are based have now been designed to
make them more responsive to current realities. These improvements not only help in assessing women's situation and potential, but the differentiated data provide a more accurate basis for overall human resource and development planning.
By 1989 the UNSO was able to publish a Compendium of Statistics and Indicators on the Situation of Women. The compendium, a compilation of statistics and indicators from 178 countries and territories, includes disaggregated data on nine topics including population composition, distribution and change, households and families, housing and settlements, and political participation. The compendium was drawn up from a microcomputer database on Women's Indicators and Statistics (WISTAT), and represents the integrated work of a number of specialized United Nations agencies. It aims to provide both information and practical models, guidelines and indications of areas needing particular attention at the national level. WISTAT is being regularly updated, and while the quality and coverage is still very uneven, it is already used extensively in macro-level analyses of the interrelationship between different factors and the status of women.
However, even this markedly improved coverage still does not include most aspects of women's non-remunerated household work; nor does it address important differences between households. A clearer picture is needed to understand, support, or capitalize on the household as a unit of production and consumption. Whilst the problems and progress in measurement and definition apply to both remunerated and unpaid work, particular attention and extensive research within the other institutions has been focused on the latter. Means of measuring non-market or unpaid activity have been developed and refined in recent years. Household surveys, and specialized adaptations of them, and time-use studies have already yielded a wealth of data. Research based on interviews and observation of all household members have begun to elucidate intra-household relationships. Cohort studies which look at different generations and other methodologies based on life-course perspectives arc identifying
changes through time and responses to them. Qualitative and attitudinal research is helping to explain the motivation of these responses; the results arc all the more important because they arc sometimes unexpected.
How to assign value to unpaid activities so they can be used for comparison and inclusion in national records is the subject of ongoing debate and experimentation by governments, institutions, and individual scholars. Two approaches seem to offer the most meaningful results: one imputes a value calculated on the market price of the domestic output of goods or services, if they had to be purchased, or the costs of the labour input if it were supplied by a paid worker; the other, based on opportunity costs, assigns a monetary value to non-remunerated work based on what the worker would earn if she or he were engaged in formal economic activity. Regardless of which method is used, including unpaid labour in national accounts would make a very big difference. If unpaid domestic and related work were included in the Gross National Product (GNP) of the United States, Canada, the United Kingdom, and France, their GNP would be 30 to 50 per cent higher (Ironmonger, 1989).
Extrapolations based on time-use surveys put the monetary value of domestic work in France at between 48 and 65 per cent of the Gross Domestic Product calculated on market activities. Cooking and dishwashing in Australian homes in 1975-1976 produced output that could be valued at only slightly less than the gross product of that country's manufacturing industries (Ironmonger and Sonius, 1989). If the same calculations were used to assign value to unpaid work in developing countries, where even more of women's work is unremunerated, the differences would be even greater.
Many reasons can be advanced for not including non-market activity in national accounts, including problems of measurement and definition and the fact that it would be impossible to readjust historical series. A promising solution could be the establishment of satellite accounts of household productivity defined and constructed in ways that facilitate linkages with national accounts data and so become an integral part of a complementary system.
Most of the published work in this field has been in and on developed countries, reflecting the greater availability of funding and trained personnel there. The country studies presented in this book arc therefore a significant contribution to a growing corpus of research that can facilitate more effective policies founded on an understanding of the pivotal economic role of women and of the household.
<section>The nature of change in households</section>
Three major determinants of household ability to adapt to change can be identified as a level of resources adequate to allow maximization of advantages and new options; perspectives, social stereotypes, and power structures that encourage rather than inhibit modifications in new circumstances; and equitable ways of sharing responsibility for basic social functions like reproduction and dependent care.
Form
The incidence of different forms of the household or primary living unit is determined by a combination of historical, cultural, and economic factors. Different forms may predominate at different periods. Household forms will themselves vary through time, a process which both influences and is influenced by its own strong cultural rationale, though this may or may not change at the same pace. However conspicuous any of these variations may be, their real significance lies in how they affect the ability of the household to provide for its members.
Four household forms represent trends at the end of the twentieth century. These are the multi-generational extended household, the nuclear household, the female-headed household, and the single-person household. Examining some of the effects of macro-level economic, political, cultural, and social influences on their internal organization, external relationships, and functioning can help to distinguish between positive and negative elements of change and indicate areas where intervention is needed.
The terms household and family are often used interchangeably. Indeed, the Universal Declaration of Human Rights speaks of the family as the fundamental unit of society. However, apart from the implication of kinship, there is no universally accepted definition of the family, and in practice attention often centres on the household. Households are usually families in the sense that most of their members are kin of some kind, but not all family members live in the same household and households may include people who are not family members. Here the focus is on the household as a unit of co-residence, and the linkages between separate households containing family members bound by reciprocal rights and obligations is considered as an external relationship.
Multi-generational or Extended Households
The multi-generational household containing parents, their children, and their children's children, as well as other relatives at each level, was once the norm in most countries. This applied particularly in rural areas, and this kind of household still predominates in regions of Africa, Asia, and Latin America. However, it is fast becoming less prevalent and the multi-generational households that do exist are often smaller than before. An individual is now much less likely to spend her or his entire lifetime in an extended household, though many people will still be part of one intermittently, at certain points in their life-cycle.
The introduction of the cash economy, the shift of the means and rewards of production from collective entities to the individual, and industrialization have changed the nature of the household and combined with the increasing separation of the place of work from the place of residence to make the multi-generational household less necessary as a unit of economic survival. The economic viability of large households was often eroded as the ratio of dependents increased with the rise in longevity and survival rates, while the resources that could be generated by domestic production declined in monetized societies. Agricultural development, which replaced traditional farming for internal consumption with cash-cropping, diminished the ability of rural households to meet the needs of their members. Some of them left to find ways of supporting themselves and other family members as urban or international migrants. The rapid urbanization - fed by large-scale rural-urban migration -
that accompanied industrialization separated generations geographically. Changing perspectives emphasized the household as a unit of consumption rather than production. New educational and employment opportunities made households with even a single earner potentially viable.
The influence of socio-economic factors on the size and composition of the contemporary multi-generational household is seen in several of the country studies. Young married couples in China and Brazil remained in an extended household until they were able to accumulate sufficient resources to set up their own households. Most of them stayed in this conjugal nuclear household, but there were others whose need for the support of the original household sent them back into it. This sometimes happened when the first child arrived in two-earner nuclear families in Argentina. In Sri Lanka married daughters returned to their rural parents' households in times of illness and crisis, and that study refers to the conscious reformation of the extended family for convenience when young mothers were employed locally or in West Asia.
This episodic dependence on multi-generational households is also seen at another point in the life-cycle when economic and personal support is essential-old age. Elderly parents, especially widows, may move in with their children, forming a three-or even four-generational household. Variants of this phenomenon have been observed in developing and developed countries alike. A study of family support for the aged in Latin America came to the conclusion that these families might often "be held together less by ties of affection than by force of necessity." A profile drawn from a household survey in Brazil depicts an old person typical of the 56 per cent living in a multi-generational households as an illiterate widow, a relatively recent migrant from the countryside with few if any resources of her own, who was likely to be older and more incapacitated than members of her cohort who lived in other types of households. The house and household she lived in were likely to be very
poor and her perceptions of her situation were frequently negative. Her counterparts who were better off materially and physically tended to live with a spouse (32 per cent) or alone (Ramos, 1990).
In Japan the migration of the elderly to live with younger generations of their family is a major influence on household size and shape: the increasing number and longevity of the older people there is, as in other countries, compensating for the smaller number of children in contemporary families. Fifty-nine per cent of the elderly live in multi-generational extended families. This group tends to be the oldest of the aged, most of whom have lost their spouse. Until they need more physical care, those old people who have the resources extend their independence by living close to, but not with, their families (Kong, 1990). This pattern has been observed in a number of industrialized countries.
The same factors that have reduced the prevalence of multi-generational households have produced a higher incidence of nuclear households consisting of a couple and their children. Declining fertility associated with family-planning and health services, and female access to health, educational, and employment opportunities, mean that these households have become smaller in most parts of the world. Most are headed by a man whose authority, control of resources, and position as the focus of attention and policies often remain unquestioned, although his income-generating role is increasingly shared with his partner.
Though many of the characteristics of a nuclear household are shaped by its economic environment, changing socio-cultural attitudes arc also important. A high value on privacy and individual autonomy make the conjugal nuclear household an option increasingly preferred even where extended households are still prevalent. Economic and demographic pressures may be responsible for the rising number of nuclear households bound by consensual rather than legal ties, but even the majority which arc based on formal marriage may be formed and dissolved more easily in societies increasingly tolerant of personal choice as a factor in both these events. Emotional or psychological motives may dominate in decisions about marriage and divorce in more cultures today, but the newly acquired freedom of choice may also be used to select a partner at least partly on socioeconomic grounds, as the country studies of Sri Lanka and China show. Similar reasons may outweigh personal dissatisfaction
when divorce is considered.
In those societies where the dissolution and re-formation of families is easy, which often depends as much on economic possibilities as on legal and social acceptance, people may belong to different types of households at various points in their lives. They may move perhaps from their family of origin to a conjugal household, then back to the first, or into a single-person or sole-parent household until remarriage and a return to a conjugal household, the internal composition of which may be changed by the presence of offspring from previous unions. In other words, household types may be considered and treated in practical terms not so much as discrete forms, but as part of a continuum through the life-course.
Though single-person households have become more common as individuals are able to be economically independent, they are still relatively rare. However, the proportion of single-person households is rising as they become part of transitional stages. In industrialized countries young people tire of the prolonged period spent in their household of origin because of extended education and delayed marriage. If this education has given them sufficient earning power, they may leave to set up a single-person household. Nevertheless, studies in several countries where this has been a highly desirable goal suggests these and similarly motivated joint peer-group households are very sensitive to rising costs. In Australia and the United States, young people are likely to return to their households of origin as rents rise.
Most of them will eventually leave the household of origin again after a relatively brief time to set up their own conjugal households. Whilst these are likely to endure until the death of the partner in some cultures, in others there is a strong possibility that divorce or separation will dissolve the union. This will lead to the formation of single-person or single-parent (usually female-headed) households, or expanding nuclear households, at least temporarily. If the union is ended by the death of one of the partners, the other may remain in what has become a single-person household for as long as she (for the surviving partner is statistically likely to be the woman) is able. This widow is likely to have a depleted economic base and little way of supplementing it: her low educational level and intermittent workforce experience will prevent her increasing her income substantially, even if legal or cultural barriers do not stand in her way. If she is older, it is very
unlikely that she will have her own employment-based pension: the ILO has estimated that only 6 per cent of the women in the world will be receiving such benefits in the year 2000. She may have some residual rights to her husband's pension, though this would apply to very few women in developing countries. As time goes on she may become physically as well as economically incapacitated and so seek the security of her family and become part of an extended multigenerational household; or she may resort to institutional care, if it is available.
Because more older people are women, this type of single-person household is likely to be a female-headed household. Sometimes, though rarely, an extended household may be headed by a woman, and somewhat more often a nuclear household may also be headed by a woman, if she is the major income-earner and recognized as such. However, the term female-headed household typically refers to one consisting of a woman and her dependents who are usually, though not always, her children. Because women's opportunities for remunerated work are likely to be constrained by age or family responsibilities, and their pay levels are in any case lower than men's, households headed by women are a major component of what has come to be called the feminization of poverty.
This has wide-ranging implications, for belonging to a female-headed household is now part of the life-course of an increasing number of women and children in every region. The proportion they make up of total households shows that they are a significant component, rather than a minor aberration of a nation's social organization. Conservative official estimates suggest that between 20 and 25 per cent of the rural households in the Caribbean and Latin America arc headed by women. The proportion is even higher in some of the countries in the region like Trinidad and Tobago, the Netherlands Antilles, Jamaica, and Cuba. In the last country, the figure has doubled from 14 to 28 per cent in less than three decades. In some of the countries in sub-Saharan Africa over 40 per cent of the households are headed by women, and the figure is over 30 per cent in a number of others. In Ghana the national figure rose from 26 to 32 per cent between 1960 and 1984, but a breakdown by region
gives figures of 12 per cent in the northern part of the country, where traditional structures have remained more intact and widows and divorcees are still reincorporated into extended family households, and 41 per cent in the central region, where this support system does not operate (WISTAT. 1989; Calderón, 1990; Appiah, 1990).
Difficulties of definition affect analysis of this, the most rapidly growing, household form. When the women are widowed, divorced, or unequivocally bearing sole responsibility and authority in the household, their de jure status is clear. Others become de facto heads of households when war, migration, seasonal work, separation, or abandonment force them into this role regardless of their legal status. Their situation may thus be potentially permanent or temporary. They may be the sole supporter of their family or be partly maintained by remittances or other resource flows from a spouse or members of their extended, though not co-resident, family. They arc usually the mothers of the children in the household, but in some regions, the Caribbean for example, they may be their grandmothers. Female-headed households often contain fewer people than male-headed households, and they usually include fewer potential earners. The situation of women who bear the major responsibility
for providing for households that include other adults (who may or may not contribute to its support) is particularly complex. Statisticians and demographers are not the only ones who have trouble identifying the head of household in this case: both male and female informants show a strong tendency to attribute the position to the male, regardless of his role in supporting the unit, and, as the women in the Kenyan study learned as their children grew up, adolescent dependent sons may automatically assume the title on the basis of their gender alone.
However, it is possible to make a number of valid generalizations about this heterogeneous group. Though it is not a new form, its extraordinary increase and spread to societies and cultures where it did not previously exist is directly attributable to macro-level development processes and stages. The shift from communal productivity based on land and the human resources of the extended family marginalized and impoverished many women and men. They needed money to survive in a cash economy. Lack of access to new resources like education, paid employment, or technology often led to urban or international migration in an attempt to meet family needs. Policies to attract labour to a particular sector drew more men away from their family households. Sometimes desperation in the face of a perceived inability to fulfil family responsibilities caused fathers to abandon their families. This became easier as greater mobility, as well as the pressures and opportunities of the cash
economy, weakened traditional social controls. These pressures also eroded the kin or community support systems that had formerly protected women left alone for any reason. When social mores and moral values seemed confused, irrelevant, or too restrictive, sexual unions formed without the support of either the traditional or the new system left many women and children vulnerable if they collapsed. In more developed countries an element of choice was added to the economic pressures and the easing of social sanctions that helped to create so many female-headed households. Sometimes this took the form of a positive decision to assert ideological or financial independence. More often it represented an escape from a situation made intolerable by authoritarian or oppressive behaviour.
Many of these factors were also instrumental in variations in the shape and prevalence of other household forms. The growing number of female heads of households were hit by a congruence of them at a specific stage in their country's development and a particular point in their own life-course. They, like other women and men, need to have a level of economic and social competence sufficient to assure they can cope with changing circumstances. The female-headed household is a transitional or permanent base of growing numbers of women and it deserves the same kind of recognition and support as other types of household, especially as it has the same functions to perform. As will be shown below, it is in its ability to meet the needs of its members that differences may warrant differential treatment.
Internal Relationships
Attitudinal change has been a factor in all the contemporary variations in household form. While it is easy to observe these outward changes, variations in the internal relationships of households may be more difficult to recognize; they seem to come about more slowly, too. Practical recognition of changing roles and responsibilities within households is sometimes very slow indeed.
Change has tended to extend women's role by increasing their responsibility for providing household cash income. The migration of young Sri Lankan mothers to West Asia to earn money for their families is an extreme example of this, but rising costs and expectations, inflation, recession, and the harsh impact of many stabilization and structural adjustment policies mean that increasing numbers of mothers have to combine reproductive, remunerative, and domestic work. In Japan, the proportion of married women aged between 20 and 49 in the formal workforce rose from 13 per cent in 1963 to 40 per cent in 1989. In Australia only 18 per cent of all families with children, which represents 16 per cent of all households, depends on a sole income-earner. In Canada the figure is about 16 per cent (Ogawa and Ermish, 1990). In some societies, poor households may depend on the economic activities of their women and children for up to 50 per cent income. While more and more of them join
the formal labour force, many others generate income in cash or in kind in the informal sector or by household production.
It might be logical to assume that as women extend their domestic responsibilities to include the provision of cash, other members of the household will share the household tasks that have been customarily allocated to them. Observation and the available data give little indication that this is happening. Nor do they suggest that changes in the control and management of economic resources within the household have come anywhere near to matching the magnitude of the shift in patterns of acquiring them. The persistence of behavioural patterns inappropriate in new situations can be traced to gender roles and power structures which appear highly resistant to change. It is very difficult to chart the socio-psychological aspects of domestic relationships, but it is essential to try to assess them because of their influence on household form and function.
Demographic trends are already causing changes in both the shape and internal relationships of many households. Lower fertility and greater longevity mean that the generational structure of households will be more like a beanpole than a pyramid in shape: there may be fewer people in every generation, but more generations. Changing attitudes to non-formal unions and to divorce and separation mean new combinations of blended families. In some cultures economic difficulties may cause a rise in the number of foster children. Later marriage and entry into the workforce and increased time spent in education mean the period in which young family members are financially dependent on their households of origin is prolonged.
The proportion of a woman's life devoted to child-rearing is declining as fertility decreases: it now occupies only about seven years of her life in an industrialized country and about 16-17 years in a developing country. Secondly, whilst the emotional and financial dependence of childhood may be extended, the years of physical dependence are not, and the emphasis on maternity as the focal point in a woman's life should diminish as she becomes more available for other productive roles. However, whilst women's traditional role as mothers may occupy a lesser proportion of their life-cycle, it may become transmuted into economic activity to cover the rising expectations or extended dependency of their children. Then, in their middle years, women may have to reassume a primary caring responsibility as the daughters or daughters-in-law of the longer-living older generation.
None of these family roles or relationships is new, but different emphases and time-spans may have significant effects on household organization. They may also be a major determinant of whether the cohesion of the domestic group is reinforced by shared affections, values, and goals, or undermined by conflict over these and the distribution of household resources and responsibilities. As the solidarity this cohesion represents is an important factor in the unit's ability to function to maximum advantage and to provide the most satisfactory base for its members' activities outside it, it is necessary to recognize potential of friction. For example, if adolescent and young adult offspring arc denied the input into decision-making or the emphasis on their interests and autonomy that they enjoy in the wider community, tensions are bound to arise. If old people are prematurely relegated to dependence and inactivity by social attitudes, legal constraints, and economic difficulties,
their increasing need to share scarce resources may lead to resentful competition. If rhetorical respect for women and their rights as equal citizens is denied by custom and structures within the home, their potential is diminished. The gap between their expectations and prerogatives in their broader environment and their actual status in the domestic group has already made some young people and women of all ages reluctant to be part of the more conventional household forms.
A major cause of their dissatisfaction is socially reinforced systems of domestic authority based on male dominance in decision-making. Whilst their impact in certain areas like sexuality and contraception and labour-force participation is recognized, it pervades almost all spheres of domestic activity. It is difficult to measure this intangible power, but it can be traced through the allocation of household income, an area in which its force was previously misunderstood. Recent research has shown that while women may appear to be in charge of this, in fact their role is much more limited: they are most often managers of that portion of household income which the men who in tact control it allocate to them. The boundaries of women's power usually coincide with those of gender-based divisions of labour and interests which confine them to areas life food, child and dependent care, clothing, rent, and day-to-day expenses. In some areas like education the decisions may be taken
by men, but the responsibility for paying for them may rest with women. Decisions about expenditure that is less routine or more external, like the maintenance of the dwelling, holidays, or the purchase of major items, are also more likely to be made by men. Several of the country studies below support the findings of surveys in developed countries that indicate that even when women themselves declare such decisions to be jointly taken, this represents a conscious or unconscious magnification of their input and influence.
Patterns in the control and management of household income seem to vary more between socio-economic strata than they do between cultures or countries. The strategies used by comparable (in relative terms) income groups in every region are remarkably similar. Women control and manage income in male-headed households (which most extended and nuclear households are assumed to be) only if they are the sole provider. Women who head single-person or single-parent households often cite complete control of resources as one advantage of their situation. As the proportion of the household income earned by women decreases, so their role reverts to management rather than control. This widely observed phenomenon relates less to economic rationality and competence than to male and female attitudes that see women's income-generation, whether in cash or kind, as merely a supplement to male earnings. Women's remunerated work is therefore perceived not as a primary economic function but as an
extension of their social roles as helpmates to husbands and purveyors of family care.
The two points at which exceptions to this pattern are likely to occur throw further light on the broader question of the economic foundation of power structures. Women may also acquire total control in dual- or single-earner households if the income is so low that it is extremely hard to eke it out to cover basic needs. This pattern, which appears in studies of low-income sectors and families relying on social welfare benefits in industrialized countries, may also be seen as a way of extending women's responsibilities for the household's standard of living when they become too heavy for men. The increased domestic and income-generating activities of many women in developing countries, which constituted an invisible micro-level adjustment to recent international crises, are another facet of this trend.
Women are more likely (though by no means certain) to have more real control if they enjoy middle to high incomes and employment status which equals or exceeds their husbands'. Some research has detected an interesting tendency to underplay women's superior earning power in households where to acknowledge it would undermine the socially endorsed status of the male breadwinner. However, this is a rare problem. Quite apart from cultural perceptions which undervalue their economic input, whatever form it takes, most women do not have the opportunity to make equal cash contributions to their households. Lower levels of education and training, their concentration in poorly paid jobs or economic sectors, social stereotypes and other barriers to employment and promotion, and intermittent and atypical workforce participation - shaped, ironically enough, by the very family responsibilities they are trying to meet-mean there is no country in the world where women's waged income equals
men's. In Chile, for example, the average adjusted female figure for the period 1960-1985 was no more than 68 per cent of male income. In 1985, it ranged between 53 and 84 per cent in five major cities in Latin America. In Switzerland there was an overall difference of approximately 30 per cent in 1986. Even when they worked in similar employment categories, there was a difference of some 20 per cent between what women and men earned (ECLAC, 1988; Swiss Federal Bureau of Statistics, 1989).
This unbalanced pattern of authority and control may have severe repercussions on household well-being. First, it runs counter to the conventional wisdom, now supported by research, that women are more likely to be aware of family needs and to give priority to expenditure on them. But their ability to do this will be constrained if they can only manage a limited amount of money which may be allocated with less sensitivity to family needs. A number of studies in industrialized countries have shown that the amount allocated by a man for general household expenditure often fails to keep pace with rising costs. Research in a range of countries suggests that men are more likely to devote money for personal consumption to leisure and greater or smaller luxuries, while women tend to spend more of any surplus or personal funds on their families.
Second, government policies which overlook this unbalanced control of incoming resources may miss their targets. Tax rebates, child allowances, and income maintenance systems which ease the father's financial situation or channel payments through him do not necessarily achieve their stated aim of helping households and families. The determination of mothers in industrialized countries to have family allowances paid directly to them reflects their practical need to control expenditure as much as the expressed desire for independence.
The same unequal division of power maintains inequitable allocations of domestic responsibilities. It is a circular process whereby the fact that women do undervalued domestic work reinforces stereotypes of male superiority. This situation persists in spite of the heavy burden of labour-force activities women have had to assume in addition to their non-market work and reproductive and caring functions. Socio-legal appreciation of women as equal participants in all spheres of activity and the declarations of many women and younger people of both genders that shared domestic responsibility is more appropriate in today's world make little practical difference. The data from the time-use surveys and qualitative information in the country studies are corroborated by a growing body of research in this field. Male attitudes towards women in Barbados typify widespread assumptions ("Certain things make for a man and certain things make for a woman"), in fields ranging from sexuality
("A woman is here for a man") to domestic labour ("Women should take their place and do the housework. I think that a woman's place is in the home") (Dan, 1986). Though they may be less blatant, these concepts underlie male and female attitudes in every region. They appear impervious to the pressures imposed by women's incorporation into the labour force.
It has been estimated that, while married, women whose productive work was confined to non-market domestic activity in Chile in the early 1980s devoted five to six hours a day to household work. Those who responded to rising male unemployment, lower real wages, and rising prices by taking on waged work still did an average of 37.9 hours' housework a week. A study which included six other countries in the region found no corresponding increase in male participation in domestic labour (ECLAC, 1988). Women agriculturists in Guyana spent three to five hours of their 15 ½ -hour working day on household chores; their men helped with some of the farm work only if there were no older female children to do so. A study of Jamaican women factory workers suggested their household responsibilities were heavier in male-headed households, where the tasks were not shared, than in female-headed households, where other women and the children helped them (Bolles, 1986).
In 1987, a year-long survey of 1,668 households in the Netherlands concluded that the division of paid and unpaid labour, leisure activities, and child care was unequal. When female labour-force participation was limited by the presence of young children, 53 per cent of the men said domestic work should be shared. When both partners were in full-time employment, 84 per cent of the men agreed the housework should be shared. In fact, it devolved mainly on the women (Stoop and Oudhoff, 1989). This apparent example of attitudinal change preceding behavioural change may reflect the element of choice which men feel in this matter: they are willing to assist with cooking, washing up, or some of the more interesting areas of child care, for example, but the primary responsibility remains with women who have little choice but to do everything else. In Switzerland women devote an average of six times more time to household tasks; even those in full-time employment spend four times as
much on it (Swiss Federal Bureau of Statistics, 1989).
Time budgets show many employed women must adopt the strategies of the women in the Kenyan study, who had to "make the day longer" by getting up earlier and going to bed later, denying themselves rest in order to get their household tasks done. A time-use survey of 12 countries as disparate as Belgium, Hungary, Peru, the United States, and the Soviet Union found men had an average of 34 hours free time a week; women in full-time household work had 32.6 and employed women had 14.5 (Waring, 1988). Many women in developing countries would share the Kenyan women's feeling that the concept of leisure time was irrelevant in their circumstances.
Just as the Kenyans did not have enough time to attend literacy classes or organize women's groups, so women everywhere arc precluded from other activities because domestic work absorbs so much of their time and energy. This is probably as strong a factor as outdated stereotyping and prejudice in their continuing low levels of representation in formal political and trade union activity. It is easier for women to participate in community level and non-government organizations whose structures may be more responsive to the demands of their household responsibilities, but their input is very much needed at the higher levels where the decisions on macro-policies are made.
The care of the young, sick, disabled, and old members of the household is part of the function of the basic social unit. However, because the primary responsibility for this is usually allocated to women, inequitable relationships within the household are accentuated and women, the traditional carers, are further denied time and opportunity. The extended household has advantages over those where there are fewer people to share this task, and fertility and female labour-force participation rates may be higher in them. But extended households are decreasing, even in developing countries, at the same time as the number of those needing care is increasing. While the number and proportion of infants and children needing care is falling, the obverse of the demographic transition, the ageing of the population, means the number and proportion of the elderly who may need care will continue to rise. This is demonstrated by dependency and caring ratios, which express the proportion of
those who need care in relation to the number of potential care-givers. In 1950 in industrialized countries there were 22 old people for every 100 potential care-givers. The ratio had risen to 33 to 100 by 1985 and it is projected to be 55 to 100 by the year 2025. Though this dilemma was once thought to be specific to industrialized countries, it is now clear that the ratio will rise significantly in developing countries, from 14 dependents per 100 carers in 1950 to 25 per 100 in 2025 (UNDAW, 1988). Women there will have less support from shrinking extended families and governments which face fiercely competing demands on their resources, though they may continue to have the advantage of cultures in which old people can remain active and productive without the legal and social impediments that may impede them in more developed countries.
Women in all regions will be increasingly called on to make up the shortfall in the workforce due to the drop in the younger population. The burden of caring for dependents of all ages will have to be shared. The extent to which governments and institutions can participate in this will be severely limited by resources that are likely to fall as the tax base narrows. An obvious strategy will be to broaden the ranks of the carers by sharing the work among both genders.
In spite of its often-cited connection with the biology and psychology of women, the responsibility for taking care of the aged is in fact assigned on the basis of cultural expectations and personal availability. In 1987 a survey of primary caregivers in four localities in China showed three in every five carers were men. A typical carer was under 40, married, had completed secondary education, and was in full-time employment. Both the urban and rural carers were overwhelmingly classified in the middle-income range. Day-to-day physical and financial care were provided. "Duty towards the elderly" was their main reason for assuming this responsibility, and the majority (56 per cent) of the carers expected their sons to look after them in their old age. Only 21 per cent wanted their daughters to do this. In fact, more than two-thirds of the carers were the sons or daughters-in-law of those being looked after (Concepción, 1990). Expectations of care from sons and their wives may
be an important factor in retaining a preference for bearing and educating boys, and decisions made on this basis at the micro-level may have a significant effect on the success of national policies on population, education, and support for the aged.
In 1985 the General Household Survey (GHS) of the United Kingdom was used to investigate dependent care. The results were surprising in that they indicated almost the same proportion of both sexes were involved: 15 per cent of the women and 12 per cent of the men in the 10,000 households surveyed were caring for someone who was sick, handicapped, or old. The dearth of earlier comparable data makes it difficult to know whether the GHS has illuminated a situation previously misunderstood or discovered a new trend. However, some of the data were not so surprising: 59 per cent of the women, but only 39 per cent of the men, bore the main responsibility for ongoing basic care. The male carers were more likely to undertake less constant or onerous tasks, a parallel situation to that revealed in studies of shared child care and housework. The GHS also shows that the nuclear household may still carry out functions formerly undertaken within the extended household: 11 per cent of the
women in the sample and 8 per cent of the men cared for a dependent, usually a parent, who lived elsewhere (Green, 1989). The extension of a formerly internal activity into an intra-household function can be seen in geriatric care in both developed and industrialized countries, though like the reverse flow of help in cash or kind from the households of older to younger family members, this can only occur at a certain economic level.
New ways of identifying the patterns of authority, resource allocation, and domestic and caring responsibilities in households suggest they are not changing as rapidly as external circumstances would suggest or require. Deeply entrenched ideas about gender roles appear to be the major reason for this, though younger people are beginning to express attitudes more in keeping with current ideologies and demands. However, whether it relates to joint decision-making or shared responsibility for child care, the behaviour consistent with these attitudes is much more likely to occur when it is facilitated by the level of economic resources. Generally speaking, women now have an equitable part in financial decision-making and the power this confers only if they contribute as much or more income than their partners. Domestic tasks are more likely to be fairly apportioned when both parties enjoy equivalent educational and employment status, an effect which operates only when both are
above the average attainment. Parents in dual-earner families do not usually take the maximum advantage of provisions designed to facilitate shared dependent care. It is almost always the mother who resorts to part-time or atypical work in an attempt to reconcile family and labour-force commitments. This increases women's financial dependence and reinforces patterns of domestic subordination, but as long as men's remuneration and promotion prospects are better, this option will be in the best material interests of the household. The issues of pay equity and equality of access to employment opportunity are therefore crucial to the establishment of more balanced intra-house-hold relationships.
External Relations
As the basic unit of social organization, the household both reflects and influences the larger units. Value systems are cultivated and transmitted through the household as a centre of socialization. Macro-level events and national policies have a conspicuous impact on household, but their direction and effectiveness is strongly influenced by household response to them, as in the fields of population and education. Some of the most significant macro-level developments - demographic transition or increasing female labour-force participation, for example-are in fact the outcome of the accumulated actions or reactions of households.
The web of mutually responsive linkages which bind the primary living unit and other social groupings will vary according to the status accorded to the form of the unit and to the individuals of whom it is composed. The key issues in examining these relationships might be summarized as matters of reciprocity of obligation. As individuals and households inevitably surrender more of their autonomy to larger socio-political groupings which are better able to meet certain needs, for example in health, education, or infrastructure, the ethical and practical imperatives for support systems for those who carry out the basic societal tasks of reproduction and care become stronger.
The household is also an economic entity, a centre of production and consumption, as well as the base from which the labour force originates and operates. Its patterns of consumption, saving, and investment can have a considerable impact on economic growth. Equity and efficiency suggest that social support measures to enable households to cope with change and contribute to development demand that responsibility for dependent care be shared within the household and between the household and the public and economic sector. This sharing should be based on capacity and need rather than on gender or preconception.
The comforting myth of the extended household as a source of adequate care for all family members overlooks both the economic limitations on this function in contemporary society and the fact that many who seek its coverage do so reluctantly, only because they lack the means to be more independent. Yet expectations may persist to such an extent that the need for alternative support systems is not recognized, much less addressed. The caring role of the traditional extended family was almost certainly more limited when high mortality rates and low life expectancy meant there were not as many people surviving to need care. In societies at all stages of development, with weak or strong generational links and ideals of support for the aged, economic constraints may make it very difficult for households to supply this now. Customs and formalized systems which formerly protected people at vulnerable stages may not operate in altered circumstances. For example, in some African
cultures widowed daughters and their children were reabsorbed into the parental household. Today, the pressures of the cash economy and shrinking land resources may make this impractical. In other societies, polygynous families enabled a widow to reassert her claim to her former husband's support by remarrying into his family. A lack of the means to support newcomers may now deny women this avenue of survival.
On the other hand, flows of cash and various kinds of material and nonmaterial assistance between family members who reside in different households may characterize the external relations of many domestic groups, as functions formerly provided within a co-resident household are now spread between a number of nuclear households. Remittances and two-way flows of resources (cash in one direction, food or child care in the other) are well-recognized examples of this in developing countries. Studies suggest that intra-household systems of caring, for example for nearby elderly relatives or children, and regular or occasional material support may be more common than previously realized in more developed areas, too. Other intra-household support systems may be strengthening as non-kin and peer networks and community groupings replace some former family ties.
Greater sensitivity to and support for household responsibilities might be expected from the economic sector which benefits from households as the base of the labour force, and from women as workers, consumers, and managers of family income. Employers and unions are now more sensitive to workers' need to balance workforce and domestic responsibilities, but they teed to regard domestic responsibilities as women's responsibilities, an approach which can marginalize women, reinforce their role as primary carers, and deny men the possibility of increasing their share of these responsibilities. Some schemes do seek to cater for parents rather than for mothers, but, as noted above, as long as women's labour-force participation is less remunerative and less secure, response to them will inevitably be biased.
Women should be recognized as an intrinsic and valuable component of the labour force, rather than a supplementary reserve of low cost, transient workers. If pay equity can be achieved, the economic rationale underlying the allocation to women of dependent care responsibilities will be undercut. This in turn will allow mothers and fathers, sons and daughters alike to participate in dependent care. Economic restructuring and technological change provide an opportunity to stimulate human resource development through policies that broaden the options of male and female workers. Training that emphasizes broad-based and transferable skills for women whose employment may be interrupted by pregnancy and lactation, and systems that offer proportional protection and rights to men and women who choose atypical work to fit in with domestic responsibilities, are as important as the provision of childcare facilities.
In the broader community, approaches more sensitive to the reality of dual-earner households should mean reorganization of infrastructure, schedules, and facilities which pre-suppose that households have someone free to carry out a wide range of activities during conventional working hours. Sensitization to gender issues in access to income and to educational and political activities, as well as the transformation of obsolete stereotypes, are also essential to ensure that the relationship between the household and its wider environment is supportive. A broad perspective of how the needs and contribution of individuals and households vary at different points in the life-cycle would encourage this. For example, recognition of the fundamental socioeconomic value of women's reproductive and caring roles, and of the feet that old age is part of a universal process that need not be induced by social attitudes or arbitrary legislation, would ease the development of ways to prepare
and cater for these stages. Community and state resources may be reduced or subject to competing priorities, and while social welfare systems might be necessary to cover particular stages or crises, it is important that social support systems enhance the flexibility and long-term capacity of individuals and households to function effectively.
Female heads of households with dependents usually face particular difficulties in providing care and earning income. Yet their need to do so may be greater: in the Caribbean and parts of Latin America, for example, many women head multigenerational households with high rates of dependency. In 1985 households headed by non-married mothers were the largest recipient group of welfare payments in the United States (Population Crisis Committee, 1985). A World Bank study of Ghana found that, even allowing for those who received remittances from absent husbands, women farmers who headed households had less than two-thirds of the income, in cash or kind, of male household heads, a situation replicated in many African countries (World Bank, 1989). All over the world female-headed households are overrepresented among the poorest of the poor.
This characteristic poverty stems from three main sources: pre-existing inequalities in women's access to resources like land, education, and services, which might have equipped them to cope better in the economic sector; the circumstances which have thrust their role as major provider on them; and reduced household capacity for income generation after this has occurred. The first and third elements of this sequence are symptoms of uneven or gender-biased development which disadvantages women in all regions, although their difficulties in providing for their families later will be more acute than those of women whose households have more than one worker or more alternatives for dependent care and domestic labour. While some specific measures - socio-legal recognition of their situation and rights and supportive interventions during crises, for example- are needed, the steps that would give the mothers more options and autonomy and reduce the risk of trapping the children in
these households in a continuing cycle of deprivation are those which would help women generally gain an adequate level of economic and social competence. These must begin in childhood with fair access to nutrition, health services, and education. They should be part of a continuum which ensures that legal recognition of the rights of all women are accompanied by policies that enable women to take advantage of them. Equitable access to education and training, to credit and economic opportunity, to family-planning and health services, and to assistance with dependent care would benefit all women, and therefore prevent or alleviate many of the problems that presently disadvantage female-headed households.
<section>Conclusions</section>
The most fundamental attribute of the household as the basic living unit is its ability to meet the material and non-material needs of its members. Changes in form or internal or external relationships which inhibit the household's capacity to do this must be considered inimical to goals of social stability and personal well-being. Those that enhance the household's capacity and flexibility must be considered beneficial. The rising number of households too poor to meet material needs and the growing dissatisfaction with some household forms as a source of non-material support suggest that much recent change has impaired household capacity, indicating that reassessment and redirection are imperative. It also suggests that perspectives and policies should focus more on the individuals for whom the households exist.
Whatever form it takes, the household should be a resilient unit, the strength of which is not jeopardized by structural or socio-psychological factors that enfeeble the contribution of any of its members. Through them it must have access to the services and resources which are major practical determinants of function - or dysfunction - in families and households. This relates not only to economic or political opportunity but also to the confidence and social competence to take up and expand this opportunity. Basic social responsibilities may have to be reallocated as the ability to meet them shifts. This applies not only within households; it also affects the linkages between them and other households, the community, and the state. The reciprocal support of these larger social entities should be directed towards enhancing the ability of the micro-unit to meet those basic functions for which it is best suited. This should not be a matter of rejecting or shuffling of social
responsibilities but of developing the complementary and reciprocal arrangements most appropriate in various contexts.
Obsolete stereotypes and attitudes are a major obstacle to the flexibility that facilitates adaptation. Attempts to modify these through socialization and education will only be successful if attitudinal change is encouraged by real options for new behaviour. Women's ability to cope and adjust to change is constrained by their subordinate position in households and in society. Measures which enshrine legal and rhetorical recognition of their rights as individuals and the value of their role should be accompanied by practical steps to support and enhance them. Equitably shared domestic responsibilities and equal access to economic opportunity would strengthen households of all kinds and reduce their vulnerability in transitional phases.
Though research and experimentation with methodologies and measurements that cover activities hitherto hidden must continue, it is neither necessary nor desirable to delay policies or programmes for lack of them. The search for better definitions or data can easily become an excuse for procrastination. It will be a long time before all the conceptual and technical difficulties are overcome. The very nature of many of the social and cultural factors which must be considered if change is to be monitored and managed means the indicators may be very different from those which are taken as most authoritative now. In any case, more emphasis on quantitative data as criteria for micro-level social betterment might well be queried. They must be complemented and interpreted by qualitative material that expresses the attitudes and perspectives of the people concerned.
These factors must be taken into account if policy-makers and opinion-formers want to identify the types of integrated change that do bring development; they must also be aware that the processes of change are mutually interactive, though not necessarily in predictable ways. Assessing the impact of change on individuals in their domestic setting will enhance understanding of how sustainable development is achieved. Studying the responses of households to change would enable them to be supported and directed as a valuable resource which can - and does influence and direct macro-level change. To recognize the power and predict the patterns of action and reaction at the micro-level would be a significant step to harnessing them as a force of change appropriate to the aims of development.
<section>References</section>
Appiah, Rebecca. 1990. The Socio-economic Profile of Female-headed Household in Ghana. Paper for the United Nations Division for the Advancement of Women (UN/ CSDHA/DAW) Expert Group Meeting on Vulnerable Women, Vienna, 1990.
Bolles, A. Lynn. 1986. Women's Productive and Reproductive Roles in the Caribbean. ISER, Bridgetown.
Calderón, Mirta Rodríguez. 1990. Women Heads of Household in Cuba: Going beyond Diagnosis. UN DAW EGM, Vienna.
Concepción, Mercedes. 1990. The Evolving Status and Roles of Women and the Provision of Family Care. Paper for the United Nations International Conference on Aging Populations in the Context of the Family, Kitakyushu, Japan, 1990.
Dan, Graham M.G. 1986. Getting Out of Hand. Men's Views of Women in Barbados? Paper presented to the ISER/Unesco Seminar on Changing Family Patterns on Women's Role in the Caribbean, the Wl, Cave Hill, 1987. Institute of Social and Economic Research, Bridgetown.
ECLAC (United Nations Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean). 1988. Women, Work and Crisis. Paper for the Fourth Regional Conference on the Integration of Women into the Economic and Social Development of Latin America and the Caribbean, Guatemala, 1988.
Green, Hazel. 1989. Survey of Informal Carers, Great Britain. Paper submitted by the Great Britain Office of Population Census and Surveys to the Second ECE/INSTRAW Joint Meeting on Statistics of Women, Geneva, 1989.
Ironmonger, Duncan. 1989. Households and the Household Economy. In: Duncan Ironmonger, ed., Household Work: Productive Activities, Women and Income in the Household Economy. Allen & Unwin, Sydney.
Ironmonger, Duncan, and Evelyn Sonius. 1989. Household Productive Activities. In: Duncan Ironmonger, ed., Household Work: Productive Activities, Women and Income in the Household Economy. Allen & Unwin, Sydney.
Kono, Shigemi. 1990. Aging and the Family in the Developed Countries of Asia: Continuities and Transitions. Paper for the United Nations International Conference on Aging Populations in the Context of the Family, Kitakyushu, Japan, 1990.
Ogawa, Naohiro, and John Ermish. 1990. Family Structure, Home Time Demands and the Employment Patterns of Japanese Married Women. Unpublished MS.
Population Crisis Committee. 1985. Country Rankings of the Status of Women: Poor, Powerless and Pregnant. Population Briefing Paper 20. Washington, D.C.
Ramos, Luis. 1990. Family Support for the Elderly in Latin American; The Role of the Multigenerational Household. Paper for the United Nations International Conference on Aging Populations in the Context of the Family, Kitakyushu, Japan, 1990.
Stoop, Aneke A.L., and J. Oudhof. 1989. How Partners Spend Their Time: A Comparative Study on Time Use by Men and Women. Paper presented by the Netherlands Central Bureau of Statistics to the ECE/INSTRAW Joint Meeting on Statistics of Women, Geneva, 1989.
Swiss Federal Bureau of Statistics. 1989. Indicators of the Social Status of Women in Switzerland: Disparities and Perspectives. Paper submitted by the Swiss Federal Bureau of Statistics to the Second Economic Commission for Europe (ECE)/International Research and Training Institute for the Advancement of Women (INSTRAW) Joint Meeting on Statistics of Women, Geneva, 1989.
UNDAW. 1988. Age Structure of the Female Population and Dependency and Caring Ratios. Data Highlights 2. UNDAW, Vienna.
Waring, Marilyn. 1988. Counting for Nothing: What Men Value and What Women are Working. Allen & Unwin, Wellington.
WISTAT. 1989. Women's Indicators and Statistics Data Base. United Nations Statistical Office, New York.
World Bank. 1989. Kenya: The Role of Women in Development. Washington, D.C.
<section>The demographic transition in Colombia</section>
Carmen Elisa Flórez and Elssy Bonilla
Centro de Estudios sobre Desarrollo Económico (CEDE), Facultad de Economía,
Universidad de Los Andes, Bogotá
<section>Background</section>
Over the last five decades Colombia has experienced a demographic transition, a change from high to low birth- and death-rates. It began towards the end of the 1930s when mortality rates started to decline. The crude mortality rate decreased from 30.5 to 9 per thousand, and the infant mortality rate from 200.2 to 61 per thousand, between 1938 and 1978. Life expectancy at birth is the average number of years a person can expect to live, calculated on current mortality rates for each age-group. This increased from 44 to 61 over the same period. Later, at the beginning of the 1960s, fertility started to decline sharply. The total fertility rate is the number of children a woman may be estimated to have on the basis of the current pattern and projections for those in her age. It decreased from 7.04 in 1960-1964 to 4.6 in 19721973 and to 3.6 in 1980, a reduction of almost 50 per cent in less than 20 years. The crude birth-rate dropped from 45.2 at the end of the 1950s to 28.9 per
thousand in 1980. The decline began in the towns; although the decrease in rural areas was equally dramatic, there was a time-lag of almost 12 years before it began. In 1980, rural fertility levels were as high as they had been in urban areas in 1968, with a total fertility rate of 5 per cent. However, by the time of the 1985 census, the total fertility rate was 3.2 for the nation, 2.7 for urban areas and 4.6 for rural areas (Flórez, Echeverri, and Méndez, 1987). The combination of these trends resulted in what has been called a "demographic transition without precedent."
Much of this paper was written while the first author was a Hewlett Foundation post-doctoral fellow at the Population Research Center, University of Chicago. It is a summary of two studies, "The Impact of the Demographic Transition on Colombian Households" and "The Meaning of the Demographic Transition in Households of a Colombian Rural Setting," done at CEDE between 1983 and 1987 by a group in which Rafael Echeverri, Bernardo Guerero, Argemiro Morales, Martha Rodríguez, and Diana Medrano worked with the authors. Both studies were supported by the Household, Gender, and Age Programme of the United Nations University and the Female Status and Fertility Program of the Rockefeller Foundation.
During the same period, the country went through a number of important developmental changes. Without examining these socio-economic changes in detail, those which had the most significant effect on population structure were, first, the government's countrywide health campaigns oriented towards preventive medicine, which began around 1950, and, second, from 1956, a remarkable increase in public expenditure on education, which led to a decrease in illiteracy from 47.7 per cent in 1938 to 20.6 per cent in 1973, and a rise in elementary-school attendance from 56.2 per cent in 1951 to 89.1 per cent in 1973 However, the increased funding allocated to education and health was distributed unevenly and favoured urban areas. This factor, combined with the mechanization of agriculture in the 1950s and the growth of industry and construction in the 1960s and 1970s, caused unprecedented migration from rural areas. The percentage of the population living in urban areas doubled in 35
years from 30.7 per cent in 1937 to 62 per cent in 1937. Then, at the end of the 1960s, the private sector began providing family-planning services. This was permitted and tacitly supported by the government, thereby accelerating the fertility decrease which had begun earlier in the decade. Thus modernization and health and education policies combined to shape the demographic transition in Colombia. This process is expected to continue at least until the end of this century, although not at the same level of intensity as in the 1960s and 70s. However, analysis suggests that, even after the trends stabilize, large differences will persist between urban and rural areas, and between socio-economic sectors.
Demographic transition and falling fertility have a direct effect on the age distribution of the population. Colombia's population is becoming older; the relative proportion of infants is diminishing, while the proportion of adults and the elderly is increasing. This change has important implications at both the micro-and macro-levels. At the micro-level, it implies different types of family composition and different processes of family formation. At the macro-level, it means, amongst other things, different types of social demands on the state and different pressures in the job market. The demographic transition in Colombia has certainly had an enormous impact, as yet only partially analysed, on many spheres.
<section>The study</section>
The speed with which the demographic changes occurred made possible the simultaneous examination of households in which women were of reproductive age when the total fertility rate was at its maximum level, and households where women were of reproductive age after the fertility decline. The principal objective of this study is to analyse the impact of Colombia's demographic transition at the micro-level, through a comparison of the life-courses of two groups of women: those who were at the peak of their fertility between 1960 and 1964, when fertility was at its highest (the 25-29 age-group at that time), and those who were at the peak of their fertility (between 20 and 24) in 1980, the most recent point for which relevant figures were available. It is thus possible to compare the lives of women before and after the demographic transition by examining differences between the two birth-cohorts (or groups of people born in the same period) at various stages of family formation
and expansion. The quantitative data obtained were complemented by recording women's attitudes and perceptions to these processes.
Because of the considerable variation in incomes, the sample was divided into three socio-economic strata in both the urban and rural areas. Given the range of the study and the well-established differences in the timing and causes of the transition, two studies were set up one in an urban area, Bogota, the capital, and one in rural areas in the same Central Andean region.
This is the first longitudinal study of family formation as a dynamic process in Colombia. Most previous discussions of the demographic transition related the decreases in fertility and mortality to changes in the socio-economic and cultural variables associated with modernization. This study follows development through changes in the lives of individuals. Life-course histories charted with retrospective data permit a fuller understanding of the causes and processes of the transition in relation to family formation and develop a long-term historical perspective which produces a more dynamic analysis of change than that used in conventional demographic studies. This demands more than statistical methodology: it calls for a particular approach and research strategy which will inform both the collection and analysis of data.
Women are the primary focus of study. The household, which was defined as a co-residential unit whose members share at least one of the three daily meals, is approached through the woman. Women's behaviour and their perceptions of the household and related issues are the core of the analysis. Women's educational level and labour-force participation, as well as other variables like origin and place of residence, migration, and non-remunerated domestic and agricultural work, were included as factors in family formation and transitions. It would have been useful to include similar information about their partners, but collecting this would have added considerably to the cost of the study. Retrospective information was obtained from cohorts of women separated by an average of 20 years, so that the events recorded reflect a range of historical and contextual experiences. The analysis was based on categories which allowed a comparison of the two cohorts according to their
socioeconomic position.
Both the urban and rural projects were divided into two parts, a longitudinal study and a qualitative and time-allocation study. The longitudinal study collected data on the present circumstances of the woman and her household and on her life-history. A life-course matrix, a simple way of relating personal and macro-level events and chronology which is easy to administer at any educational level, was used to do this. The life-history information provided the basis for a multivariate analysis of reproductive and productive behaviour over time. The qualitative and time-allocation study captured women's perceptions and roles as well as the division of labour within the household. This part of the survey was confined to a subsample from the longitudinal study because of the amount of time needed for the in-depth interviews.
Within the perspective of life-history, women's activities can be seen as behaviour that develops continually throughout their lives as they grow and age in their social environment. This social environment is characterized by experiences and opportunities associated with the community, economic status, position in the family, and the normative and biological restrictions on sexual and age behaviour. Women's education, marriage, labour-force participation, occupational status, and income define the context of their life-histories. Moreover, a life-course perspective permits an investigation of the factors in a woman's life which influenced the demographic events related to her family formation process - marriage and first childbearing, for example- at a specific point in time. Rather than following the usual practice of analysing a cumulative process (like children ever born), this study was able to analyse the occurrence of single events over transitions which affected
reproduction (like marriage and fertility), as well as events spread over a life-span.
The retrospective longitudinal data made it possible to examine the determinants of such transitions. These data described sequences of events which occurred over a long period. However, the time covered does not include the complete life-histories of the women, which vary in length from 25 to 49 years, depending on the cohort. While each life-history reflects the events that occurred from birth to the time of the survey, the lives of the women of course continue after the interview. Some of the women were already married, had borne their first or second child and completed other demographic transitions by the time of the survey. Others had not yet completed any of the transitions, but might do so later: for example, a woman childless at the time of the survey could give birth subsequently. The experiences of these women are censored by the date of the survey. This problem applies particularly to those in the younger cohort whose experiences are thus cut off at a relatively
early age (25-31 years). However, the proportional hazards life-table models developed by Cox (1972) and others were used to overcome this bias in the analysis of longitudinal data.
Ethno-methodology and the time-allocation survey complemented the longitudinal perspective. The ethno-methodological approach was designed to depict individuals and their social interactions from the standpoint of their own interpretation of themselves and their activities. This can enhance understanding of women's perceptions of the factors that influence the productive and reproductive decisions reflected in their life-history data, and help reveal attitudinal and behavioural trends in the different age-groups. The study also sought to identify the conceptual framework underlying the women's interpretations. The analysis was enriched by the continual interplay of the qualitative and empirical material, which enabled the study to capture general cultural patterns in the various strata and cohorts and to offer broader substantive interpretation.
As both women's attitudes and perceptions and the distribution of household and productive activities changed through time as a consequence of socioeconomic modifications and the demographic transition, the study made use of demographic, statistical, and sociological methods of analysis. Conventional demographic measurements such as nuptiality and fertility patterns and indices of birth-control usage established the differentials between the cohorts in purely demographic terms. Nuptiality and fertility models developed by Coale (Coale, 1971; Coale and Trussell, 1974) were used to identify the principal phases of family formation and expansion. These methods, however, did not allow for the full exploitation of the available longitudinal data. Specifically, they did not examine the determinants of transitions between statuses, consider the effects of various independent variables on the likelihood of demographic events, or interrelate them at the time they occurred. Therefore
statistical techniques especially designed for multivariate analysis of life-history data (Tuma et al., 1979; Trussell and Hammerslough, 1983) were also used.
The urban survey was conducted in the capital, Bogota. The sample consisted of women of 45 to 49 and 25 to 29 living there in private houses between May and June 1984. These two cohorts respectively represent behaviour before and after the demographic transition. The sample was stratified according to an inventory of dwelling units in the city compiled by the National Administrative Department of Statistics (DANE) in 1980-1981, which classified the dwellings by external observation of the type of construction, quality of the unit, availability of utilities, location, and related data.
The target urban sample number of 1,500 women (750 in each cohort) led to visits to 6,756 dwellings in 360 clusters (120 in each stratum) from which it was possible to get information from 6,012, a coverage of 93 per cent. In these selected units there were 8,430 households, including 630 women in the younger cohort and 623 in the older cohort. Of these women, 91.7 per cent of the younger cohort and 79.5 per cent of the older cohort agreed to be interviewed, giving respective totals of 578 and 496 completed interviews.
The rural survey was conducted as a basis for comparison with the Bogota study. For this reason, and in order to control for differentials resulting from different cultural patterns, the rural areas chosen shared certain geographical and cultural features with the capital. Analysis of migration flows indicated that the states of Boyacá and Cundinamarca accounted for almost 80 per cent of the migrants to Bogota. The study therefore concentrated on townships of less than 1,000 people which were covered by the government Rural Integrated Development Program in outlying areas of these two states. They were all located in the higher part of the Andean region relatively close to Bogota, at an altitude similar to that of the capital.
The rural sample consisted of women of 40-49 and 25-31 living in private households in this area between October and November 1986. The age-range of the younger cohort was extended further than in the urban sample to avoid statistical problems related to the different numbers of women in the relevant populations in the two areas. Lack of information precluded a pre-stratified sample. The target sample of 600 women in each cohort led to a selection of 3,600 dwellings in 360 clusters. This entailed visits to 3,537 units, 3,284 of which were occupied (7.1 per cent vacancy rate). It was possible to get data on 3,059 dwellings (93 per cent coverage). These included 3,369 households, 3,133 of which gave information (93 per cent coverage). From these households' 570 women were selected for the younger cohort and 638 for the older cohort. Five hundred and thirty-three women in the younger group and 578 in the older group agreed to be interviewed (93.5 and 90.6 per cent coverage
respectively).
In order to control for socio-economic conditions, the townships, the households, and the women were stratified ex post facto. Three socio-economic strata were defined according to the state of the household dwelling, conditions of tenure, economic base, isolation, access to services, and community organization. The women were then classified into socio-economic strata according to the household to which they belonged. Those who lived in the most precarious conditions were in the lowest stratum. Those who enjoyed the highest living standards were assigned to the top stratum, and the remaining third to the middle stratum.
Both the urban and rural areas studied had better than the national average access to education, health services, roads, water supply, sewerage, and electricity. However, within each zone, differences between the socio-economic strata were highlighted by the state of the basic infrastructure and the quality of the dwellings.
Although the levels of education in Bogota were high in relation to the rest of the country, access to the higher levels was poor. There was good access to primary education in the rural zones, but retention rates were low; there was very little access to secondary education, with relatively low levels of educational attainment among the population observed.
Bogotá is a metropolitan centre with a large tertiary economic sector. Patterns of participation in non-paid family agricultural activity prevailed in the rural areas, and household resources were derived mainly from a combination of this and work for subsistence and wages, though there were notable differences between the strata.
Over the last 30 years there has been considerable immigration into Bogota from other parts of the country and not many of the urban women studied (17 per cent of the older and 40 per cent of the younger cohort) were native to the city. The migrant women, especially those in the lower strata, were of predominantly rural origin. On the other hand, the majority of the rural women interviewed (at least 90 per cent in each cohort), were native to the area, and a high proportion of them still lived where they were born.
Both the urban and rural studies used the same basic questionnaire. This was designed to gather two sets of information, one on the woman and the characteristics of her household at the time of the interview, and the other on her life-history. The first part included information about members of the household, including kinship, age, sex, marital status, and participation in wage-earning activity and housework. It also recorded facts about the woman's parents - their education and work when she was 15 years old - and her own life at the time of the interview. The second part of the questionnaire sought information about the sequence of the events of the woman's life.
The rural study used two additional instruments for cluster and household analyses. The cluster questionnaire gathered the information necessary for the retrospective stratification, including data on altitude, isolation, and community services. The household questionnaire gathered information on both the dwelling unit (typology and availability of basic infrastructure) and the household itself (land ownership, main resource base).
The qualitative part of the study sought to identify the changes between the cohorts, which represented behaviour before and after the demographic transition, in order to arrive at a better understanding of the observed differences in their family formation processes. Two different instruments were used with a subsample of 30 women, 15 from each cohort. The first, a highly detailed guideline for the in-depth interviews, was designed to elicit women's ideas, opinions, and attitudes on issues such as marriage, sexuality, motherhood, abortion, family planning, work, power relationships, and female participation in various social contexts. In view of the significance of female labour-force participation in the longitudinal study, it was considered particularly important to capture the women's perception of waged work. Secondly, for a subgroup of 10 women from each area, a time-allocation chart was designed to map their domestic work, whether paid or unpaid, and child-care and
leisure activities. This showed the distribution of work among the different members of the household. In rural areas the interviewers used a video camera to record more detailed information about the environment and life-styles of a subsample of the women.
Family Formation and Expansion
The women's marital status at the time of the interview suggested marriage patterns that differed between urban and rural areas and between socio-economic strata within each area. These variations certainly influenced fertility. The proportion of women who had ever used contraception was significantly higher among the younger women. The impact of this on fertility became stronger with the growing use of more effective and modern methods like the pill and the IUD. The increased practice of birth control in both urban and rural areas was a consequence of both higher levels of education, which led to greater acceptance, and better coverage by family-planning programmes, especially in the country. Rural women in the low stratum were the least likely to use contraception, and they also had the lowest levels of education and the poorest access to family-planning programmes.
The relationship between female productive and reproductive behaviour is complex and mutually responsive. Female labour-force participation affects family formation and marital status and vice versa. Marital status was the variable with the most significant and strongest impact on the probability of working. The number of children also had a negative effects, which highlighted the incompatibility of productive and reproductive roles among both urban and rural women. Female labour-force participation increased in all strata from the older to the younger cohort in both urban and rural areas. A concomitant decrease in fertility was noticeable between the younger and the older urban and rural cohorts. Clear patterns in the data confirm that having a family diminishes female labour-force participation. However, the constraining effect of children appears to relate more strongly to their age than to their number. Conversely, the number of children a woman had was restrained by
labour-force participation: those with waged-work experience bore fewer children than those who had never worked. The data also suggest that the increased opportunity costs of women's time as a consequence of substantial improvement in their education has led to higher workforce participation. In line with this, there has been a movement towards more qualified occupations in the city and away from family agricultural activities in the rural area. These interrelationships were examined in several ways through multivariate analysis.
The completed histories of fertility and nuptiality allowed the comparison of the processes of family formation and suggested that there have been substantial changes in the formation phase, as well as in the expansion of families between the generations, again with great differences between urban and rural areas and between socio-economic strata.
The data show that the most dramatic changes in patterns of first marriage occurred among urban women in the upper and, to a lesser extent, the middle stratum. Without a comparison of the economic strata it could have been erroneously concluded that no major changes had occurred in the family formation phase: the urban age at first marriage (which was taken to include both legal and consensual unions) was around 21.5 years and the proportion of women ever married was about 91 per cent for both cohorts. For rural women, the figures were 20.4 years and 87 per cent respectively. However, behind these similarities between the cohorts at the aggregate level, there were big differences between the urban economic strata. In the top stratum, there was no significant increase in the mean age at marriage (which only moved from 22.1 to 22.6), but at each age the proportion of marriages fell, producing a drop in the percentage ever married at the age of 50 from 85 to 62 per cent.
Contrary to the marked changes in the upper urban stratum, the pattern in all the rural and the lower urban strata remained fairly stable. This differential behaviour is of great importance as the total fertility pattern is a product of two patterns: the nuptiality or first marriage pattern, and the marital fertility pattern, so that a decline in the total fertility of upper-stratum urban women could be expected to follow the new trends in their marriage patterns.
The data show increased use of family planning and a sharp decline in both urban and rural fertility from the older to the younger cohorts. The total fertility rate decreased from 4.7 to 2.6 from the to the younger urban cohorts, and from 6.0 to 3.4 in the rural cohorts. Although the data on family planning indicates more use of contraception in all strata in both areas, the greatest decline in total fertility occurred among urban women in the upper stratum, presumably partly due to the drop in their first marriage rates. On the other hand, the total fertility rate of urban women in the middle and lower strata and of all rural women decreased without significant changes in nuptiality. Thus, although falling marriage rates probably contributed to the lower fertility of urban women in the upper stratum, nuptiality has not played an important role in the overall fertility decline.
The pace at which the urban cohorts expanded their families show that while there have been major changes in the spacing between children, the interval between marriage and the birth of the first child has not altered substantially. This suggests that the younger urban cohort used contraception to time the births of their children and to have a smaller family. The rural data, on the other hand, show that the smaller families of the younger cohort there were achieved without major changes in the former patterns of timing. This implies that the fertility decline in the country areas has mainly come about through contraception after the desired family size has been reached. This result supports the findings of the qualitative study, which indicated that rural women favoured birth control only among married women and after they have had some children. Thus both the methodologies used suggest an important difference between the urban and rural areas in the use of birth control in
family formation.
Women's educational attainments and work experience had a marked impact upon the beginning and expansion of their families. The likelihood of a woman having a third child in relation to her education and work experience was examined by analysis which included origin and place of residence as socioeconomic variables. The point at which education begins to have a strong effect on patterns of first marriage and the birth of the first child was the completion of elementary schooling. It seems clear that the higher educational levels of the younger urban cohort have been important factors in the greater changes in their nuptiality and fertility.
<section>The findings</section>
A comparison of the educational profiles of the urban women indicated a substantial increase in educational levels from the older to the younger cohort. The latter was predominantly high-school-educated, whereas the largest group of the older cohort had only completed primary school. There were also differences between the socioeconomic strata: a greater proportion of the younger urban cohort in the upper stratum reached higher education. Although the data on the rural women also showed more education, low levels of attainment in both cohorts reflected the high primary-school drop-out rates and poor access to secondary and further education. Even in the younger rural cohort, the average level education was uncompleted primary schooling. Nevertheless, the younger members of all socioeconomic strata, and particularly those in the urban area, stayed in the educational system longer and so postponed their transition to other stages for longer than the older cohorts had done.
Although urban women in the lower and middle strata have increased their labour-force participation, the bimodal pattern of their participation followed that of the women in the older cohort in the same strata, at least up to the time of the survey. This reflects activity cycles shaped by the incompatibility of their productive and reproductive roles. The younger urban women of the upper stratum, however, not only increased their participation in relation to the older cohort in the same stratum, at least up to the time of the interviews, but, as they spent more time in the educational system, their entry into the labour force was significantly later. There was a trend among the younger urban women to move away from sales and service Jobs to professional or administrative occupations and from non-salaried to salaried work. These changes imply more demanding schedules and responsibilities, which make their employment even more incompatible with their reproductive role. The
development of child-care services as part of the private educational system may help them overcome some of the difficulties.
Work experience had a negative effect on family formation, regardless of the form it took, whereas occupational status (referring to whether a woman worked in an unpaid or paid capacity) in the relevant year did not produce a significant and consistent effect. It seems that the relationship between work and family formation was determined not by the type of activity, but by contact with the labour market, whether in modern or traditional activities. However, the effect of work experience was stronger in urban than in rural areas, which presumably reflects the higher opportunity cost of children in the city. The apparent irrelevance of occupational status in a given year suggests that once decisions about having a family have been taken, they may override other considerations.
The urban and rural results demonstrate that, independent of other variables, women's place of origin had little effect on family formation. Perhaps the differentials by origin which are sometimes observed in cumulative fertility studies may be due to differences in education related to place of origin. However, place of residence had an important effect, which was apparent in the lower number of children ever born to the women in the city: 2.6 compared to 3.4 in the country areas in the younger cohorts, and 4.7 compared to 6 in the older cohorts. This reflects the impact of more access to educational, health, and family-planning services, and to better infrastructure in general, as well as to the higher direct and indirect costs of families in urban areas.
The use of contraception had a significant and negative effect on the number of children born to urban women. Among rural women, however, it did not make a marked difference to first births, but it did have a strong depressive effect on the likelihood of second and third births, an effect that rose with the number of children.
Sexuality and Fertility Control
Sexuality is sometimes considered to be a central aspect of women's subordination. The implications of female sexuality extend beyond the strictly personal in cultures in which men's dignity and the honour of the family depend heavily on their women's prudence. The rural women clearly and consistently expressed a view of sexuality differentiated according to gender. Men were considered to have wider scope and liberty in sexual behaviour, while the conduct of women had to be restricted in accordance with ethical and moral norms. Traditionally, the theme of sexuality was not a topic of conscious reflection in rural Colombian communities, at least in the Andean area. As a consequence, established social practice became the point of reference and legitimation of appropriate sexual behaviour. However, attitudes based on tradition and custom did not necessarily reflect the respondents' rational thinking on the subject. For example, there was considerable contrast between their
expressed views and their answers to questions about premarital sexual relations. Though sex before marriage was counter to traditional norms, it clearly occurred. This was evident from the life-history data, which indicated a high proportion of unmarried rural women with children. Responses to questions about the necessity to educate younger generations in matters related to sexuality also revealed changing attitudes. Their initial tentative response, but subsequent readiness to discuss these issues, reflected both the women's own lack of knowledge and their realization of how this had affected the course of their lives. The specific themes of these discussions were sexual relations and procreation, and premarital sex.
Urban women in the younger cohort, regardless of socio-economic stratum, said that sexual activity should not be confined to procreation. They pointed out that it was a right acquired by couples and that their companions shared this view. Sexuality and procreation were two independent realities: the former was not subordinate. This dichotomy was not so clear to the older women. Even though some of them agreed with the younger cohort, the majority thought that to separate sexuality from procreation "is to go against God's will," although they said their husbands did not necessarily share this opinion. There was no such distinct difference in the rural cohorts. In general, the women interviewed did not think that couples should have sexual relations only when they wanted to have children. On the other hand, their subordination to the sexual demands of their husbands was manifested in expressions like "You are under the command of your husband," "from the time you marry, you
are under this obligation," and "when they want it, you have to give it to them." The idea that the wife should be available to provide sexual services for her husband, without considering her own interests, emphasized the virtual absence of explicit female pleasure in sexuality. Of course these statements were affected by a double standard of sexual behaviour justified by the "different" nature of man and woman: "If you're a woman, yes you would have sexual relations only to have children], men no," and "they need to use your body." When asked if men agreed that sex should be solely for procreation, a majority of the group said no. The difference between male power and perceptions and female submission was reiterated. Some said that "they need a woman when they want it" and "they decide what to do."
Analysing attitudes to sexuality and premarital sex together reveals a well-defined difference between cohorts. Older urban women maintained a definite moral perspective, considering sexual relations to be exclusively for legally married couples. Premarital sexual relations were seen as immoral. Moreover, deeper examination suggested that for them morality had specific cultural connotations which emphasized the differences between the genders and women's subordinate status. Younger urban women approved of sex for single women, but their opinions differed by stratum. Upper- and middle-strata women agreed with such relationships because they believed that women have the same rights as men, and that it was a good idea for couples to get to know each other before marriage. From this perspective these young women appraised sexual activity in a positive way, reinforcing equality between men and women. However, women from the lower stratum did not identify with sexual equality. For
them, premarital sex was conditional on contraception, since they thought that this was a situation in which they ran a high risk of being cheated by their companion, even to the extent of being rejected if they got pregnant.
Two-thirds of all the women in the rural area disapproved of premarital sex. The others, mostly older women in the middle and upper strata, were not so critical. Although ethical and moral considerations were mentioned, fear of social sanctions and distrust of men were more important factors. Of course, the social sanctions only operated against women. They distrusted men as they may "ridicule you," or "toss you on the junk pile," or "trick" women with whom they had sex without any formal agreement.
In fact the great majority of women did not believe men and women had equal rights to engage in premarital sex. Younger rural women from the lower and middle strata rejected the idea unanimously. Few of the older rural women from the upper stratum claimed to be in agreement. By and large, they emphasized the double standard of sexual behaviour - "The woman should be more sensible," "a woman is faithful to one man only," or "a woman should be careful and control herself" - while men were considered "rovers" or "tom-cats": "The man has a thousand times more freedom; they're not criticized." However, there were more older women who thought that the same standards should apply to both women and men: "We should have this freedom because we are human beings equal to men. But for us, the women, we are branded for any little thing." "We women have equal rights to those of men! It's just that unfortunately we have been denied this freedom to define our own lives, have our
relationships. . ."
The survey indicated that attitudes to premarital sexual autonomy had changed most among younger urban women of the upper stratum. Younger urban women from the lower stratum also accepted premarital relations, but, in keeping with their traditional vision of the situation, they did not trust their companions.
Abortion was another very difficult various studies show that women's opinions about abortion do not correspond to their actual behaviour. Studies of women hospitalized for abortion indicate that, in spite of their situation, in principle they reject this practice. Similarly, data from the life-histories show that although they were opposed to it, urban women had had abortions. Although none of them approved of it, there were variations in the way women from the different cohorts and strata explained their attitude. All the older women and the younger women from the lower stratum said that abortion was a sin because "it was to take a life," "to deny the right to be born," or "to act against a human being unable to defend himself." Younger women from the upper and middle strata said that "it cannot be asserted that abortion is a sin," "it depends on each one's values," and "it is not a sin if you do it in time." Some maintained that abortion was not a crime because "sometimes
it is necessary" and "you have to take into account the causes that led to the abortion, such as violation, economic capacity of the woman, and whether she wants the baby or not." When the older women who did not share this position considered these situations in relation to their daughters, they said that they would prefer to offer understanding and advice about family planning and, if it became necessary, "they will help to bring up the child."
The rural women generally condemned abortion on religious, ethical. and legal grounds, though some of the women from the upper stratum softened this blanket rejection by analysing the characteristics of certain situations that women have to face. However, the strong religious and cultural tradition of rural Colombia, which constructed an image of women destined for motherhood, has produced an ideological barrier that impedes any real reflection on the issue. For this reason, abortion assumes another significance it not only means the denial of life to a new being, it also indicates the absolute rejection of the role of motherhood.
Abortion emphasizes another contradiction in women's lives. On the one hand there is the immutable moral stance of the church, upheld by the negative position of the state. On the other hand, society promulgates standards based on an apparent freedom of choice for women. In spite of this sexual freedom, a woman finds it very difficult to sustain a pregnancy if she is not legally married. If the conflict is resolved through abortion, it may be assumed to be at a high emotional cost. The nature of the social norms that influence a woman's sexuality and her life as an individual means she must be ready to make considerable sacrifices to maintain her balance.
The attitudes of urban women to family planning varied more by stratum than by cohort. All of them said that contraception should not be an exclusively female responsibility, and women from the upper and middle strata said that the decision to use contraceptives should be jointly taken by the couple after thorough discussion. They pointed out that their companions approved of family planning.
However, women from the lower stratum said that they could not discuss family planning because their companions were against it. When the women decided to use contraceptives, they had to hide them, because their men considered such decisions to be their sole prerogative, a reflection of the highly subordinated nature of their relationships. Men from this stratum were against contraceptive use for various reasons, including inadequate information and, associated with this, anxiety that it may be harmful. They also feared that they would lose control of the woman's sexuality if she used contraceptives.
Among rural women, the majority of whom accepted the responsibility to regulate family size, the use of contraceptives was clearly understood, but in their opinion, contraception should be strictly limited to married women. The use of contraceptives by single women had negative connotations and implied loss of social status. However, an increasing awareness of the social and personal costs of children can be observed through the survey, and women's interest in birth control has been stimulated as they have come to recognize the physical and psychological burdens of motherhood.
Only a few of the women from the middle stratum, most of them older, disapproved of birth control. The majority recognized the advantages of family planning since "it helps you avoid having a flock of kids." The practical benefits justified the regulation of procreation. Reservations about contraceptives arose from two basic sources - religious dogma and fear of health risks. Some women said it was "better not to plan, because when children come the hand of God is in it"; babies came "all because of the will of God." Others expressed a fear of the possible consequences of contraception. An older woman from the middle stratum exemplified this view: "I don't agree, because they say that contraceptives bring many side-effects and illnesses for women."
Although the data indicate that the majority of rural women believed in joint decisions on the use of contraception, analysis of the comments suggests that this might only be because some of the women were afraid to make independent decisions which could result in retaliative action by their spouses. As one older women from the lower stratum said: "If it is only the wife, there are problems in the home, because the husband is going to say that if it is so she can have other relations. . . so I think in this sense that there ought to be a common agreement so that there won't be any. . . disagreement in the home.'' On the other hand, as some rural women pointed out, decisions on contraception were more important to women because "the woman suffers, the man isn't interested in the number of children," "they don't see past having the children," "the woman gets pregnant. . ." This implicit and explicit criticism of men's lack of interest and irresponsibility in family planning
was a recurrent theme.
Rural women were asked what they thought about the use of birth control by others, first their daughters in general, secondly their unmarried daughters, and, finally, other single women. The answers to the question referring to their daughters were mixed, including positive, negative, and conditional responses. More than half thought that their daughters should use contraceptives, while the rest answered that it would depend on the specific situation. In all strata, approval was associated above all with a pragmatic approach which affirmed that it is not always convenient, nor economically feasible, to have a large family. One younger woman from the upper stratum said: "Yes, surely, I would advise my daughter that when she marries the best thing is to plan to have only one child and then, with ample time for planning, to have another, and that she should be thinking of the children she will have and know how she's going to educate them." The conditional responses encompassed
a more traditional view of the woman in the family. They suggested that their daughters should practice contraception only when they were married and already had several children. As a younger woman said: "When married, well, yes, but after she has already had her children. "
The use of contraceptives by single daughters was rejected by most women in both cohorts. This seemed to be based on a deep fear of the possible repercussions of "too much freedom" on their later lives. Some mothers were afraid their daughters could "become corrupted" and have "problems with their future husbands." Indeed, it could affect the possibilities of their "getting a husband" at all, as well as unleashing gossip in the community. Some of the negative opinions included extreme views of contraception as immoral and insane.
The use of contraceptives by single women in general was a controversial topic among rural women. There were opinions for and against. Half of the women from the low stratum disapproved of it, and one-third of the women from the middle and upper strata agreed with them. Half of the women in the upper stratum approved, along with one third of the middle stratum and a very few from the low stratum. Disapproval tended to be associated with reflections of an ethical and moral nature that both revealed and supported the existence of traditional patterns of female behaviour in rural areas. There was considerable suspicion of sexual relations outside marriage leading to "excessive licentiousness" or "adulterous vice." Statements like "a single woman can sleep with a married man without caring about it," "you shouldn't give in to a man, nor do those things before marriage," "it's a bad act," and "it shouldn't be that way" illustrate some of these attitudes.
Domestic Authority
The subordination of women means they have limited possibilities for taking independent initiatives in important areas of their lives and places them, totally or partially, according to their personality and situation, under male jurisdiction. The patriarchal character of Colombian culture and society has led to particular forms of socialization, protectiveness, and vigilance over female behaviour which is characterized by the authority of men over women in the organization of ethical, legal, and political relations, even within the family structures. The subordination of women is intimately linked to their economic dependence on men and to the way in which their social participation has been mediated by and through men. Women's isolation in the private domestic world has not only kept them at the margins of public life in many ways, but it also meant that, in the accepted order of things, a woman fell into second place behind her male companion.
Female dependency within the home is also the result of two other factors, which, though less tangible, are no less powerful. First, society gives men the morally approved and cultural attributes that allow them to control, judge, and sanction the behaviour of their spouses and to set limits to their freedom. Second, as some of the women said in the interviews, a deeply entrenched double standard implies that a man can do what he wants because he is a man, but a woman cannot because she is a woman. A man is given both the right to control the behaviour of his spouse, who "ought" to comply with what he determines to be best for her and for the household, regardless of her interests as an individual, and the exclusive right to her sexuality without having to abide by the same norm himself. The household has thus been organized around patterns of obedience and loyalty which are differentially applied and sanctioned according to gender.
The profound changes that have occurred in Colombian society over the past 50 years are closely related to the fact that the female population has achieved educational levels similar to those of males and that women have increased their participation in the labour force significantly. This means that women's contribution to the reproductive and productive function of the household has had to change, which could theoretically transform the basis of family organization and authority within the household. The important question is, therefore, whether or not the younger cohort now enjoys a more equal position in the domestic power structure.
The urban women were asked to consider two aspects of authority in the home: the obedience that a woman owes to a man, and household decisions on matters like housing, children's education, and family relations. Older women from the lower and middle strata accepted this obedience with its explicit implication of restrictions on their conduct according to the will of their husbands. They said that they must obey their husbands because "if we don't obey him we are not doing anything," "he is the husband and we have to obey him in everything," "we see ourselves under their command," "it is a natural law, " and "if a husband treats you well, he would be interested in the best for you."
This attitude needs to be taken into account when considering the replies to the question about family decisions. The women said that husband and wife shared family decision-making. However, their comments show that "shared" did not mean both partners had equal input: "I consult him and do what he decides" because "men are the responsible ones," and because "they are the head of the household, but of course not alone and the decision is made as a group."
When rural women were asked whether "once married, a woman ought to obey her husband," none of those in the upper stratum believed in absolute obedience. They maintained that it was necessary to reach an agreement and to make decisions that respected the views of both partners. As one observed: "You should only accept what is useful, because each spouse has his or her way of thinking and you don't have to obey if it is bad; there should be an agreement. " A more critical consciousness of the issues involved has developed in this group. This is reflected in the thinking of an older woman from the upper stratum who said: "There was a time before when you had to live subjected to your husband, to do what he said, because you didn't control even one peso, you didn't have any rights and lived too much under his thumb, but now it's not that way. Now I have seen that life is better than that, that women have the right to speak out when they want to, because men too are also more
educated." The women saw an important connection between a man's education and his behaviour in the home. This was well expressed by a young woman from the upper stratum who said that "I don't think that a man who mistreats a woman is an educated person, but a person who has no dignity, nor education, nor anything else, if he believes that he has the right to beat and mistreat the woman who married him."
The older rural women from the lower-income strata were more defensive: "You don't have to let him humiliate you," and "don't let him beat you to impose his will." Their position in no way suggested the possibility of questioning the traditional norm. On the contrary, they asserted that "I have always had this obligation to obey, although there are things that are unjust," and "you have to let them dominate because you don't know how to defend yourself." This implicit acceptance of male authority affords a telling glimpse of traditional life. Sometimes this was based on a non-reflective resignation: "It's your inheritance because Eve had to obey Adam," "the law gives the wife to the husband and if she doesn't obey he leaves, " or "what he orders turns out well. " In other cases, it sprang from the pragmatic attitude that it is better to obey "because with that idea you avoid problems" or "you live better and avoid problems." It was clear that in the rural areas, domestic
relationships differed much more by strata than by cohort. Some women in the upper-income stratum questioned male authority, but, although attitudes differed, almost all the rural women basically accepted male dominance.
Analysis of power relations in the urban households showed differences according to cohort and stratum. Older women from the middle and upper strata accepted an inferior position and reproduced it in educating their children, but younger women from the upper stratum were less inclined to accept the subjugation of the wife to the husband, and they educated their children in accordance with this perspective of equality. Of all the women in the study, those who had achieved most equality in household power structures were urban women in the upper stratum. For them, women did not owe obedience to men because "both have rights and obligations," "both have to submit to the same things," "they have to share everything." Decision-making was a joint process, even in matters of children's education. Indeed, they emphasized that girls and boys must be educated in the same way because "both are the same."
In fact, though all the women, urban and rural, said that raising children was a responsibility which should be many thought that fathers should educate the boys and mothers the girls, because "men are more difficult, women are more obedient," "women are more delicate, men resist more," "women understand better," and "a man has to be treated harder." In other words, although the couple might assume joint responsibility, there was a dichotomy in their actual practice which reproduced and reinforced concepts of the "weakness" of females and the "strength" of males.
Motherhood
Regardless of these trends, two factors continued to determine women's lives: having babies and, in conjunction with this, the role of children in their lives. Maternity shapes women's lives because they are defined by their role as mothers, at the focal point of social reproduction. This has provided the basis for a cluster of attitudes and actions which, at least ostensibly, value women for this. However, the concept has been extended to include all the responsibilities inherent in the biological and social reproduction of children and the daily care of husbands and other adult members of the household. Motherhood is thus both an honour and a heavy burden. It is also an altar on which women have sacrificed many aspects of their lives. Their reward for accepting their exclusion from various social spheres has been an increasing series of responsibilities that could and should be shared with other individuals and social groups.
When urban women were asked if the main mission of women was maternity, their reactions varied according to cohort and stratum. Older women from all strata and the younger women from the lower stratum agreed, but younger women from the middle and upper strata had different opinions. The older women said that "women were born to be mothers," that it was "life's law," "the natural mission." They felt so sure that maternity was the principal role of women that they emphasized it when discussing their daughters' lives, saying that "they are women and their purpose in life is to be women of the house and mothers," that this "is women's destiny," "the way a woman fulfils herself." They clearly expressed their belief that children were the raison ???d'être for a woman. This concept of motherhood meant that they accepted concomitant rules of behaviour and social controls. Women must "maintain good behaviour," especially in sexual matters, to deserve the respect of their children who
may also be their judges.
Like the older women, younger urban women from the lower stratum said that motherhood is the destiny of women. They explained that to be a mother is "to follow God's law" because "God made us women." This determinism was confirmed not only when they looked back to their mothers' lives, but also when they spoke of the future of their daughters. However, younger urban women from the upper and middle strata felt that, even though maternity is important, it is not the sole purpose of women's existence. For them, "women have other aims," "they can have children and do some other things at the same time," "having children is part of life but it is not everything." Nevertheless, these younger women agreed with the others that mothers are irreplaceable when it comes to caring for the children.
The majority of the rural women accepted motherhood as their role without question. They saw it as their unavoidable responsibility as women and their means of self-actualization. They believed that a woman can not be completely developed as a social being if she does not become a mother, because this is the central logic of her life and so the way to fulfil herself.
A corollary of this is that children have a responsibility to assist their parents when they get old; having children provides a safety net in a country in which the security of the elderly is quite uncertain. Most of the women expected or hoped that their children would support them in their old age when they could no longer do so themselves. This idea was expressed by a number of the younger women, like the one from the lower stratum who reflected that "to be a mother of a child is not only so that they can call you mama, but so that they also have to look after you later." A young woman from the upper stratum suggested that motherhood was of major importance because "when you get to a certain age, you need someone to lean on, someone to help you."
While these comments represent the majority view, it should not be overlooked that many of the women indicated that they could assume the responsibilities of motherhood and also fulfil themselves in other ways. They saw maternity as an important aspect of their female experience, but not the only one, nor did they think it should be the sole determinant of a woman's life, since she is also capable of excelling in other areas.
Almost all the rural women said that mothers were irreplaceable as providers of physical care and affection for their children. They strongly criticized women who did not undertake this task fully and without reserve. More than half condemned those who were able to breast-feed their babies but did not do so, indicating that the interests of children should take priority over those of mothers. These opinions were quite similar across cohorts and strata. Nevertheless, the traditional views expressed were in fact accompanied by some practical recognition of changing conditions. For example, the women did not reject the idea of mothers with young children being employed outside the home. This was often part of the future they envisaged for their daughters. An older woman from the upper stratum pointed out: "Today there's a lot of encouragement for women to work. . . one has to leave the children with someone to take care of them, making it possible to work. Neither can one just
stay around here. . . according to your situation, when you get a chance to work you should do it . . . in this way we help our husbands."
It was the younger rural women from the middle and low strata who most clearly stated the possibility of simultaneously caring for children and undertaking paid work. They thought that a woman could decide for herself about this, and furthermore they questioned whether in practical terms they had the option not to work for pay, as their husbands' salaries were insufficient to cover their basic needs and government support was very limited. This indicates the beginning of a social critique of the value assigned to motherhood. A younger woman in the low stratum commented: "I think that to work [for a wage] has become a necessity, and definitely you have to get someone else to look after the children . . . in any event you have to have a little time for them, even if it's only five or ten minutes. . ." "With the salary my husband gets and the amount he contributes to the household, I don't have any alternative other than to earn a few cents [or] we would be even poorer." The
contradiction between the abstract ideal of motherhood and the reality of the situations in which they must undertake this role presents a real conflict between ideology and reality. Those who continued to give their undivided support to the old concept of motherhood did so in thoroughly uncritical and very general terms: "It's nice," "it's the best," "it's destiny."
The women were unanimous that a mother could not be replaced when it came to rearing children. Therefore, women who work outside the household assumed the customary division of work and responsibilities within the household would continue. In practical terms, this meant that they worked much longer hours every day than their partners, who only participated in domestic work - in the few cases when they did it at all - in a very marginal way. This applied to almost all the women. Their time was used more intensively, too, as they did various things simultaneously.
Domestic Work
Indeed, one of the most difficult aspects of women's studies is how to define and measure women's work. Conventionally, work is defined as activities for which a wage is received, but this underestimates the participation of women in many areas. Even women's own perceptions of what they do is affected. The study sought to establish how women saw their work, and how their companions perceived it, in order to arrive at a female definition and assessment of household activities. An analysis of the urban women's responses on this topic showed that, regardless of cohort or stratum, they saw their domestic work as productive activity, but they also accepted the gender-based distribution of these tasks. They considered that household chores in general and child care in particular were their responsibility. This could not be delegated "because kids will suffer a lot." Similarly, housework remained the mother's duty even if she had to work outside the house or help the husband to
produce the family income.
With few exceptions, the urban women declared that their domestic activities were indeed work, because "one gets tired and exhausted" or "it is quite heavy." They had obligations that must be carried out, "but because we do not receive a salary it is said that it is not work." However, they had yet to resolve the contradiction inherent in their central responsibility for the household and their role in generating family income. The men did not contribute real help in the household in spite of women's increasing work outside it, and whatever their expressed attitudes, in practice the women did not question the power structure implicit in their double burden of paid and domestic labour. Although their heavy workload would have been eased if their husbands participated in domestic work, the women often reinforced the men's lack of involvement.
How women saw their role influenced the way they perceived their remunerated work. Even for the younger women who expressed a greater degree of equality and shared authority, maternal responsibility took precedence over other personal matters, regardless of the mother's ability and situation. Although they considered their remunerated work as important as men's, women said that they would not advise their daughters to work while they had small children, showing that they accepted the constraints maternal responsibilities imposed on women's lives. This ambiguity can be understood better in the light of their daily experience, as indicated by the time-allocation study.
The rural women were asked to enumerate all the activities in which they had invested their time during the year prior to the study. All except one had participated in domestic work, mostly in combination with remunerated activities. A sizeable group in the lower and middle strata had undertaken more than one paid activity in addition to housework. Yet the great majority considered their principal activity to have been domestic work, regardless of the number or intensity of their remunerated activities. About one-quarter of the respondents, among whom the older women predominated, perceived their domestic tasks as work because they were heavy and consumed a significant part of their time and energy.
It was obvious that some of the women had devoted considerable and careful thought to this topic. They were quite clear on a number of major points: domestic work was exhausting and laborious because "women don't stop all day long," "women work like slaves every day with very little help from members of the family," and "it is very hard work although men say that it's not work." "Domestic work is a thankless task because it's invisible, while the work that men do is more recognized." "Domestic work isn't seen, although other kinds of work are." "Work is only considered to be what men do." Domestic work is unpaid, "although if you do it in somebody else's house they pay you for it." Other comments along this line included: "It's not worth five cents," "nobody pays for it," and "it is not lucrative." One woman even said that " I would like them to pay me for it, because since it is not remunerated it makes me dependent. Housework consists of multiple activities while men do
one thing at a time. It is intensive because it includes not only work in the household but also other responsibilities such as taking care of the animals."
Those who expressed their understanding of the implications of domestic work with the greatest clarity belonged to the upper stratum. Within this group, all the older women who compared their work with what their spouses did reached the conclusion that women worked harder and more intensively than men. This was in fact corroborated later by the time-use study. They declared that women's work was harder because it was continuous and because women run "from one side to the other without stopping, always busy and always rushing." Men, on the other hand, were less pressured because "they leave, they do their jobs and they can relax on the weekends."
Those who suffered most from their heavy workloads were women with few economic resources, who said that poverty made their situation more difficult because when there was very little money they had to take on extra work.
Although most of the rural women had begun to analyse their domestic work situation, they did not yet have a clear idea of how to confront the established division of labour and they tended to accept it somewhat passively: "Although this work is unbelievably hard and you don't act anything out of it, you have to have patience." A young woman from the low stratum explained this resignation when she said that, despite everything, "one has to eat and I don't have any choice." There was an element of self-defence in the women's lack of will to confront this situation. It was particularly apparent in the insecurity of some of them who were bound to a spouse whom they did not fully trust. It meant that some of the women in the lower and middle strata accepted the established order unthinkingly and submissively, but in such a way that they did not have to assume a double workload. "If the woman works [for a wage], the man becomes irresponsible"; "the woman does her job in the home
and the man will look after getting what's needed for the shopping." Yet there was also an ambiguity which indicated deep-seated uncertainties about this arrangement, even among the young women from the lower stratum who accepted it: "They are responsible for the woman and should make her respect him"; "if the woman goes out to work, she leaves the home and the housework." Comments like these show the complexity of their perception of the "ideal woman. " In fact, almost all these women engaged in some kind of income-generating activity. However, they continued to accept the gender-based division of labour in the domestic sphere and all this entailed.
In the urban area a time budget covering one day of the week and the weekend was analysed by cohort, stratum, and family characteristics. The information was obtained from close observation of ten women and their partners. The survey was limited to women who spent part of the day at home (a number of whom did both domestic and remunerated work), as it was very difficult to interview those employed in waged work outside the home.
The survey revealed four important characteristics. First, women from the middle and lower strata who lived with a partner had a longer working day than the men did. Usually they got up half an hour earlier to get breakfast for the family, and in some cases they also went to bed later at night. Second, the women who did both domestic and remunerated work in their homes tended to integrate the tasks without clearly identifying the time specifically devoted to either category. This implies more exhausting working periods. Moreover, the women regarded much of their remunerated work as marginal; in spite of these activities, they defined themselves as housewives.
Third, the younger women appeared to organize their domestic work more efficiently. Their working periods were as long as those of the older women, but most of them had small children to look after. Even so, the majority also undertook work. Older women from the middle and low strata were more confined to the house than the others, perhaps because they had less technical and domestic support than those in the upper stratum. The households in the low stratum were in the poorest areas of the city, which had less access to public services. Some of them lacked running water, and cooking was done with gasoline or similar fuel which was not only dangerous but more time-consuming.
Fourth, the employed women concentrated a significant part of their domestic work into their weekends, although their working periods were shorter at weekends and they had some leisure time. Figures 2 and 3 illustrate the time allocation of two urban women from different age cohorts and income strata and corroborate what the surveys found: that urban women involved in remunerated activity also carried out the housework without help from their partners, although women in the upper stratum engaged a domestic servant to help them.
The survey of the rural women's use of time covered all their activities in the course of a week. This longer time-span was necessary in order to capture their main productive and domestic activities. Even though some tasks like cooking, child care, tidying, and so on had to be done daily, others like weeding, marketing, washing, and ironing might be undertaken less frequently because of the nature of rural activities. The reconstruction of the week's time allocation took both unpaid domestic work and productive labour (whether remunerated or not) into account, and included the activities of both husband and wife. In this sense the household was seen as a working unit within which tasks were distributed.
The results indicated the importance of domestic activities for the survival of the family. The majority of the women had the direct responsibility for these activities, though a few were only helpers in the home, and one woman, a single mother who lived with her parents and had outside waged work, did not do household work. The allocation of time varied somewhat by cohort. All the younger women were responsible for domestic work, except two who did not live with a partner: one helped her family and the other did not participate in domestic work. Not all the older women were responsible for domestic duties; those who were separated, like the younger women in this group, only worked as helpers, unless they had no daughters. Figures 4 and 5 illustrate two examples of time allocation among rural women.
Domestic work occupied much more of the time of the younger women, not only because they had young children who demanded more attention, but also because their children were not yet old enough to help with their work. The participation of spouses in domestic work varied significantly by cohort. It was found that although the responsibilities assumed by men bringing fuel, carrying water, marketing - were quite similar across cohorts, many more of the younger men helped with these activities. It may be that the children of older couples had reached an age at which they assumed some of the domestic labour not only of the housewife, but also of the husband. It is also possible, however, that the contribution of men is increasing. One younger man cared for the children, and another took charge of lunch on the day that the wife did the shopping. Both were thus undertaking tasks that men traditionally did not do.
<section>p079.jpg Fig. 2. Time budgeting, urban old women (middle stratum) (has five children, one two years old; husband is ill, doesn't work).</section>
Strictly speaking only three women in the rural subsample could be classified as housewives in the sense that they were engaged only in reproductive and unremunerated activities. All the others were also involved in income-generating work, and more than half took on two or three jobs to earn money for themselves or their families. All the latter, with one exception, also continued to bear the primary responsibility for domestic work. These women were mostly engaged in agricultural labour like cultivating the family garden or feeding animals, but some had small businesses like broom-making and knitting and sewing, while a third group tended a family store or acted as intermediares in the sale of coffee and cattle. There were also some who received a wage for domestic work done in other homes. Thus the range of their activities was quite wide, although most of them took place in the context of the household. The husbands had only one remunerated activity, with the exception of
four who cultivated their land and also had another job.
The rural women worked very intensively. The time budget shows how they combined domestic and remunerated work in such a way that they accomplished very different tasks simultaneously. The nature of their non-domestic work, most of which was carried out in the vicinity of the home, was not conducive to schedules that distinguished between productive behaviour, domestic work, and leisure. The women had to use their time in somewhat arbitrary ways which depended on what else the family required of them. Without exception, unless they had waged work outside the home, their domestic responsibilities determined how they apportioned the rest of their time. The demands of productive work were subordinated to domestic requirements even when the women contributed a significant part of the family income. The husbands of the rural women also spent long hours in paid work. However, given their marginal participation in domestic work, and the nature of their employment, they did not face
the same competing demands on their time.
<section>Conclusions</section>
Development in Colombia has involved changes in many interrelated areas including health, education, female labour-force participation, urban migration, and the status of women. All these changes affected fertility. Figures that the demographic transition which began at the end of the 1930s occurred with a time-lag of over a decade between the urban and rural areas, and with large differences among socio-economic groups. It happened more quickly in those sectors of the population favoured with higher incomes, greater access to services, and better living conditions.
A comparison of age-cohorts representing behaviour before and after the demographic transition indicates that it was the result of changes in the process of family formation, as well as in attitudes towards other variables, which affect this. These differed between socio-economic strata and between urban and rural populations. In Bogota, there were substantial changes in the formation and expansion of families, with great variation between socio-economic strata. In comparable rural sectors in the provinces of Boyacá and Cundinamarca, there were substantial changes in the size of families but not in their stages of formation, and this applied to all socio-economic strata.
Changing marriage patterns have contributed to a decline in fertility among urban women in the upper stratum. However, nuptiality has not played an important role in the decline among urban women in the low and middle strata and all rural women, who have achieved their smaller families through contraception. There seemed to be an important difference in the use of birth control between the two areas. Urban women use it to space births as part of obtaining a smaller family. Rural women, on the other hand, use family planning after they have had the smaller family they want. Most rural women agreed married women should control their family size, but only after they had had some children.
Although there have been substantial gains in female education in both urban and country areas and in all strata, primary schooling was the most usual attainment in rural areas, primary and secondary education were common in the lower and middle urban strata, and higher educational levels were likely to be confined to the upper urban stratum. Education usually relates to lower fertility. However, evidence from both areas suggests that this only occurred after a certain level had been reached. Incomplete primary education may, in fact, lead to increased rather than decreased fertility. Completed primary school apparently marked the point from which education lowered the probability of early marriage and larger families. The higher educational Ievels of the younger women gave them more practical knowledge and access to information as well as broader perspectives which predisposed them to birth control. Contraception also became more readily available and these two factors
combined to bring about the observed reduction in fertility.
Female labour-force participation also relates to educational attainment. Higher levels of education increase the opportunity cost of a woman's time, leading to greater workforce participation when suitable jobs are available, and to lower fertility. The study showed that not only have workforce participation rates increased, but there has been a movement among the younger cohort towards more skilled occupations in the urban areas and away from family agricultural work in the rural areas. These productive activities can conflict with women's reproductive role. In both areas, paid work which interfered with childbearing depressed fertility. Work in the service industries seems to have led to lower fertility, though this occurred more in some sectors than in others, whereas domestic work and home-based economic activity did not. However, contemporary occupational status did not appear to have a significant effect on fertility, suggesting that decisions about having children,
once made, are not affected by employment. However, the number of children had a negative effect on the probability of female workforce participation.
Among urban women, place of origin did not have an important effect on family formation, but place of residence played a significant role in nuptiality and fertility patterns. City dwellers generally had more possibilities for education, a wider range of work opportunities, a better public health environment, greater access to family-planning services, and more avenues for social mobility. They also faced higher costs in raising children.
Although there had been a decline in both urban and rural fertility at the time of the survey, the rate among the younger rural cohort was the same, 3.3, as that of the older urban cohort in the upper stratum. Thus rural women's reproductive behaviour after the demographic transition was very similar to the behaviour of the urban women who enjoyed the best socio-economic conditions before it.
Techniques derived mainly from ethno-methodology revealed changes between the cohorts in both urban and rural areas which were generally in keeping with women's new ideas about themselves and their lives. However, there were important differences between the strata in their perceptions of such important aspects of their lives as sexuality, maternity, family planning, power relationships, and female work. Urban women in the upper stratum, especially the younger ones, were questioning traditional perceptions and seemed to be redefining their lives within a conceptual framework more attuned to the changes in their social environment. Younger women from the lower stratum, on the other hand, maintained more conventional approaches, for example to issues like morality and legality in relation to sexuality and contraception. In the rural area, where the demographic transition started later, there were no clear differences by stratum in women's attitudes and perceptions, although it
seemed that women in the upper stratum have started to question the traditional vision of their roles.
Having children and the responsibility for them determines the way both urban and rural women shape their lives. Consequently women who participate in the workforce have undertaken responsibilities outside the household without seeking to alter the division of labour within it. It is to be hoped that in the future new ideas and perceptions of women's roles may be reflected in a more equitable reorganization and redistribution of domestic work.
The structural changes wrought by development and modernization over the last three decades have had a substantial impact on mortality and fertility. Government policies which improved education and health (including tacit official support for private family-planning services) have contributed, in many different ways, to lower fertility and mortality and to accelerating the demographic transition.
Both the urban and rural surveys show that education policies are a major means of intervention in both the behaviour and the socio-economic variables that influence family formation and expansion. As education depresses fertility only after the completion of elementary school, increased post-elementary education for women has an impact on nuptiality and fertility. At the same time, increased secondary and higher education has other mutually reinforcing effects by enabling greater female labour-force participation. The higher opportunity cost of educated women's time and their better chances of employment in the modern remunerated sector compete with their reproductive roles and tend to depress fertility and nuptiality.
Employment policies should take into account not only their influence on demographic trends, but also changes in the female labour market. The study suggests that women are likely to continue to increase their workforce participation rates. The survey also confirms that higher levels of education have led to a qualitative change in female labour-force participation. However, better qualifications lead to nontraditional occupations perhaps even more incompatible with reproductive roles, which suggests that creating greater opportunities for women to work in more responsible and well-paid jobs would have a further impact on family formation.
Employment aside, general improvements in living standards and the situation of women are likely to contribute to fertility decline: as a woman's social and economic opportunities improve she becomes more sensitive to the costs of bearing and rearing children. Higher female status in the home was associated with lower fertility among young urban women in the upper stratum.
Looking at women's lives provides insights into many aspects of the demographic change, while the differences thrown into relief by the urban and rural studies indicate the value of comparative studies of this kind. Collecting retrospective data to compile women's life-histories yielded usable, high-quality data, which has encouraging implications for further research along these lines. Proportional hazards models provided a very powerful analytical tool that avoided several biases introduced in models based on comparisons of censored populations and proved their usefulness in life-course research. As the use of statistical models for life-history data analysis is a relatively recent development, especially in developing countries, it would be highly desirable to encourage this. Steps to provide the necessary training for researchers in these countries would be a worthwhile beginning.
Life-history studies can be of significant assistance to policy-makers and planners, since a comparison of the experiences and characteristics of different cohorts can provide a basis on which to predict the reactions of those currently in the younger cohorts to various alternatives.
Complementary life-course approaches and time-allocation studies of households can provide a useful way to understand the effects of macro-economic changes on individuals and households. This study aimed to contribute to new methodological techniques which will furnish a better understanding of the myriad ways in which families adapt to changing conditions.
<section>References</section>
Baltes, P., and B. Orville, eds. 1979. Life Span Development and Behaviour. Vol 2. Academic Press, New York.
Bonilla, Elssy. 1985. Mujer familia en Colombia. Plaza y Janes, Bogotá.
Bonilla, Elssy 1986. Poder patriarcal: una constante social? Texto y contexto (Bogotá), 7: 11-34.
Bonilla, E., and E. Vélez. 1987. Mujer y trabajo en el sector rural colombiano. Plaza y Janes, Bogotá.
Caldwell, John. 1982. Theory of Fertility Decline. Academic Press, New York.
Coale, Ansley. 1971. Age Patterns of Marriage. Population Studies, 25(2): 193-214.
Coale, Ansley, and D.R. McNeil. 1972. Distribution by Age of the Frequency of First Marriage in a Female Cohort. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 67: 743-749.
Coale, Ansley, end dames Trussel. 1974. Model Fertility Schedules. Population Index, 40 (2): 185-258.
Cox, D.R. 1972. Regression Models and Life Tables. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society, Series B. 34: 187-202.
Elder, J. Glen. 1975. Age Differentiation and the Life Course. Annual Review of Sociology, 1: 165-191.
Featherman, David. 1980. Retrospective Longitudinal Research: Methodological Considerations. Journal of Economics and Business, 32: 152-169.
Flórez, C. Elisa, Rafael Echeverri, and Elssy Bonilla. 1985. The Impact of the Demographic Transition on Households in Bogotá. Centro de Estudios sobre Desarrollo Económico (CEDE), Universidad de Los Andes, Bogotá.
---. 1987. The Meaning of the Demographic Transition on Households of a Colombian Rural Setting. CEDE, Universidad de Los Andes, Bogota.
Flórez, C. Elisa, Rafael Echeverri, and Regina Méndez. 1987. Análisis demográfico del censo de 1985: fecundidad. CEDE, Universidad de Los Andes, Bogota.
Hogan, Dennis. 1981. Transition and Social Change: The Early Lives of American Men. Academic Press, New York.
Karweit, Nancy. 1987. CASA: A Data Base Management System for Event Histories. John Hopkins University, Baltimore, Md.
Kertzer, David. 1982. Generation and Age on Cross-cultural Perspectives. In: Matilda Riley, Ronald Abeles, and Michael Teitbaum, eds., Aging from Birth to Death: Social Temporal Perspectives. Westview, Boulder, Colo.
----. 1983. Generation as a Sociological Problem. Annual Review of Sociology, 9: 25-49.
Ochoa, Luis Hernando. 1982. El descenso de la fecundidad en Colombia y sus implicaciones demográficas. In: Luis Hernando Ochoa, ed., Implicaciones demográficas del descenso de la fecundidad en Colombia. Monografía de la Corporación Centro Regional de Población (CCRP), vol. 18. Bogotá.
Trussell, James, and Charles Hammerslough. 1983. A Hazards Model Analysis of Covariates of Infant and Child Mortality in Sri Lanka. Demography, 20: 1-26.
Tuma, Nancy, Michael Harman, and Lyle Groeneveld. 1979. Dynamic Analysis of Event Histories. American Journal of Sociology, 84: 820-854.
Tuma, Nancy, and Michael Harman. 1984. Social Dynamics: Models and Methods. Academic Press, New York.
<section>Textile workers in Brazil and Argentina: work and household behaviour by gender and age</section>
Liliana Acero
Director of CIS (Centro de Investigaciones Sociales), Buenos Aires, Argentina
<section>Background</section>
This paper presents the results of two projects undertaken by teams under the direction of the author in Brazil and Argentina respectively between 1984 and 1986 (Acero and Rotania, 1986; Acero et al., 1987). The study used a life-course approach to investigate the effects of developments in the textiles industry on the household composition of the workers, with special reference to age and gender differences. The main findings of the two studies arc compared and related to different aspects of training, policy and research on women's issues.
First it is necessary to look briefly at social and economic conditions in the countries where the projects were conducted. Data drawn from the International Labour Organisation (ILO) Yearbook of Labour Statistics and the United Nations Demographic Yearbook for 1960, 1970, and 1980 show that there arc some major differences between the two countries. Brazil has more than four times the population of Argentina: in 1980, there were 123,032,068 people in Brazil compared to 27,947,446 in Argentina. Demographic growth-rates are also significantly higher in Brazil, amounting to a 31.5 per cent increase between 1960 and 1970 and a 33.4 per cent rise between 1970 and 1980. In Argentina, the rates were 16.7 and 19.6 per cent respectively. In both countries the population is predominantly urban. In 1980, there were 96.9 men for every 100 women in Argentina and 98.8 in Brazil. The economically active population (EAP) represents about one-third of the total population in each country, a
proportion which remained quite stable throughout the period 1960-1980, although it rose by 4.5 per cent in Brazil in the 1970s. Significant differences arc to be found in the gender distribution of the EAP.
Instituto Universitario de Pesquisas de Rio de Janeiro (IUPERJ), Brazil, and CIPES, Argentina, provided the institutional bases for the specific country studies. Conselho Nacional de Pesquisas (CNPQ) in Brazil supported the project with research assistance and field-work funding.
Table 1.
Percentage of the general population in EAP by gender
Total
Men
Women
Total
Men
Women
Total
Men
Women
Brazil
Argentina
Source: ILO. Yearbook of Labour Statistics.
Table 1 shows that more than half the men in both countries participate in some form of economic activity. Women had been more involved in Argentina than in Brazil, but this difference had Ievelled out by 1980. Feijoo end Jelín (1987) show that in Argentina, women in the 35- to 44-year-old age-bracket accounted for the highest increase in rates of employment between 1970 and 1980. In contrast, the employment of middle-aged men fell more than three points in that decade. These figures suggest that women entered the labour force as new workers in order to compensate for loss of income. Barroso and Amado (1987) reached a similar conclusion in Brazil: increasing female participation in the EAP there between 1977 and 1984 is attributed to the feet that many women looked for jobs to compensate for either their husbands' loss of work or the sharp fall in the purchasing power of their incomes.
ILO figures for employment distribution by economic sector show that in Brazil there was a much higher proportion of primary-sector employment than in Argentina. It was the other way around in the tertiary sector. Employment in secondary-sector activities, for example industry and building, was greater in Argentina in 1970 and 1980. However, the gap between the countries decreased towards 1980, owing partly to the stagnation in Argentine industry and partly to reactivation, modernization, and growth in the Brazilian economy.
Most employed women in both countries worked in the tertiary sector, although there was considerable female participation in secondary activities, too. This was relatively more important in Argentina, with the gap between countries diminishing by 1980. Between 1970 and 1980, the proportion of women employed in the secondary sector in Brazil rose, while it decreased in relative terms in Argentina. The primary sector was substantially more important as a source of general and female employment in Brazil than in Argentina. Men in Brazil were mostly employed in the primary sector, although in decreasing numbers towards 1980. In Argentina, they were mainly occupied in tertiary activities and, secondly, in the industrial sector.
One major difference between Brazil and Argentina pertains to educational levels. In spite of the strong policies implemented over the past decades to reduce illiteracy rates in Brazil, they are still high. In 1960, 38.9 per cent of the population in the 15 year-old and above age-bracket was illiterate, and this proportion had only been reduced to 23.9 per cent by 1978. To these high illiteracy rates should be added the still higher ones found among children and young adolescents. By contrast, Argentina is well known in Latin America for having reduced illiteracy rates during the educational boom of the 1960s. At the beginning of that decade, only 8.6 per cent of children and young adolescents were illiterate. By 1970, the figure had been reduced to 7.4 per cent. Other educational data show that in 1980 48.4 per cent of the EAP of Argentina had completed primary school or had an incomplete secondary schooling; 16.') per cent had completed secondary schooling or had an
incomplete university education; and 5.3 per cent had finished their higher education or university degree (INDEC, 1980). The same source shows that the level of education of women in the workforce was higher than that of the workforce as a whole. Unfortunately, similar data have not been found for Brazil.
Table 2. Infant mortality rates in Brazil and Argentina (percentages)
Brazil
Argentina
Source: Demographic Yearbook.
Another area of enormous difference between the two countries is in their fertility rates. Total fertility rates indicate the average number of children a woman may be expected to have before she is 50, if she bears children in accordance with the pattern specific to her age-group. In the 1970s, Brazil had a total fertility rate of 4.35. Between 1980 and 1984 the pace of the decline accelerated and the rate dropped to 3.53. Crude live-birth rates represent the number of live births per 1,000 population. In Brazil the birth-rate was at least 10 points higher than in Argentina between 1970 and 1983. Although it fell between 1975 and 1980, it rose again between 1980 and 1983. In Argentina, the rates were quite stable during the whole period.
Life expectancy at birth was significantly higher in Argentina, especially for women. In 1980, the average Brazilian woman could expect to live 65.5 years and the average man 61.3, while in Argentina life expectancy in 1975 was 72 years for a woman and 65 for a man. However, life expectancy varies according to region and income: it is much lower for poor people.
Infant mortality rates are the best indicator of the disparity between socioeconomic conditions and health status in the two countries. They are also a good indication of the many hardships borne particularly by the poorer people who were the main informants for these studies. Table 2 shows that Brazilian infant mortality rates were almost double the Argentinian levels. The main causes of infant mortality were enteritis and other diarrhoeal diseases, nutritional deficiency, and lung problems. Unfortunately the economic crisis reversed the downward trend in infant mortality rates in Brazil after 1983.
Countries define poverty in different ways, making comparison difficult. In Brazil, poverty levels are measured by the proportion of households with an income of less than two minimum wages. Using the personal income of two monthly wages as the yardstick, this came to 52.6 per cent of all households in 1980, equivalent to 55.35 per cent of the total population or 64.7 per cent of the economically active population. In Argentina, people arc considered poor when certain of their basic needs are unsatisfied. INDEC considers five indicators in assessing this: a large number of family members in relation to available space, precarious housing, low schooling levels, weak subsistence capacity, and type of sanitary conditions. In 1980 it estimated that 28 per cent of the total population lived in poverty, compared to an estimated 10 per cent in 1970 (INDEC, 1984). In spite of the diverse methodologies and measurements, it is apparent that there were more poor people in Brazil than
in Argentina, as some of the specific evidence presented below will indicate.
<section>The study</section>
This was the environment in which the two studies were undertaken to investigate transformations in relationships within households and to analyse how these are influenced by changes in industrialization in developing countries. A particular concern was how these transformations affect the distribution and negotiation of power between the genders and different age-groups within the domestic unit. The central question was to discover and, where possible, to measure changes in the behaviour of a social sector, in this case industrial workers, who were studied within the context of their households. Changes over the past 20 years, which was considered a reasonable period for an evaluation of the effects of different development strategies, were analysed. This was done through life-histories which enabled the recording of micro-changes in the level and management of household income, the distribution of household chores, and attitudes and perceptions vis-a-vis fertility and
sexuality (Acero, 1984). The studies sought to illustrate on the one hand how structural transformations affect working-class families and, on the other hand, how the ways in which families respond and reorganize affect these same structures. Of course, these studies can only demonstrate some behavioural tendencies of a limited number of industrial workers, specifically textile workers, but they are trends which might usefully be examined in the light of similar studies in these and other developing countries.
The textile industry was selected as it was well established, though at different stages of development, in both Argentina and Brazil. A sample of 260 employed workers was studied in each country. Both samples were stratified by the same three variables: degree of textile modernization (according to whether the interviewee worked in the traditional or modern subsection), gender, and age. The unit of analysis was the household (or family group), wherever its domicile, where the head and/or spouse (in Argentina) and/or one or more members of the family (in Brazil) was a blue-collar worker or production supervisor. Information on personal history, present employment, birth-control and family-planning practices, nuptiality, household income, domestic chores, and administration, as well as perceptions of work, was gathered from 530 interviewees. Data on income levels, occupation, gender, age, and certain kinds of household decisions were also collected about all members of the
interviewees' households. In this way the survey obtained substantive information on the household composition and behaviour of 1,073 members of working-class families in Brazil and 1,015 in Argentina.
Table 3a. Distribution of number of interviews by degree of modernization, gender, and age, Petrópolis, Brazil
Modern
Traditional
Age-cohort ^a
Men
Women
Total
Men
Women
Total
Young
Old
Total
a. In the modern sector, workers who were 30 years old or less were classified as young workers. In the traditional sector, men 25 years old or less and women who were 30 or less were considered young workers The rest form the old cohort.
Differences in the characteristics of the populations studied, the availability of secondary data, and access to primary information meant there were some differences in sampling procedure and the collection and analysis of data in the two countries. Given the scarcity of recent secondary statistical data at the municipal level in Brazil, national industrial census data were used to establish the variable degree of modernization. Sixty-five per cent of the textile firms were classified as modern by this means.
The parameters of age and gender had to be established by developing data for a "reference textile population." A preliminary study of the distribution of employment by gender, age, size of firm, and type of textile subsector was undertaken through visits to 50 local firms. These constituted 58.1 per cent of the registered textile businesses in a recent local survey and they employed a total of 1,742 production workers. A non-random sample of 260, about 8 per cent of the workers employed at the time, stratified by age and gender, was then drawn up from that information (table 3a).
In Argentina, the limited data available meant that a two-stage stabilized sampling procedure had to be adopted. First, it was necessary to make a survey and sample the existing textile factories on the basis of information provided by the State Secretary of Industry and the Textile Workers' Union. A profile of the industry in the district was established according to employment scale, degree of modernization, and size of plant. The modern and traditional sectors were each considered a separate subuniverse of analysis and half the sample was assigned to each. The second stage, the household random sample, was based on local trade union information or company records. There were few lists of workers' addresses, so the process of selecting the households to be interviewed differed from that used in Brazil. Snowball techniques were used for 70 per cent of the cases. The sample represents 10 per cent of the total textile workforce. Table 3b shows the distribution of the
interviewees by degree of modernization, gender, and age. Age categories (young and old) were assigned in each subuniverse (traditional and modern), according to the size of firm and gender.
Table 3b. Distribution of number of interviews by degree of modernization, gender, and age, San Martin, Argentina
Modern
Traditional
Age-cohort ^a
Men
Women
Total
Men
Women
Total
Young
Old
Total
a. For Argentina, the classification was different. In the modern sector, men 38 years old or less and women 34 or less were classified as young workers. In the traditional sector, men 39 or less and women 36 or less form the young group. The rest of the workers are in the old cohort.
Nor were the methods used to study the samples identical. In Brazil, half the workers (130) were studied by means of a quantitative and qualitative questionnaire which was designed to gather longitudinal and synchronic information necessary to compile their lice-histories. The other half of the sample was surveyed by means of a questionnaire which was similar in content but designed for quantitative use and life-matrix analysis. A modified version of the latter was applied to all the 260 people studied in Argentina. Finally, in each country, extensive qualitative life-histories of five female and at least two male workers were compiled through recorded and unrecorded interviews.
<section>The findings</section>
Both countries had experienced significant economic and social change over the previous two decades. In 1964, a military coup in Brazil installed a government that wanted to develop the means necessary to change the basis of Brazilian economic growth. It implemented a broad range of policies designed to stimulate the production of consumer durables and capital goods. This called for a high level of foreign and state investment. A policy of selective import substitution allowed for a degree of local accumulation, primarily at the industrial level. Economic growth accelerated, especially between 1965 and 1976, the decade of "the Brazilian economic miracle." During this period Brazil's GDP showed an annual growth rate of 10.4 per cent, which was 3.7 times greater than the 2.8 per cent annual rate of population growth. In spite of heavy importation and the introduction of modern industrial technologies, the economically active population increased between 1972 and 1976 and
levels of employment rose.
However, modern growth in Brazil also exacerbated economic inequality. For example, the majority of workers suffered a severe reduction in wages, which fell by half. In 1981, it was calculated that a labourer would have to work 310 hours and 36 minutes a month in order to earn sufficient to cover his basic needs - food, transportation, rent, and taxes. Moreover, government policies on income distribution brought about radical changes in work stability. The Labour Law of 1966, while compensating laid-off employees, also facilitated their dismissal. These factors, plus economic and political repression, altered the composition of the industrial labour force significantly. As time went on, the massive entry of women into industry represented a new form of subsistence strategy in the low-income sectors. In 1950 and 1970 female participation rates in manufacturing were recorded as growing at an annual rate of 2.3 per cent. By 1980, the rate was rising to 10.7 per cent per year.
Meanwhile, in Argentina, the industrial structure was fundamentally altered by the military coup of 1976 that established a totally different socio-economic model based on monetary policies. Indeed, the recent economic history of the country can be divided into three main periods: before 1976, from 1976 to 1983, and from 1983 on. In the first period, from 1930, the economy was ruled by variations on an import-substitution model of industrialization. It was based mainly on the promotion of light industry, the expansion of the domestic market, and protectionist policies. As a result, the country experienced early industrial growth and the development of a strong and well-organized industrial working class, mostly concentrated in the Greater Buenos Aires area. After 1963, the growth in domestic manufacturing began to slow down, a trend that was never reversed in the years that followed.
In 1976, the military government imposed a radically new socio-economic model based on the opening of the economy through the reduction of custom duties, an overvalued currency, and large-scale financial reform. A group of labour laws froze real wages and severely restricted union activity, though wage negotiation was freed later on. The industries most vulnerable to international competition, such as textiles and clothing, suffered particularly in this period. As a result, industrial employment fell by 40 per cent between 1975 and 1982. The number of working factories was reduced by 18 per cent and 30 per cent of total industrial output capacity was idle. Contrary to what happened in Brazil, the general level of economic activity in Argentina started to fall off significantly. In 1982, GDP (8 per cent) was lower than in 1975 and diminishing. There was significant restructuring between economic sectors, the impact of which was most severe on industrial production and
employment. Only in 1980 was the downward trend in productivity reversed, but output levels never reached 1974 figures again. The period ended with a severe imbalance in foreign debt and trade, hyperinflation, and recession.
Since 1983, new political and economic policies have accompanied the country's return to democracy. In the first two years there was a slight economic turn-round: the volume of activity in the second quarter of 1984 increased by 3.85 per cent. However, this partial recovery could not be sustained nor the hyperinflation reversed. There was a new start in 1985. New guidelines for industry introduced to reinstate Argentina in world markets included promoting the export of manufactured goods in combination with selective import substitution and capital goods expenditure. For the plan to work, investment capital and new technology were required, and in 1986 considerable incentives were granted to the local electronics industry to stimulate a new technological thrust. Industrial production and employment, including textiles, particularly in the cotton spinning and weaving subsector where most of the workers studied were employed, recovered slightly.
The textiles industry has existed for almost a century in Brazil; many of the current factories were established in the 1920s. It expanded during the Second World War but since the 1950s it has enjoyed only moderate growth. Between 1940 and 1980 employment levels remained quite stable, although manufacturing employment generally grew appreciably during this period. Employment levels in the industry in fact fell throughout Brazil between 1970 and 1975, mainly owing to the introduction of modern equipment, but they recovered in the latter half of the decade. However, the growth of the dynamic automobile and metallurgical industries meant that the importance of the textile industry markedly declined between 1950 and 1980. Its proportion of total manufacturing output fell from 18.7 per cent in 1950 to only 6.9 per cent in 1980. In 40 years, textiles, which had employed 33 per cent of the industrial labour force, came to employ only 1.5 per cent. In 1970, it was the fourth
largest manufacturing sector; by 1980 it had fallen to fifth place as a producer and sixth place as an employer. The industry has seen three periods of equipment modernization: mechanization in the 1950s, automation on a moderate scale in the 1960s, and large-scale modernization, with the introduction of fully automatic shuttleless looms and rotary or open-end spinning machines, in the 1970s.
This last labour-saving phase is of particular interest to this study. The effects of the introduction of this type of equipment were most pronounced in the states of Rio de Janeiro and São Paulo. Output grew substantially in 1970 and 1975 in Rio de Janeiro (by 54 and 40.5 per cent respectively), while employment underwent a continuous decline (-18.5 per cent). Between 1975 and 1980, production diminished substantially while employment stabilized its decline at--1.6 per cent. The textile industry in this state was in crisis, and although it was traditionally a major employer of women, female workforce participation was reduced over these three decades, a trend that was only arrested and reversed between 1975 and 1980. During these years, women were absorbed into the industry more than twice as rapidly as men: female employment increased at a rate of 14 per cent, while male employment grew at only 6 per cent. The reversal reflects the behaviour of modern firms towards women:
initially, modernizing textile firms tested their new capital equipment with male workers. Later, they preferred to recruit young and inexperienced female workers who could be paid less than men to operate the new machines that did not require skilled labour.
In Argentina, the textile industry also has a long tradition. Here it developed rather quickly, along with general manufacturing, especially during the Second World War. By 1950, it contributed 14.8 per cent of aggregated industrial value and 16.6 per cent of industrial employment. The industry tended to be concentrated in Buenos Aires Province where 65.7 per cent of the textile workers were. Its growth was quite stable in terms of both employment and production between 1946 and 1963.
Since the 1970s, the textile industry has become less dynamic. Employment and production decreased gradually during the period 1973-1983, except in 1982 when production increased by 21.82 per cent, though employment still showed a downward trend. The crisis in the industry was mainly the result of strong competition from imports after 1979. Although the years 1979-1981 saw the heaviest importation of new automatic machinery for modernization, initial entrepreneurial reactions to the new economic policy resulted in the closure of many factories and falling activity in the industry. In 1981, there were 12 per cent fewer industrial plants than there had been in 1980.
Female participation in the textiles industry was always significant: in 1946 half the women in the industrial labour force worked in this sector. In the following years, the proportion decreased nationally, but remained stable in Buenos Aires Province until 1976: it was 66.3 per cent there in 1974. By 1982, when the industry had been radically transformed, the division of labour had changed nationally to 36.6 per cent women and 63.4 per cent men. In 1985, labour unions had a female participation rate of 39.9 per cent; 95 per cent of the textile workforce in Argentina belonged to trade unions. In general, the textiles labour force was somewhat older than that in Brazil, 47 per cent of the workers being concentrated in the 21- to 30-year-old age-group.
Petrópolis, the site of the Brazilian study, is a city 60 kilometres from Rio de Janeiro with a century-long tradition of manufacturing textiles and clothing that was reinforced during the 1960s by the establishment of knitting firms. In 1970, the textile industry was responsible for almost half the industrial employment and output in the municipality. However, these proportions began to fall between 1970 and 1980, owing to extensive industrial diversification in the area, the shift of the industry to other Brazilian states, and a crisis in the local textile industry. Between 1970 and 1975, textile employment fell significantly in Petrópolis (-24.2 per cent), although output grew by 33 per cent, partly thanks to modernization. Between 1975 and 1980, both employment and output in the industry had negative growth rates (-1.7 and -2.3 per cent respectively). However, in July 1984, the industry was still the largest single source of local employment. It employed 29.9 per cent of
the city's industrial labour force (3,751 employees) and its proportion of female workers (66.7 per cent) was higher than in the textile industry nationally.
San Martín, the site of the Argentina study, is situated 16 kilometres from Buenos Aires and occupies an area of 56 square kilometres within what is known as the Greater Buenos Aires district. For a century, most of the country's textile production and employment has been concentrated here. In 1974, 13.2 per cent of national textile production and 13.3 per cent of employment in the industry was in San Martin. This corresponded to 27.2 per cent of provincial textile production and 23.2 per cent of provincial textile employment. In the district, textiles were the second source of industrial activity in 1980, with a 20 per cent share of the area's production. Since 1976, the national crisis in textiles which accompanied the general economic downturn has affected the local industry. However, in 1981, in spite of the recession, San Martin's textiles plants increased by 4.6 per cent compared to the previous year. Contrary to recent national trends, local textile firms have
continued to absorb an important proportion of women. In 1985, 53 per cent of the workers in the San Martin textile plants were female.
The general demographic profile of both the populations studied (1,073 people in Brazil and 1,015 in Argentina) is similar to that found in the most representative censuses of low-income groups in Latin America. On the whole, these populations are rather young with a low ratio of males, a high proportion of economically active people and household members who contribute personal earnings to the family budget, and low dependency rates; a majority of the women are in the labour market.
Textile workers have made up a significant proportion of the economically active population of these groups. However, the textile tradition of large households with several members working in the sector tended to disappear faster in Argentina than in Brazil, thanks to modernization and the economic crisis. In Brazil, 52 per cent of the sampled households still had more than one member employed in textiles, particularly within the traditional subsector.
The population studied was slightly younger in Brazil than in Argentina, while the latter has a somewhat higher ratio of males. In Brazil, 73.3 per cent of those involved were between 14 and 59, 4.3 per cent were over 60, and 21.9 per cent were under 14; in Argentina the figures were 69.5, 5.2, and 23.3 per cent respectively.
More men than women continued in the labour market in their sixties in Argentina. In Brazil, where pension rights become available earlier, men tended to enter the workforce younger and became entitled to an industrial worker's pension after 25 years' work. Nobody under 14 in the Argentina sample was employed. Brazilian children tended to arrange various kinds of paid informal jobs and errands, or else they contributed to family income through student scholarships, which were usually not available to low-income groups in Argentina. The employment of apprentices, normally adolescents between 14 and 18, is regulated by law in Brazil. However, factories and shops often offered work to children under 14.
Both the populations studied had high schooling rates compared to other local low-income groups. Textile workers in Petrópolis enjoyed relatively better paid and more stable employment and 51.2 per cent of the children in the sample were attending school. Proportionately more girls than boys were enrolled, as the latter begin to participate in income-generating activities earlier. However, only 7.2 per cent of the sample was attending secondary school. For most Brazilian workers, schooling means only rudimentary levels of education: the fourth class is the minimum required to be legally considered literate and to obtain formal employment. In the Argentinian sample, 28.8 per cent of the males and 26.8 per cent of the females were involved in some form of schooling at the time of study, with some of the boys in relatively high levels of secondary schooling.
Households, Income, and Management
Nuclear families make up almost half the households in both countries. They were usually (70 per cent in Argentina and 51.1 per cent in Brazil) made up of three to four people. The interviewee was generally a married member of the household. Single workers tended to live with their families of origin. There were more nuclear families in the Brazilian sample and more extended families in the Argentina group (66.9 and 7.3 per cent respectively in Brazil, and 41.5 and 14.5 per cent in Argentina). There were larger households and a wider range of family sizes in the Brazilian sample, and fewer single-person units (2.3 per cent of households compared to 5.4 per cent in Argentina). Very large households, with eight or more members, were more frequent in Brazil (14 cases); there were 13 people in the largest family interviewed.
Almost half the households studied could be classified as middle or high income in relation to other working-class groups. These households were usually made up of four members whose combined earnings were between three and five times the minimum prevailing wage. In December 1987, this meant the equivalent of US$168-280. The monthly minimum wage was equal to US$56, and, with the criterion of two minimum wages per household to indicate the poverty line, 53.3 per cent of Brazilian households fell below it.
The poorest families made up 10 per cent of the households studied in each country. They were mostly associated with the traditional subsector. Families where the worker interviewed was employed in the modernized sector tended to be slightly better off in both samples. Of course, total income does not depend on household size, but on the number of contributors to the unit's income. In Brazil, where wage scales differed considerably and activities in the informal sector were particularly important, total household income also depended greatly on the type of remunerative work done by all concerned.
Table 4. Forms of household income management among one-income married couples (percentages)
Argentina
Brazil
Provider
Provider as sole manager
Joint management
Other
Provider as sole manager
Joint management
Other
Woman sole provider
Man sole provider
In 59.6 per cent of the households studied in Brazil and about 70 per cent of those in Argentina, there were two people- the interviewee and his or her spouse contributing to family income. All members were earning in 15 households. There were twice as many households with a sole provider in Argentina as there were in Brazil. This may be partially explained by Argentina's generally better industrial conditions: higher and more consistent wages, greater employment stability, and compensation for dismissal. It could also be partly attributed to the way in which women's reproductive role militates against their employment continuity, as analysed below. The sole income-earners were usually men, though in Argentina 18.5 per cent of single-income households were maintained by women. In Brazil, there were two male sole-provider households for every one dependent on a woman's income. In Argentina, employer strategies to cope with the economic crisis often led to male unemployment.
In Brazil, the situation was more frequently characterized by high turnover rates, the changing of jobs between firms within the sector, and reduced wages. In spite of the prevalence of sole-provider households in the surveys, especially in Argentina, income was managed jointly in about half the households studied in both countries. However, when considering information on this point, it is well to remember that concepts and practices of sharing financial control varied considerably.
As table 4 shows, in Argentina, when the female interviewee was the only provider of household income, she was usually also the sole administrator; she shared its management with her husband in only 20 per cent of the cases. However, this trend was virtually reversed when the husband was the only earner: only 19.7 per cent of sole male providers also managed the income. Forty-one per cent of them shared this task with their wives. In Brazil, the vast majority of sole female earners administered family income alone; very few of them shared this with their husbands. Men sole providers were the sole administrators in half of the cases, and joint managers with their wives in just under a quarter. Thus there were important differences between the practices in the two countries.
The generally higher rate of female management in Argentina, where the woman usually managed the family income, either alone or jointly, regardless of who earned it, related more to a woman's role in the family than to her earnings: women were considered to have a greater awareness of family needs. Even in cases where both contributed to family income, it was managed by the woman alone in 25 per cent of the sample. There was no case in which a man administered jointly earned income alone. However, as the qualitative information presented later will indicate, these women did not necessarily have much financial autonomy. They had the formal management, rather than the control, of household income: they allocated day-to-day expenditure, but they were not able to direct the use of surpluses, for example to non-routine repairs or vacations. In fact, unless they provided the income, they were more likely to be managing funds according to decisions made by their husbands than they
were actually to control expenditure themselves. Brazilian women were less involved in the administration of family income, whether they provided it or not. Contributing to household income gave them better access to its management, but in any case they were mainly executing decisions taken by men.
It was unusual for younger household members in either country to manage family income, even when they provided part of it. In Brazil, 55.9 per cent of the young workers who lived with their family of origin had no part in its control or administration. In both countries, young couples tended to share the responsibility for providing and managing household income more frequently than older married couples.
When considered individually, that is, not as part of their households, the 260 textile workers interviewed in each sample belonged mainly to the two lowest income brackets. There were more women than men in this category, which included 72.8 per cent of the Brazilian female workers and 54.9 per cent of the Argentinian women. The Brazilian workers were the worst paid of all in the two samples, reflecting modernization and employment strategies there which favoured cheap female labour. Age had little effect on the distribution of workers into these two low wage brackets, particularly in Argentina.
In general, the working classes in Brazil were poorer than the proletariat in Argentina, and the Brazilians interviewed were somewhat poorer than the Argentinians: 69 per cent of them earned only up to the minimum salary criterion, compared to 47 per cent of the Argentinians. Brazilian textile workers earned, on average, the equivalent of US$120 monthly, a little bit more than two minimum wages, while the Argentinian average equalled US$200 (December 1987). The wages of those interviewed varied in relation to workers' wages in other formal or informal sectors within their respective countries. The Petrópolis textile workers formed a relatively prosperous population, particularly because they enjoyed relatively stable employment. Brazilians who worked in the informal sector generally earned less than the minimum wage, often less than half of it. Only 65.2 per cent of the country's total employees made between half and twice the minimum wage in 1983. Still, the wages of a
Petrópolis textile worker were a half to a third lower than those of the average skilled metalworker, who belonged to the most highly paid sector of the working class in Brazil. In any case, a Brazilian worker earning up to two minimum wages, like the majority of those in the Petrópolis sample, had to spend 60 per cent of his or her wage on food alone to obtain only half the daily requirement of protein and calories. The San Martin textile workers, on the other hand, were not relatively better off than other waged workers in Argentina.
The majority of the workers interviewed - 65.8 per cent of the Argentinian and 63.5 per cent of the Brazilian workers - tended to contribute more than half their wages to the family income: the lowest contributors to household income were the younger workers. Forty-four per cent of the young Brazilian workers contributed up to 39 per cent of their household income. The pattern was similar in Argentina, though relatively more women there made the highest and/or only contribution to family income.
The importance of the textile workers' earnings to total family income was high in both countries, particularly among those in the modernized sector in Argentina. Those working in the traditional sector tended to rely on more members of the household being employed. This was also a frequent strategy in Brazil. The need to support the domestic group meant that most workers withheld a very small proportion of their earnings for personal expenses. Ninety-eight per cent of the Argentinian men and 79.3 per cent of the women there did not keep back any part of their wages, or they kept less than half, compared to 67.1 per cent of the men and 65.3 per cent of the women in Brazil. Married workers kept back less income than single workers. Money handed over for household expenses was often put into a common fund, the formal administration of which was usually in a woman's hands.
Gender differences were slightly more marked in Argentina, where relatively more women retained something of their wages for themselves. Contrary to the male custom, the women increased their savings when they were better paid. The practice of setting aside a part of their wages for personal needs did not necessarily seem to make workers more independent of family decision-making, nor did it give women more autonomy. The money retained was put to very different uses in the two countries and spending decisions were taken on different grounds by each gender. Women tended to regard a wider range of spending as personal expenditure, considering shopping for their children as a major part of this. They directed the money they saved to items for others. This trend was even more marked when they contributed less to family income, so they often played an indirect role in the distribution of household income.
Men, on the other hand, saved money for themselves, spending it mainly on leisure and personal items and, to a lesser extent, on home purchases or house-building. In both countries, the women consulted others on expenditure less than the men did, as they tended to have a better idea of the needs of family members. The more money the women provided to their household, the more they could manage this money and take real decisions about how to spend it, regardless of whether or not they were the formal administrators of household income. Among males, the degree of participation in the administration of the total family income did not seem to be in direct relation to their decisions on spending. They could always take any surplus. The younger Brazilian workers were inclined to use the money they saved on themselves to buy clothes and pay for leisure activities. In Argentina, this type of personal expenditure, especially by young, single people, was more controlled by other
household members.
Domestic Work
The majority of the workers, 81.5 per cent in Argentina and 73 per cent in Brazil, participated in housework. However, very well marked gender differences were discernible, the greater burden of housework resting on the women. Among the female workers, 97.2 per cent of the Brazilians and 98.5 per cent of the Argentinians were responsible for this. These women spent long hours daily in the factories and travelling to and from work during the week, and it was common for them to spend part of their Sunday doing even more domestic tasks than they did on weekdays. Women in both countries tended to do the heavier jobs like household cleaning and laundry on Sundays. In Brazil, 83.3 per cent of the women did housework on weekends while 93.8 per cent did it on Sundays. The percentage of male and female workers doing housework on Sundays was slightly higher than on weekdays in both Argentina and Brazil. A very high proportion of men - 70.4 per cent in Brazil and 73.3 per cent in
Argentina - did not usually participate in domestic work on weekdays. However, the rate fell to 51 per cent when only married men were considered. Of them, 30.4 per cent declared that the housework was done by their spouses and 14.7 per cent said it was done by their spouses and children. Young single female workers did not do household tasks on Sundays in Brazil, or on weekdays in Argentina.
The median time devoted to housework was greater in Brazil than in Argentina. Fifty-one per cent of Brazilian women spent up to four hours on housework on weekdays, and 32.4 per cent devoted more than this to it. Fifty-three per cent worked more than four hours and 41.3 per cent did four hours or less. Men, on the other hand, devoted no more than three hours per weekday to such tasks and no more than four hours on Sundays. In Argentina, the time most workers allotted to domestic chores was two hours per day. In general, the older people did more housework than the younger, and they did it in longer time-spans. Twenty-three per cent usually devoted three hours to domestic labour, 18.5 per cent spent two hours on it, and 16.9 per cent worked four hours every day. Among the young cohort, the frequencies show that 27.7 per cent did two hours a day, 16.2 per cent four hours, and 11.5 per cent three hours.
The types of chores were similar in both countries, but again they varied substantially according to gender. Women engaged mainly in cooking, cleaning, straightening the house, and washing dishes. Child care was a secondary task, usually combined with the others. Laundry and ironing, while almost exclusively female tasks in Argentina, were also sometimes done by men in Brazil. There was a more pronounced difference between the countries in the type of domestic work most frequently done by men. While the principal jobs Argentine men did included some cooking, straightening the house, and washing dishes, they undertook some shopping and child care (by which they frequently meant playing and entertainment). Brazilians reported only sporadic involvement in child care and they distributed their domestic participation more between shopping (17.4 per cent) and cooking (13 per cent). Washing dishes, cleaning the house, and caring for children were tasks less frequently performed by
Brazilian men. Their involvement in housework was in any case dispersed and discontinuous, although 7 per cent of them sometimes prepared meals on Sundays.
It was rare to find married couples sharing the housework. Even when men did share responsibility for it, this did not mean that the number of jobs or the time spent on them was symmetrically apportioned. Though the degree of sharing was not necessarily equitable, the greatest co-operation between spouses was found among young couples, those with children in Brazil and those with or without children in Argentina. In Argentina, there was more sharing between spouses working in the modern sector; in Brazil, family co-operation was higher in the traditional sector. The degree of co-operation always related more to gender than to any other variable. The greatest co-operation was between women belonging to the same household. Family support clearly reduced the burden of household chores upon the individual woman. For example, in Brazil, work that would take an individual a median of six hours could take only four hours when done with other women.
Contraception and Abortion
Knowledge about sexuality and birth control was relatively widespread in both the samples studied, and there was a high level of awareness of most of the methods about which the interviewees were questioned. Half the Brazilian workers knew six of the nine methods mentioned; the Argentinians recognized seven of the ten about which they were asked. In Brazil, however, there was a certain polarity between those workers (29.2 per cent, the modal value) who knew of all the contraceptive methods and the 12.3 per cent who knew no methods at all. To some extent this indicated the generally uneven distribution of knowledge among the population. However, it also reflected the reluctance or discomfort of the interviewees when the topic was raised. They often resorted to an immediate answer - either affirmative or negative - about all methods. The most valid responses came from those who showed a more positive attitude towards the subject. This embarrassment and uneasiness was less
frequent among the Argentinian workers, who seemed to have a more even knowledge of a wide range of methods; only 0.8 per cent of them declared themselves totally ignorant of any form of contraception and only 7.3 per cent said they knew them all.
Table 5. Non-users of contraceptive methods (percentages)
Brazil
Argentina
Women
Men
The men appeared to be better informed about more methods than the women, especially in Argentina. Single women in Brazil had the lowest levels of knowledge; 11.4 per cent knew no methods, compared to 3.9 per cent of the single men there. In order to investigate the quality of contraceptive knowledge, methods were grouped according to the frequency with which they were known by the sample population. The category of "least common knowledge" included the most well-known techniques (pills, condoms, abortion, tubal ligation and natural methods), plus others like diaphragms, IUDs, suppositories, and vasectomy. "Least common knowledge" represented modal values in both countries. Gender differences in relation to the "quality of knowledge" code were not significant in either country.
However, there were significant gender differences between the countries when it came to the best-known methods. For the men in both countries and the Brazilian women, the best-known methods were the pill and the condom, with natural methods ranking second. For Argentine women, it was abortion followed by natural methods. In contrast to Brazil, men in Argentina had heard little about tubal ligation and vasectomy, although the young there seemed more knowledgeable. Brazilians working in the modern sector know more than the others, probably because of factory attitudes to contraception. In both countries, however, there was little correlation between the knowledge and practice of contraception: high levels of knowledge did not necessarily result in high usage.
As table 5 shows, more than half the Brazilian women interviewed (the majority of whom were of childbearing age) did not take contraceptive precautions. Even fewer men did so. The proportion of non-users was lowest among Argentinian women. Actual birth-control practices will be considered in more detail when analysing the life-histories by age and gender, but this gap between knowledge and practice deserves closer attention. It might be thought that it was related to poverty, but women had relatively simple access to free pills in Brazil and cheap ones in Argentina. Condoms were also available for those on low incomes, and information on natural methods costs nothing. Deeper motives rooted in traditional gender stereotypes appeared to be more important than economic constraints. The life-histories showed how birth control was influenced by the concepts both genders had of woman's role in society as a mother of children, and of her basic responsibility for the consequences of
her sexual life.
Table 6. Female acceptance of abortion (percentages)
Acceptable circumstances
Brazil
Argentina
Under no circumstances
Life-threatening conditions and/or foetal defect
Likely loss of job and/or lack of economic means
No wish to have any, or any more, children
Other (or no answer)
Table 6 shows the circumstances under which the women interviewed would have an abortion. Most women, particularly those who were married, with or without children, would only resort to abortion if life were endangered and/ or there were foetal problems. A higher proportion of the Argentinian women declared that under no circumstances would they seek an abortion. Most who responded like this were younger workers. In contrast, hardly any of the young Brazilians held this view. Very few women in either country would seek an abortion to avoid having more children or if they wanted none at all.
Regardless of marital status or number of children, the women in both samples were almost equally divided between those who would consult their partner about a possible abortion and those who would decide alone. In Argentina, there was a correlation between the degree of autonomy on abortion decisions and knowledge of contraceptive methods. This trend was not so definite in Brazil. Regardless of whether or not they used birth control, most women gave physical danger or impairment as the main grounds for abortion. Other non-users said they would seek an abortion if their spouses or families disapproved of their pregnancy. Gender stereotypes seemed to have a stronger effect on Brazilian women's attitudes to abortion than on their knowledge or actual use of contraception.
The Life-histories
EMPLOYMENT
The events that have influenced the behaviour of the workers interviewed can best be understood by looking at their life-histories. These have been used to analyse their patterns of employment, marriage, fertility, family planning, and co-residence. Two fundamental factors which pertain to all these emerge from the life-histories. They show that the main differences were not so much between the workers from the two countries, but between the men and the women in the total sample. Secondly, and less surprisingly perhaps, they show how women's personal lives and both the social and biological aspects of their reproductive role affect working cycles greatly, and are greatly influenced by them.
The workers took their first jobs when they were very young, in early adolescence. The boys were even younger than the girls- 13 years old in Argentina and 15 in Brazil. The median ages for women were 17 and 16 respectively. When women entered the labour market younger than this, in Argentina it was usually to substitute for an ill or absent father-provider, while in Brazil it was also sometimes to contribute income to families with a lot of children. Girls entered the labour market later in Argentina, where they attended school while helping with household tasks.
Seventy-five per cent of Brazilian women and 39.2 per cent of Argentine women found their first job in textiles. Fifty-three per cent of the men in Argentina and 15 per cent in Brazil found their first work in "non-waged work in services, commerce and non-textile industries." These were mainly sporadic odd jobs in the informal sector, where remuneration and conditions of work were not covered by national labour laws. Fourteen per cent of the men in Argentina and 6.2 per cent of them in Brazil entered the workforce through "formal waged jobs in services and commerce" such as supermarket assistants, bus drivers, watchmen, and office-boys. Civil construction offered some their first job: 9 per cent of the Brazilian males and 6 per cent of the Argentinians entered the workforce via the building industry.
For women, domestic service was the second most frequent way into the labour market. Household staff were more highly paid (earning roughly US$80-120 a month, about a third more than in Brazil) and better treated in Argentina, and 30.3 per cent of the women there worked first as maids, compared to only 10 per cent in Brazil. The older females in Brazil tended to stay longer as domestic servants before moving to textiles. Younger women were usually recruited directly into textiles. The women switched from domestic service to textiles for much the same reason in both countries: the better labour regulations and health facilities for industrial workers.
The workers usually left their first jobs of their own accord, the males looking for better wages and the females for better working conditions. Women usually stayed in their first job for less time than the men did. Dismissal accounted for more of the Brazilian women leaving their first jobs: 16 per cent were fired for pregnancy. In Argentina, 23.9 per cent of the women quit their first jobs "of their own will" for reasons relating to their traditional role: marriage, birth of a child, or illness, either their own or that of another family member, which meant they had to take care of the household. More Argentinian women were occupied as housewives before they went into textiles: a third of them got married and/or had their first child before they entered the industry.
Male workers had a wider variety of jobs before entering textiles than the women, who usually had only had one. However, although the men joined textiles with more labour-force experience, this was not reflected in the type of jobs they got; for both genders these were usually unskilled. The figures show that 74 per cent of the Brazilian women, 64 per cent of the Brazilian men, and 93.3 per cent of all the Argentinians were unskilled workers in their first textile job. Subsequently, fewer women than men reached skilled or semi-skilled positions. In Argentina, 3.2 per cent of the men interviewed held skilled jobs; there were no women in that category. In Brazil, while 36 per cent of the men held skilled or semi-skilled jobs, only 26 per cent of the women did. More men than women had managed to climb up the occupational ladder between 1970 and 1980. This was particularly significant in Argentina, where the skilled jobs for men increased significantly during that period, while
they remained constant for women. In general, however, most workers in the industry remained unskilled throughout their entire working lives.
The Argentine sample had a longer tradition in employment. They entered the labour market in the 1960s, and the Brazilians in the 1970s. Both populations, however, have almost the same length of experience as workers in textiles, a sector to which they were recruited at the beginning of the 1970s: 61.1 per cent of the Argentinian sample and 66 per cent of the Brazilians were already working in textiles in 1970. However, the Argentine women entered the labour market six years later than their male counterparts: 10.4 per cent of those interviewed were housewives and 35.6 per cent were voluntarily unemployed in that year. It was different in Brazil, where the time-lag between male and female entry into the textiles industry related more to the men being employed elsewhere for longer periods than the women. However, women's rate of entry into textiles in Argentina in the 1970s was 1.9 per cent higher than men's. The period 1976-1985 was still more favourable for female
recruitment, like the period 1975-1980 in Brazil, when fewer men from the sample were absorbed into the sector. There were several reasons for this: the firms' search for cheaper labour in both countries, the impact of modernization strategies in Brazil, and the general crisis that impoverished the working classes in Argentina during the military regime and drew more women into the labour market. Fewer Argentinian workers joined the sector after 1980, a reflection of the more severe crisis there in industry generally and in textiles in particular. However, even in the crisis, the trend was still in favour of women. The ratio for Argentinian female recruits after 1980 was 9 per cent higher than for men.
MARRIAGE
Textile workers tended to marry within their own social class, mostly to others in the same industry or to workers in services or commerce. The highest proportion of marriages to textile (30 per cent) and other industrial workers (50 per cent) was found among the women in Brazil. Women were likely to find partners in such occupations in a town like Petrópolis, with a longer textile tradition and significant contemporary industrial diversification. The first spouses of 19 per cent of the Brazilian and 17.7 per cent of the Argentine men also worked in textiles. Many more men than women (33.3 per cent of the Argentinians and 26.5 per cent of the Brazilians) found their first spouse outside the labour market. In Argentina it was common for men to marry housemaids. However, domestic workers in Brazil were a much lower income group, more differentiated from industrial workers, and the men in the Brazilian sample seldom married them. In Argentina, the occupations of second spouses
were markedly different; they were much more likely to work in "other industrial, services, or commerce."
The workers married early: when they were 19.5 in Brazil and 22.5 in Argentina. Women tended to marry even earlier than men. The younger Brazilian women married earliest of all those in the samples, even earlier than the older women had. There were more marriages among the Argentine population; 84 per cent of the workers had married once, compared to 63 per cent of the Brazilians. Men in Argentina were more likely to embark on a second marriage: 75 per cent of them had married twice, compared to only 29.2 per cent of the women. Men tended to marry younger women and women to marry older men, in line with stereotyped gender roles.
Separation rates were similar in both countries - 15.3 per cent in Argentina and 13 per cent in Brazil. The proportion of women in Argentina who were separated was 12.6 per cent higher than the figure for men, perhaps indicating a positive correlation between separation and women in the industrial workforce that did not appear in Brazil. The qualitative information showed that female labour-force participation increased women's autonomy and introduced new household conflict about housework and child care more frequently in Argentina. This trend was undoubtedly related to the traditional perceptions of women working outside the house, which were particularly strong in Argentina. The effect of the tensions during the period of military rule between 1975 and 1980, when there was a registered separation rate of 8.9 per cent, may also have had an impact. Separated women tended to remain single. Men in Argentina had more stable unions and a higher disposition to both first and
second marriages. However, the women spent longer in their first marriages than the men did, tending to divorce only after five years of marriage. At the time of interview, 37 per cent of the females in the Argentine sample and 35.4 per cent of those in Brazil were single.
Workers in both countries tended to marry after some work experience. This reflected both the need to establish an income before marriage as well as the early age at which they entered the labour market. Women married after a shorter time in work than men. In Brazil, work seemed to delay female marriage two years more than in Argentina: Brazilians tended to have five years' work experience before marriage and Argentinians three years. There were very few cases of female textile workers marrying before they entered paid employment; there were no examples of this among the males, who were expected to be income-providers. Sexual intercourse before marriage or stable unions seemed frequent, especially in Brazil. However, it was difficult to obtain clear information on this topic in Argentina, because of the stronger traditional views on sexuality found in this country where religious influences are stronger.
FERTILITY AND CONTRACEPTION
Approximately half the female workers in the sample (52.6 per cent of the women in Argentina and 49.2 per cent in Brazil) had children; a higher proportion of the men had children. The average number of children per interviewee was low: three in Brazil and two in Argentina. Eighty-three per cent of all the Brazilian households included two to four children. In fact, the Brazilian sample had a fertility rate below the national average. Only 11.8 per cent of all the households in the survey had between five and eight children. Families with more than five children were less common in Argentina. Infant mortality rates in both samples were low in relation to the general population, particularly in Brazil, perhaps because of the relatively high economic status of the workers in Petrópolis. Moreover, national aggregate rates in that country tended to be skewed by figures from other low-income groups and particular regions. Only 5.8 per cent of the workers in Argentina had lost a
child before its first birthday.
Generally the women had their children earlier in their life-cycles than the men. Only 34.6 per cent of the Argentinian men had had children before they were 25, whereas 63.4 per cent of the women had children by that age. In Brazil, half the women had had children before 21, and half the men before 23. The younger age-cohorts had their children even earlier than the older workers had done.
Most women workers tended to wait longer than men after marriage or stable union to have their first child. Twenty-three per cent of the mothers in both samples waited two years. Industrial work undoubtedly influenced these women. In Argentina, it was clear that women tended to reduce the number of births once they were incorporated into the labour force, which both limited their reproductive role and widened their social horizons. In Brazil, a large number of women had been dismissed because of pregnancy. Men waited less time after marriage to have their first child, perhaps because the great majority of them had housewives or women outside the labour force as their first spouse, so their wives were available to care for children. Moreover, in general, family responsibility had less impact on the working lives of men.
Contraceptive use was slightly less extensive in Brazil than Argentina. However, all the Brazilian workers declared that they had used some form of contraception at some point in their lives. Less than half the Argentinians rated themselves as regular users. It was not possible to draw definite conclusions on comparative rates of birth control from the data available.
In Brazil, the population studied began using birth-control methods earlier in their twenties, at an average age of 23. In Argentina, 87.5 per cent of the sample first used contraceptive methods before the age of 30, and a higher proportion than in Brazil began contraception in their thirties. There was very little difference between the two samples in the types most used, which were the pill, the condom, and natural methods. The use of more than one method was more frequent among the Argentine sample. Three-quarters of the Brazilians, but only one-third of the Argentinians, continued to practice the first method they used.
Contraception was usually left to the women, a habit which increased in both countries after marriage. More of the women in the sample practiced contraception. They often began after the birth of their first child, when they were already in the textile sector. However, there did not seem to be any definite positive correlation between birth-control practices and formal employment, as there was between marriage and industrial work. Only qualitative data on the effect of labour-force participation on family planning after the first child were gathered, but it did not seem to have more impact than other factors like economic difficulties and exhaustion from the double burden of formal and domestic work.
Men tended to start birth control relatively earlier in their life-cycles, as early as 19 in Brazil. The data suggest that they later abandoned their early contraceptive practices more frequently than women did, though men in Brazil returned to the use of condoms to a certain extent when they were older. They seemed to take more responsibility for family planning after they had had several children. Argentina showed the opposite trend: there was a significant increase in male non-users as the sample population aged between 1970 and 1980. In general, it may be said that very few men shared contraception responsibilities with their wives or permanent partners.
Condoms were the contraceptive most frequently used by men in both countries. It was the first method for 61 per cent of the Brazilian men who practiced contraception, and 55.7 per cent of the Argentinians. Men in Argentina also began birth-control use with natural methods: coitus interruptus was the initial practice of 42.2 per cent of them. In Brazil, it was used by only 31.7 per cent of the men, all of them among the older workers.
The majority of women in the Brazilian sample (73 per cent) chose the pill as their first birth-control method. This was the case for 50 per cent of the sample in Argentina, where the women used a wider range of methods, the second most common being abstaining from sexual intercourse during the fertile period of their ovulation. This technique was practiced by 31.2 per cent in Argentina but only 16 per cent in Brazil. Sterilization (mainly by tubal ligation) rates were also very different in the two samples. In Brazil, where it was encouraged by government policies, it had become widespread, and 10.9 per cent of the women in the sample had been sterilized. It was commonly performed during caesarean births, and the positive correlation between caesarean births and sterilization had risen to 31 per cent at the national level by 1985. This method had been chosen by only one woman in the Argentine sample (1.5 per cent of the sample). On the other hand, monthly injections to
suppress fertility were only used in Argentina, where it was the third most common method, adopted by 7.8 per cent of the women. Other methods, such as the IUD and the diaphragm, were seldom used in either country, largely on account of their higher cost. In both countries, a diaphragm could cost US$30-60 and an IUD US$25-40), while the pill or monthly injection could be obtained for US$2-4 a month, and sometimes for even less or free of charge in Brazil.
Given the types of methods most commonly used in each country, it is apparent that the Brazilian sample had access to more adequate and secure birth control, while the less reliable natural methods were more likely to be used by the Argentine population of both genders. There was still a relatively high proportion of women in both countries - a quarter of the Argentinian women and a third of those in Brazil who were not using any form of contraception at the time they were interviewed. Most of them said this was because they were not involved in an ongoing sexual relationship. In Argentina, the most frequent explanation was that they were not likely to have sexual intercourse because they were too young or had no stable or legitimate partner. In Brazil, the emphasis was more on just not having a sexual partner. There, abortion was openly considered an important birth-control resource in the case of "accidents" within an occasional sexual relationship. It was clear that women
in both countries had less continuity in their contraceptive practices during their life-cycles than the men did.
HOUSEHOLDS
The textile workers studied tended to have stable living arrangements throughout their lives. More than half of them changed living arrangements only once, usually from choice rather than necessity. This was normally when they formed a new household after marriage. In Brazil, the number of workers who had never changed residence during their lifetime was higher. At the time of their first job, most workers in both countries lived with their family of origin, or, more specifically, with their mothers. This was due not only to the death of their fathers, but also because of the number of men who had abandoned their wives. In Petrópolis, the fathers had often migrated in search of better jobs. Most of these young workers living at home were men. As mentioned earlier, it was common for women to take their first job in domestic service, living in with a wealthier family that provided board and lodging as weld as a small wage. Later, when they got their first textile job, the
women returned to live with their parents.
Most workers moved away from their parents' home when they got married, although there were differences between the practices in each country. It was common for many Brazilian workers to co-reside with their families of origin after marriage until they obtained government funds to buy their own house. Thirty-eight per cent of the sample there still lived with a parent or parent-in-law, an arrangement which sometimes persisted until after the birth of their first child. This was less common in Argentina. Reorganization of the domestic group, involving a higher degree of co-residence with parents and in-laws, was more frequent in Argentina at the time the first child was born. In Brazil, the number of compound families decreased between 1970 and 1980, when most of the population studied had had their first child. The median year of first childbirths (1974) coincided with the main thrust of modernization in the textile industry, when many women lost their jobs. The lower
incidence of co-residence when the first child was born suggests that unemployed women workers could engage in full-time child care. It also reflects the longer time it took Brazilian workers to form their own households after marriage and the birth of their first child. In general, families in both countries retained an accentuated nuclear form through the workers' lives.
CASE-STUDIES
Broadly speaking, the pattern of life-cycle events was similar in both samples. The workers found a first job; later they moved to the textiles industry. They married a few years before or after that; they moved from their parental home; they had their first child and only then began to practice contraception. However, there were certain important differences by gender and age between the two countries.
Brazilian women spent fewer years between their entry into the textiles industry and marriage (three years was the median) than the men did, as well as between marriage and the birth of their first child (also a three-year median). Life-cycle events followed each other rapidly in these women's lives. There was strong work continuity, and although both the biological and sociological aspects of their reproductive role interfered with their working lives in many ways, they experienced less disruption than the Argentine women. Indeed, marriage and labour-force participation were closely interwoven for them, and their industrial setting was a major factor in their socialization and search for a partner.
A discontinuous work history was more common among the Argentine women This was most striking when compared to men's working life in that country. Argentine women acted more in accordance with gender stereotypes regarding sexual intercourse, marriage, birth control, and, most specifically, child care. For them, traditional values were a major factor in delaying nuptiality and childbearing after they became industrial workers. They had longer time-spans between these three events than the Brazilian women, but this was not because they were more work-oriented: they felt that, once married, their flexibility and autonomy in decision-making might be surrendered to men. Births, marriage, and illness in the domestic group could make them retire, apparently voluntarily, from the formal labour force. These pressures represented a spectrum of socio-cultural determinants which established what is required of women. They accepted the demands and fulfilled the expectations. In both
populations, birth control started later for women than for men, but then it became almost solely their responsibility. Contraception was initiated after marriage and first childbirth, especially among Argentine women. This pattern of contraception was a central factor in the greater impact that women's personal life-cycles had on their employment, and vice versa, during their reproductive life. In general, males in both countries had more varied employment and greater work continuity than females. They also delayed marriage and reproduction relative to their early start in the workforce, especially in Argentina.
Among the young there was a clear tendency to experience certain events like marriage, reproduction, and contraception earlier, particularly in Brazil. Their ideas about fertility and marriage were directly related to this change. Young workers looked forward to getting married and starting a family immediately, even though they initiated birth control earlier than the older workers had. However, patterns of employment and co-residence were much the same for both the younger and the older cohorts.
Lidia's life-history illustrates a typical profile of a woman in the older cohort of those surveyed in Brazil. A summary of her life as it has been shaped by occupation, marriage, fertility, contraception, and co-residence presents a typical example of the kind of events and sequences most common among her peers in that country.
At the time of the research Lidia was 38 years old. She was born in 1947 in a household made up of her father, who was a municipal civil servant, her mother, who was a textile worker, and four kin. When she was eight years old her father died and her mother used to send her to the local crèche, where she picked her up after work. In 1963, when she was 16, she started work in the local textile firm where her mother and brothers were already employed. Lidia says that her mother considered this family continuity "as natural." After two years there she found a boyfriend five years her senior who was a taxi-driver. She had had a fellow textile worker as a boyfriend before that, but the relationship did not develop because of problems at work.
She married at 19, an event which coincided with her losing her job because the firm had run into difficulties. As Lidia put it: "The factory was in crisis; it delayed wage payments; you rotated between jobs; so I decided to find a boyfriend." In other words, she had expectations of economic security through this relationship. This was characteristic of the older generation of Brazilian women, although in Lidia's case it turned out to be an illusion. After her marriage she left her household of origin to live alone with her husband. Shortly after that she found a job in a modern textile factory.
After marriage, she began taking the pill. She was 20 at the time. She says this was because they were not in an economic position to raise a child. Her husband collaborated on and off with contraception, using condoms. They both planned their first child, who was born three years after their marriage, when Lidia was 22. After the birth, she continued using contraceptives, a practice she maintained until two years before the interview.
All this time, however, her husband was drinking heavily and they had many problems in their relationship. Because of this and his lack of economic support, they separated for seven months, but she went back to him. She kept her second job for nine years, until she was dismissed because she commanded too high a wage - she was replaced by a younger worker on a lower wage. This happened in 1975, during the modernization of the industry. She stayed unemployed for 10 months, using her time to make ice-cream at home for sale. Finally, she found a job in another textile firm, in which she was working at the time of the interview.
In her conversation, Lidia interrelated private events with what was happening in the workforce: for example, her own employment opportunities and the fact that she belonged to a family traditionally of textile workers. She repeated several times that "to be in the factory was like being at home." Her marriage and motherhood did not interfere significantly with her occupational history. This was a characteristic of Brazilian female workers, in contrast to the Argentinian sample, who experienced greater work discontinuity because of nuptiality or childbearing. In Lidia's case, unemployment was the result of dismissal.
Lidia was atypical in her use of contraception, both because she and her husband shared responsibility for it and because she used it earlier than the average woman in her age-cohort in Brazil. However, she is typical in waiting a longer time between marriage and her first child (three years) than the younger generation did.
Indeed, the study suggests a number of key differences in the behaviour and life-course of the two cohorts of Brazilian women. In many cases, the younger women had worked as domestic servants, a situation which they usually disliked, before they moved to the textiles industry. This shows the diversification of occupations in Petrópolis which years ago consisted of traditional families of textile workers. Maria and Juana described their experiences in the interviews.
María: "The first time I looked for work, I went out asking people if they needed a maid. I found a woman who was interested and I got a job. Afterwards, I quit and stayed at home for a while. Then I worked for another family for five years. The woman had a job outside the home and I took care of the children, the house, and the washing. Then they moved to Sao Paulo and wanted to take me with them, but I didn't go because my own family needed me so much, you know. I remained unemployed for a while, until I found a job in the factory where I still am. . . I prefer the factory; there we have all our rights. Living and working in the house of a family, you don't have any. . . I weep over the five years I wasted on that job. . . "
Juana: "Then I went to work as a live-in maid in the house of a family, because at that time there were six of us at home. . . things were very difficult. . .I worked in this house until August. Then I left and stayed home until December, and the summer began. I began to work in another house. . . there I did the cleaning. . . today I could continue working as a domestic, but I don't want to . . . we are treated like things. . . I'm going to work in a factory; there I'm not going to know who the boss (patrão) is."
In her interview Maria referred to the fact that her family really needed her help. Up to the time she got her job, she had taken responsibility for most of the household tasks. Her paid employment as a domestic servant was virtually an extension of her activities within her own home. Maria's home life thus conditioned her manner of entry into the labour market. It is also possible to observe the effect of household pressures in Juana's case when she says "at that time there were six of us at home."
Both the women were young when they joined the workforce. Maria did so at the age of 17, a year later than the average woman in the study. Juana began working when she was 13 years old. Both entered the labour force as domestic servants. Both said that they preferred to work in a factory rather than as domestic servants, given the benefits that factory work provided. It should be remembered that the employment of domestic servants was not rigorously controlled by labour legislation in Brazil, and domestic workers arc often subject to excessive demands and unreasonable working conditions without access to any legal recourse.
The younger women in Brazil tended to marry immediately after entering the labour market, at an average age of 21. They had usually begun contraception three years earlier than the older cohort, frequently after having their first child, like Amalia, whose experiences follow. Younger women chose the pill more often than the older women, though this does not mean they were necessarily more aware of birth-control methods than the older women. They also tended to begin sexual relations before using contraception. The younger women talked about sexuality and contraception more openly and their opinions were more independent and less traditional.
Amalia, for example, was a single mother who explained how she began taking the pill. "My mother never informed me about the pill. She said she opposes the use of it; she says it destroys women's health . . . My cousin gave me the name of that pill I take now. . . I don't know about other contraceptive methods, I've never asked the doctor. . . I never made use of contraception, I wasn't even worried, but after I became pregnant I had twins and they died and I didn't want to have any more. . . This baby was lack of care. . . I tried to do everything, take injections, but it was useless. I tried to induce an abortion in many ways. . . but now he is born, he is everybody's joy." Amalia, who never practiced contraception before her first birth and resorted to contraception only after the loss of her twins in their first week, when she was in an unstable relationship, thought that contraception was ineffective (she only knew of the pill her cousin recommended) and, if she became
pregnant again, she said she would try to induce an abortion, which she regarded as necessary in an extreme case.
Yolanda, who was 26 and had five children, said the doctor had given her vaginal contraceptives but they had been ineffective. She said it was impossible to have a lot of children without help to bring them up. She got no help from her husband or family and that is why she had had a tubal ligation during her last caesarean delivery. Both interviews showed how women may have few contraceptive resources in spite of apparent access to them. However, they were prepared to talk frankly about extreme ways to control their fertility.
In Argentina, the younger female workers also entered the labour market early, though not as young as in Brazil. In Argentina, the absence of a father provider was more likely to cause girls to take their first job early. If not subject to this pressure, the younger women stayed at school longer. Clara, who was 18 at the time of the interview, had been taken care of by her grandparents since the age of seven, when her parents divorced. She was still living with her grandmother when she began to work at 14. Clara explained the importance of her wage in family subsistence: "When I started working, I saved some money to buy clothes and handed the rest to my grandmother. . . and she bought things for the house. . . " In spite of this early involvement in the labour market, she did not use contraceptives because she considered that "the time has not come yet." The young Argentinian women began sexual activity later than the Brazilian girls and they were less open about their
sexuality, fertility, and contraception.
Many of the older Argentinian women had quit their jobs because of marriage, childbirth, or family illness, which resulted in greater discontinuity in the pattern of their productive activity than shown in the histories of their Brazilian counterparts. Employment was commonly interrupted when they had a baby, as in Nina's case. Nina's son was born at the beginning of 1971. She re-entered the textile industry when the boy was two, considering that "by then, he could stay with his grandmother. " It would seem that children of this age were perceived to be less in need of personal attention and it was not so risky to entrust them to someone else at this point. The end of a marriage or union was another critical point which could force a woman to re-enter the market where she had already had experience. This happened to Maria, who had left her textiles job in 1962 when her first child was born. When she separated from her husband in 1971, she was employed again at the same
factory where she had worked before.
The behaviour of the women in both cohorts followed more traditional patterns in Argentina than in Brazil. The comments of one of them on what her husband's family thought of a working woman illustrated gender stereotypes which were encountered more frequently in Argentina: "They think a woman must stay at home, and the man in the street. Actually, for my father-in-law, women working at the factory are not decent, and when his daughters were 13 he made them work as live-in maids (domestic service). He prefers them to work with a family rather than in a factory. Many times I tried to convince my sisters-in-law to come and work with me, but he wouldn't let them because for him women working in a factory are all light-headed." The older women also reinforced social stereotypes, for example when they considered the possibilities of sexual intercourse and contraception only in terms of a stable union. Lila, a 35-year-old interviewee, declared that she did not use contraceptives
"because I am separated and don't have a spouse now."
PERCEPTIONS
There were thus some clearly perceptible differences in women's behaviour according to their age and country. Some seeds of change were discernible among the younger group, especially in Brazil. However, the main differences were more a matter of ideology than practice, and general attitudes to women's role as workers and wage-earners continued to influence their behaviour. This of course included the perceptions the workers had of themselves: how they saw women's work and wages in general as well as their attitude to their own wages and attachment to the textile labour force. The women in the groups studied provided a significant proportion of their household's income. In spite of this, an amazing proportion of men in both countries said that women should "under no circumstances work outside the home." Thirty-seven per cent of the men interviewed in Argentina and 17.4 per cent in Brazil expressed this opinion. Usually, the more the men contributed to household income, the
less they accepted women's work in the labour market. More striking still was the fact that some (7.6 per cent in Argentina and 2.8 per cent in Brazil) of the female workers themselves agreed. Negative views on women's paid work increased among both genders when there were small children: 5.5 per cent of the Brazilian women and 12.9 per cent of the Argentinian women agreed that women should not work in these circumstances. Men felt even more strongly about this than women: 19.1 per cent of them in Brazil and 19.5 per cent in Argentina considered waged work for women unacceptable when they had small children. The agreement between the genders on this point was even greater in Argentina than in Brazil.
In response to further inquiry about the circumstances in which women might work outside their homes, the main reason given by both samples was "[when] it is necessary to maintain the household." For both genders, women's work was accepted when it was a matter of necessity. This was most clearly expressed by the men: women could work outside the home when it was a question of need, but they should not gain autonomy from this involvement in the labour market. While a third of the men in both samples and 49.2 per cent and 33.1 per cent of the Argentinian and Brazilian women respectively considered women's work as acceptable when the family had to be maintained, only 12.2 per cent of them in Brazil and 3.1 per cent in Argentina thought of female workforce participation as a way to guarantee independence from their husbands' wages. Thirty-five per cent of the Brazilian women saw the money as a way to acquire autonomy but only 16.7 per cent of the Argentine women agreed. This
difference of opinion among the women in the two countries persisted even among women who provided more than 75 per cent of their household's income.
Hence, although the Argentine women were more realistic about the importance of their income to family subsistence, their status vis-a-vis their husbands was less questioned. In both countries, women whose contribution was about equal to their husbands' (those bringing in 41 to 59 per cent of family income) believed that work made them more independent. Making a similar contribution helped them balance their advantages as workers. Only 25.5 per cent of the Brazilian sample and 10.1 per cent of the Argentines entertained the idea of women's work as a way to acquire a career. Certain changes in behavioural patterns and perceptions were appearing among the younger workers in both samples. They found it less difficult to accept female participation in the labour market and the new roles which might develop from this. They were also more accepting of wider autonomy for women, which implied new roles for the men, too. More independence for women did not make the young men feel as
threatened as it did the old men.
In spite of the generally negative opinions expressed about women's waged work, most of the women were more realistic than their male counterparts in acknowledging that their wages "are very necessary" for family survival. Yet a large proportion of the women in both countries (46.2 per cent in Brazil and 21.2 per cent in Argentina) regarded their wages as merely complementary. Men in both countries were less ready to admit the extent of women's contribution: women's wages were regarded as complementary by two-thirds of them in each country. Only 11.3 per cent of the Brazilian men considered women's wages as essential for family subsistence; they generally regarded themselves as the main providers. However, the sample showed that 34.2 per cent of the women provided 60 per cent or more of their households' income. Argentine men were somewhat more realistic: 31.3 per cent of them acknowledged women's wages as essential. In general, women's employment was accepted as an economic
necessity, but there was little appreciation of new roles for women.
These opinions were expressed in a context of perceived impoverishment. Seventy-three per cent of Argentine men declared that their economic situation in relation to both wages and stability had not improved or had worsened since they entered the textiles industry. More women (33.3 per cent) than men (20.3 per cent) recorded a positive change in their economic situation. More of the Brazilian workers (58.6 per cent of the women and 56.5 per cent of the men) registered an improvement in their lives. However, whether the men thought their situation had improved or deteriorated did not seem to make much difference to their stereotyped views of women's work and wages. Indeed, in spite of the marked socio-economic improvement in their lives as textile workers and their obvious role as providers of a significant proportion of their family income, most women, too, considered their wages as complementary and their work as acceptable mainly on the grounds of helping to maintain their
families.
<section>Conclusions</section>
The results of the study raise questions on a number of issues of crucial concern for planners and policy-makers in developing countries. They have implications for employment and technology policies, for income distribution, training projects, and family-planning programmes, and for demographic forecasting in relation to the industrial workforce. They also raise questions about methods of developing labour statistics and data on low-income groups. The special emphasis on women's issues in this study provided a useful perspective from which to consider these points.
It is clearly essential to raise the awareness of policy-makers to the impact of new technologies on the number, distribution, and content of jobs and the quality of work and life among different occupational categories. The study shows the need to devote greater attention to devising instruments to monitor the effects of new technologies on the employment of low-level industrial workers. The establishment of unemployment funds for selected categories of industrial workers and the provision of subsidies to industries operating with labour-stability clauses, negotiated agreements with labour unions on patterns of recruitment and wages, including those for part-time and shift workers, and a thorough examination of the effects on both genders should be integrated components of programmes of technological change.
Moreover, as the study shows, there arc important gender differences in the effects on unemployment and labour deployment of technological renewal and policies which seek to rationalize cost structures by the use of cheap labour. New industrialization strategies in developing countries should involve the establishment of local monitoring bodies like the Equal Opportunities Commission in the United Kingdom to ensure equitable treatment and conditions for men and women.
While there is a growing awareness of the need for national investment in new technologies in order to develop comparative advantages in an increasingly internationalized trading system, their impact on employment is not necessarily taken into account in macro-level discussions or policy proposals. The national workforce is sometimes considered only as a source of cheap labour to enhance advantages in international markets or import-substitution policies as part of broad stabilization programmes. The results of the study shed light on how the everyday lives of working people are affected by incremental technological change. By analogy, they illustrate the type of short- and long-term consequences for employment, unemployment, and income distribution which can follow the introduction of new technologies in other low-income groups and other countries. As the pace of radical technological change quickens, it becomes imperative to increase national sensitivity to its broad
socioeconomic implications.
The study also delineates the types of household arrangements low-income populations set up for economic survival. Many of them depend on several members of the domestic group working for wages, but the burdens of this strategy may fall very heavily on women, who must then carry the double workload of remunerated and family work, and children, especially boys, who have to enter the workforce very early. This suggests an urgent need for policy-makers to formulate more realistic pay structures and fixed national minimum wages, based on a reappraisal of the costing components by which many wages are calculated and accompanied by closer monitoring of actual industrial practice. Programmes to supply a free or subsidized "basic needs basket" to needy populations have been satisfactorily implemented during crisis periods in some developing countries; indeed, some low-income or unemployed groups in Argentina have been supported in this way since 1985. This type of alternative policy
instrument could be more closely studied. Variations of it could be and applied in periods of industrial stagnation or economic difficulty, whether local or consequent on international strategies.
The research generated valuable material on demographic trends and family planning. In the 1960s, policies encouraged slowing population growth as a means of limiting poverty and raising standards of living. However, the study shows that having children in the labour market was sometimes crucial to the survival of low-income households. Government family-planning policies should then be integrated with programmes to ameliorate material conditions in poor households.
Family-planning programmes need to include persuasive campaigns to motivate and train both genders so that they share responsibility and decisions on birth control. Firm managers, factory doctors, and trade union representatives should also be the target of programmes to raise sensitivity and awareness of family-planning issues. This should diminish both the coercive practices and attitudes reflected in the high correlation found between caesarean births and female sterilization in Brazil, and the widespread loss of industrial jobs due to pregnancy. There appeared to be little real knowledge about the risk of contraceptive pills, the most widespread method of birth control in both countries, in either of the populations studied. The findings suggest that abortion, although illegal, is quite common. There is an obvious need to monitor birth-control measures and biased family-planning programmes.
Moreover, the workers' access to national family-planning programmes was shown to be inadequate or unsatisfactory. Traditional gender-stereotyped attitudes towards both birth control and housework, and biased perceptions of the importance of women's work and wages, continued to exert a powerful influence on behaviour. Low-income groups' distrust of government initiatives was apparent. Policy-makers could utilize existing community-based organizations to lead family-planning education and raise consciousness on related issues. Channelling national funds through such local groups could also be more cost-effective.
Relevant labour statistics are fundamental to the policy innovations suggested. Heightened awareness of the problems indicated should encourage policy-makers to seek ways of collecting statistical information that will allow these issues to be studied and addressed. At present much of the information available is collected and classified in such a way that the identification and/or definition of certain specific labour and household problems is difficult. The political will to insist on better statistical approaches and methods could hasten the solution of the technical problems which now inhibit progress in this field.
In times of rapid technical change and household poverty, it is crucial to have overall figures disaggregated by gender and age as well as by location. Information should be collected not only by sector or branch of industry, but by occupation within them, in far more detail than it is now. A closer matching of the information gathered in national industrial and employment censuses on the one hand, and population and household censuses and surveys on the other, would be beneficial. The study suggests a number of important fields where the aggregate data are now insufficient, unavailable, or mismatched. For example, household data by income level do not usually include type of occupation per age and gender of the head and other members of the household. This complicates the relating of data on living standards to information on wages and employment in various industrial sectors, which constrains the possibility of forecasting changes that might result from alternative
industrialization or economic policies.
The findings show the advantages of analysing the behaviour of men and women comparatively, especially when both genders are in the same type of employment. This approach helps us to discover which patterns are general to a certain category of workers and which are specifically gender-related. This has been one of the major gaps in previous research on women's issues, especially in Latin America. The lack of data on income allocation among different groups and of comparative studies within and between developing countries which take gender and age differences in account, and the dearth of studies exploring these differences within households, continue to inhibit the recognition of problems and effective means of addressing them. Comparative life-history studies of men and women of different generations within a particular group can be a valuable source of the kind of data needed, as well as providing useful pointers to areas needing further research.
Such studies require innovative methodologies for gathering data, including the establishing of appropriate relations between the interviewees and the interviewers, especially when exploring sensitive and private topics. In the course of this research, the interviewers encountered a high level of refusal to participate in the quantitative studies, but more positive attitudes towards the qualitative component. This is consistent with the well-founded fears and suspicions of people who have long been subjected to economic, social, political, and gender repression and/or manipulation. Both the quantitative and the qualitative surveys are necessary and it is therefore important to remember that the time taken to establish confidence and trust is necessary to obtain valid information and to allow the research to become an opportunity for mutual learning.
Quantitative and qualitative analyses based on life-history data provide valid measures of the way individual behaviour influences work in the public sphere and vice versa. This approach and women's studies can clarify the way in which individuals and households respond and relate to macro-level events and so offer important insights and perspectives on national problems and development. However, to relegate women's studies to a secondary area that only deals with problems thought to be specific to them is to overlook an important research opportunity, especially as women may be a crucial source of labour for future industrialization policies as well as the mainstay of the households which sustain and influence the effects of these policies.
Investigating the inter-relationship between waged work and the household throws light on patterns of gender subordination and the need for their renegotiations. Gender roles in society will remain relatively unchanged without a transformation of power relations in the household. The theory that more equal contributions to household income will lead to more equitable distribution of power within them turns out to be too simplistic. It is necessary to look at ways in which authority is associated with the use and distribution of income and other social resources and services through which power is negotiated. Women's actual behaviour and their perception of themselves were modified by their domestic setting. The contradiction between practice and perception documented in both Brazil and Argentina shows the need to differentiate between them in research and to consider both when designing consciousness-raising programmes.
Finally, the comparison of different age-cohorts allows for prospective fore casting. The seeds of new behaviour were discernible in the younger generations: it is they who will construct the future.
<section>References</section>
Acero, L. 1984. Technical Change in a Newly Industrializing Country: A Case-study of the Impacts on Employment in the Brazilian Textiles Industry. SPRU Occasional Paper, no. 22.
Acero, L., I.N. Perez Vichich, M. Arunada, and S. Severini. 1987. Textile Workers in Argentina: Household, Gender, and Age. Final Progress Report, UNU/IUPERJ. Buenos Aires.
Acero, L., and A. Rotania. 1986. Textile Workers in Brazil: Household, Gender, and Age. Final Progress Report, UNU/IUPERJ. Rio de Janeiro.
Bacha, E.L. 1977. Issues and Evidence on Recent Brazilian Economic Growth. World Development, 5 (1,2).
Barroso, C., and T. Amado. 1987. The Impact of the Crisis upon Poor Women's Health: The Case of Brazil. In: UNICEF, The Invisible Adjustment. UNICEF, Santiago de Chile.
Cardoso, F.H. 1973. Associated-dependent Development: Theoretical and Practical Implications. In: A. Stepan, ed., Authoritarian Brazil: Origins, Policies and Futures. Yale University Press, New Haven/London.
Cebotarev, E.A. 1984. A organização do tempo das atividades domésticas de mulheres camponesas na América Latina. In: N. Aguiar, ed., Mulheres na força de trabalho na América latina. Vozes, Petrópolis.
Cole, S., and I. Miles. 1964. Worlds Apart; Technology and North-South Relations in the Global Economy. UNITAR/SPRU. Rowman & Allenheld, London.
Feijoo, M., and E. Jelín. 1987. Women from Low-income Sectors: Economic Recession and Democratization of Politics in Argentina. In: UNICEF, The Invisible Adjustment. UNICEF, Santiago de Chile.
INDEC (Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Censos). 1980. Censo demográfico. Buenos Aires.
INDEC (Instituto Nacional de Estadística y Censos). 1984. La pobreza en la Argentina. Buenos Aires.
International Labour Organisation. 1980-1987. Yearbook of Labour Statistics. ILO, Geneva.
Palma, G. 1981. Dependency and Development: A Critical Overview. In: D. Seers, ed., Dependency Theory, A Critical Assessment. Frances Pinter, London.
Schmitz, H. 1982. Manufacturing in the Backyard: Case Studies on Accumulation and Employment in Small Industry. Allanheld Osmun & Co.
United Nations. 1980-1987. Demographic Yearbook. UN, New York.
<section>Determinants of women's employment in Chile: a life-history approach</section>
Eugenia Muchnik de Rubinstein
Department of Agricultural Economics, School of Agriculture, Catholic University or Chile
Isabel Vial de Valdés
Institute of Nutrition and Food Technology, University or Chile
Lucía Pardo
Institute of Nutrition and Food Technology, University of Chile
<section>Background</section>
An analysis of national census data since 1907 and long-term labour trends in the city of Santiago provided background information for this study to improve the understanding of current generational differences in women's workforce behaviour. A life-history methodology, based on data from two age-cohorts selected from a cross-sectional sample of households, was implemented to assess the effect of demographic and socio-economic change and different patterns of family formation on women's labour-force participation.
Chile is a country with a low population density. The 1970 census gave a total population of 8.9 million, but the National Planning Office estimated under-enumeration by about 4.8 per cent, so it was probably in the order of 9.4 million. The last population census (1982) put the figure at approximately 11.3 million. Since 1970, the annual rate of population growth has been between 1.5 and 2 per cent, which is below the average both for Latin America and for countries with similar per capita incomes. This growth is almost exclusively the result of natural Increase.
Labour-force participation rates, which express the ratio between the population in the labour market and the total population of 12 years of age and over, are influenced by both demographic and socio-economic change. Three main demographic trends have shaped population growth in Chile. The first was a steady decline in mortality rates starting in 1907, which resulted in greater longevity, especially for women. The second was a proportionally greater decline in infant mortality rates, which followed much later. In 1960, Chile had one of the highest infant mortality rates in Latin America- 120.3 deaths per 1,000 live births. By 1970, the rate had dropped by 34 per cent; neonatal (less than 28 days) rates had fallen by 11 per cent and general mortality had decreased by 30 per cent. Between 1970 and 1980, infant mortality was further reduced by 60 per cent, the neonatal rate by 48 per cent, and general mortality by 23 per cent. The decline was fastest in the periods 1976-1980
and 1980-1983.
Third, there was a long-term drop in the birth-rate after the 1920s and 1930s, (with the exception of the period 1952-1960), which became particularly noticeable after 1970. These demographic characteristics have affected the structure and composition of both the working and the total population. For example, the increase in population growth in the 1950s partially explains the decline in the total labour force in the 1970s and early 1980s.
These changes have altered both the age distribution of the population and the proportion of the population in the labour force. While the total labour force declined during the second half of the 1960s, it has been increasing since 1970. The National Bureau of Statistics (INK) estimated it to be approximately 2.9 million in 1970 and 3.9 million in 1984. An examination of census data since 1907 shows that male and female labour-force participation has declined, although both series present long-term cyclical changes. Since the 1952 census, male participation has declined comparatively more than female participation, which the 1982 census shows to have increased since 1970 (Muchnik and Vial, 1987). Women's workforce participation in the period 1960 to 1982 was relatively stable, fluctuating between 20.9 and 26.5 per cent. At the end of 1984, 30.7 per cent (1,196,100) of the workforce were women. By mid-1985, their proportion had increased to 34.6 per cent, a rise of 3.9 per
cent in one year. In spite of this and the widespread increase in women's labour-market participation in developing countries in recent decades, women in Latin America, including Chile, have had one of the lowest participation rates, although they have had at least as much, and often more, formal education and technical training than women in the rest of the third world.
In Chile, as in other Latin American countries, there has been a significant rural-urban migration, particularly during the 1950s and 1960s. The impact of migration on the participation of women in the urban labour market is not easy to identify because it occurred simultaneously with other changes like increased enrolment in secondary education. The number of girls coming in to look for work may have been counterbalanced by those who stayed on in school and so sought employment later, with the result that the effect on the participation rate was probably postponed until the 1970s.
Labour-force participation rates are also influenced by socio-economic factors including education, financial pressures, and modifications in role perceptions. There have been important changes in illiteracy rates, school attendance, and the average educational level in Chile. Illiteracy has decreased substantially since 1907, while secondary-school attendance has continued to increase since the educational reform in 1965. Since 1940, the literacy rates of men and women have been about the same, and no significant gender differences in terms of years of education are apparent in the 1982 census.
These trends in education affect labour-force participation as well as the age distribution of the economically active population. An important proportion of very young people (12 to 14 years of age) began to postpone their participation in the labour force by extending their schooling; after 1960, there was an even greater reduction in the proportion of working women in the 15-19 age-bracket. Increased female participation rates since 1977 could be associated with the higher wages expected to follow the rise in education levels, which is reflected in the greater number of women professionals and technicians.
A comparison between 1960 and 1982 census data shows a 25 per cent increase in the proportion of married women in the labour force. This is not so much due to a small observed increase in nuptiality rates, but rather to the higher proportion of married women who took up formal economic activity. It is also evident that the labour-force participation of married women with one to four children increased between 1961) and 1982. It is not yet clear whether this represents a long-term trend or is more a consequence of deteriorating economic conditions. Rosales (1979) suggests that in a recession the labour-force participation of low-income women increases, while that of medium- and high-income women decreases. The lower real wages and general unemployment force poorer women, including those with children, to work in order to maintain family income. Better-off women, on the other hand, are deterred from entering the workforce by the lower real wages and the higher opportunity cost
of their time.
This is borne out by data which show that the workforce participation rates of poorer women increased from 18 to 22.4 per cent during 1975, a year of crisis characterized by rising and falling real incomes. The participation of middle- and high-income women decreased significantly at this time.
Another indicator of their increasing involvement in formal economic activity and of their need to work in difficult times - was their participation in government programmes like the Programa de Empleo Mínimo (PEM) (Minimum Employment Programme) and, later, in a special programme for heads of households, Programa de Ocupación para Jefes de Hogar (POJH). Women's high participation rates in these programmes was remarkable, especially as many of them had to cope simultaneously with child care. A survey of 10,000 PEM participants in June 1982 showed that 52.3 per cent of them were women (Cheyre and Ogrodnic, 1982). Seventy per cent were aged between 18 and 40, and so likely to be raising children, and 22 per cent were invalids and sick women who worked up to eight hours a day in the programme. While there are as yet no comparable studies of the POJH program, a newspaper survey of eight communities showed that a somewhat lower proportion of women also took part in this programme,
in which they worked seven hours a day, frequently performing the same heavy duties as men (Buvinic, 1983).
According to consumer demand theories, individuals and families seek to maximize the relative benefits that they perceive that they derive from the consumption of goods, some of which have to be purchased and some of which are produced at home, and from leisure time. In order to obtain the market goods, members of the household must devote part of their time to work in order to generate income. This in turn implies less time for either leisure or the production of other goods or services in the home. This dilemma is particularly relevant in the case of housewives, as the production of domestic goods and services is very time-consuming and therefore competes with the allocation of time to market work. Cultural norms in countries like Chile usually assign household responsibilities such as child care, household maintenance, and food production to women.
It is well known that conventional definitions of women's activities consistently underestimate their economic functions as well as their productive contribution to society. Several features of women's work at home contribute to this. The partial and sporadic nature of women's income-generating activities, payments in kind, and the fact that many of their tasks (for example, child care, washing, or sewing) are carried out concurrently with regular home-keeping duties make it difficult to observe and measure the full extent of their economic activities. Sometimes their work is not even perceived as such by women themselves, and although household activities which do not generate income also have significant economic value, they are not usually included in national accounts or statistics.
When an individual does not participate in the labour market, it is possible to estimate his or her reservation wage, that is, the maximum wage at which the individual is not willing to work in the market. In other words, the reservation wage represents the value assigned to time spent in activities outside the market. The individual's willingness to participate in the labour market will depend therefore on the difference between the market wage and his or her reservation wage. For example, a housewife may seek employment if the wage she can earn is greater than the opportunity cost of her time. Because of their greater domestic responsibilities, Pardo (1983) has postulated that, other things being equal, the reservation wage for women is significantly higher than for men and tends to increase with the number of children.
Women's labour-force participation rate will vary according to marital status, number of children, and other factors including education, previous workforce experience and training, health, nutrition, and, of course, economic pressures and opportunities. Its duration is not merely a matter of length of employment in terms of years or hours per week, but also of disruption and discontinuity. Research into these matters has implications for the well-being of the women and their households as well as for the economic development of their country.
<section>The study</section>
Two sources of information were used in this study: an employment survey of a sample of 1,060 households carried out by the Institute of Nutrition and Food Technology (INTA) and the Department of Agricultural Economics of the Catholic University (DEAUC) in October 1985; and a second survey, also implemented by INTA/DEAUC, which sought retrospective information on the work history of a subsample of approximately 1,000 women drawn from the earlier group and was carried out in April 1986. Both were carried out under contract with the Department of Economics of the University of Chile, which conducts periodic employment surveys in Santiago. Both samples covered households from all income levels. These surveys were conducted through personal interviews in the home, and aimed to measure employment rates and patterns and to reveal changes in these over time. Generally speaking, employment behaviour was considered within a reference period of one week. However, questions on the
previous month and the previous year were also included in order to cover partial and sporadic economic activities.
The primary aim of the second survey, in April 1986, was to gather information on paid work and other events in each woman's life since she entered the formal educational system. As the study sought to observe change through time, two age-cohorts were defined: one of women between 15 and 32 and the other of those between 39 and 65. The data on the work history of each woman is continuous, with information on events at selected points in their lives. The respondents were asked about the sequence of their working activities between starting school and the time of the survey. They were requested to recall each job and to describe it, specifying the month and year in which they began, its duration, and the reasons for leaving. The same methodology was used to obtain data on other aspects of their lives - education, marital history, fertility and the use of family-planning methods - which could build up a more complete description of the main socio-economic factors which
influence, and are influenced by, women's participation in the labour force.
The pattern of each of these life events is set out in frequency tables compiled on the basis of the woman's age at the time the events took place rather than the calendar year. The results are presented by age-cohort and by income group. The latter are designated low, medium, and high (strata 1, 2 and 3 respectively), with each level corresponding to one-third of the initial sample of 3,060 households classified according to per capita family income. However, the proportion of each cohort in the three income levels in the subsample of 1,000 households is not exactly one-third: women in cohort 1 are evenly distributed among the three income groups, but a slightly higher percentage of the women in cohort 2 belong to the lowest income group.
<section>The findings</section>
Labour-force Participation
The study showed that 51 .8 per cent of the economically active population in the sample were actually in the labour force; the participation rates were 70.1 per cent for men and 36.6 per cent for women. The male unemployment rate was higher (14 per cent) than the female rate (9.9 per cent).
A breakdown of the reported working population by economic sector showed the female workforce to be heavily involved in the service sector: 59 per cent of them were employed there as compared to 34 per cent of the male workforce. Women worked mainly in personal services (29.7 per cent), followed by manufacturing (17.5 per cent), commercial (16.8 per cent), and government services (11.2 per cent). A very small percentage of them worked in agriculture and fisheries (1.9 per cent) and in housing construction (1 per cent).
Figures for the distribution of the labour force by occupation indicated that approximately 38 per cent of women were white-collar workers, around 27 per cent were in domestic service, 15.5 per cent were self-employed, and 13 per cent were blue-collar workers. About 5 per cent worked in one of the government-subsidized employment programmes (PEM and POJH). Less than 5 per cent were employers. The number of women in domestic service stood out: 485 out of 2,930 working women in the sample, or one woman in less than every four, worked as housemaids. It is interesting that none of the female heads of household was so employed.
Eighty-nine per cent of the women worked for wages or income for 25 to 58 hours per week. Those who had permanent jobs and related social security coverage had slightly longer average working hours than other female workers; however, the women participating in one of the subsidized employment programmes, PEM or POJH, worked only about 25 hours per week.
Figure 1 shows the frequency of women's participation in the labour force by cohort: in other words, it shows the number of women who worked or sought a job at each age. Obviously, the frequency curves of the younger cohort are, by definition, truncated at 32 years of age, or at 29 if the number of observations above that age was too low to be representative. Nor was it feasible to estimate averages for the younger cohort as the relevant events had not yet been completed in most cases.
According to figure 1, a higher proportion of the older cohort was working when they were 20 or less, but the opposite is true after the age of 21. In the older cohort, the percentage of women in the labour force increased with age up to 49 per cent at 24 years, then declined by about 10 per cent between 24 and 27, and continued to do so very slowly thereafter. The participation of the younger cohort increased constantly up to the cut-off point at 29, when there was around 57 per cent. Only 42 per cent of the older cohort were working at this age. Although the younger cohort postponed entry into the labour force by an average of five years, its rate of participation was substantially above that of the older group.
Within cohort 1, the pattern of labour-force participation differs substantially according to income group (fig. 2). Women in the low-income group exhibit significantly higher frequencies of participation when they are younger than either the medium- or high-income women. However, from around 26 onwards, and particularly after 39, their labour-force participation drops. On the other hand, the participation of the high-income group increases with age up to 29, where it stabilizes at approximately 45 per cent till 46, when it begins to increase again, reaching a peak of around 56 per cent in the early fifties. The middle-income group presents the classic double-peak pattern of labour-force participation, in which women work before or during their childbearing years, leave the labour force to raise their children, and subsequently return to work.
Figure 3 shows that in the younger cohort the labour-force participation of the low-income group is generally not above that of the other two income strata. It increases up to 22 years and is maintained at an average rate of 43 per cent up to 29. The pattern of labour-force participation in the high-income group is similar to that in the older cohort, in that it increases with age, but the participation rates after 21 years are much higher, reaching 78 per cent at 29, compared to only 47 per cent of this segment of the older cohort at the same age.
The separate and joint impact of demographic, socio-economic, and behavioural variables on the women's labour-force participation was assessed by means of multivariate regression analysis. Econometric analysis of the survey data focused on the main factors that determine women's wages and the way in which wages and other factors like education and family formation influence women's decisions about employment.
A comparison of working behaviour by income strata independent of age shows that the impact of changes in wage rates was much more significant in the middle than in either the high- or low-income groups. Married women in the medium- and high-income groups spent fewer hours in formal work than single women, but marital status was not a significant determinant of low-income women's working behaviour. For women in the high-income group, the availability of domestic staff increased the probability of market work. The analysis shows that, in the lower socio-economic group, an increase in family income induced women to work fewer hours. This also occurred in the high socioeconomic group, but to a much smaller extent. On the other hand, increases in family income had a positive effect on women's employment in the middle-income stratum.
Real wage levels were shown to be an important factor in women's decision to enter the labour force and also in the number of hours worked per month. The positive impact of wage rates on hours of work and on the probability of working was stronger in the younger cohort. This, in combination with higher educational levels, was having a substantial effect on the labour-market time allocation of younger women.
Education
Educational attainment was a major determinant of average earnings. The higher the level of school completed, the higher the wage which could be expected. The hourly income of women who had only completed primary school was not much better than that of those who were illiterate. However, secondary education or incomplete tertiary studies led to double the income of those who had only primary schooling, and those with a university degree earned four times as much. Women with technical training earned somewhat less than those who had secondary school qualifications. The impact of education on female earnings was greater in the younger cohort. Of course, age and working experience have a considerable influence on hourly earnings, but this cannot be considered so important in the younger cohort because of the early cut-off point.
The educational system in Chile is in four parts, primary (eight years), secondary (four years), technical (from one to three years) and university (five to seven years). In 1965, secondary education was reduced to four years, and primary schooling expanded from six to eight years, so that free compulsory education could be extended by two years. The data for the older cohort in this study have been adjusted so that valid comparisons between the cohorts can be made.
Important differences between them can be observed in the proportion of each completing primary education. The cumulative frequency distribution indicates that about 29 per cent of the older cohort had finished their primary education at 13, compared to 39 per cent of the younger cohort. About 53 per cent of cohort 1 had finished primary education by 16, compared to 76 per cent of cohort 2. This difference of approximately 23 per cent in favour of the younger generation remains unchanged thereafter.
Looking at the differences between income groups, a greater proportion of the high-income group completed their primary education in both cohorts, as might be expected, but this difference between the income groups decreased drastically within the younger cohort. The proportion of low- and medium-income groups finishing primary education by 13 increased from 12 to 29 per cent and from 15 to 34 per cent respectively between cohorts 1 and 2. This means that better access had more than doubled the proportion of low- and medium-income women completing primary education.
Turning to secondary education, the highest frequencies of completion among the older cohort occur at 17 and 18, while they are concentrated at 17 for the younger cohort. The cumulative profiles show that by 19, 39 per cent of the women in cohort 2 had finished secondary education, compared to only 19 per cent of cohort 1. The observed difference remains unchanged thereafter. In other words, the proportion of women who completed secondary education has also doubled among the younger group.
The probability of completing secondary education is much more restricted at the lower income levels in both cohorts, in spite of the narrowing differences between them in cohort 2. Among cohort 1, only 1.7 per cent of the low-income women had completed secondary education at 17, while in cohort 2 the proportion increased to 10 per cent. In the medium-income groups, the proportion increased from 2.3 to 15 per cent. The percentage of women who had completed secondary education at 17 also increased - from 15 to 34 per cent - in the high-income group. The data indicate not only improved access to secondary education but, even more important, a better rate of completing it.
The figures for female enrolment in higher education are much lower. Within the older group, the highest frequencies of women graduating from university occur at ages 22 and 24. In the case of cohort 2, this is at 22. Only 4.5 per cent of women in cohort I had finished university studies at 24. The proportion had increased to 7 per cent in the second cohort, a figure which may rise as some of the younger women were still university students at the time of the survey.
Looking at variation by income level within the two cohorts, none of the low-income women in the sample had graduated. Four women from this group in cohort 2 did enter university, but none had finished: they were either still studying at the time of the survey or had dropped out. Within the older cohort, the majority of high-income women graduated from university at 22, while women of the medium-income level did so two years later at 24. In cohort 2, the same difference between the income groups in age at graduation is maintained, but graduation rates increased. Most women graduates come from the higher-income strata. Comparing educational levels by gender suggested the greater socioeconomic vulnerability of households which were headed by women. Six-and-a-half per cent of these women were illiterate, compared to only 1.9 per cent of male heads of households. Logically, this unfortunate disparity continued as educational levels rose: 30 per cent of female heads of households
had completed secondary schooling, compared to 35.4 per cent of the men, and the proportion of women in this position with a university education (8.8 per cent) was only about half that of men (16.3 per cent).
Marriage
Figure 4 indicates that women in first cohort married younger than those in cohort 2, although both frequency curves exhibit a similar shape. Two peaks are observed in cohort 1, at ages 19 and 21; within cohort 2, most married in their early twenties.
Within the older group, patterns vary according to income levels (fig. 5). A higher proportion of the women in the medium- and low-income groups married younger (before 19) than those in the higher-income stratum, with a fairly constant difference of about five percentage points. The highest frequency of marriage occurs at 19 among women of medium- and low-income groups, but at 27 for the high-income group. A second but lower peak is observed at 21 for low-income women, at 23 for medium-income women, and at 21 for those in the high-income group.
Analysing income groups within cohort 2 shows that a relatively higher percentage of low-income women marry before 21, as do a lesser proportion of the medium-income group The lowest incidence of marriage before age 21 is among the high-income group (fig. 6). The highest frequencies of first marriage occur at 21, 23, and 24 for the low-, medium-, and high-income groups respectively. The pattern in figure 6 reveals a clear decline from the older to the younger cohort in the proportion of women married at similar ages. Most (approximately 85 per cent) of the older cohort were already married at 30, compared to 64 per cent of the women in cohort 2. This lower nuptiality rate among the younger women appears to contradict the slight increase observed in the census data.
Contraception and Fertility
The women were asked about the age they began using contraception and their pattern of subsequent usage. The frequencies of first usage in both cohorts are shown in figure 7. Contraception was initiated earlier in the younger cohort. It is also clear from the data that, at least tip to 26, the younger women were much more likely to practice family planning, with a particularly rapid comparative increase in usage between 16 and 20. The peak frequencies are at 22 for the younger cohort and at 27 and 30 for cohort 1.
Figure 8 illustrates the proportions of women in cohorts and 2 practicing family planning at each age. Again, the higher proportion of younger women using contraceptive methods is evident: at 31, the last age at which the cohorts can be validly compared, about 45 per cent of the older cohort were practicing contraception, compared to 64 per cent of the younger group.
The difference in usage between income groups within cohort 1 can be observed in figure 9. It is minimal up to 30 years of age. Subsequently, the highest frequency in the low-income group occurs at age 33, while the peak occurs at 40 for both the medium- and high-income groups. Within the younger cohort, figure 10 shows that the use of contraceptives is highest in the low-income group, followed by the medium- and then the high-income group. For example, at age 22, 58 per cent of the low-income women were using contraceptives, compared to 28 and 20 per cent in the middle- and high-income segments respectively. The corresponding figures for the older cohort were considerably lower- 13 and 11 per cent. Wide access to family-planning programmes is reflected in the fact that there are no particular differences between the income strata apparent within cohort 1, and the lowest income group in the younger cohort includes the highest proportion of women using contraceptives at 29 or
younger.
Figures 11 to 20 show the frequencies of events related pregnancy according to age cohort and income level. Figure 11 depicts the distribution of women by age at the end of first pregnancy, showing the proportion of the total number of women in the respective cohorts becoming pregnant for the first time at each age. It should be remembered that in the younger cohort all first pregnancies may not necessarily have occurred by age 29. No clear differences between the cohorts are apparent in the shape of the frequency curve, although the curve for the younger cohort is usually below that of the older cohort.
This becomes clearer in figure 12, which gives the cumulated frequencies by cohort and shows that, from the age of 15, the proportion of first pregnancies occurring is lower among the younger women, with a difference between the cohorts which increases with age. Only about 64 per cent of the younger cohort had been pregnant by the time they were 29, compared to approximately 79 per cent of the older cohort.
A different pattern appears when differentiating by income level (figs. 13 and 14). In cohort 1, the older group, approximately 3 per cent of the women in the lower-income group had completed their first pregnancy at 15, and, up to 19, they had experienced a higher accumulated proportion of pregnancy events than those in the other two income groups. Those in the higher income stratum postponed their first pregnancies still later than the others, with the highest frequencies occurring between 22 and 28.
Within the younger cohort, there is a much more marked difference between the income groups, as shown in figure 14. The pattern of the low-income group shows that their first pregnancies occur at significantly younger ages, while the opposite is observed in the high-income stratum. The latter reaches a peak frequency at 26, compared to 20 in the low-income group. The peak for the middle-income group is at 24. Although it is not shown in the figure, first pregnancies begin at 13 in the low-income group, but not till after 15 in the middle-income stratum.
Data on second pregnancies are presented in figures 15 to 17. Figure 15 shows a higher proportion of second pregnancies at lower ages among the older cohort. These differences within the cohort are less evident when disaggregated by income level, although in the younger cohort considerably more of the poorer women had second pregnancies at lower ages (figs. 16 and 17).
Figures 18 to 20 refer to the frequency of pregnancy by age and cohort, independent of the number of pregnancies for each woman. It can be seen in figure 18 that the frequency curve of the older cohort is much higher than of the younger cohort. For example, at 22 about 11 per cent of the younger women were pregnant, compared to about 25 per cent of the older cohort. A similar difference is observed at later ages.
Looking at pregnancy and income level in both cohorts figs. 19 and 20), it may be seen that a higher proportion of women in the lower-income group were pregnant at each age. The difference in frequency between the low- and the high-income groups is particularly striking between ages 19 and 25 in cohort 1 and between ages 18 and 20 in the younger cohort. In the high-income stratum of cohort 2, the peak frequency occurs at ages 21 and 25 (11 per cent of the in each case), compared to 27 (20 per cent of the stratum) in the middle-income group and 19 (21 per cent of the relevant sample) in the low-income group.
<section>Conclusions</section>
Women's working behaviour in urban Chile varies markedly according to socioeconomic background, age, education, and the process of family formation. The data give a clear picture of many aspects of the female workforce, and, of particular importance to the country's human resource development, it delineates many of the factors that influence women's participation in it. It shows that younger women now postpone entry into the labour force. The life-histories of both cohorts indicate that, on average, the older group started working five years earlier than the younger group; however, the labour-force participation of the latter increased from 21 years of age on, although, as their participation curve is censored by their youth, it is not possible to draw any conclusions about their working patterns after the age of 29. In the older cohort, participation rates started declining at 23. Analysis by income groups reveals higher workforce participation among low-income women up to
approximately 30 in the older cohort. After 35, labour-force participation among the low- and medium-income groups within this cohort decreases, but the opposite trend characterizes the high-income group. Within cohort 2 there is no difference in working behaviour according to income level up to 20. From there on, the women who arc better off show a substantially higher rate of participation, as in the older cohort.
The differences described are the result of a number of factors, one of the most important being changes over time in education. A higher percentage of women in the younger cohort had completed primary education. The proportion of women who finished primary education in both cohorts increased as income rose.
The difference in the higher proportion of the younger women completing secondary education is even greater than it is for primary schooling. Moreover, the gap between the socio-economic groups in terms of secondary education is narrower within the younger cohort. Only a few of the older women from the medium- and low-income groups stayed in the educational system until they had completed secondary schooling. Finally, it is clear that higher income has been closely associated with access to higher education in both cohorts. None of the low-income women in the sample had completed university-level education.
The data support the hypothesis that women are postponing entry into employment while they acquire better educational qualifications. As a result of these higher attainments, they can expect better wages, which in turn encourages them to join the workforce.
Family formation is also an important factor in participation. By the age of 30 approximately 64 per cent of the women in the younger cohort had married, compared to 85 per cent of those in the older cohort, which indicates a lower rate of nuptiality within the younger group. Consistent with this, age at first marriage has been delayed by an average of three years in the younger cohort. This postponement is longer among the high-income women within the cohort, so that their peak age at marriage is 24, compared to 19 for the poorest group.
The cumulative frequency of women pregnant for the first time at each age shows that fertility is lower among the younger women who use contraceptive methods sooner and more extensively. At 29, almost 63 per cent of them were practising contraception, compared to 38 per cent of the older cohort at the same age. Pregnancy occurs earlier among the low-income group in both cohorts. The frequency of second pregnancy at each age is also lower for the younger cohort, at least until the cut-off age at 29. Within this cohort, the second pregnancy takes place much earlier in the low-income group, with a peak at ages 21-22, compared to 28 for the medium- and high-income groups. Comparing the proportion of women who were pregnant at each age, whether it was their first, second, or subsequent pregnancy, shows that the proportion of women pregnant at 29 or less is approximately 50 per cent lower in the younger cohort, particularly in the high-income group.
Other trends identified in the survey suggest that while the number of hours worked per month tended to decrease with age in the older cohort, the opposite was true in the younger group. Married women have lower labour-force participation rates than single women, and those who were employed were likely to work considerably fewer hours than their single counterparts.
The availability of domestic help or others to provide substitute child care allowed mothers in both cohorts to increase their number of hours in the workforce considerably. Other things being equal, increased family income (apart from women's earnings) led to a reduction in formal work in the older cohort, suggesting that, at higher income levels, women allocate more time to domestic duties or leisure. Family income did not seem to influence working decisions in the younger cohort. Head of household status appeared to limit women's work in cohort 1, another indication of the competing demands on women's time.
Data from employment surveys in Santiago have been showing changes in the age structure of the female workforce. The life-history approach of the present study has made it possible to link these trends to behavioural differences between age-groups that have been induced by various socio-demographic changes. Information provided by life-history methodology has allowed more precise identification of the sequence and relationships of events and their impact on the structural changes observed in female labour-force participation.
The distinction made in the analysis between income strata was extremely useful in understanding important differences and patterns within each age-cohort. In certain areas, such as education, marriage, and age at first pregnancy, the differences between income groups within the age-cohorts were more striking than those between the two cohorts.
It is clear that the policies to increase access to education and family planning introduced since the mid-1960s have borne fruit. The data show that younger women tend to have much more education, to delay marriage and childbearing, and to have lower fertility rates than their older counterparts. In fact, the changes observed in the family formation process are similar to those described in developed countries.
Thus, an indirect result of these policies has been to enhance the ability and desire of women to participate in formal economic activity, and future policies must take their economic needs, workforce potential, and personal aspirations into account.
<section>References</section>
Buvinic, Maira. 1983. Women's Issues in Third World Poverty: A Poverty Analysis. In: M. Buvinic, ed., Women and Poverty in the Third World. Johns Hopkins University Press, Baltimore, Md.
Cabrera, R., G. Delgado, E. Taucher, and Avendaño. 1985. Evaluación de 10 años de planificación de la familia en Chile. Congress of Obstetrics and Gynaecology, Chile, December 1985.
Cheyre, H., and E. Ogrodnic. 1982. El Programa de Empleo Mínimo: análisis de una encuesta. Revista de economía. Universidad de Chile, November.
Coale, Ansley J. 1971. Age Patterns of Marriage. Population Studies, 25(2): 193-214.
Coale, Ansley, J., and D.R. McNeil. 1972. The Distribution by Age of the Frequency of First Marriage in a Female Cohort. Journal of the American Statistical Association, 67(340).
Lavados, I. 1983. Evolución de las political sociales en Chile, 1964-1980. Estudios ILPES UNICEF sobre Políticas Sociales. Santiago.
Marshall, P., G. García, and F. Fuentes. Censos de población y vivienda: resultados principales. Informe de estudio, Cl-86.
Muchnik, E., and 1. Vial. 1987. Determinants of Women's Employment Behaviour: A Life History Approach. Final Report. UNU, Tokyo.
Pardo, L., and P. Cruz. 1983. La dueña de case en sus actividades de trabajo; su valoración en el mercado y dentro del hogan Documento Serie Investigacíon, 59. Departamento de Economía, Universidad de Chile, Santiago.
Pindyck, Robert S., and Daniel L. Rubinfeld. 1976. Econometric Models and Economic Forecasts. University of Michigan/McGraw-Hill, New York.
Robinson, J.G. 1979. Labor Force Participation Rates of Cohorts of Women in the United States: 1890 to 1979. Paper presented to the Population Association of America, Denver, Colo., 1980.
Rosales, O. 1970. La mujer chilena en la fuerza de trabajo, participación, empleo y desempleo (1957-1977). Memoria de Prueba, Facultad de Ciencias Económicas y Administrativas, Escolatina, Universidad de Chile.
Tisné, L., G. Corvalán, P. Atria, L Cereceda, P. Gayan, A.M. Kaempffer, J. Robinovich, and E. Taucher, Evaluación de los programas de planificación familiar en Chile. Mesa Redonda XVIII, Congreso Chileno de Obstetricia y Ginecología, 1980.
Viel, B., and M.W. Campos. 1986. Influencia de la planificación familiar sobre la mortalidad materna e infantil (la experiencia chilena). Nutrición y Paz, VII Congreso Chileno de Nutrición.
<section>The impact of macro-events on social structure in Sri Lanka</section>
Myrtle Perera
Marga Institute, Colombo, Sri Lanka
<section>Background</section>
Traditional society in Sri Lanka was based primarily on subsistence peasant agriculture and governed by ideological norms within which sex roles were differentiated. This feudal social order, influenced by Buddhist and Hindu values and characterized by occupation-based caste groups, passed through many stages of evolution, including the colonial period which introduced the plantation economy, new Western religious ideas, and education and health initiatives, followed by independence in 1948 and the development policies of successive national governments. Throughout these changes, the interaction between social norms and new influences had specific implications for the roles of men and women, as it continues to do in contemporary society.
These changes have occurred in the context of considerable cultural and religious differences. Sri Lanka's heterogeneous socio-cultural base includes a majority of Sinhalese Buddhists (about 74 per cent of the population), the Tamil community, most of whom are Hindus (18 per cent), a multi-ethnic Christian group (8 per cent), and an Islamic minority (7 per cent). In each of these groups, religious ideology, socio-economic factors, and ethnic traditions have shaped value patterns relating to the roles of women and the family in society. Regional subcultures, such as those of the hill-country Sinhalese, the more urbanized mixed social groups along the coast, and the Indian Tamils on the plantations, have provided even greater diversity.
The agrarian social structure was based on an extended family unit consisting of two or three generations living in separate houses but in community compounds in which each family functioned as an independent economic unit. In the patriarchal system which prevailed, men were ascribed the role of providers and women that of home-makers. Marriages were arranged and required the compliance of family elders. They had to conform to the established determinants of caste, religion, and kin group. The rights of the woman depended on whether the system of marriage was matrilocal or patrilocal. For Buddhists, marriage and family belong to secular life and therefore widowhood or childlessness did not cause the kind of disabilities that occurred in the Hindu tradition. However, certain pre-Buddhistic traditions and taboos imposed restrictions on women at puberty, menstruation, and childbirth. Women passed on these values through the socialization of girls and boys in their prescribed
social and productive roles.
Social stability and continuity were ensured by a network of kinship groups and elders, men and women, who exercised sanctions that kept the gender-based roles intact. The segregation of men and women did not constrain women's involvement in economic activities, although these were differentiated on the basis of gender. For example, ploughing, threshing, and sowing were male tasks, while females were responsible for weeding, harvesting, and processing. Domestic industries and crafts were also gender-differentiated. However, women were not perceived as producers: their work was an extension of their family role. Women in the lower strata did agricultural work, but it was not normal for elite women to participate in productive work outside the household. The popular value system allowed some women greater mobility, but it was accompanied by a suggestion of social inferiority.
Colonialism introduced changes which impinged on the long-standing traditional feudal structure. The dual economy of plantation and peasant agriculture which it established brought about not only economic but also social change. New forms of monetized organization resulted in the separation of the workplace from the home and led to the creation of a public provider role for the man and an isolated, home-centred role for the woman. In the lower economic strata, women extended their unpaid family worker role to the factories, which were adjuncts to the plantations, and became wage-earners. However, their differentiated economic value was replicated there, where their wages were lower than men's. In the pockets of subsistence economy that survived, women continued as "invisible," marginalized workers subordinated to men.
In the first half of the twentieth century, new policies, partly designed to grapple with the problems of vulnerable groups and of women and children in particular, were introduced. The catalysts which transformed the social and cultural milieu of women were the granting of universal franchise in 1931 and the subsequent expansion of education and health programmes, of which they were the chief beneficiaries.
Secular education and formal schooling began with Western colonialism. Women from the affluent urban classes were the first to benefit. However, their education was governed by the social norms relating to their gender. When it came to higher education, teacher-training colleges and institutes for art and handicrafts were deemed culturally suitable for women. In any case, since tertiary training did not bring girls any particular advantage, such as better work opportunities, many of them dropped out at the secondary level. Although institutions for higher academic training were opened to females to pursue education on different lines, the small number who went on to the University College or the Medical College did not do so with the objective of employment. From the early 1940s, many became active in voluntary (unpaid) social work to help women in less advantaged groups. Education was not seen to be of direct economic benefit; it was more an added qualification for
marriage.
The introduction of free education in 1945, the use of national languages as the medium of instruction, and support schemes like scholarships and free midday meals removed most of the barriers which, combined with cultural constraints, had limited schooling for girls. The principle of equal access to education for girls and boys was reinforced by the establishment of a network of co-educational schools throughout the country. There were almost 1(1,000 by the 1970s. Female enrolment rates increased from 36 per cent in 1931 to 48.1 per cent in 1970. However, there were considerable regional disparities. For example, it remained particularly low in the Mannar and Batticaloa districts, where there was a high Muslim population.
The government decision to allow women limited access to the administrative service in the 1960s enhanced the incentive to go on to higher education. The proportion of women in the universities rose from 29.4 per cent in 1950 to 40.1 per cent in 1978. Although a few of them studied veterinary science, science, and medicine, the concentration of females in the humanities persisted. However, economically disadvantaged women had very slim chances of entering the universities in the capital. In 1950, nearly 77 per cent of the females studying there came from the professional and managerial classes.
Female literacy rose to 43.8 per cent in 1946 nearly double the 1921 figure. The gap between the genders began to narrow, and it was only 15 per cent in 1971; it is currently 7.9 per cent. However, there were marked differences between urban and rural areas, which were the result of cultural inhibitions. For example, females were not allowed to travel to school after puberty and girls were not allowed to begin domestic and agricultural work at a very early age. Female literacy was low in districts were there was a large proportion of plantation workers or Muslims. The absence of effective adult education programmes is evident in the differences between literacy levels in the generations which had access to schooling and the older females.
By the 1970s, education had become a passport to employment, and through this to higher social and economic status for females as well as males. The increasing demand for university education saw the number of universities grow to six, with another three campuses and an open university by 1981, although at the end of the 1980s they are still only able to admit 1 per cent of the population in the relevant age-group, and women enrol primarily in the stereotyped fields of arts and humanities, education, veterinary science, and medicine. They remain underrepresented in engineering and physical science. This would not in itself be a disadvantage, except that the areas they choose hold little prospect for employment.
The education system has failed to meet the demand for employment skills. Vocational and technical training courses arc limited in scope and coverage. The lack is felt more by females, who do not appear to have easy access to courses in agriculture, the electrical trades, woodwork or other fields that provide better job prospects but are still perceived as male preserves. The Labour Department and the Rural Development Department have continued to conduct vocational training courses based on gender stereotypes. Inevitably, the courses for women are mat-weaving, sewing, and tailoring. Attempts to introduce new kinds of female training in the early 1970s faced resistance from employers. However, the migration of skilled men to West Asia left a vacuum, and a number of young females have gone into motor mechanics, masonry, carpentry, and telecommunications.
In the 1920s and 1930s, high maternal and infant mortality rates (20.8 and 158 per thousand live births respectively) reflected the poor health status of women and children. This was one of the factors which led to the decision to grant universal franchise in 1931, on the premise that women with voting power would have a better chance of attracting the government's attention. Nutrition, preventive health, and maternal and child welfare programmes resulted in a drop in maternal and infant mortality to 3 and 57 per thousand live births respectively by 1960. Again, there were marked regional disparities and the rates were higher in areas where female education and literacy were lower and where plantation workers and Muslim communities predominated. This breakthrough in the health status of women and children has been successfully followed through and the current (1985) mortality rates are 0.6 per thousand live births for mothers and 24 for infants. However, the infant mortality
rate on the state plantations, where approximately half the estate population live, is 50 per thousand. In 1979, female life expectancy was 70.2, compared to 66 for males.
State policies are now being directed against malnutrition. The extent of maternal malnutrition can be inferred from the number of low-birth-weight babies; they are said to make up 21 per cent of all those born in Colombo's main hospital, although data are available only from small ad hoc surveys and personal communications. The mothers' malnutrition appears to be a legacy from their youth: studies done by the Food and Nutrition Policy Planning Division of the Ministry of Plan Implementation have shown that more girls than boys are malnourished. Family planning is now incorporated in an integrated scheme for family health, which indicates the relationship between small, manageable families and their health status. Family-planning programmes have been directed primarily towards women. The proportion of acceptors increased from 32 per cent in 1975 to 54.9 per cent in 1982. A government incentive payment of Rs. 500 for either male or female sterilization appears to have
increased the number of such operations. Currently, the State Health Programme concentrates on primary health care, with a particular focus on women and children. A high proportion of children and pregnant mothers are immunized through a WHO and UNICEF segment of this programme.
However, these improvements in the quality of life for women have failed to have a corresponding impact on their participation in economic and development activities in the formal public sphere. Labour-force participation rates have remained around 26 per cent over a long period, and female workers tend to be concentrated in services and unskilled jobs. At the beginning of the 1980s the rate of female unemployment was considerably higher than that of men (23 compared with 12 per cent). This is partly because of the undiminished burden of the household, which still very definitely rests on women. Since 1975, however, the focus on women's issues has succeeded in bringing discrepancies in administrative, legal, and social equality to light, and much has been done to remove disabilities in these areas.
<section>The study</section>
The primary objective of this study was to analyse the impact of national policies on individuals and households and to provide insights which will assist in evaluating this and ensuring that all groups share the benefits of development. Its perspective was based on the assumption that gender is a critical element of change within domestic groups. The research concentrated on the adult female members of the selected households, on the hypothesis that changes in the situation of the women have a great influence on the lives of other members, and that together these changes have a synergistic effect on the community. Development programmes can offer new options to women. The leads and lags of their responses and the manner in which these are facilitated or constrained are examined. The study also investigates whether the cultural underpinnings of intra-household relationships are maintained or jettisoned in attempts to adjust to new options in the non-domestic sphere, and
looks at the implications of such decisions both for the household as a social entity and for development policy as a vehicle of social and economic progress.
The sample of 356 women, 11 husbands, and 42 children was drawn from a random selection of 40 households in six locations taken from a list drawn up for the 1981 census. On the first visit, preliminary data on all members of the household were collected on a household data card. The information from these 240 cards was used to draw up a profile of the households for the location reports and also to select the main female, extended family females, and all unmarried females of 18 years of age and over. A partially structured pre-coded dialogue schedule, an expanded version of which was applied with the main female, was used in the interviews; mote selective schedules were applied with the other women. Three hundred and fifty-six of these dialogues were carried out. Data for the life-course approach were elicited from a life-history matrix designed to cover work, marriage, migration, fertility, education, and co-residence. This was used with all 356 women. A long, unstructured
but focused dialogue, which at times concentrated on specific points of interest in the location or a life-history, was conducted with a specially selected sample of 69 married and unmarried females and 11 husbands. Two households in each location were observed on a normal day and their members' activities recorded for the time-use study. A series of questions was addressed to 42 children between the ages of 6 and 13 to establish their attitudes to issues like mothers' employment, their future aspirations, and their perceptions and images of mothers, fathers, and grandparents.
The methodology was participatory. Researchers who spoke the local dialect lived in these communities for the greater part of a year and visited each household from five to eight times. A multi-technique approach combined life-histories with a qualitative research design that enabled women and men to relate their experiences from their own perspectives.
The study looked at four examples of recent phenomena which have wrought significant change in women's lives: an agricultural, irrigation, and power project, a model village development scheme, West Asian employment for Sri Lankan women, and jobs in the Free Trade or Export Processing Zone (FTZ or EPZ). The impact of these aspects of development was studied in locations that have been exposed to one or more of them - the site of an irrigation project, a traditional village, a model village resettlement, two semi-urban locations, and one urban site. Data from the traditional village was not included in all the analyses as it was not relevant to the issues under consideration.
The Mahawali Scheme followed the ancient tank or reservoir system of irrigation and created new settlements by distributing land around the tank to landless and displaced villagers. Agricultural activities which since ancient times had been encapsulated in a socio-cultural and ideological framework arc now centrally orchestrated by state institutions, albeit with community involvement. Divorced from age-old beliefs and ritual, agriculture in the new settlements now utilizes modern technology and methods of cultivation. One such settlement, adjacent to a traditional agricultural tank village from which some of the settlers are drawn, was studied. It is referred to as the Irrigated Village (IV) in the analysis.
The traditional village (TV) studied is situated nine miles from Kandy in the central hill country of the wet zone. Under royal patronage in ancient times, the village had provided services to the kings, and even today it bears the mark of historical caste distinctions based on occupation, although the lines of demarcation are less rigidly drawn now. During the colonial period some of the best arable land was taken over for coffee and tea plantations, where the dispossessed peasants became part of a casual labour force as pickers. In the 1970s one of the plantations was subdivided into small plots which were distributed to these landless workers, and the dual economy now rests on small-scale paddy agriculture and the tea plantations. The predominantly Buddhist village includes a small but economically powerful Muslim community.
The Model Village Development Scheme makes land and shelter available to the homeless, using previously unprofitable or uncultivable land to provide uniform plots and homes for villagers who had been in poverty. Initially, the schemes are managed by a project officer, the ultimate aim being the evolution of a basically self-sufficient community. The selected location (MV) had been settled about five years before the research began, when landless peasants from neigh-bouring traditional villages were allocated parts of an old tea plantation. It is also in the hill country fairly close to Kandy. This is an artificially created community of mixed caste and ethnic origin, whose only common denominator had been landlessness and deprivation. It was therefore a homogeneous economic group whose members had been given new status and hope with the ownership of their house and land.
One of the semi-urban locations (SU-K) had also been an ancient agricultural village which had been transformed during the colonial era, in this case by the development of the country's western seaboard. It is only 8½ miles from Colombo, to which it has road and rail access, and its urbanization has been accelerated by the expansion of the capital's suburbs. The women came from both Buddhist families who had long been settled there and migrant groups of different castes and religions. This intermingling had exposed them to a range of influences which had led to the relaxation of some of the more rigid social norms. The influx of tourists into the coastal area had also broken down some inhibitions and opened the doors to new ideas. They had more access to knowledge and information about opportunities for employment in West Asia and the FTZ and were eager to take advantage of them.
The other semi-urban location (SU-K) is about 20 miles from Colombo, close to the FTZ and the main airport; indeed, it has developed because of its proximity to the airport and centres of employment. Most of the people are migrants from rural areas. They are of various castes; the majority are Catholics. Although there is some fishing, very little agriculture, and some cottage industries utilizing coconut fibre, the location is in some ways closer to an urban than a rural settlement. About 75 per cent of the families worked for the government. Employment opportunities for women (and, to a lesser extent, for men) had expanded in the previous decade with the establishment of garment factories in the nearby FTZ which provided jobs for those with only a basic education. For those without marketable skills, domestic work in West Asia was a popular choice.
The urban location (UL) is in the Municipality of Colombo. It was originally a residential area and there are still some rich elite groups living there in their own rather isolated residences. This location has the broadest mix of social classes, for it also includes middle- and low-income groups. The latter were mainly migrants from southern villages who began to come to the area 50-60 years ago. Many lived in conglomerates of shanties and small gardens which had replaced some of the big old residences; others became squatters on crown land. Some of them found employment in the old government textile mill, and as time went on they claimed ownership of their originally temporary shacks on the canal, where they were living in crowded and insanitary conditions at the time of the survey. In keeping with the heterogeneous social groupings, economic activities ranged from informal trading, fruit and vegetable sales, illicit brewing, and other home-based enterprises to high-level
professional, business, and government work. This location offered telling insights into both the beneficial and adverse effects of development. While economic activity had clearly been stimulated, the effects of unaccustomed cash earnings and, especially among the conventional élites, conflicts of values were also apparent.
In order to measure the impact of change, responses to key questions in the study were designated modern (M) or traditional (T). Average M or T scores provided an indicator for comparison - but not value-judgement - of the nature and degree of response to change in each of the locations.
A work-intensity score (WIS) and a stress score (SS) were used to compare female work over the life-cycle. The WIS ranged from I to 3 depending on the type of work and the support and facilities available at different stages in the woman's life. A typical life-pattern score from youth to old age- 1, 2, 3, 2, 1-was evolved and considered as a norm. A score of 4 indicated stress arising from loss of resources, family support, or other deprivation.
Work activities were categorized as waged work, including all activities in the formal or organized sector, whether permanent or casual; remunerative work comprised of ad hoc or seasonal cash-generating activities in the informal sector; and non-remunerative work, which included housework, child care, and agricultural, craft, or trade-related work for domestic use only. The tasks of females in both the urban and rural settings were investigated longitudinally (through life-histories) and cross-sectionally (across communities). They were found to be crucially linked to women's role and status within the household and the community, and work was an important symbol of social differentiation.
Work was also the area most affected by the perception of the female as secondary to the male, which had given rise to a chain of repercussions which are only too well known and documented. The study investigated changes in work arising from varied interventions in the diverse backgrounds. Over the years, these changes have been both conceptual and empirical; some were gradual, while others catapulted women's work into wholly new dimensions. They have included women's positive response to employment, new agricultural activities, and their involvement in non-traditional occupations.
<section>The findings</section>
The Irrigated Village
Information in the life-histories from the Irrigated Village, which was corroborated by observation of the remaining pockets of subsistence agriculture, portrayed the former pattern of high female participation in family labour outside the home and in craft and agriculture-related work in the home. Agriculture was seasonal, accompanied by ritual and characterized by tasks divided on the basis of gender. Agricultural work was community-based, mostly unpaid, and carried out on a sharecropping basis on tenanted land.
Although it was recognized that the agricultural sector should diversify from rice, the country's staple food, into subsidiary crops and provide suitable employment opportunities for educated youth, agriculture had been so entrenched in the social ethos as to be quite inflexible, at least in the short term. This had been borne out in the IV, where the new and more productive techniques used on an adjacent government farm had made little impression on the villagers, although they knew about them through informal contact with the farm workers at common bathing spots in the old tank. Older women had recounted their experiences as wage labourers on the farm, but this had had no impact on either systems of cultivation or the nature of the women's work in the village until the advent of the new settlements.
The key elements in the subsequent transformation were the relocation of a whole community, the possibility of owning land and acquiring resources for cultivation, and the diversification and commercialization of production. The uprooting of traditional life-styles that this involved had more drastic effects on the women than it did on the men. However, the women displayed remarkable flexibility in taking up the new agriculture and in accommodating the accompanying changes in their way of life. Their response was encouraged by the rewards and remuneration which now accrued to individual effort. Women quite unconsciously accepted a new conceptual framework and a new approach to production where the individual, rather than the community, was becoming the key entity.
Another aspect of the response to change was demonstrated in the life-histories of the older men and women. This was a positive endorsement, sometimes only in theory but often in practice as well, of new agricultural methods and the separation of agriculture from ritual and ideology. This had helped to eliminate social sanctions and factors which may have aroused the resistance of the customary custodians of tradition in a rural village. The key factor in this was the contact the older women had had with the government farm and its technology-oriented agriculture. The research was able to discern a time dimension in this change, as knowledge stored over the years and articulated in the dialogues accompanying the life-histories was catalyzed by the new agriculture and translated into attitudes and action.
The life-histories revealed the nature of the change from the old system wherein women had worked intensively in stipulated areas, their labour unremunerated and considered part of family input. This was the situation of all except the few older women who had worked for wages on the government farm. Cultivation had been solely at the will of the community, although as it was necessarily determined by weather patterns and by ritual, there had been some flexibility. Community labour had been available to complete all activities. Tasks were differentiated by seasons, with the periods between the single-crop paddy cultivation or slash-and-burn techniques used by women to refurbish their houses and grain stores and preserve food.
In the new system, the continuous availability of water, a centrally planned agricultural schedule and the introduction of subsidiary cash crops required year-round and simultaneous labour. New technology, like tractors to cope with the increased workload, was capital-intensive and therefore not available. Both the buffalo and female labour were in great demand. The tasks expected of women expanded in several ways. About 20 per cent of them took over the entire management of agricultural work, while their husbands worked in other occupations, developed entrepreneurial roles in non-traditional crafts for a new elitist market, or began trading to meet the emerging desire of the now monetized society for consumer goods. A more egalitarian attitude to work resulted in the traditional work taboos fading and the application of new criteria based on physical ability. The threshing floor, for example, which had previously been out of bounds to women, now became part of their work
arena.
These changes raised many conceptual and practical issues. The household was replacing the community as the basic unit of production, and within it the female productive role was becoming pivotal. This transformation was accompanied by other new experiences for women, too. They had to deal with the formerly virtually unknown public sphere in order to transact business. They had to learn and practice new skills and technology. While there was some awareness of the need to direct training and extension services to women in view of their new tasks, such programmes did not seem to be widely available in this area. Extension work was mainly for men. This had unfortunate consequences: pesticides and herbicides were used by women (and by some men too) without heed to the hazards of their indiscriminate use, and equipment designed for men had to be used by the women. However, some of the women took initiatives to meet these challenges. Approximately 14 per cent of the young women
had joined farmer organizations, while others were learning to handle a buffalo and plough. Not to be left out of the new technology, one young girl was learning to drive the tractor.
Nor were these the only features of the new agriculture which heaped more disadvantages on women. The compatibility of agricultural work and the female role in traditional societies was related in large measure to the possibility of reconciling family functions with work. The life-histories reveal that women sometimes withdrew from work (even waged work) as often as three or four times, to accommodate marriage and the birth of children, for instance. Others entered the workforce at marriage or during gaps between the birth of their children. In this way they had some flexibility in relation to major life events.
However, the new agriculture altered these options significantly, not only by the year-round work schedules, but in other ways, too. Community help was no longer available. The cost of inputs demanded that production should be continuous. Women complained that their modern homes required more attention and protection: they could no longer leave their thatched huts unattended and go into the fields. The spread of education and the higher value attached to it meant young girls no longer contributed to agricultural work. Evidence from the life-history data suggests young females of 18 or so who were educated did not use their new skills in unpaid family work.
A composite measurement of the amount of women's work in the Irrigated Village was available through the WIS. A mean score of 1.9 indicated that they had the heaviest workload of any of the locations studied. 1 his village had also the highest proportion (32 per cent) of females whose life-span score deviated from the 1, 2, 3, 2, 1 workload pattern which was regarded as the norm. The main reasons for the high score in the Irrigated Village lay in the increased tasks that were the result of acquiring land and engaging in the new agriculture. The life-histories also revealed a high proportion of women, both married and unmarried, who were employed in remunerated work for many years.
This location also had the highest proportion (20 per cent) of women with a stress score of 4. While unrewarding subsistence agriculture contributed to this among the older women, who made up 4 per cent of this figure, the balance was younger women whose stress was not always related to agricultural work. New responsibilities in home care, keeping abreast of introduced technology, and the unaccustomed competition also contributed. The time-use study revealed a very long working day for the average woman in the village.
Although increasing female education and the consequent expectations of formal employment meant that agriculture was rejected as a means of livelihood in the country at large, this national trend was not particularly apparent in the Irrigated Village. On the contrary, some of the young educated girls responded to the new image of agriculture and expressed a desire to "obtain agriculture-related jobs," or even to "work on their parents land" and to "remain in the location." However, this was accompanied by the realization that land was now limited and seeking other work was more an imperative than an aspiration. New types of employment were therefore appearing: young women were taking up teaching or dressmaking. These were certainly stereotyped jobs for women but they were new in the IV. This pursuit of other avenues was more clearly demonstrated by a new phenomenon, the involvement of young females in voluntary community activity. They were undertaking key positions in
organizations, a positive indication of female leadership and decision-making in the future.
Albeit generally beneficial, the new agriculture had some undesirable consequences. Hand in hand with unprecedentedly high incomes, there was the phenomenon of households mortgaging their land and falling into poverty. The cost of inputs was high. Heavy expenditure on the consumer goods that were timed to fill the shops at harvest seasons drained cash away. Indebted households were forced to give up their land. If there were any training programmes in money management and saving, the women were not aware of them. The hazards of ignorance and shortcomings in the extension services were clearly demonstrated, for example in practices like storing grain in malathion-sprayed bags in ill-ventilated spaces regularly used by women and children. People claimed that the new competitive spirit was eroding the community spirit which had safeguarded its weaker members. This loss was particularly felt by women, as caring for children, the sick, and the aged had been shared obligations in
the former close-knit society. The new system isolated families in houses which were no longer close to one another. The burden of home and child care was exacerbated.
The Traditional Village
The new settlement was not far from the traditional village (TV), and yet another aspect of the impact of change, the "spill-over" effect, was occurring. The demonstrable results of the new agriculture were undoubtedly leading to attempts at emulation in the old village. Women were undertaking new tasks like chili harvesting and drying and cowpea cultivation. However, in doing this they lost the advantage of the proximity of home and workplace. Mothers had to take their young children along with them, setting out early in the morning and returning home late in the evening during peak harvest seasons. The children, who were often exposed to the elements, were cared for by older siblings who therefore could not attend school.
But change in the old village still lagged behind the new settlement. Women in the village did not have the land or the inputs that the settlement women had. So it was that, in the old village, faint traces of scenes recalled in the life-histories of older women in the Irrigated Village continued to survive. They still did their own grain-processing in the old village, while this had been taken over completely by commercial hullers in the new settlement. Non-remunerative production for domestic use was still important for 36 per cent of the women in the old village.
The impact of new perceptions of female activities was greatest on the lower-caste groups in the village. They proceeded to benefit both socially and economically from diversified activities and training programmes introduced by national, local, and non-government organizations. The upper castes kept aloof, reluctant to mix with the others. There was, therefore, a reversal of status between the caste groups as a result of development.
This village had a population of approximately 1,800 in about 300 households, 32 per cent of them extended and 68 per cent nuclear. A majority of households (63 per cent) fell into the lowest income category in the sample, and there was a high dependency ratio of 3.9 persons per earner. Women contributed cash income in 20 per cent of the households. Most of them (87 per cent) were sole earners, bringing in between Rs. 76 and Rs. 500 per month.
Educational opportunities had improved in recent times with better roads and transport, and almost 78 per cent of the unmarried young females had obtained secondary qualifications. Only 36 per cent of the married women in the youngest cohort had pursued education to this level, while 28 per cent of the older females had had no schooling. Thirty-five per cent of the husbands and wives had had an equal education, while 32 per cent of the wives had better levels of education but 88 per cent of the wives were unemployed, as against only 3 per cent of the husbands.
The Model Village
The Model Village Scheme's initial aim was to provide a house and land for people who were living in poverty in previously prosperous villages. This was to be the springboard for social and economic improvement through participatory development. The basis for such progress lay in employment opportunities. The former work patterns of females taken from the life-histories show that a fair proportion of married (49 per cent) and unmarried (60 per cent) women had engaged in remunerated work before, although this had been in poorly paid jobs like domestic service. Unfortunately in this case relocation had in fact resulted in a loss of work opportunities: agriculture was not possible on the small plots in the new location, and if the women could not return to their villages of origin for agricultural jobs they remained unemployed. Attempts to introduce vocational training for income-generating activities had failed, primarily because the activities chosen, like crafts and
tailoring, had no market. This village had the lowest household incomes of all the locations studied. In fact, despite the new access to housing and land, the situation in the Model Village tended to replicate the deprivation that it had been established to eradicate.
Some of the women did return to their villages of origin for casual work in the fields. However, the major source of female employment was domestic service in West Asia. About 11 per cent of the unmarried women had already taken jobs there, and at the time of the survey others were ready to leave in the near future. The husbands had permanent jobs in about 10 per cent of the households. However, these did not bring in the kind of capital that West Asian jobs did. Those households that had been able to improve their homes and begin to invest in education for their children derived their income from women working in West Asia.
Another negative effect of this relocation scheme arose from the fact that only young families had been moved to the new site, and the social structure therefore lacked some of the essential elements of a rural community: there were no village elders, no one to perform religious or other rituals, no village shrines. Parents, relatives, and other members of the extended family still lived in the old villages. The settlers tried to fill this vacuum by maintaining close ties with the old village, going there to find work, gather food, borrow utensils, to seek advice in illness and times of trouble, to consult astrologers, and to worship at the accustomed shrines. Those who had no time to go felt a sense of deprivation and loneliness. The missing role of the elderly was a significant loss to these settlers.
On the other hand, the relocation of young families severed not only physical ties but also cultural and social bonds, with the result that the women had greater freedom to make their own choices for themselves and for their children, and these choices were relatively untrammelled by the cultural and social sanctions that generally prevail in a typical village community. People here were relatively free from caste consciousness and more receptive to change, as exemplified by the Muslim woman who stated emphatically that her daughter would be educated for employment and would marry "late."
The Semi-urban Locations
If the Model Village lacked some of the characteristics of the more typical rural settlement, like agriculture and the presence of extended families, semi-urban location H (SU-H) retained some of them. About half its land (100 acres) was used for paddy cultivation and its economic base was still partly agricultural. However, this was changing because of its proximity to the capital and a rapid increase in its population. Urbanization was accelerating and housing, health, education, and communication policies were affecting the area. Industrial activity was rising and the increasing pressure for residential and industrial space was competing with the old agricultural system.
At the time of the survey there were approximately 5,000 people living in 520 households there. About 90-100 acres of the land, most of it owned by the older residents, was devoted to housing. The migrants who came looking for work rented accommodation there. The sample here comprised 35 households; 44 per cent of them were extended and 66 per cent nuclear. The women were divided into three age-cohorts: 18-39 (which included 32 per cent of those who were married and 20 per cent of those who lived in extended families), 40-59 (54 per cent of the married women but only 10 per cent of those in extended households), and 60+ (14 per cent of the married women in the sample and 70 per cent of those who lived in extended households).
The average household included six people, but the dependency ratio was fairly low at 2.1 persons per earner. In roughly a third of the households about 34 per cent of the women contributed, from various sources, to cash income. Only 27 per cent of the husbands and 9 per cent of the wives were employed and household income was mainly derived from the earnings of younger family members. The educational levels of the young women, both married and unmarried, were quite high. Twenty-seven per cent had married less educated men; 18 per cent of the couples had equal education.
The employment prospects for women had brightened and their status had changed somewhat as more jobs for them became available in the FTZ. This created some resentment among young unemployed men for whom there were fewer opportunities, especially when they had to concede the role of provider to their wives.
Most households (63 per cent in SU-H and 66 per cent in SW-K) in both semi-urban locations fell in the middle of the income classifications, which embraced household income between Rs. 1,(8)0 and 2,999 and per capita income of Rs. 101300 per month. However, while over half (57 per cent) of the earners in SU-H fell in the highest per capita income group (over Rs. 300 a month), only 42 per cent of those in SU-K were in this category, and more (53 per cent) were in the middle group, compared to only 36 per cent of those in SU-H. Although their income was low by urban standards, the new jobs, albeit poorly paid, had eased household deprivation.
There were nearly 6,000 people in 1,100 households in SW-K. Sixty-three per cent of the 40 households in the selected sample were nuclear and 37 per cent were extended. There were 5.1 people in the average household, which was below the national average. The dependency rate was 2.1. Fifty-three per cent of the married women in the sample and 55 per cent of those who lived in extended households were in the youngest cohort. The middle cohort included 31 per cent of the married women and 18 per cent of those in the extended households, while 16 per cent of the married women and 27 per cent of those in extended families were over 60. In contrast to the other locations, where all the never-married women were clustered in the youngest groups, 17 per cent of the unmarried women were in the middle cohort here.
Again the level of education was high among the younger women, many of whom had completed the final secondary-school examinations. Some of them had gone on to acquire skills like typing and stenography. Fifty-three per cent of all the women were in formal employment and another 37 per cent earned small amounts by informal trading, in which they were sometimes assisted by their small children. Although new avenues of employment had opened for both men and women, the opportunities in the FTZ were greater for women.
The Urban Location
There were approximately 13,400 people living in 2,230 households in the densely populated urban location (UV). Only 28 households were included in the final study because in 12 of the 40 selected the main female had gone to West Asia. However, in these and the other five families in the total sample, the implications of this were discussed with the husbands or other family members. Fifty-four per cent were extended households to which half of the youngest cohort belonged, the rest of the women being equally divided between the older cohorts. Thirty-two per cent of the married women were in the youngest group, 54 per cent in the middle group and 14 per cent in the oldest cohort. Some of the extended households were actually multiple households in which related families occupied small parts of the same house but did not operate as a single economic unit. Average household size was seven, with a dependency ratio of 1.6.
Incomes were relatively good in this location, but the socio-economic heterogeneity of the community meant there were great disparities. Half the households and 68 per cent of the per capita incomes were in the highest categories, but in this urban setting the poorer groups in semi-permanent shanties were totally dependent on cash income. Their poverty was somewhat alleviated by food stamps and their conditions and spirits had recently been raised by public and non-government programmes to upgrade child health and housing in the area.
The women's educational levels ranged from none at all to postgraduate degrees. Thirty-nine per cent of the women were employed and contributed monthly incomes between Rs. 200 and Rs. 3,500 to 64 per cent of the households. Sixty-seven per cent of the female sample obtained between Rs. 50 and Rs. 6,250 from various other sources ranging from food stamps to fixed deposits and investments.
Work
The heterogeneous nature of the households in the urban and semi-urban locations made this a complex issue. The life-histories point to the fact that remunerated urban work did not provide the flexibility found in rural jobs. As a result, 50 per cent of the women were occupied exclusively in housework, compared to only 4 per cent in the Irrigated Village. Extremes in class differences also contributed to a low M score for job acceptance. The élite at one end of the spectrum and those from low-income groups at the other both subscribed to a non-working role for females, though for different reasons. The élite found role fulfilment in marriage and housekeeping; the low-income women rejected the only jobs available, which were in domestic service, as demeaning. With regard to work intensity, a significant finding was that in contrast to the rural locations, the score here was higher for the more educated than for the less educated women. This points again to the lack of
acceptable employment for the lower socioeconomic groups.
However, there had been great changes. Employment options had widened for females of all social classes, for those without schooling and for those with secondary or higher education. Twenty-eight per cent of the women who had been unemployed because they rejected low-status jobs responded positively to work in West Asia, and many unmarried women (20 per cent in one location and 58 per cent in another) had taken up work in the FTZ. The lesser-educated had also ventured out into new areas in informal retail trading, food processing, and the preparation and sale of snacks and lunch packets to meet a new demand from employees for whom home-cooking had become a burden. While the more educated still kept mainly to traditional fields like nursing and teaching, some women were now taking new occupations. These included jobs as clerks, managers of co-operatives, postmistresses, tailors, and, for those with higher qualifications, librarians and research workers.
THE FREE TRADE ZONE (FTZ)
One of the government's key considerations in the establishment of the FTZ had been the expansion of employment and training opportunities for educated young people. Most of the enterprises were garment factories which sought female labour, particularly those with good secondary qualifications, and they employed large numbers of young women, the majority of whom came from the vicinity. Proximity to the zone was an important factor, as the wages were not sufficient to cover travel or lodgings and many of the households in both semi-urban locations included females who worked in the zone. FTZ employment was sex-stereotyped, the schedules were more rigorous and more regimented than in workplaces outside the zone, and the jobs were described as "low paid" and "tedious," though they carried a certain status. There was some attraction in working for foreign companies and dealing with new technology and equipment and the employees "could tell the world they worked in the FTZ, " as
one of them put it.
There were other disadvantages, too. There was no mobility of employment, since training was limited to the FTZ industries. Work on the night shift affected eyesight. Indeed, the late night shift was viewed by many as unsuitable for young girls and there were allegations of misconduct among those who returned home late at night. Many of the women had to have an older household member to chaperone them to and from the bus stop. However, some married women preferred this shift because it enabled them to complete their housework and leave their children with their husband or other family members.
Nor did the jobs provide long-term benefits, because the pay was low and only covered basic needs. In one SU, however, it had given a new value to some females as sole providers in homes where the men could not find work. Unfortunately, there was no evidence of any extensive role changes whereby the men took over household chores or child care. The unemployed husband was often found to be "looking for jobs" outside the home (using his wife's money for expenses) and the dual responsibility of remunerated and domestic work fell heavily on the female.
The temporary and insecure nature of these jobs caused anxiety, particularly among the married women who had become the sole earners in their households. The unmarried females were more inclined to view them as opportunities to earn some money before marriage. The FTZ had certainly provided new opportunities for the young women. In spite of the drawbacks, they saw this work as a means to a better future, perhaps through a better job, a better marriage, or even the possibility of postponing marriage and keeping their independence. Others recognized that the FTZ was just another source of ill-rewarded, strenuous jobs for females, but for those who had no choice, the work was valued for what small income it brought them. In the broader community, the increased employment opportunities for young women appeared to cause some resentment among young educated males, whose prospects had not improved.
WEST ASIAN MIGRATION
The demand for housemaids to work on two- to four-year contracts in West Asian countries provided an opportunity for large numbers of unskilled females with little education to earn money. It is estimated that around 75,000 to 100,000 of them from both rural and urban households had been so employed over the previous decade. The jobs were domestic and so compatible with gender stereotypes about work. However, as they uprooted a female from a known and protected sphere and involved travel, financial dealings, and other unaccustomed practices and ways of living, the earlier migrants had been more adventurous spirits who had already opted out of traditional roles and been exposed to non-conventional life-styles as sales girls or hotel workers. Migration was not considered "respectable" then and the girls had to contend with social ostracism. The idea caught on, however, as there was no role conflict or need for special skills, and this avenue of employment began to attract
females from very conventional backgrounds who had no opportunity or desire to participate in the labour force at home. Although they rejected the same work in Sri Lankan homes as demeaning, they were attracted by the prospect of earning a considerable sum of money in a short period, after which they could revert to their customary roles. This primary economic motivation was reinforced by the demonstrable material gains of relatives and friends who had benefited in this way.
Community attitudes to these jobs were confused. On the one hand there was a suggestion of social inferiority, while on the other the ensuing benefits of travel abroad, familiarity with modern equipment, the improvement of their homes, and other material advantages lent status and acceptance to the West Asian returnees and their families. The families which were studied came from the urban and two semi-urban locations. One of the rural locations, the Model Village, had also benefited from the females who took jobs in West Asia. In the other locations, only a minority were willing to brave the social sanctions. "When we bring back money, society will accept us," said one of them.
With aspirations rising with their levels of education, the kind of work girls took up was becoming more important. However, those with less education were realistic about their potential for employment. Their contention was that the type of job they could get locally would be of very low status anyway, and would expose them to similar risks as in West Asia, but with less financial reward. Some families found a way out of the dilemma by sending mothers or older sisters; others were careful to select the family member "who would know how to behave and not disgrace the family." Although no one in the sample had had any adverse personal experiences, they had all seen and heard of them. However, they seemed to believe that "good behaviour" could assure protection.
Increasingly, the would-be migrants were seeking jobs through friends who were "selecting good homes there," or even lending them the passage fare. Otherwise they raised the money by selling assets or borrowing from those who lent money specifically for this purpose. However, the majority paid sums ranging from a minimum of US$100-200 to private agencies, as they were disinclined to trust government bureaux. Although some attempts were being made to train women for work they would be expected to do, those in the sample were totally unprepared and depended solely on the kindness of the lady of the house to train them.
All the money the women earned was sent back by bank draft or brought home on their return. Those who had worked for two years - many had worked longer - brought back at least Rs. 20,000 (US$700). Priorities in expenditure seemed to be fairly uniform. After settling outstanding debts, the primary goal was to buy or build a house, and almost every returnee managed to do this, even if it was only a semi-permanent structure. Children's education was the other most important area of investment. Those who had earned enough brought a package of benefits, including television and radio sets and other electrical equipment. While the modern kitchen equipment was sometimes more for conspicuous display than actual use, there were many instances in which it not only lightened women's workload but encouraged some male participation in domestic chores. The insistent demands of husbands, children, and other family members for consumer goods and luxury foods put great pressure on a woman
whose "nature is to pamper her family." With exposure to the media and better education, aspirations and expenses for children rose.
Most of the women arranged for family members to care for their children and house; others put their children in hostels and convents. Parents and c lose family members sometimes offered support out of concern and a desire to help, but the returnee often shared her earnings in cash or gifts with a fairly wide circle of relatives and neighbours who had assisted in the expectation of monetary reward. Some of these arrangements worked better than others; there were examples of neglect and misspending and of transactions which led to ill-will or even caused the break-up of relationships.
Despite the tremendous boost West Asian job opportunities gave to a new class of participants in the labour force, it has remained a controversial area both nationally and globally. It was not always considered a boon and it was not always beneficial. Children's exposure to new media, labour-saving equipment for the household, release from the stresses of tenancy, and, for some, a better marriage were among the benefits described. On the negative side, there was often fear and anxiety about a female venturing out in this unaccustomed way. The migrant and her family were frequently under great strain, which they had to endure as part of the only way out of poverty open to most of them. However, family fears usually abated considerably after the woman's first home leave and the distribution of the fruits of her labour. Some of the women felt they had been covertly pressured into taking these jobs, considering this as yet another burden thrust on them as part of their caring
role. While there was no doubt that most of the families benefited from a higher quality of life, for some, albeit a minority, the advantages were short-lived and they paid a high price for them in broken homes and neglected children.
The management of the money earned depended very much on the cooperation and temperament of the husband or, in other instances, on the status of the wife vis-a-vis the husband and the children in the family. Some families had been reduced to poverty as a result of mismanagement or extravagance, usually by the husband. Only a very small proportion of the money earned was invested in banks or business enterprises. Lack of financial experience was a factor in much wasteful expenditure, for the women who had had an income prior to their departure spent frugally and saved for the future.
In fact, all the families had invested in goods and a standard of living that required a regular high income, which in most cases they failed to ensure. It was suggested that this situation might have been prevented had the government-which after all benefited by their foreign exchange earnings- recognized the problems that would confront the women when it encouraged their pursuit of jobs in West Asia. A supportive package of training, financial counselling, and advice on investing their money for regular returns could, it was felt, have ensured stability and long-term benefits for the families that availed themselves of these new opportunities. As a matter of fact, some such measures had recently been implemented through the Department of Labour, but the women in the sample knew nothing about them.
The impact of foreign employment on the women themselves was rather more superficial than might have been expected. There was no perception of a role change. Rather, some of them considered it yet another service they were compelled to perform for their families" welfare, an attitude reinforced by the fact that the initial agency fee was less for a female migrant than it was for a male. Some of the women did not even refer to their work in West Asia as "a job." Nor did the experience lead to further employment when they came back, because the wages for similar domestic jobs at home were not sufficient to attract them. So many reverted to the same situation they had left. While working in West Asia was a way out of poverty for some, for many it was only a palliative, the benefits of which wore off with the euphoria.
Changing and Unchanging Roles and Perceptions
In one respect the image of women was changing somewhat. Children were beginning to perceive the mother as the one who encouraged them to study and whose earnings enabled them to do so. Another dimension was being added to her role: that of providing the extra means to educate children, and the responsibility to see that they took full advantage of this. In so doing, of course, the modern mother sacrificed the substantial domestic help which she would otherwise have had from her older girls. In spite of this, the perceptions children and unmarried girls had of parents had not changed much: the father was still seen by most as the provider and seat of authority, and the mother's new function to make education possible was merely taken to be an extension of her traditional role.
Women as the torch-bearers of tradition was another concept still strongly entrenched in the domestic sphere. This was evident from the high rate of adherence to customs, beliefs, and rituals. In all locations and all age-groups, the responses indicated a society where traditional customs were accepted. Although there was a significant minority who dropped observances because ideas had changed or they did not believe in them, a fair proportion of the unmarried educated females said they would continue such observances because they believed them to be beneficial. Another reason given was "respect for tradition," irrespective of personal belief. Neither a withering away of tradition nor a generalized homage to modernity appeared to be on their current agenda. A point of interest lay in the way the transmission of change was sometimes reversed from the young to the old. The older women were as strong in their endorsement of different values that they perceived as beneficial as
they were vehement in their denunciation of them when they were not.
Most of the women in the study held that marriage was central to household formation. However, an important change was the universal acceptance of later marriage - over 25 - which was supported even by those who had themselves been married when they were under 16. Marriage was very definitely being postponed to 28 or even 30. It was recognized that preparation for marriage now included gaining independent means, or at least paving the way for such means through education.
These findings have important demographic and social implications. Later marriage was enabling women to develop an individual identity in the household and in society. The search for financial independence was combined with economic necessity and the need to relieve extra burdens on parents, who now had perforce to extend their nurturing role. Some of those who had no jobs became involved in voluntary community tasks. But, like employment, this was seen as a mere stop-gap. Marriage was perceived to have more than a biological purpose; it was a vehicle of progress up the class ladder, and as such it entailed inevitable pressures on both males and females for ever greater achievement.
The concept of marriage as a means of economic security for a woman was implied in the statement of a fair minority (from 13 to 33 per cent) of the girls in both the rural and urban locations that marriage was not absolutely necessary for a female. A woman could dispense with it if she could earn her own livelihood independently: the search for new options was challenging even basic value systems. However, this did not apply among urban elite families, whose parents desired an early marriage for fear their daughters would make undesirable alliances if left to themselves too long. Delayed marriages prolonged dependency on parents and entailed new family interactions. Older females saw this extended space between puberty and marriage as fraught with danger for young girls, though some considered that the new ideas and ways of this transient phase would eventually be cancelled by the sobering effects of marriage.
The selection of a marriage partner appeared to hinge more on the consent of the woman rather than on the choice of parents, although parents still wanted the acceptable combination of nationality, caste, and religion. However, the situation was changing considerably and a good education and a job could override other considerations. In fact, parents were willing to leave the selection of a husband to their daughters, if they were educated and mature, provided their choice satisfied basic economic and social aspirations. However, this was not altogether welcomed by the girls, some of whom indicated that they found the task overwhelming.
Contrary to the general impression that considerations of caste and the dowry system were outmoded, a significant number, including young unmarried women, thought they were important. In some places where caste and dowries had not been part of the tradition, young girls were said to be emulating "elitist thinking" and supporting them. While some parents, and a few young women, did reject the concept of dowry vehemently, a considerable proportion of both parents and educated young women endorsed the dowry system as enhancing status in an otherwise unequal contract. It was now even thought to be more attainable, since education and employment were perceived as feasible substitutes for cash and property. Thus, symbolically, the custom had been transformed from one denoting female subservience to a token of a new level of independence for women.
A perceived increase in marital instability in the urban areas was partly attributed to female employment opportunities and partly to contact with the public sphere, which made female work more "visible" and had adverse effects on husbands' egos already dented by their wives' assistance in providing for their families. Female employment or other activities outside the home, exclusion from decision-making, and other points of contention which challenged the customary dominance of the husband were frequent sources of marital conflict. Buddhist, Hindu, and Islamic cultures provide a firm base for this male-dominated ethos, and in spite of all the changes and the rejection of many traditional structures, a large majority of the men and women in all locations upheld the superiority of the man in the home. However, analysis of the data on current marital status suggested that marital distress had taken the form of more expressed dissatisfaction within the marriage, rather than an
actual increase in separation or divorce. West Asian migration had sometimes led to infidelity on the part of the husband or the wife and the break-up of some marriages. Social sanctions still operated against infidelity, out-of-caste marriage, and other deviations from norms, but not in the stringent forms they once did.
Two factors appeared to have contributed to the relatively higher incidence of marital break-up observed in the earlier years of the life-histories of the older women. One was that they often entered into customary marriages with no legal backing and the other was the refuge readily available for a daughter and her children in her parents' home. This was evident in the frequency with which some females moved in and out of a marriage in the older life-histories. The poverty of a parents' home did not appear to detract from its ability to shelter a separated daughter.
The idea of a small family was universally accepted, without any relationship to education, age, location, or social class. Small families were most common in the Irrigated Village, where natural spacing methods and sterilization at very early ages were used. A new motivation for family planning was apparent, as a number of women in the urban locations had adopted contraceptive practices in the hope of proceeding to jobs in West Asia. Although there was widespread knowledge of contraception, the most popular method in all locations appeared to be sterilization, especially among the would-be migrants, who were also more likely to use modern techniques. The more cautious kept to traditional practices. Fears about modern methods were still very high and lack of access to supplies frequently surfaced as a reason for not using them. The overriding rationale for the acceptance of the small family was the desire to educate children for employment and thereby progress up the social
ladder. The economic liability of educating a large family had made even the older women change their minds about the desirable number of children. Another important factor was the impact of education, which acted as a catalyst in the community. The government Rs. 500 incentive was encouraging some men to have vasectomies or to permit their wives to be sterilized.
The complete endorsement of small - two children - families, but the wide divergence in its achievement, raises many questions. The reasons for this discrepancy have not been fully understood. The predominant acceptance of natural methods of contraception and sterilization suggests a lack of confidence in the modern family-spacing methods available caused by very real fears of side-effects.
At another level, the small family is more likely to be viewed as a viable proposition in countries that are able to provide institutional assistance for responsibilities in those areas of care which, in poorer countries, are borne solely by family, kin, and community. A recurring concern was the inability of small families to bear the burden of care for its aged and ageing members. The advantage of a small family was perceived as its ability to ensure better employment through education. This was not always possible, which led to families with neither the numbers nor the economic strength they needed for viability and support.
Obligatory responsibilities for the aged were clearly accepted. However, the practical circumstances of women in employment and changed life-styles and living conditions have made it sometimes more an inevitable duty than a welcomed pleasure. Both young and old people commented on the practical difficulties of upkeep and support when there were fewer younger family members, and they faced competing demands on their time and resources. The rising aspirations and expectations of children confronted young parents with the dilemma of prioritizing their family responsibilities and led to conflicting loyalties that created traumas, especially for the women.
There were some aspects of a women's role which did not appear to have moved at the same pace as, for instance, women's employment. This was the case with women in the home. However, relationships had progressed to the point where, although a majority of younger females accorded a special place to the husband, they did not see the wife as inferior. This concept left room for discussion on family matters, though it was usually between unequal partners.
There was considerable confusion about another important aspect of authority in the home: the ultimate conclusion was that while there was some discussion of expenditure, in most cases husbands confessed to having greater independence in spending even joint incomes. Their responses ranged from "my wife is provided with everything she wants - what does she want money for? I control the money" to "I consult my wife before I incur any major expenses." "She generally agrees with what I say" was all too frequently heard. The more educated wives stated that their husbands left them free to spend on essential household equipment, but they always consulted them beforehand. In fact, more often than not, "authority" was confined to the wife managing to supply food and clothing on a shoestring budget, while the husband often had money that he could spend as he desired. This has many implications for children and households where facilities are deemed to flow from a mother's control
over expenditure.
Another crucial area was the division of labour in the home. Male support in times of crisis was as far as both men and women would go in sharing housework and child care. The idea of child care and housework as women's jobs was clearly endorsed by both sexes. Furthermore, its perpetuation was well ensured, as fair proportions of all the women subscribed to the socialization of boys and girls in their traditional roles. Rural women in the agricultural sector had the heaviest workload, averaging 16½ to 17, hours a day. Tasks were varied and multiple, indoor and outdoor. They included food cultivation, gathering, processing and preparation, and caring for children and the old. The men worked more outdoors, but had a shorter day of 8 to 10 hours, as they did not participate in domestic and caring activities.
The urban upper-class females had a long day too, averaging 10 to 12 hours. The character of their work differed in that their household tasks were more concerned with supervision and management and the maintenance of the social image of the elite. There was less interaction with neighbours than among the rural or the lower-income urban women. The latter were found to have two to three hours free time each day, because they had only a simple shelter to care for and very basic cooking and domestic duties. They spent six hours or so a day on casual work or informal trading. Community living was more the norm here, and the children, very few of whom went to school, played together in groups throughout the day.
The weight of the dual role of married women was seen in their higher work-intensity scores, which also showed that the less educated participated in more burdensome economic activity. In the Irrigated Village the workload increased on the receipt of new land. In the urban locations, the young unmarried females had a higher score, since they participated in economic activity more than those in rural locations, where jobs to suit their aspirations were scarce. In the semi-urban and urban locations, West Asian employment contributed to the scores of those who otherwise would have been engaged only in housework. The stress score was lower in locations where new opportunities were utilized to obtain income. It was high in the rural locations where peasant agriculture predominated.
The study sought to establish how women, husbands, and children felt about a wage-earning role for women and how their attitudes related to actual practice. The acceptance of the possibility of both employment and domestic work for women was one of the greatest positive changes observed in all locations.
There appeared to be widespread recognition of the need for equal employment opportunities for both men and women, and of the role of women as co-providers. In practice, however, neither of these appeared to have helped the employed woman to increase her independence or extend her authority in the home. Older women deplored the neglect of home and children which they felt female employment, however otherwise acceptable, could cause, and sometimes blamed it for delinquency and disruption in the family. Others said their labour-force participation was just another aspect of women's responsibility to contribute to family welfare. Young unmarried females assumed that employed women would have more control, independence, and authority in marriage.
There was some evidence that the trend towards nuclear family structures seemed to have especially enhanced the status of the mother and wife vis-a-vis the husband. However, this gain may have been counterbalanced for many young employed mothers by the loss of the support and strength, and the child care and advice, provided by the presence of an older relative. All the locations except the Model Village included a mixture of extended and nuclear households. There was no evidence of a generation gap militating against older people living with younger family members. While traditional obligations or inheritance patterns often led to the formation of extended families, convenience was becoming more of a decisive factor in the conscious formation of extended households. There was a new phenomenon of extended family members coming in to look after a family when the mother was employed locally or in West Asia, or to overcome crises in child care. There was, however, a preference
for nuclear families on the part of young people who valued their independence. While some older women welcomed the opportunity to help their younger women to achieve status through employment by taking over some of the family responsibilities, others deplored their plight in having to manage young children and being "used" in their old age. Rural households were still open to all kin members and the practice of married daughters returning to the parents' home in times of illness or family crisis was continuing. It was not so in urban locations, where houses were congested.
Previously, women in particular had achieved some recognition as aged mothers and grandmothers whose advice was sought by the young. Now, their wisdom was superseded by modern education. A sense of uselessness therefore prevailed among the older women, whose roles had become attenuated and devalued. On the other hand, the expected widening of the generation gap had not created severe dichotomies. In fact, it was bridged by the elders, who endorsed some of the changes in the lives of young women, and by the young themselves, who continued to respect tradition. This was the meeting point which to some extent reduced the potential for contradictions and conflict between the generations.
An important instance of role change was seen in the extensive female participation in community, public, and voluntary organizations. This was particularly evident in the rural locations, where young educated unmarried women were becoming leaders in youth development groups. In the absence of suitable jobs, they were launching themselves into the public sphere in this way and gaining valuable experience and training in scientific agriculture and income-generating activities. This was signalling a clear extension of authority into a sphere where the dearth of women has often been lamented.
There was no correlation between education and economic activity. Nor did high economic activity signify high income. There was great diversity between the attitudes and practices of married and unmarried females within each location and between locations. Work aspirations were persistently high among all the unmarried females with similar levels of education in all the locations. The responses of the married females of different age-groups and educational levels were conditioned by their particular image of work. This was mainly determined by where they lived.
The responses from the Irrigated Village flowed not merely from an appreciation of agricultural work for women but also from current opportunities in new agriculture, while women in the other rural areas aspired to jobs outside agriculture because traditional agriculture had a low status there. A high proportion of the women in the village were working, and while the educated unmarried girls aspired to well-paid, status-oriented jobs, they expressed strong preference for working in agriculture, which was now seen there as being both lucrative and rewarding. In fact, the highest level of female participation in remunerated activity was found in the Irrigated Village. The catalyst here was the break with the mono-crop culture and the introduction of the new agriculture which not only diversified opportunity for wage-earning but extended it from seasonal to annual work. In the two semi-urban locations, employment for women was mainly in the Middle East, the Free Trade Zones, or
low-paid local jobs, so some of the older females did not see employment as good for women. The severe deprivation of females in the Model Village and their familiarity with agricultural work resulted in favourable responses to work. In the urban areas, the elite groups favoured a housewife's role for women while the low-income groups in the shanties rejected the jobs available to them in domestic service as demeaning. Some women recognized new work opportunities in informal trading or, for the educated, in the professions, and had more positive responses towards women's employment.
A majority of the parents and young unmarried women showed a tendency towards job stereotyping, although a few recognized the feasibility of a female fitting into the hitherto male preserves like the armed forces, engineering, and technical and mechanical work. This trend was apparent in the Irrigated Village, where the new agriculture had broken down traditional gender differentiation in work.
Young females and their parents favoured jobs which could be continued throughout their working life. The option of withdrawing from the workforce to cope with domestic events or to satisfy cultural norms was no longer open to them. However, many females in all locations, especially agricultural workers and casual workers in the urban areas, had dropped out. A high proportion did so after marriage because the "husband disliked it" or "to look after young daughters." The withdrawal rate was lowest in the Irrigated Village. After the distribution of new land, when female participation in remunerative work was enhanced, in the Irrigated Village it was possible for many women to work in the spaces between the births of their children. It was interesting to note that older mothers and fathers were changing their attitudes towards female employment, not for themselves, but for their daughters.
Women, parents, and husbands rejected marginalized areas of work, unless as a last resort to relieve poverty. Jobs as domestic servants or casual agricultural workers and as housemaids in West Asia were not acceptable to the educated young females in the semi-urban locations. In all locations it was found that status was a more important factor in women's employment than in men's. However, while some men and women would not settle for mere economic gain through low-status employment, there were others, like those who chose West Asian work, for instance, who dispensed with status and opted instead for a way out of their present poverty, postponing their progress up the class structure by investing in their children's education, which was recognized as the key to good jobs and upward social mobility.
The life-histories thus indicated that responses to key issues at any given point in time were, by and large, shaped by personal experiences and socialization. Nevertheless, the data also pointed to other crucial responses less consonant with these influences and more directly stimulated by development programmes or policy interventions. The mean M scores shown in table 1 are a means of comparing the response to change in five of the locations:
These scores encapsulate both types of responses. Some features of relevance to policy are worth noting. High M scores showed a significant correlation between education and non-traditional attitudes. Unmarried women had generally higher M scores than married women. There was an overall low M score on customs, indicating the tenacity with which married, and to a lesser degree, unmarried young women upheld tradition.
Table 1. Responses indicating modern attitudes (total M score = 100)
Location
Married
Unmarried
Irrigated Village
Model Village
Semi-urban area (H)
Semi-urban area (K)
Urban location
Both married and unmarried women in the Irrigated Village, where the married women had had little formal education, scored high on attitudes to work and participation in labour, and low on education. They also scored high on marriage and fertility issues. These responses were only partly due to evolutionary processes and were much more likely to be a response to the stimulus of the new agriculture and its deviation from tradition. In the urban locations high scores on work may be more validly attributed to FTZ and West Asian employment than to general job opportunities for educated females. Scores on marriage and fertility issues followed the same pattern: West Asian jobs often provided the incentive for men and women to use family-planning methods.
Another characteristic of the response to change was the diversity of experience in five of the locations, as expressed in table 2.
The Irrigated Village had the highest proportion of young females and also the highest proportion in economic activity, but levels of education and household income were poor. However, there was a low dependency ratio, as more people in a household engaged in economic activity. In the urban location, levels of work and education were not high, but it had the highest household incomes as new avenues of employment provided money to those with low skills. The Model Village showed the greatest deprivation, as the relatively young population there had low levels of education, economic activity, and income.
Table 2. The locations in ranked order of variables
Location
Age
Work
Income
Education
Irrigated Village
Model Village
Semi-urban area (H)
Semi-urban area (K)
Urban location
<section>Conclusions</section>
More extensive micro-level research should be carried out to bring information now hidden and dispersed to light. Such research will have to initiate and encourage innovative methodologies and instruments of measurement. This study has demonstrated the effectiveness of a multi-technique approach and shown how the complex nature of women's work requires the development of new indicators. It has also highlighted some of the many problems which must be heed when devising a methodology to evaluate the impact of development policy. These problems are exacerbated by the time-lag of various interactions, which in itself makes development interventions irreversible, even if they are found to be detrimental and damaging to the social fabric they aim to strengthen.
Each of the development policies examined here had both beneficial and adverse effects on the people concerned. The impact of each on the different social groups varied according to the group's situation and particular experience. Policy evaluation should therefore begin by taking account of such diversity.
In this study, the change which seemed to enhance the quality of life and social stability most, as well as facilitating sustained development, was the introduction of the new agriculture. The synergistic effect of the changes involved was apparent in the modification of deeply rooted attitudes and ideological concepts. The way in which people in the Irrigated Village transcended their accustomed social behaviour to absorb and cultivate new ideas and practices suggests how such settlements could be managed elsewhere. A demonstrable gain, such as land for the landless and displaced, is seen to have contributed significantly to the positive response to change. However, this acceptance could easily be reversed if there is no land for the next generation or schemes to use existing land without fragmentation, and there is little hope of continuity. A partial solution could lie in agro-industrial ventures which include diversified training programmes and future prospects for young
people. The modernity scores revealed a direct correlation between age and education: younger educated women had the highest scores in all locations, with one exception. This was the Irrigated Village, which shared the highest overall modernity score (with an SU-K) that was not confined to any age or educational status. The new agriculture was therefore a catalyst that had an effect on an entire social ethos.
Female investment in education and employment in expectation of a good marriage, and the growing numbers of households supported by co-earners, have important policy implications. The new jobs for less educated females are mainly in arduous low-paid work; West Asian jobs may very well peter out in time. A number of women are already seeking jobs outside the traditionally female areas, showing their potential for earning in new ways of which all are not yet aware. A campaign to publicize new opportunities and schemes could help fill the gap created by shrinking job opportunities in West Asia or the FTZ in the future. There was sometimes a considerable shortfall between the labour demand and supply, a situation often exacerbated as much by prevailing attitudes as by practical considerations. In the urban location, for example, there was a desperate need for income on the one hand and for household help on the other, but neither was met because the poorer women rejected the
idea of domestic service. Other means of income generation, like outlets for take-away food, for instance, which have the trappings of status should be developed to attract labour and skills now underutilized.
Family-planning programmes need to broaden their target group to include males. The resistance to modern methods of birth control calls for more personalized monitoring of their effects on young mothers, with a view to alleviating their anxieties about them. Later marriages and smaller families release a vital human resource - female labour - which can no longer be kept out of the mainstream of development activity.
Contrary to general impressions, the study suggests contemporary Sri Lankan society does not necessarily reject tradition or practical commitment to its underlying value system. It was most significant that while some continued rituals and observances out of respect for tradition, most women were convinced of the value of these traditions. This is encouraging in a poor nation which must perforce depend largely on the customary services of its women to care for the weaker members of the population. However, there are two disturbing elements in this situation. One is the particular load it places on women, especially as their caring role is expanded in contemporary socio-economic conditions. The burden and stress of coping with rapid and varied changes somehow appears to fall heavily on the women in the household. The second is the tendency of policy workers to focus on the virtue of women's caring role in order to obviate the necessity for state intervention in this field.
Maintaining the tradition of caring for the aged has become burdensome and stressful. Supportive measures like insurance schemes and nursing care through community groups could ease the load considerably. Indeed, they will become imperative in the future, when smaller families will not be able to undertake the responsibilities they are expected to carry now.
Women are inevitably at the centre of the household as an economic unit. However, the imperatives of their role in the wider sphere of economic activity outside the home may encounter cultural barriers which inhibit their effectiveness there. The project revealed the tenacity with which both men and women safeguard the household as the basic social unit. The dilemma of policy-makers, planners, and participants in development is to reconcile the stability of the household with the demands made on its various members to perform outside it in roles and functions that may appear to threaten or destabilize the gender-based structure within it. The evidence of changing male and female attitudes towards specified activities and, to a lesser extent, of changes in the activities themselves, is central to the issue of the impact of development. Though these have occurred both within and beyond the domestic sphere, there has been very little change in the conceptualization of gender
roles. Indeed, the strong acceptance of traditional perceptions and norms suggests substantive change in this area is unlikely.
The success of development efforts must hinge very much on the extent to which this and similar real though intangible limitations on its participants are recognized. Future policies must incorporate measures to enhance the contribution of both men and women in ways that are compatible with their intuitive concern for the continued stability of the household and the family.
<section>The impact of economic development on rural women in China</section>
All-China Women's Federation, Beijing, China
1. A STUDY OF TWO TOWNSHIPS
<section>Background</section>
In old China, agricultural productivity was low and the small-scale peasant economy was basically a combination of traditional farming and handicraft industries. Most of the land belonged to a handful of landlords and the majority of peasants lived in poverty. Rural women generally worked at home, where they were responsible for the household chores, raising livestock, weaving, and various supplementary jobs. Their status in the family and society was very low.
Soon after modern China was founded in 1949, land reform began throughout the country. Landless people, both men and women, now got some land and women's economic status began to change: the feudal tradition of male superiority was under attack. Then the government began to transform the peasant economy by establishing public ownership of the basic means of production and a socialist co-operative economy. During this period rural women came out in their millions to participate in collective productive work. They earned their own income and expanded the range of their activities greatly. On the whole, their outlook broadened and their status in the family and society began to improve, though it was a gradual process and it differed in degree from individual to individual.
After 1957, inexperience and economic mismanagement put a damper on agricultural growth. Grain production was unduly emphasized, to the neglect of other crops. Those who tilled the land had little say in how it was used and egalitarian patterns of distribution were enforced. Women were further disadvantaged by the vestiges of feudal ideas that prevented the implementation of the principle of equal pay: they usually got less than men for doing the same amount of work. Moreover, while women participated in collective production just like men, they had also heavy household chores to attend to in the home. This situation lasted until the late 1970s.
At the end of 1978 China began rural structural reforms by adopting a household contract responsibility system whereby farmers could keep their surplus produce for themselves after they had sold a contracted amount to the state. The new economic policies effectively boosted the farmers" enthusiasm for work and raised levels of efficiency in agricultural production. Policies encouraged a diversified economy, and forestry, animal husbandry, fishing, and other sideline occupations flourished as well as farming. At the same time, village and township enterprises developed rapidly, providing employment for surplus rural labour, including women. While it would be difficult to give accurate relative values of the yuan during these different phases, the unadjusted figures will give some idea of general trends: in 1949, the value of China's total agricultural output was 32.6 billion yuan; in 1978 it was 156.7 billion yuan. In 1949, farmers had a per capita annual income of 44 yuan.
It was 134 in 1978, and by 1986 it had risen to 424.
<section>The study</section>
The research project focused on the economic reforms since 1979, with the land reform of the early 1950s as a subtheme. It studied the impact of the consequent social change and economic development on the education, occupations, marriage, family formation, and attitudes of rural women.
China is a huge country with an enormous population. As the level of economic development differs from place to place, it was decided to select two research locations from areas at different stages of development to make the research findings fairly representative of the general situation while facilitating comparative analysis. One was in Jiangsu province and the other in Sichuan.
Hengtang is a township or district in Danyang county in the municipality of Zhengjiang in Jiangsu province. Jiangsu is on the cast coast of China. It covers an area of over 100,000 square kilometres and has a population of 62.69 million. It leads the rest of China in economic development and was one of the earliest provinces to start developing village and township enterprises. Its industrial and agricultural output was valued at 145.8 billion yuan in 1986, which was 26.8 times that of 1949 and three times that of 1')78. In 1986, the per capita annual income of farmers in the province was 561.28 yuan, which was 406.28 yuan above the 1978 figure.
Hengtang is in the south of Danyang county in the municipality of Zhengjiang. It covers an area of 507 square kilometres and includes 3,000 hectares of arable land. It comprises 25 villages and 10,183 households, with a total population of 36,844, including 18,657 females. The main farm products are rice, wheat, silkworm cocoons, pigs, poultry, and fish, and its industrial products include silk, knitwear, clothing, leather, farm machinery, and wood carvings. There were 33 township enterprises in Hengtang in 1986 with a total of 4,436 employees, two-thirds of whom were women. Besides these, every village in the area had its own factories. These village enterprises employed altogether 3,129 people, of whom 27 per cent were women. The per capita annual income of the farmers there was 628 yuan in 1986 compared to 182 yuan in 1978. Hengtang had 30 nurseries, 29 primary schools, and six middle schools, with a total enrolment of 5,000. It also had a fairly well equipped hospital
and 28 health stations.
Jiahong is a township in Guanxian county, in the municipality of Chengdu in the province of Sichuan. Sichuan is an outlying, landlocked province near the country's southern border. It covers an area of 578,000 square kilometres and has a population of 100 million, making up one-tenth of the nation's total. The value of the province's total industrial and agricultural output in 1986 was 82.369 billion yuan, 18.9 times that of 1949 and 2.3 times that of 1978. The annual per capita income of farmers in 1986 was 338 yuan, or 2.9 times that of 1978.
Jiahong covers an area of 12.5 square kilometres and comprises nine villages, which include 2,641 households with a total population of 10,992, including 5,472 females. Jiahong has 806 hectares of fairly fertile arable land, 93 per cent of which is irrigated by the Dujiangyan irrigation system. Its main farm products are grain, pigs, poultry, fish, fruit, and tea, while its industries produce edible oil, processed grain, poultry products, and building materials. There is also a farm machine repair service. The annual per capita income of farmers in the township only was 74 yuan in 1978, but this had risen to 465 yuan by 1986. There were nine primary schools and one middle school, with a total enrolment of 1,974. There is a township hospital and a health station in each village, so the farmers did not have to travel far to see a doctor.
The main research method was a life-history approach supplemented by a time-allocation study. This was done through a general survey of women over 17 years old and their households in the two locations. In Hengtang the survey was conducted among 9,729 households with 13,955 women over 17. In Jiahong, it was carried out among 2,545 households, which included 3,654 women over 17 years. It recorded basic data on the women and other members of their families, including name, date and place of birth, educational level, marital status, occupation, and family income.
Using stratified cluster sampling with random selection, 450 women classified in three cohorts - old (55-65), middle-aged (35-45), and young (17-27) - were selected in each location for the in-depth quantitative and qualitative research. The sample size was thus 900 women in all. A life-history matrix was used for the longitudinal analysis. Informal discussions on special topics were also held with women from the three age-cohorts, and special visits were paid to those women with particular knowledge of local conditions. Exchanging views with them helped to confirm the survey results. A time-allocation study was carried out among 20 women, including some from each age-group, and five in each location, for seven days during both the busy season and the slack farming seasons.
<section>The findings</section>
Education
The social changes and economic development which followed the founding of modern China made an obvious impact on women's education. The proportion of illiterates in the oldest cohort is 79.9 per cent, as against 11.8 per cent in the middle-aged cohort and 0.5 per cent in the young cohort. The women's educational levels have clearly risen considerably. While the majority of the oldest cohort are illiterate, the average length of schooling among the middle cohort was 4.1 years, with the majority of them having a primary education. Women in the youngest cohort had an average of 6.6 years schooling and 60 per cent of them had a secondary education. However, it is worth pointing out that dropping out of school was quite common in all three cohorts. The main reasons for this among the two older cohorts were financial difficulties, shortage of labour in the family, or the feudal view of women as inferior and unworthy of education. In the young cohort, 35 per cent dropped out
because of financial difficulties, and nearly 50 per cent dropped out because they could not catch up with the rest of the class or failed entrance examinations to higher schools. Further investigation revealed that female schoolchildren did much more housework after school than boys did. The girls cut and collected green fodder, looked after younger siblings, and helped with cooking and washing. This heavy workload at home was an important factor in their academic difficulties.
Another noteworthy feature in the area of education is a decline in the number of years of schooling for young women in both locations. The trend was particularly obvious in Hengtang in the well-developed province of Jiangsu. At the time of the survey, all the women in the youngest cohort had already stopped schooling and taken jobs or become exclusively engaged in housework. The data showed that the 17-21 age-group had received 0.7 years less schooling on average than the 22-27 age-group. In the former, the number of women with junior middle-school education was 10.3 per cent less than in the 22-27 age-group, and those with senior middle-school education were 3.6 per cent less, even though the number of women with primary-school education was 14.1 per cent higher. There are several reasons for this. Since the rural economic reforms, the tempo of life in country areas has quickened as never before. While the adults are busy working, the bulk of housework falls on the
shoulders of the young girls, who have little time left for studying and so may eventually have to drop out of school. Second, the new economic policies have caused some farmers to become overzealous in boosting production. Deep-seated mental attitudes have inclined them to a pragmatic and narrow focus on immediate gains. They therefore deemed it expedient to ask their children, especially their daughters, to engage in income-generating activities, even though this money was earned at the expense of their schooling. Moreover, work on the farm or in village industries was still mainly done by hand, so there was no big demand for educated skilled workers. New recruits for rural enterprises were supposed to have educational qualifications, but this rule was not always strictly observed. This situation hardly stimulated young women's motivation to study.
Adult education for women has also made progress over the years, but some problems call for urgent attention here, too. Since the 1950s, massive efforts have been made to wipe out illiteracy in China's rural areas and the survey shows that among the illiterates in the older cohort in both locations, 14 to 19 per cent had attended literacy classes. In the middle cohort, the figure was 55 per cent. However, the majority of these women had forgotten most of the words they had learned because they have had had little chance to use them. At the time of the survey they could only read a few characters and figures and write no more than their own names. They were in fact semi-literates.
The percentage of women participating in occupational training (including crop-planting, stock and fowl breeding, handicrafts, general education, health care, or accounting, for example) was very low in both locations. Although the prospects of employment for women are quite good in the township of Jiangsu, less than l per cent of the women in the old and middle cohorts there had had any vocational training. Even in the young cohort, the figure was no more than 10 per cent. In any case, this training lasted less than three months and sometimes it had only been for a few days.
The scope of the training programmes available in rural areas was limited, and they were not very relevant to women, the majority of whom were not particularly interested in them. With few exceptions, the older women in both locations had no desire for training. One-third of the middle cohort hoped to participate in training, while the rest had never thought about it or were not interested. Even among the young cohort, only about half the women wanted training programmes.
This lack of interest in learning, even among those with more education, was reflected in their reading habits. The survey showed that in Hengtang, one-third of the young women and two-thirds of the middle cohort did little reading. In Jiahong, nearly 60 per cent of the married young and middle groups did not read newspapers any more. About a quarter of the young unmarried women seldom read any newspapers. The reading material that appealed to women most in both locations was martial arts stories, thrillers, and romances. Popular science, agriculture, and marriage and family life ranked next. The women read mainly to pass the time, not to learn. This tendency is a serious problem that merits attention.
Occupations
As a result of the development that accompanied rural economic reform, surplus labour, including women, began to shift to non-agricultural occupations. At the same time, the number of women mainly occupied in housework has gone up slightly. There are two reasons for this. After the reform, farmers had more say in organizing their work. Family members were now able to allocate the division of labour amongst themselves instead of doing mandatory collective jobs regardless of their age or gender. However, the more important reason was that there were not yet so many nonagricultural job opportunities for women.
Local levels of economic development were the main determinant of rural women's occupational structure and employment opportunities. A comparison of the situation in 1986 with that in the pre-reform years (before 1978) indicated some clear differences between the two locations. In Hengtang, there was a drop of 29.7 per cent in the number of women engaged in agriculture. Most of them shifted to nonagricultural work. At the time of the study, nearly 70 per cent of the young women were engaged in non-agricultural work, while this applied to only 1.6 per cent of the older women and 7.2 per cent of the middle group. The number of women whose main occupation was housework went up by only 1.8 per cent. About 35 per cent of the older cohort gave housework as their main occupation, but very few in the middle and young cohorts did. In Jiahong, the percentage of women in agricultural work dropped by 18.8 per cent. Among them, however, more shifted to housework than to non-agricultural
employment; 56.7 per cent of the older women and 20 per cent of the middle and younger cohorts gave housework as their main occupation.
The nature of the industries in the township also made a difference to nonagricultural employment opportunities for the women. In Hengtang, where they were highly developed, local women were able to find jobs in net-making, silk-reeling, embroidery, garment-making, and the shoe industry. In Jiahong, however, where the level of economic development was low and the factories were mainly involved in processing food grains and edible oil, producing building materials, and repairing farm machinery, they did not provide enough work for men, let alone suitable jobs for women. Many men found short-term employment as contract construction workers or seasonal labourers in nearby towns and cities. Some of these jobs, such as bricklaying and carpentry, were strenuous and required skills that most women did not have. This kind of work outside the village went to strong men who earned good incomes in these labour-intensive sectors. They therefore worked away from home most of the year,
which is another reason why their wives had to bear a heavy burden of household work at home.
In both locations, the percentage of women shifting to non-agricultural jobs was considerably higher in the youngest cohort. In the early days of industrial development, the workers did simple manual jobs and productivity was low. In order to raise productivity, industries later sought young and capable workers with a certain amount of education, and the young women were among the first to take up this work.
Table 1. Average age at marriage by age- cohort
Township
Cohort
Average age at marriage
Hengtang
Older
Middle
Young
Jiahong
Older
Middle
Young
Annual per capita figures show that total family income in Hengtang in 1986 was about 3.5 times that of 1978; in Jiahong, the 1986 figure was about five times that of 1978. Evidence of increasing income was clearly visible in the newly built houses, healthy children and adults, and changes in the style of clothing. However, both before and after the reforms, nearly half or more of the women in the three age-cohorts in both field locations earned less than their husbands. In some families the husbands earned more than twice as much as their wives did. However, as women's income increased after the reforms, the income gap between the two began to narrow. The figures show that it was less in Hengtang than in Jiahong.
After the founding of the People's Republic in 1949, the Marriage Law prohibited feudal pre-arranged and mercenary marriages and promulgated monogamy, equality between men and women, and the freedom to choose a life partner. The shackles of feudal tradition on marriage were broken, but old concepts die hard. Analysis of the three age-cohorts shows that the transition from the old marriage system to the new will take much longer than expected.
In both townships, 80 to 90 per cent of the marriages in the oldest cohort were arranged by parents. Among the middle-aged women, half made their own decisions about marriage and one third had pre-arranged marriages. Among the young women in Hengtang, 71 per cent of their marriages were determined by personal choice and parent-arranged marriages accounted for 12.5 per cent. In Jiahong, the corresponding figures were less than 50 and 25 per cent respectively, indicating that the influence of former practice was still strong.
There was a tendency towards later marriage age in both townships. The average age at marriage was higher for women in Hengtang than it was in Jiahong, as the figures in table I show.
Of course, it must be borne in mind that as all the women in the younger cohort had not yet married at the time of the study, the figures for their group cannot be regarded as definitive. In both townships, the traditional notion that the husband should be older than the wife is still prevalent. However, the age-gap between husband and wife has gradually narrowed and the number of husband-older couples was declining, as table 2 indicates.
Table 2. Age difference between husbands and wives
% of husband-older marriages
Average age-gap (years)
Older cohort
Middle cohort
Young cohort
From the 1950s rural women focused their attention on family conditions instead of personal qualifications when evaluating a prospective spouse. Their considerations were, in order of importance, the social status and stratum of the man's family, its financial standing, especially as this related to housing conditions, and, lastly, the qualities of the man himself. These conventional criteria for choosing a life partner were attributable to both former influences and the realities of China's rural development: several decades of egalitarianism and emphasis on collective labour had led people to disregard the ability and talents of the individual. However, after the rural reforms, the household contract system emphasized these personal qualities, which were becoming more important factors in choosing life partners, too. However, most of the young women paid more attention to the man's occupational skills and capabilities, as determinants of income and living standards, than
to matters like personality, congeniality, or shared interests and ideals. Traces of the old approach to marriage were still discernible.
Although great efforts had been made to abolish such relics of feudal times at the time of the survey, betrothal gifts and dowries were still common in the rural areas. In both locations, the common practice was for the groom's family to provide a home and present a certain amount of money or some valuables to the wife's family as betrothal gifts. The dowry from the wife's family included bedding, clothing, utensils, bicycles, furniture, and electrical appliances. The survey showed that only a few women in the three age-cohorts favoured changing these practices, and the majority supported them. Several reasons were given for this. The girls began working when they were quite young. They handed all their earnings over to their parents who therefore had a responsibility to arrange their weddings and prepare betrothal gifts for them. Almost all the girls' parents thought this was right, as their daughters had worked for the family for years before marriage and contributed to
family resources. They said they would not feel at ease if they married them off without a dowry. The girls themselves thought it would be unfair if their brothers got the benefit of their contribution to the family.
As for betrothal gifts, the young men's parents thought that they had nothing to lose, because the gifts to their future daughter-in-law would return to their families in the form of dowry. Others thought that since the wife's parents lose an able-bodied worker when their daughter marries, it was reasonable for the husband's family to give something to compensate for this economic loss. In some cases, people who had become well-off in recent years were afraid they would be looked down on if they did not follow the conventional practice. Basically, the practice continued to survive in spite of attempts to eradicate it because, even at the time of the study, young people still needed their parents' material support to set themselves up in married life. Further research might suggest ways of adapting the system to contemporary conditions in such a way that extravagance and waste could be avoided.
Turning to divorce and remarriage, most of the women in the three age-cohorts no longer felt bound by the old practice of remaining devoted to one husband even after his death. They also held that divorce should be possible if mutual affection no longer existed between husband and wife, and that a divorced or widowed woman had the right to remarry and should not be discriminated against if she did so. However, most of the married women adopted a prudent and practical attitude towards divorce because they thought that, after all, divorce harmed the family, the women themselves, and, especially, the children. In fact it would be hard for a divorced woman, burdened with children from a previous marriage, to marry a second husband and handle the complicated interrelationships in the new family. Most women therefore believed that divorce was not necessarily the best solution for couples at odds with one other, and that short of complete alienation, every effort should be made
towards reconciliation. Rash divorce was something to be avoided.
Among the women interviewed in both locations, only six were divorced, accounting for 1 per cent of the total number of married women. They had all remarried. Eighty-two, or 13 per cent of the total, had been widows, of whom 22, or a quarter of the total number, had remarried.
The land reform of the early 1950s and the later economic reforms brought about a number of changes in family structures. Over half the families in the sample were nuclear families; a third were lineal families in which different generations of directly related people (grandparents, parents, adult children, for example) lived together. These two types thus accounted for over 85 per cent of the total and were the basic forms of family structure. As a result of rural socioeconomic development, the percentage of nuclear families was increasing steadily while that of lineal and joint (co-resident groups of related married couples) families was falling slowly. At the time of the survey joint families made up only 0.2 per cent of the total in Hengtang and 1.4 per cent in Jiahong. Single-person and other family types constituted a very small proportion of the total.
The life-course study of the three age-cohorts showed the pattern of these changes in family structure. From the time of their birth to their marriage, most of the respondents lived in nuclear families. After marriage, most of the women lived with their parents-in-law as a lineal family until around the time their first child was born or later, when the young couple left to form their own nuclear family.
Women's right to make family decisions was closely related to their status and role in the family. Girls living with their parents before marriage had little input. In the first two years after marriage, most of them lived with their parents-in-law, who had the final authority in family matters, though the women enjoyed more say in the purchase of daily necessities than they had before marriage. After the establishment of their own nuclear family, husband and wife had decision-making rights in different areas. The wife usually had more say in day-to-day purchases while the husband had more influence on the acquisition of means of production and housebuilding.
The results of the time-allocation study show that the women in all three age-cohorts had the primary responsibility for housework and spent much more time on it than their husbands did, though half the husbands often helped. The young husbands did more household work than the older ones. However, the effect of the rural reforms on sharing of domestic tasks was very different in the two locations.
In Hengtang, the percentage of husbands who share housework increased by 22 per cent in the oldest cohort and 13 per cent in the middle cohort after the reforms. In Jiahong, the data shows no increase in the older group and a decline of 12 per cent in the middle group. Since most of the young couples married after the reforms, no comparative figures were available for them. However, comparing the status quo at that time of the survey showed that young husbands in Hengtang did more household work than those in Jiahong. The difference was mainly the result of the differing stages of development in these places: after the reforms there were more employment opportunities for women in Hengtang than in Jiahong, and the pace of life there was faster, so sharing housework had become more of a necessity.
Analysis of the survey data suggests that as far as communicating ideas and feelings are concerned, the young couples were very close to each other, the middle-aged less so. As for the older couples, their marriages had been arbitrarily arranged by parents; the woman had not so much as a glimpse of her prospective husband before the wedding. As the matchmakers' descriptions were often exaggerated, many of the older women felt frustrated, and frequent quarrels with their husbands made their "golden years of marriage" miserable. They admitted that they were getting along with their husbands better than when they were younger, but only a few of the old couples really loved each other. The majority of them just managed to live together in peace after years of mutual adjustment.
The survey showed that most of the women in the oldest cohort were enjoying a secure life in both locations. If they lived by themselves, their children helped them by doing heavy jobs. If they were in good health, they often went in for poultry-breeding, wickerwork, and other light jobs as a sideline. The majority of their sons and daughters gave them some pocket money. In general, however, their income was less than that of the middle-aged and young women. Their room furnishings and living standards were interior, too. In Jiahong, local leaders and elderly people of status in the community helped in the analysis of the relationships between the older women and their children. Ten to twenty per cent were described as excellent, 40 to 50 per cent as good, and 30 to 40 per cent as inharmonious. It was agreed that while economic growth was bringing higher living standards to all, it still called for special attention to the material and nonmaterial well-being of the ageing.
Changing Attitudes
In Hengtang, the overwhelming majority of women in all three age-cohorts held that remunerated work should be the main occupation of women so that they could have an income to improve their own and their families' living standards and win genuine equality. But three-quarters of those interviewed in Jiahong thought that women had dual responsibilities. Although they shared the view that only by participating in production can women enhance their economic status and achieve equality, they still felt that women had a responsibility to be good housekeepers and look after their husbands and children. They wanted to allow their men to concentrate on paid work. Almost all of them believed that housework should be done by women. Sixty per cent thought they should do it themselves. The rest assigned it to other female members of the family - mothers, mothers-in-law, daughters, or daughters-in-law. Very few of them thought it should be done by their husbands or other males in the
family. Even in Hengtang, where they strongly advocated women devoting the greater part of their time and energy to paid labour, most of them still thought that housework was their responsibility. In fact, quite a number of husbands in both locations did do household chores, particularly in Hengtang. On the whole, however, though the actual situation was changing, old ideas were very persistent.
The survey showed that the women working in industry, handicrafts, commerce, culture, education, and public health were satisfied with their jobs, which were considered better than farm work because they generated more income and offered more opportunities for social contact. Yet most of the women farmers were also satisfied with their work, as agricultural work offered more freedom, more choice of activity, and more time at their own disposal. Moreover, farm income had increased considerably. However, there were variations in the attitudes of the women in the different age-cohorts. Many in the oldest cohort felt rather alienated because they were old and semi-literate and no longer able to change their occupations. In the middle group, women whose husbands earned a higher income in non-agricultural work preferred to do the farm work so they could take care of the house and the children at the same time. Young women also thought that doing farm work made it easy for them to
look after their babies, and so they were satisfied with it.
The women farmers were generally not eager to acquire more knowledge or improve their technical skills. Not many of them were interested in self-improvement or even training to prepare themselves for better jobs. They were content with their small gains and many seemed to lack initiative. This was despite the fact that there was also a tendency to look down on agricultural work. Most of the women hoped that their children would go to college or reach the highest educational level available so that they would not have to do it in the future. Some wanted their children to be skilled workers or to have jobs in culture, education, or public health. Only a few women wanted their children to become farmers. Of these, most were in the older cohort; few in the middle cohort and fewer still in the young cohort shared this view. Not one of the young women in Hengtang wanted their children to be farmers and only a few wanted them to be workers. Seventy-seven per cent of them wanted
their children to have a college education and become engineers and technicians.
<section>Conclusions</section>
The survey shows that socio-economic developments in China since 1949 have had a strong and widespread impact on women's education, employment, marriage, and family life, as well as on their views and concepts. Changes in women's education and employment are particularly noteworthy because of the impact they in turn have had on economic development. However, a number of factors, including the stage of political development, levels of productivity, economic trends, and the lingering influence of outdated traditional ideologies have combined to have an inhibiting effect on both the growth of the rural economy and the advancement of women. There are some implications here for policy-makers. It is most important to upgrade women's competence by strengthening their education and training. In rural areas this means that the compulsory educational programme should be accompanied by publicity and mandatory measures to ensure the enrolment of all school-age girls. The problems of
drop-outs and lower educational standards among female students require urgent attention.
In this respect, the experience in Hengtang, where special attention was paid to developing township enterprises suitable for women, offers an encouraging example. However, such enterprises were still in their initial stages and some weaknesses in management and other aspects were apparent. Women's organizations and the official departments concerned should intensify their scrutiny of the working conditions, hours, wage scales, welfare, and labour protection in these enterprises and take measures to advance and protect the legitimate rights and interests of workers.
More attention should be given to women's participation in adult education and occupational training programmes order to upgrade their scientific and technical knowledge and job skills. Policies should try to draw more women into programmes designed to develop the rural economy. There should be projects to raise the consciousness and confidence of rural women and to kindle their spirit of self-awareness, so that they shed outmoded apathy and complacency, reject vestiges of dependence on husbands, and discard their contempt for agricultural work. They should be motivated to become agents of change through active participation in developing the economy and bringing up a healthy younger generation. Women are needed for structural reform and economic development, and those women in the surplus rural workforce are an important human resource a nation cannot afford to neglect.
2. THE STORIES OF FIVE TIBETAN WOMEN
Sichuan, one of the provinces where the research described in the first part of this chapter was carried out, is a multinational province. It includes autonomous prefectures of the Ganzi Tibetan, Aba Tibetan, and Qiang and Liangshan Yi peoples and counties, where other minority nationalities live in small communities. There are altogether more than 3 million people of about 10 minority nationalities in the province, with the Yi and Tibetan peoples accounting for the majority of this population.
These narrative accounts of the lives of five Tibetan women of different age-groups come from the townships or districts of Shaba and Jiabi in Li County in the eastern part of the autonomous prefecture of the Aba Tibetan and Qiang nationalities. The vicissitudes of their lives and the impact of social reforms and economic development are clear at a glance. They were not collected as part of a systematic survey but rather as illustrative material which might help to shape the criteria if such a study were possible at a later date.
Before the emergence of modern China in 1949, the Tibetan region of Sichuan was basically organized as a feudal serfdom. Between 1950 and 1953, autonomous prefectures and counties were set up, one after another, for the Tibetan peoples in Ganzi and Aba. We have already seen that after the foundation of the People's Republic of China, land reforms were carried out rapidly in the majority of villages throughout the country. However, the practice in regions where minority nationalities lived was somewhat different. The government's first step was to extend economic assistance to the serfs and poverty-stricken people, and to provide them with free farm implements, cattle, seeds, grain, and relief funding to encourage them to increase production. Democratic reform, which was essentially land reform, came to this region between 1955 and 1957, and feudal privileges and exploitation were finally abolished.
After that, the Tibetan people of Sichuan, like peasants in other regions all over the country, followed a tortuous path towards development . Progress was very limited until the gradual implementation of agricultural reform and the introduction of the joint household contract responsibility system of production. It was not until the beginning of the 1980s that their lives and livelihood took a turn for the better. The stories of five Tibetan women of Sichuan reflect and illustrate these macro-events.
<section>Atai: a young woman</section>
My name is Atai. I was born in October 1954. By the time I began to remember things, all the adults in my family were taking part in collective labour in a production team. My grandfather herded sheep, my grandmother raised pigs, my father was the leader of a production team, and my mother worked in the fields. I still remember that my grandmother was very good at raising pigs, and she won many prizes and certificates of merit. I have one elder brother, three younger brothers, and two younger sisters. My elder brother is crippled by polio, so l had to help my mother cook and look after the younger brothers and sisters when I was a mere child. At the age of six, I began to gather firewood in the mountains and to cut green fodder. I wore patched clothes all the year round. I had never had padded shoes. In fact, I went barefoot. When I saw my friends going to school with their school bags, I begged my parents to let me go too. My father felt embarrassed and said: "Our family is
poor and there is so much work to do. You can't help the family if you go to school, and our life will become more difficult. "
I began to take part in collective productive labour when I was 12 years old. At that time I earned only two or three work points a day, which was equivalent to a little over ten fen (100 fen = 1 yuan). I worked with great energy, and by the time I was 16 I earned eight to ten work points a day (about 50 fen), which was the maximum for women. I worked more than ten hours a day. This is how I spent my childhood and teenage days. The only time I felt happy was at the festivals. I liked New Year's Day, the Spring Festival, and Tibetan Ren Liao Festival best and always counted the days until they came around. When the festive days arrived, I would get up very early and dress smartly, putting on an embroidered scarf, earrings, flowers, and new clothes before I went out to enjoy myself. In the evenings, I would dance around the bonfire with friends as much as I liked. I really enjoyed it very much.
I fell in love with Aza, a young man living in a neighbouring village, when I was 16. I often saw him going to school with his school bag when I was herding sheep. He became more handsome as he grew up. He was not only a good worker, but he also played the flute very well. He often accompanied my singing with his flute. Both Aza's parents had been dead for some time and he was then living with his elder brother and sister-in-law. And so, following our Tibetan custom, he asked his brother and sister-in-law to ask for my hand. Although my parents' marriage was an arranged one, they believed in freedom of choice and held that I had a right to choose my own life partner long as we two loved each other. After we were engaged, Aza often came to help me cut firewood and do some of the heavy work. I meticulously made him a pair of shoe-pads and two pairs of cloth socks.
During the spring festival of 1972 Aza took me on his bicycle to the district government office for marriage registration. The traditional wedding ceremony was presided over by the leader of the production brigade and held in the brigade's club. We put on new Tibetan costumes and wore big red flowers. After drinking highland barley wine, my friends and guests sang happily around me with flute accompaniment by Aza. Girls and young men danced Tibetan dances hand in hand, while the older people drank wine in the middle. It was the best and most unforgettable night of my life.
As it was beyond our means to build a new house after we got married, we had to live separately with our own families which were about two kilometres apart. But we often stayed in each other's homes alternately for a few days. We worked very hard in order to save money. I didn't stop working even after I became pregnant; the production team gave me some light work to do. At that time I earned about two thousand work points a year, while Aza got four to five thousand for heavy work like chopping wood and making charcoal. On holidays he would go hunting, and sometimes, if he was lucky, he got wild boars, bears, and river deer.
We had a daughter in 1973 and a son four years later. The childbirths were managed at home with the help of a "barefoot doctor" from the production team. Aza helped me wash napkins, carry water, and do household chores, while my grandmother helped me take care of my children. I did not want to have more children after my second birth, so I began to use contraceptive devices.
Not until 1977 did we build our own small house with three storeys of four rooms on which we spent about 2,000 yuan we had saved. My parents gave me a milking cow and we raised some pigs and chickens. At last, we had our own little home, and though we were still quite poor, we felt very happy because I loved my husband and children and they loved me too.
The happiest time for me came in 1982 after the adoption of the family joint contract responsibility system of production in our village. With four family members, we were allotted 7.2 mu (15 mu = I hectare) of land, ten yaks, and three Chinese prickly ash trees. In the first year, we grew corn and potatoes and we got a net income of 330 yuan from agricultural production. By then, Aza had become crazy about driving, so he attended a special course for training tractor drivers sponsored by the County Agricultural Machinery Bureau. We borrowed about 1,000 yuan and pooled enough money to raise 4,800 yuan to buy a small tractor for transporting goods. We paid off our debts very soon. In 1983 I noticed the high price of cabbage in the market, so I planted 1.1 mu of cabbage as well as the grain. I harvested more than 3,000 kilos of cabbage and sold them at a good price. Aza occasionally went to dig medicinal plants or undertook other small projects besides his transportation
business. As a result, we had a net income of over 5,000 yuan in 1983.
In 1984, we spent more than 3,000 yuan extending our house to 18 rooms. The first floor is used as pens for keeping domestic animals and the second one includes a kitchen and living rooms where we sleep and meet our friends. Our children have their own bedrooms. On the third floor there is a storage room and a lectorium. Each Tibetan family has a lectorium where we chant scripture and worship. In the same year, I planted over 100 apple trees interspersed with vegetables and soya beans. Aza went to fruit-growing classes run by the township. He was responsible for pruning and grafting our trees while I took charge of manuring and watering. Our annual family income increased steadily. As well as buying two imported watches and a tape-recorder, we purchased a new big tractor last year. I buy new clothes for my husband and children every year. In 1987, we spent 700 yuan on decorating the Iectorium. Now we have the right to arrange our own production, so during winter and in my
free time I weave colourful waistbands at home. My work is beautiful. I also help friends and relatives weave waistbands and occasionally I barter waistbands for embroidered scarfs.
On New Year's Day and other festivals I take my whole family to visit my parents. We quite often go to help them with heavy work throughout the year, too. My neighbours are an old couple without any children, so we usually help them with their farm work, carrying water or doing household chores. We also give them fresh vegetables, sugar, and wine. The life of farmers in our village has improved a lot, but the fine tradition of helping each other is still being kept up.
My only regret is that I had no chance to go to school when I was a child. I have suffered a lot because of my illiteracy. Hence I was determined that my children should not follow the old road. My daughter is now in the sixth year of primary school and my son is in the fourth. Both of them do well in their studies and are always among the best in the class. They also help me with herding the cattle and other odd jobs. My greatest wish is that they will study hard and go to a university and become useful people.
Asman: A Housekeeper
Thirty-six-year-old Asman is the eldest daughter-in-law of a large Tibetan peasant family. Both her parents-in-law are in their sixties. The old couple has eight children, most of whom are married; they now live with their eldest son and daughter-in-law, two unmarried children, and two grandchildren. The family is a harmonious one with three generations living under one roof.
Born after the liberation, Asman was also from a peasant family. Though there was a primary school in the village, only a few girls attended because they had to help their mothers with the housework. Like other girls, Asman had to look after her younger brothers, herd cattle, and collect green feed for the pigs. Yearning to be educated, she went to school at the age of nine, but she had to leave a year later because her mother fell seriously ill. Her mother and two brothers died one after the other when she was 11. As her father was not good at housekeeping, she had to manage the household affairs, work on the farm, and feed the cattle.
At 19, she married Dongzhuosijia, a young man she loved dearly. But she was ill at ease because there was no one to look after her old grandmother, her father, and her younger brother, and she returned to her maternal home three days after her wedding. Her husband understood how she felt. He often came to her home to give her a hand with ploughing and cuttting firewood. More than ten years passed like this, and though they lived separately, the husband and wife understood and loved each other. It was not until 1982, when Asman's grandmother died and her younger brother got married, that she came back to her husband's home with her two children.
1982 was also the year when the joint contract responsibility system was put into practice and remuneration became linked to production. The family was allotted 14 mu of land. When they got together to decide how they would work it, Asman volunteered to share the farm work with her husband and her younger brother-in-law. She felt that as her parents-in-law had worked so hard all their lives they ought to have some rest now they were getting old and her disabled sister-in-law, long an invalid, needed more care.
The corn, potatoes, and cabbages they harvested were more than enough for family use and stock fodder, and they sold the surplus in the market. At Asman's suggestion, they planted two mu of apple trees on their contracted land. After several years' hard work they were able to produce 5,000 kilos of apples in a good year. The family bred 6 pigs and 12 head of cattle and had 20 yaks grazing on high mountain pasture. In addition, they bought a tractor, which Asman's husband and younger brother-in-law took turns to operate for ploughing the land and for transportation. Within a few years the family's storehouse overflowed with grain and their house was rebuilt and expanded. It was a magnificent scene of prosperity.
Full of vigour, Asman took over the work of washing, sewing, and mending from her mother-in-law. Her loving care embraced the whole family: the younger brother-in-law and sister-in-law trusted her, confiding even their intimate secrets and anxieties to her and seeking her advice. When her husband's married brothers and sisters came she always received them with generosity and cordiality. In recent years their living standards, like hers, had improved a great deal. Only her husband's fourth sister and her husband lived less well, though they only had one child. Asman showed the utmost solicitude for them by sending them gifts and food and necessities after each harvest.
The old couple had worked hard all their lives, and they refused to stay idle, let alone leave the housework in the hands of others. However, ever since this capable and kind daughter-in-law came into the family, their burdens have been much lighter. Over the last few years they have been able to lead a life of Ieisure, visiting various famous mountains like Emei and Qingcheng and making pilgrimages to Wutai Mountain in Shansi and the Taer Temple in Qinghai province. Asman is affectionately called "our beloved housekeeper" by her parents-in-law and other members of the family.
<section>Ren Zhen Chu: a middle-aged woman</section>
I am 39 this year (1988). I was brought up in a poor craftsman's family. My parents were very skilful at embroidery and sewing. My father made clothing for the headman's family and my mother did embroidery and wove belts. They were so busy the year round that they had no time to look after their children. There were eight of us, and I am the fifth. Until I was two years old I stayed in bed all day long, though I often crawled to the edge and fell off, bruising myself black and blue. When I grew older my elder brothers and sisters took turns to carry me on their shoulders to the fields with the dogs and sheep. Later on my mother gave birth to another two sons and one more daughter. When I was five it became my turn to carry my younger brothers on my back.
In 1956, when I was seven, some reforms were carried out in our village. My family was allotted a few mu of land and a cow. My mother and my elder brother farmed the land and my father went to teach Tibetan script in Shuajin Temple in Songpan county, sending money back every year. Our life became much better than before. My elder sister and I went to school the next year and we led a happy and carefree existence. At 15, when I was in the first grade of junior middle school, I found I could not keep up with the others and I often fell asleep in class. I thought farming was much easier, so I left school. My mother and my elder brother scolded me and urged me to go back, but I insisted, and they had to let me do as I wanted. Of the eight of us, the five younger ones have been to school. My elder sister and two younger brothers finished the middle school; my younger sister and I left school after finishing the first grade of our secondary education.
When I was 17 someone came and proposed a match for me. There had been three young suitors writing me letters, but I didn't like any of them, because I felt they were ugly or bad-tempered. My mother let me have my way. It was not until I was 21 that I met an ideal young man, Heerbin, whom one of my neighbours introduced to me. He was clever, hard working, and good-tempered. My mother thought he lived too far away, but I loved him and a year later I married him and went to live in his house.
My husband had an old father of 60 and a younger brother and a sister in their early teens. After our marriage I gave birth to two daughters. As we Tibetans do not discriminate against them - a girl is just as good as a boy - I decided not to have any more babies. I don't believe in the saying "more children, more blessings." My mother has toiled all her life for her eight children, but how happy is she?
As a family we were hardly well-off in the first few years of our marriage. Although five of us worked in the production team, our annual income was less than 100 yuan in cash. However, we got about 1,000 kilos of grain, which was quite enough for our subsistence. In addition, we had pigs and milking cows, which provided us with enough meat and milk. My father-in-law was a good orchardist and the trees under his care were very productive. Unfortunately, at that time anyone who grew fruit trees was considered to be a capitalist sympathizer. Afraid of being called this, we cut down four of the five walnut trees in our courtyard.
The rural economic reform began in our village in 1980. Our production team developed a diversified economy and no longer labelled everything as capitalism. The team organized its members for lumbering and picking herbs. Our daily income per person increased from less than one yuan to two yuan. In 1982 our family got 2,500 kilos of grains and over 3,000 yuan in cash. In the same year we spent 2,000 yuan building a new house for our younger brother and his bride. The next year we married off our younger sister with a decent dowry of 400 kilos of grains, eight suits, and two suitcases.
At the beginning of 1983 the household responsibility system was put into practice here. My family contracted for 4 mu of land and 10 mu of orchard. In addition to the fruit trees in front of and behind our house, we had altogether 350 apple trees, 100 Chinese prickly ash, and 10 walnut trees. My husband had had only one year's schooling and could read very little. However, in order to be a good orchardist, as well as learning from his father he tried to read books on how to grow fruit trees and he sought the advice of agro-technologists. As a result of careful management, the yield from our orchard increased from 2,500 to 5,000 kilos in the second year and kept on growing in the following years. In 1986 a meeting was held to choose the best apple-growers in the county. The apples from our orchard were high in yield, big in size, and good to taste, and my family was placed number 2 in the whole county.
Just when our life was getting better, my father-in-law died. As the old man had worked so hard when he was alive we engaged 12 lames and monks to recite Buddhist sutras for five days. His body was cremated on a stack of firewood on the sixth day and his ashes were buried outside the lame temple. Our relatives and friends planted 100 canon streamers, each of which was made of six metres of white cloth and printed with Buddhist sutras. We usually had to plant them beside our houses to dispel demons, avert evil, and bring blessings, and it was believed that by planting them around the cremation ground souls could be released from purgatory. The funeral cost us 2,000 yuan which we had planned to spend on house repairs, but we felt it was worth while.
Last year we estimated the yield of apples from our orchard would reach 7,500 kilos, but a heavy downpour washed away the fertile soil at the roots of the trees. As a result, the apples were small and ugly and we suffered a big loss. I had to make up this loss by selling grain, cows, pigs, and eggs. I still wanted to repair my house. We Tibetans are used to cooking indoors and heat our rooms with firewood, which means smoke-blackened walls and ceilings. I planned to whitewash the inner walls, cook the food on a chimneyed stove and warm the rooms with an electric heater instead of the old fire, but we spent too much money over the last few years, with the natural disaster on top of that. Buying a TV set and a tape-recorder has to be postponed for a year or two.
Our eldest daughter is 14 now. Like me, she has no interest in studying and is now working on the farm. I am going to teach her embroidery and how to weave belts, just as my mother taught me. My younger daughter does well academically. She is now in the second grade of primary school. I hope she will continue to study and enrol in the Institute of Nationalities in Sichuan province when she grows up.
<section>Asman: the Tibetan landlady</section>
Asman, a 42-year-old Tibetan woman, and her husband Sanlangenbo run a "Happy Inn" by the highway on the bank of the Zagunao River in the autonomous Tibetan prefecture of Aba. People call her "The Tibetan landlady." Among the local women, who are still not used to her kind of enterpreneurship, she is a pioneer.
Asman was brought up in a poor peasant family with many children. After the liberation, she began school at the age of eight. As her younger brother and sister were very small, she often went to help her parents in the field after school. When she was in the fifth grade she had to leave school because of financial difficulties in her family. At the age of 14 she went to work in a production team. In the beginning she worked as a recorder of work points. She did well and was appointed as a grain storekeeper the following year, and worked as this for ten years.
At 19 she fell in love with Sanlangenbo, a young man from her village. They were former primary schoolmates. Sanlangenbo had gone on to study in a middle school, but he returned to the village to farm after graduation. All Asman's family liked the capable young man. A year later traditional festivities were held on the production team's threshing ground to celebrate their wedding. Many relatives and friends came to extend their greetings, drinking qingke (highland barley) spirits and doing traditional circle dances.
After they were married the young couple worked as hard as ever, but because of the low value of work points and the financial condition of both families, things were rather difficult. It took them as long as four years to save over 1,000 yuan to build a small six-roomed house of three storeys. They had four children. The eldest was a daughter, clever and beautiful, who in her teens was selected to be a dancer and actress in the Song and Dance Troupe of the prefecture. The second daughter died of pneumonia. Later Asman gave birth to two sons. One is studying in the middle school and the other is in primary school.
In 1979 there was an accident. Asman's husband fell and was injured while installing electric wires for the production team. He was hospitalized for more than four months, and although the team paid all the medical bills and an additional sum of 50 yuan as a relief fund, he could no longer work in the team to earn a living. Asman not only had to take care of her husband and children, but to earn as well. What could she possibly do to support her family? There were three hard years for Asman. She was at her wit's end, almost without hope.
It was at this critical juncture that the rural economic reforms and the contract responsibility system introduced a diversified economy and brought her new prospects. The couple decided to use their knowledge and experience to find a way out. As a first step, Sanlangenbo, being an electrician, contracted for the management of the 55-kilowatt power station in the village. Next the couple decided to apply for a loan from the state to build an inn and restaurant by the roadside. They also sold cigarettes and drinks to passers-by, who found it difficult to get a place to eat or stay as this mountainous area was sparsely inhabited. When the inn and restaurant began doing business, Asman concentrated her main attention on the inn and her husband saw to the restaurant. Early in the morning Asman cleaned every corner of the inn and sent hot water to the guest rooms. After doing the washing and seeing to the bedding she went to help her husband cook and serve food. In addition to
all this, she energetically farmed the land and fed the pigs. The wife and husband always helped and supported each other.
Their inn was clean and comfortable, the food fresh and tasty, the service good, and the charges reasonable, so before long it became well known. Drivers and passengers liked to stay there. The number of beds in the guest rooms soon increased from 21 to 52. The couple employed four workers to help them and bought new equipment, including a film projector. Their services expanded to include showing films and washing trucks and buses.
Now that they had succeeded, they wanted to share what they had with the other villagers. For example, they supplied electricity free of charge to the 30 families in the village for domestic use for two years, so many families began to use electricity for cooking. At New Year and other festivals they organized film shows, dancing parties, or get-togethers to entertain the villagers free of charge. There was always fun and laughter in their small inn where old Tibetan customs and modern civilization merged. Outside, streamers printed with ancient Buddhist sutras fluttered in the wind, while inside a refrigerator, washing machine, and several other domestic electrical appliances were visible. In the sitting-room there was the sacred hada, a white silk scarf that symbolizes luck and happiness, and an electric stove had replaced the old fire. Under the bright neon lights some guests did circle dances, while others danced disco steps to songs from the tape-recorder.
<section>Hai Zhang Tou: an old woman who was once a slave</section>
My name is Hai Zhang Tou. I am 65 years old now (1988). I have been a serf, as my parents were. Serfs rented land from a tribal chief. They had to hand over half of their harvest as rent, and also to work for his family gratis for about 15 days every month, bringing their own grain ration with them. My father was a serf like that. He died, worn out, when I was only five. My mother brought up her three children by herself: I was her only helper. When I was six, I started to help mother herding cattle, looking after my younger brother and sister, and doing household chores. At seven I accompanied my mother to dig medicinal herbs in the high mountains, leaving the younger ones in the care of our neighbours. Each trip took nearly a month. The weather is changeable up there: "There are four seasons in a mountain and different climates every ten li." We were sometimes caught in storms with thunder or hailstones. At night we stayed in makeshift shelters, sometimes threatened by
bears, jackals, or wolves. We were often cold and hungry. Coming down the mountain, my mother had to carry over 50 kilos of herbs while I carried all the clothing and other things we used. She was tall and beautiful, but after the death of my father her health was crushed by the heavy burden of life. The year I was 13 she fell victim to typhoid fever which was then raging in our village. Without medicine and with nobody coming to help us, we three children just sat there and watched her dying in agony. After her death my uncle came. He sold the few head of cattle and sheep that we had and engaged lames to chant scriptures in expiation of the sins of the dead. After that my younger sister was led away by a distantly related uncle, while my younger brother and I were taken to Suo Yong He, a tribal chief, to work for him as slaves.
A house in Tibet is commonly divided into three storeys. The first floor usually serves as a pen for livestock, the second floor as living quarters, and the third one as a lectorium. At that time Suo Yong He's household included more than 30 slaves who were locked up on the ground floor with the animals. Men and women lived separately. There were no beds and we slept on the ice-cold ground covered with grass and worn animal skins. We had highland barley, peas, and wheat bran for food and wore coarse cloth robes and short baggy trousers made of sacking. The length of a garment was a symbol of social status so the lower hem of a slave's robe was not allowed to reach below his or her knee.
My work was to wait upon the mistress. When I was ordered to fetch her something, I had to kneel down, bow low, and present it respectfully with both hands. When she went to the toilet two of us slave-girls had to keep watch. We also had to go down on our knees to serve as mounting blocks for the master to step on when he got on a horse. The mistress beat and kicked us at will; I could hardly remember how many times I had been beaten.
I got to know Yang Zhong Er Jia when I was 19. He was a young peasant who came from the same village as I did. His only family was his elderly mother. He was very poor with only few mus of bad land. He was tall and husky and a well-known sharpshooter in our township. He often went hunting to help out with the family expenses. At that time slaves were discriminated against, their status being the lowest in society, and ordinary people did not want to marry them. But Yang Zhong Er Jia loved me and was determined to marry me in spite of his mother's objections. When I was 23 we got married with the permission of the tribal chief. At that period a wedding ceremony for rich people was grand and solemn and took about three days. The bridal couple would put on new and expensive clothes and ornament themselves with gold and inlaid jade. They would ride horses and "present a hada," the traditional Tibetan white silk scarf used as a gift to greet people. Even when poor people married
they would wear new clothes and invite friends and relatives to drink barley wine and dance for one night. But when I was married I had no new clothes. In fact, no one even came to congratulate me because my mother-in-law drove all the relatives and friends away and forbade them to dance. I was still bound by the feudal rule, as I had to go on working without payment after my marriage. As well as that, I had to silently endure the beating and cursing of my mother-in-law. When she died of an illness two years later we were in debt and our life became more difficult, but at least I had my own family.
In 1950 my hometown was peacefully liberated. Some of the tribal chiefs fled to India while others joined the new coalition. The government distributed farm implements, seed, cattle, and relief funds to us and our life became better. In 1956 reforms were introduced and our family got five mus of land, some livestock, clothing, and other necessities. However, for me the most important thing was that with the help and education of the work team I began to understand why the poor people had suffered so much in the past. I condemned the lawless tribal chiefs' cruel oppression and exploitation with accusations based on my personal experiences. As I had been a slave who dared to speak, I got support from the villagers, who elected me to be the head of a village women's committee. I worked wholeheartedly for the people, but I was uneducated and could not read and write, so when we studied documents I simply listened carefully and tried to keep them in my head. When I recorded work
points for the co-operative members I just drew circles and dealt out bamboo tallies. It was hard to avoid mistakes working this way, which sometimes led to quarrels. However, the villagers consistently trusted me because I was fair and just in handling affairs. Our place was in a remote area, so during the Cultural Revolution we did not suffer as much as the others in the interior. I was criticized twice, in the village and in the township, and was not allowed to run affairs. I didn't care about this, feeling at ease instead. A year later I was elected as the head of a women's committee again and I held this post until I retired in 1983. The present head of the women's committee and the others who run the cadres at grass-roots level are now educated young people. Being and literate, they can do much better than me. However, they still respect me and ask me for advice sometimes; for my part, I try to counsel them as best I can.
Both my husband and I arc good workers, but in the past more work could not bring in more income. Women labourers only got eight work points a day while men got ten. Even when my husband shot a bear he still got no more than ten work points. The value of the work points then was very low, too. At that time our children were small, and though we worked very hard all the year round we still owed the production team about 300 yuan. As our children grew up we paid off our debt bit by bit. There were families who never paid off their debts. In 1981 rural economic reforms were introduced here and farm output quotas were fixed for each production group. Productivity rose as a result. In the following year a contract responsibility system was implemented. Each household was allocated an average of 2.7 mus of land per person and payment was linked to output. Within a year the income of every family rose significantly.
I have three sons and one daughter and all of them are married. I have now ten grandchildren altogether. Both my husband and I suffered a lot because of our illiteracy, so although we were badly off in those days, we tried our best to let our children go to school. Of the four, three finished primary school or secondary vocational school. My second son had only two years of schooling because the family needed help at that time.
At present my husband and I live in our second son's family with his wife and four children. We now work 17 mus of contracted land, keep two milking cows, four sheep, and six pigs, and we also have six beehives. We have planted apple trees on the family land and bought a tractor for transporting goods as well as farm use. My family's income could be said to be around the middle level in the village.
My eldest son built a new house a few years ago and his family moved out and lives separately now. He has four grown-up children and his eldest son-in-law has settled down in his family. As they have plenty of strong labour in the family they are quite well-off. The pocket money they give us is more than enough for my husband's expenses for cigarettes and wine the year round. My third son is a graduate of a secondary vocational school. Both he and his wife work in the chief town of the county. They are the only ones in my family who live on wages. All the clothes we have are bought by them. When we have leisure time we go to visit them and stay for a few days. My daughter is also married and lives in the same village as we do, so we often visit each other. All our children are very good to us. Last year, when my husband was sick, our three sons took him to a hospital in the provincial capital. The doctor diagnosed his illness as stomach trouble and he recovered very soon
after some medical treatment. Who could have expected that my husband and I, after having suffered so much and toiled as slaves in the past, could live a happy life today?
<section>Households and historical change on plantations in Kenya</section>
Kavetsa Adagala
University of Nairobi, Kenya
<section>Background</section>
Historically, the establishment of the plantation system represented the most important turning-point in the history of Kenya, as it not only set the colonial process in motion, but it remains today, like the urban centres, as both the symbol and the means of the economic, social, political, and cultural breakdown of the traditional African societies. The effects of this parallel process on the household in general and gender relations in particular were the major concerns of this project. Kenya has undergone tremendous change as a nation and a society. The process of national formation has directed and accelerated the stratification of the population. For women, change has brought patriarchal economic, social, and cultural relations into question. The study examined the impact of the irreversible changes of the past century on the lives of plantation workers and the patterns of relationships within their households.
The landlessness which is another legacy of colonialism has forced many men and women to migrate in search of paid employment. However, patrilineal constraints like discriminatory inheritance systems and the double load of housework and employment, for example, impose added burdens on women. As women can only live in the rural areas on land owned by their fathers, husbands, or sons, many unmarried mothers or those who have suffered broken marriages must migrate to support themselves and their dependents. Migration therefore provides a way out of a patrilineal system and an entry into the cash economy as a basis for livelihood.
This project focused on plantations where there were large congregations of workers employed in the production of a particular crop. The labour-intensive nature of the plantation system justified surveying the employees and their families as a working unit, although the main emphasis was on the workers themselves and the structure and dynamics of their households as units integrated into the plantation system and so the international economy. A household is an autonomous entity capable of reacting to stimuli by adopting certain measures in order to maintain its integrity. In this process it will modify or discard dispensable aspects of form or function while maintaining its fundamental characteristics. However, as the pattern of change in the households of plantation workers shows, external limitations and contradictions may constrain its ability to adapt in its own best interests. This project concentrated on change that has been wrought as the result of national and
international events.
The study area was the coffee and lea zones of the country. Kenya is an agricultural country and tea and coffee are its major cash crops, but although these crops are crucial to the economy, little research had been done on the workers who produce them. The coffee zone is in the Kiambu and Murang'a districts of Central Province, the tea zone in the Kericho district of Rift Valley Province. Coffee and tea arc grown on a large scale in these areas. The ownership of a plantation affects the organization of work and the nature of labour relations, as there is minimal mediating intervention from the trade unions. The extensive coffee plantations are mostly privately owned by foreigners and Kenyan nationals. The lives of workers on three of the plantations owned by Kenyans - Munene, Koorali, and Nyakinyua - were investigated. In the tea zone most of the plantations are in the hands of multinational companies. The study surveyed the lives of workers on plantations owned by the
Brooke Bond Company, the country's major tea producer. The areas chosen represent two geocultural regions, each with a distinct ecosystem and ecoculture. It is important to emphasize this, as the extent of the cultural, historical, and socio-economic diversity within parts of Africa is often underestimated.
Large-scale tea and coffee planting started at the beginning of the twentieth century when the Uganda Railway was completed. The colonial government then encouraged settlers as a means of satisfying the growing demand for the products in metropolitan Britain. The establishment of the settler economy and Kenya's incorporation into the international capitalist system inevitably had adverse effects on the local population, which became subordinated to the white community and dependent on wage-labour.
Before European settlement, the African societies had been at different stages of development. Most were in transition from a communal to a feudal economic system, which contrasted sharply with the individualistic capitalist approach. It is important to highlight the contradictions between the two modes of production as they eventually created unique sociological, political, and economic patterns in contemporary Kenyan society. Of central importance to this study arc the social effects of this change on the household, the micro-unit of production and reproduction where the historical and economic effects of this transformation were reflected.
Land, the principal means of production, was wrenched from the peasants and taxation enforced wage-labour, so large-scale migration began. The agricultural sector absorbed many of the migrants and patterns of migration came to correspond to the needs of the plantations. There the combination of hierarchical internal structures and the colonial system led to the exploitation of the household, which subsidized the inadequate wages by contributing the unpaid labour of the worker's family. Women were supposed to reproduce generations of workers for the plantations and at the same time to supplement both the labour force and their husbands' low and heavily taxed wages. With squatters and their families, they formed a labour reservoir guaranteed by the 1925 Resident Native Labourers' Ordinance, which stipulated that all members of a labourer's family living on the plantation had to render services on compulsory terms. Those over 16 had to enter into contracts on their own behalf
or cease to live there. When the husband migrated alone the household he left had to manage without his assistance and the burden of bringing up children was left to the women, who had to perform the roles of both parents.
Table 1. Size, acreage under coffee, and annual output of the three plantations
Plantation
Size (acres)
Acreage under coffee
Average annual output (tons)
Munene
Koorali
Nyakinyua
After the Second World War, more peasants were dispossessed in the violent years of the anti-colonial Mau Mau struggle, and it has been estimated that there were 250,000 squatters by 1952. Later resettlement schemes excluded most of them on political or, more commonly, economic grounds, as the squatters lacked the capital demanded for down payments and improvements. Despite all attempts to develop a satisfactory land policy since independence, the dual problem of landlessness and migration continue to colour Kenyan politics and to keep dispossessed peasants supplying their labour to the plantations in return for inadequate pay, poor conditions, and low living standards.
<section>The study</section>
This study had three main objectives: first, to explore methodology that would be able to incorporate the time dimension, to capture qualitative and quantitative data, and to move between different levels of analysis. Second, it aimed to establish the main causal links between situations on the plantations and the households' structure and dynamics. Third, it sought to provide a basis for policy recommendations and action-oriented projects appropriate in the harsh reality of developing countries today.
It was necessary to identify indicators that would facilitate the evaluation of the web of involved relationships. First, there was the relationship between the labourer and the employer, including terms and conditions, wages and allowances, services and security, and the schedule of duties and work commitments. Then there were the relationships between the individual members of the households; this entailed establishing who was the head of the household, the power structure, and the division of labour within and outside the household by gender and age, as well as the formation and composition of the domestic unit and its variation through time. It was essential to devise an approach that would take both the diachronic and synchronic dimensions of household composition, stability, and interaction into account. Research tools that would allow comparison of historical and structural variation in these elements were needed. It was decided to construct a typology of households
on the basis of some selected economic, social, and political variables: the labourer's contribution to the productive process and the wages and benefits he/she got from it; the level and type of participation in social and cultural activities; and active involvement in trade union activities and political affairs.
A historical or longitudinal approach created a perspective that moved along a time axis, gathering information on the past and the present and images of the future. Two kinds of material were collected: quantitative primary data and the results of two types of questionnaires, and qualitative information obtained basically from household members, complemented by the input of community elders or longstanding residents.
The field-work involved both observation and data collection. It was carried out by specially trained female and male students of the University of Nairobi, supervised on the site by members of the research team, who chose the locations, selected the samples, and planned, organized, and co-ordinated the interviews. The team was also responsible for designing, pre-testing, and revising the questionnaires, as well as making sure they were complete and the data clean. Training and research were both integral to the fundamental aims of the Household, Gender, and Age (HGA) project, and it was originally intended to send a member of the team to the HGA training courses in Chicago and Bogota. However, this plan collapsed as the prospective candidate had not completed her Master's course at the University of Nairobi.
After negotiation with the management, the respondents were interviewed only during working hours. The labourers took a break of two to three hours from their work for the interviews, which took place on the plantation itself, under the shade of the tea or coffee plants, or at the factory. In some cases the team had to compensate them for this time by paying the equivalent of a day's wages. In other cases the management understood the value of the research and was willing to give them the time off. In all 600 respondents, 400 women and 200 men, randomly selected from the plantation workers in each crop zone, were interviewed. The main criteria for selection was the household as a unit of co-residence, reproduction, and production.
Questionnaire 1 was designed for and filled out by the plantation management in order to ascertain general and quantitative facts about the plantations and to assist in the preparation of other questionnaires, as well as to verify information supplied by workers. The data related to the age, size, crops, and output of the plantation, the composition of the workforce, type of labour contract, degree of unionization, and housing and social services. The questionnaire was necessary because there was very little literature available on plantation workers; previous studies had concentrated on capital input, profits, management, mechanization, and crop improvement.
Questionnaire 2 was designed to capture the characteristics of the environment and the main economic activities, social facilities, and major problems of the research area. This questionnaire, which was applied to supervisors and longstanding residents of the plantations, also provided a unique historical perspective of the changes in the conditions there. These changes, and the households' adjustment to them, have been precipitated and determined by national socio-economic and political factors as well as by policies on the plantations, and both must be taken into account in any attempt to understand the workers' households.
The questionnaire was administered to the 30 respondents with the longest history of employment on the plantations. Only five of the 15 respondents in each area were women; it was very difficult to find female workers with more than 15 years of service because employers only resorted to engaging them en masse after 1978, when they became entitled to national identification cards which gave them freedom and autonomy of movement and enabled them to be employed as individual workers. It was also a problem to find workers who had been recruited in the colonial period. Most workers retire at 55, in compliance with government policy which took effect in 1979. In fact only one man, a factory artisan, with a total of 28 years' service was found. His was therefore the only first-hand information from that era, as the other respondents were not referring to their own personal experiences.
Questionnaire 3, the main instrument of the project, collected basic big-data and quantitative and qualitative information on household structure, migration patterns, health, nutrition and reproduction, finance, property base and earning capacity, union participation, the division of labour and time-budgeting, decision-making, aspirations, and cultural activities. It was administered to 600 contracted employees, men and women, on the payroll of the coffee plantation, with a ratio of two female to every one male respondent. After rejecting incomplete or inconsistent questionnaires there was a total of 551.
Qualitative information was drawn from Questionnaire 2 and from life-histories of female household members stratified by age-group. This was gathered through two main instruments: a life-course matrix applied to the 150 female respondents, 75 from each plantation area, which dealt with such variables as fertility, education, migration, and employment, and recorded narrative life-histories highlighting major events in the lives of 20 women, 10 from each plantation area. Traditional and popular songs, which gave creative expression to the experiences and aspirations of the workers, were gathered from the plantation generally and from specialized artists.
The diachronic perspective was approached through a time-budget survey of the subsample of 20 women already mentioned. The various activities carried out by members of the household according to gender and age were studied in terms of timing, duration, frequency, and sequential order. One of the main objectives here was to appraise the division of household labour and the weight of individual tasks according to the time spent on them and the number of people involved in carrying them out. The data on time budgets was gathered mainly in blocks of time - before duty and after duty - with a rough estimate of the duration of each activity made after preliminary interviews. The women evaluated these activities and the relevant time allocation because direct observation was not possible, as the management did not allow the team to stay on the site outside official working hours.
<section>The findings</section>
The Coffee Plantations
The three coffee plantations surveyed are over 60 years old. Though originally foreign-owned, all except Nyakinyua are now owned by Kenyans but managed by companies which run them with a view to recovering the loans used to purchase them. For example, the 5,000 members, most of them women, of Nyakinyua Investment Limited bought Murera Coffee Estates from the Norwegian owners in 1977 and appointed three managers to run them.
Koorali Estate has an interesting cropping pattern, as both cash and food crops, including a variety of vegetables, are grown. Nyakinyua and Munene produce only coffee, though the workers have small plots on which they grow vegetables for their own consumption.
The total labour force varied with the work to be done and table 2 shows that most workers were seasonal casuals, except on Nyakinyua where there was a fortnightly turnover. More casuals arc employed during the picking season, but there are never enough, so all have to work for longer than the stipulated eight hours. Although children are a common sight on both the coffee and tea plantations, the management always denied their presence as workers, as they were not on the payroll. In fact, some of them supplemented their parents' work, especially during peak picking seasons, but they were paid on a daily basis for the work they did.
Male workers had a higher turnover rate, as they were more likely to find better opportunities elsewhere if they had some education. They were generally ambitious to earn more. The women stayed longer on the plantations: their mobility was limited by children, whom they often had to look after single-handed. In any case most of them had neither enough education to allow them to get better jobs somewhere nor land to return to in other rural areas.
Table 2. The labour force on the coffee plantations
Composition
Type of contract
Union members
Workers housed
Plantation
Total employees
Men
Women
Permanent
Casual
Men
Women
Permanent
Casual
Munene
Koorali
Nyakinyua
Variable
The criteria for employment varied from plantation to plantation, though mature workers and those with experience, especially in pruning, were considered first. On Nyakinyua anyone over 18 who wanted to work was taken on for a three-month probation period. All workers were initially employed as casuals, with the possibility of permanent status between three and eight months later, depending on their skills and ability to work hard. There was no system to upgrade workers who acquired skills informally on the job, though this was done occasionally on Nyakinyua and the Brooke Bond tea plantations. There were various technical training programmes on Koorali and Munene but they were mainly for men.
Wage rates were the same for permanent and casual labour, but casual workers were paid only for days actually worked. Absence, for whatever reason, meant no money for that time. Frequent absenteeism could result in dismissal after two weeks' notice. Permanent workers had to be given two to three months' notice before termination. If a permanent worker failed to meet the daily quota, he or she was only paid for the work done, and not for the day. Permanent workers were entitled to 22 days' annual leave, rising to 25 days after five years' service. There was no leave allowance, but an allowance was paid to cover travel expenses for the worker and three children. Permanently employed women were entitled to two months' maternity leave with pay. Workers were given unpaid time off for family problems like illness or bereavement. They were also entitled to housing, small plots for cultivation, and termination payments. The employers contributed 5 per cent of the total earnings of
permanent workers to the National Social Security Fund. All medical expenses had to be met by the workers themselves. Some workers belonged to the Kenya Plantation Workers' Union, but only permanent employees were eligible to join. Unionism was not compulsory and the membership was predominantly male.
Every coffee estate had a number of houses to which permanent workers and those with families were given first priority. Casual workers were only accommodated if there were extra houses. If a worker was not housed, transport to and from work was provided from a central point. On Koorali an allowance of Ksh. 120 per month was paid to any permanent worker who was not housed on the plantation.
The management considered the houses to be in fairly good condition. Electricity was not available but bathrooms, toilets, and kitchens had water laid on. The houses themselves remained as they were when the plantations were first set up in the colonial period. They consisted of single units that were previously meant to accommodate a sole worker but which were now housing families with as many as 10 members. New houses were being built on Koorali and the Brooke Bond tea estates, but they were still single units with no electricity, despite the fact that the plantations have their own generators.
Table 3. Criteria for head of household
Frequency
Oldest person
Oldest man
Employed person
Decision-maker
Other
Total
The Tea Plantations
Contrary to what happened in the coffee-growing region in Central Province, the alienation of the land in the Kericho district and the Rift Valley did not turn the local communities to wage-labour, so the tea companies had to import workers from other districts. Most of them were Kisii, Luo, and Luhya migrants from western Kenya. These three large ethnic groups speak different languages and have slightly different cultural practices.
Patterns of labour recruitment generally followed lines of extended family relationships. The company would promote a worker to become a field supervisor and send him to his home area to recruit workers, so large numbers of them would come from one location. For example, most of the Luo workers at Brooke Bond come from South Nyanza. In most cases the company recruited the workers' dependent and family members, so the extended family was a major factor in labour migration to the tea plantations. Ethnic and personal contacts were also important.
The majority of the males interviewed had worked elsewhere and could easily compare situations in different places. The females had only been exposed to the rural and plantation environments. In most cases, the men had migrated to seek employment and the women had followed. Contemporary economic conditions have marginalized many in the rural areas and created a modern reservoir of unskilled labour.
Poverty and illiteracy were important factors: 36 per cent of the workers had not been to school. For the desperate, the low but regular monthly wage was better than less predictable levels of poverty in other rural areas. Brooke Bond offered nothing to attract labour, but, like all the plantations, it relied on a pool of destitute workers who had no alternatives.
The new recruits faced difficulties ranging from their economic constraints to psychological problems and inexperience in the work environment. They had to make a series of adjustments to plantation life. Most of the new employees were young males, though female workers were more visible on the plantations than in most other sectors of the formal economy.
The climatic and environmental conditions cause a number of health problems at Kericho and Kiambu. It is cold in the tea-growing zone, and as most of the workers came from regions of relatively low altitude, they found it very difficult to adjust and this lowered their productive capacity. Working conditions which required them to work in heavy rain definitely affected their health and colds and pneumonia were as common as malaria. There was usually a lot of dew on the tea and the dampness produced deep and long cracks on the palms of their hands. Heavy work in the fields and carrying tea baskets 11 hours a day caused backache, chest pain, and rheumatism, particularly among the women, whose health was already often impaired by anaemia related to childbirth and loss of blood. There was a high incidence of venereal diseases due to the considerable promiscuity and lack of medication.
The effects of the climate were exacerbated by poverty, for the workers were underpaid and could not afford a balanced diet. The overemphasis on cash crops at the expense or total elimination of crops for domestic consumption meant food had to be bought in from elsewhere. The workers were sometimes given small plots for growing vegetables, but they were not allowed to plant maize, which was the staple food of most of them. Some of the workers on Kiambu travelled to Nairobi every week for supplies of vegetables, fruit, legumes, and grains. A number of respondents, particularly on the tea plantations, depended on maize or beans supplied by their extended rural family. Meat was available, and those on Kericho could get fish, but they could hardly afford to buy as much as they needed. The long working hours also affected nutrition: apart from the fact that the workers had little time to cultivate or go looking for food, they had no lunch break, so the children had to fend for
themselves or eat something prepared in the morning and left for them.
According to the respondents, children outnumbered the workers in the camps. This is in line with the fact that 61) per cent of the population of Kenya is under 15. Though they looked healthy because their diet included a lot of starch and carbohydrates, which put weight on them, the children had a number of health problems and mortality rates were high. Many were affected by chicken pox, measles, and a strange undiagnosed disease called enyamurero in Gusii, which causes skin rashes, swelling, and, eventually, death. Scurvy was common. The children lacked parental care and their parents could not afford to pay someone else to look after them, so the older children had to take care of the infants, who are thus exposed to numerous hazards. In most cases they were carried along to school so that they could be taken care of there by older siblings. The children either took cold lunches or did without food if they were unable to cook for themselves.
Following the practice of the time, the living quarters at Brooke Bond used to be allocated according to ethnic group. Up to 1978, when the government took steps to alleviate ethnic tensions in the country, there had been very few intercultural marriages on the plantations, and those that had taken place were viewed as contaminating values and were sources of tension in the camps. Compartmentalization was stopped in 1978 and workers from all groups were integrated in all the camps. This has forged more harmonious relations. An incipient class consciousness arising from their common experience and material conditions has also diluted some of the previous differences and difficulties.
Indeed, ethnic values are steadily being merged and transformed into a unique plantation culture. The workers have opted for Kiswahili as the common language. Collective co-operation and the development of new social networks, especially in serious crises like bereavement, have strengthened and modified the heritage of diverse traditions transplanted from a variety of rural backgrounds. For example, the workers contributed to meet all funeral expenses when someone died, and households lent each other domestic items.
Culture and Life-style
This unique plantation culture is distinct from the urban proletariat and peasant cultures, although it borrows heavily from the latter. It was more highly developed in the tea region, where the workers living in exile have been overwhelmed by their new environment and have changed, and recognized the need to change, their attitudes.
Government policy has played a role. After 1978 all cultural activities and festivals were prohibited in the camps. A respondent explained: "Mod stopped all the traditional dances on his accession to the presidency because he is a Christian. They were told that cultural dancing troupes do not constitute development." This led to the suppression of traditional elements that had been carried into the diaspora and could have enriched this new culture. In general, the paucity of cultural activities on the plantations was striking. There were few musicians, no dances or ceremonies, hardly any rituals. However, there were still storytellers who passed social values on to the young through stories and poetry. There were also still a few people who played traditional instruments, though only to amuse themselves, since public performance was proscribed. There were Christian choirs and Christian rituals instead of traditional songs and ceremonies.
The survey included questions to try to assess changes in attitudes and circumstances that had come about through the mixture of ethnic groups characteristic of plantation life, and the investigation revealed some enriching cross-cultural interaction, including the use of Kiswahili, the common work language, interethnic marriages, and an increasing national consciousness which could override disparate, parochial ethnic identities.
The language used in the domestic setting remained basically unchanged except in those households that were the results of intermarriage. In this case Kiswahili and either or both the mother-tongues of the partners were used. Kiswahili was the language of communication in the workplace; the former trading language between Arabs and Africans has become a lingua franca between Africans who speak different languages and is now linked with migration and the intermingling of peoples in contemporary Kenya.
Perhaps because the topic was not well presented in the questionnaire, it was difficult to measure possible changes in attitudes towards customs and traditions. Some of the respondents showed that their attitudes remained unchanged while others indicated that circumstances had changed and therefore their attitudes had been modified by necessity. Many continued to prefer the ways of their own people, even though some customs were perceived to be outmoded and far removed from the contemporary plantation environment. There were some complaints of increasing ethnic bias in promotions as economic pressures tightened.
The facilities on the plantations were, at best, minimal and substandard, with better services to be found only on Nyakinyua, which was collectively owned. Amenities varied from plantation to plantation. On Nyakinyua they included a church in which the people met on Saturdays and Sundays, free nursery schooling, and television provided by the company. The women said they did not have time to watch it. Some of them felt alienated by it as they understood neither English nor Kiswahili. The few who did watch it said that, like radio, which they thought was more useful, it was educational. On Munene they were limited to piped water, a church, and a group set up by the women themselves. The adjacent Kamiti Prison provided primary and secondary schools and shops. However, the workers found it easy to commute either to Nairobi or Ruiru, as the plantation is only about three kilometres from the main road.
Koorali Estate had a nursery school, piped water, an all-weather road, a shopping centre, sporting facilities, and transport to Thika and Ruiru. There was a primary school less than one kilometre from the plantation and a health centre 13 kilometres away, both of them provided by the government. There were no telephones, adult literacy classes, day-care centres, or clubs
Nyakinyua had a nursery and primary school, a shopping centre, sporting facilities, a church, a cemetery, boreholes for water, and transport for workers living off the plantation, all provided by the plantation. However, there was no secondary school or health centre. The workers used those provided by the government in Ruiru and Gatundu. There are no public telephones, women's groups, day-care centres, or adult literacy classes. Only Nyakinyua had plans to improve amenities: the management hoped to upgrade the nursery and primary schools and the sporting facilities in the future.
Brooke Bond's 22 estates offered varying degrees of social support. For instance, there was a nursery on Jamjii, but the workers on Kericho were struggling to build a nursery out of their own funds.
The question of participation in adult literacy programmes was raised in order to measure gender participation in development-oriented programmes, but it was difficult to find such projects on the plantations. The dearth of adult literacy programmes and women's groups on some of the plantations was partially due to the fact that the workers had little time to organize or participate in them at the end of their long day. On Nyakinyua, where adult literacy classes did exist, gender participation was unequal. As happened elsewhere in the country, women attended the classes more often and in greater than the men. Male respondents asserted that adult literacy classes interfered with their leisure and drinking time and exposed them to competition with women. Some of the women who attended and benefited from the classes complained that they had to stop going because of their housework. The classes were held after work, which, as the time budgets show, was when the women had to look
after their households.
Recreational activities for men on the plantations were limited to television, playing ajua (a game for men) and football, and going to church, though a good number of the workers did not attend because they did not have enough time. A few engaged in petty trading to supplement their meagre wages and some spent their spare time working on a vegetable garden, though this meant they had virtually no time for leisure and rest except at night.
For the young people, leisure time presented some problems. There were no youth groups. The young men played football, watched television where it was available, and visited each other. The young women plaited their hair, visited one another, watched television, and sewed. Men spent their leisure time at the social centre, watching television, visiting, chatting with other men and resting. Women respondents spent what they perceived as their free time with their children or working in the house, knitting, making baskets, or mending. Indeed, some women found it difficult to decide what was meant by "free time," for even when they were at their leisure they were doing tasks related to child care and maintenance. When parents were able to devote special time to their children they spent it advising them, telling them traditional stories, or singing with them. On occasion they were taken to visit relatives in order to get to know them better.
Conditions in the camp were crowded and noisy and there was little privacy, factors that related to the general lack of discipline, which was manifested in many ways: drunken men, difficult young people, women who had many men friends, men who associated with other women regardless of their social obligations, rape, and teenage pregnancy. However, while some respondents complained about these things, others said they saw no problems in these areas. A number of them attributed the informal cohabitation which had become a feature of plantation life to the pressures of poverty. The percentage of teenage pregnancies was high. It was a general lament among the women that girls as young as 12 and 13 were getting pregnant. Some older men also complained, but the younger men saw this as unavoidable in the absence of social barriers.
In a situation where exploitation was rampant, gender problems could pass unnoticed, but age-old patriarchal discrimination still operated against women. Some jobs were considered masculine, like working in the factory, or feminine, like tea-picking. In the house all duties fell on the women, a division of labour enforced by communal and patriarchal norms that were in fact in contradiction to the contemporary household situation. The social status of women was still inferior, and in male-headed households it was always the man who decided on crucial matters like expenditure.
Single women were the most exploited of all the workers. Most of them were widows, unmarried mothers, or divorced or separated women who had been ejected from the rural areas by poverty or social and cultural problems. On the plantations they faced a range of difficulties from financial constraints to problems with the care and social development of their children. Single women were often looked down upon as prostitutes, and relations between single and married women were riddled with tension. As one 44-year-old put it: "The relations between married and unmarried arc strained because of suspicion of unmarried women by married women of grabbing their husbands."
Life was hard for the odder people. Their expectations and ambitions had been smothered by the decades of poverty and their lives were nearing their end. The harsh working conditions left them weak and inefficient. One older female respondent likened plantation life to a dog's life. The old workers were psychologically displaced. They said that rural life would be better, yet they still went on working on the plantation under wretched conditions, a contradiction explicable in terms of the limitations of the subsistence economy in the rural areas and the dominance of the monetary economy. They would leave the plantation empty-handed if they retired. The employers claimed that the National Social Security Fund would provide for them, but the workers said they might be dead before this money got through bureaucracy and corruption to them.
Forty-nine per cent of the respondents found their housing unsatisfactory, 38 per cent were satisfied, and 13 per cent were uncertain. Although there were some new houses, there were still workers living in rough, grass-thatched colonial units with uncemented floors and walls that were breeding-grounds for jiggers, cockroaches, and rats. In some of the camps they had to share latrines, bathrooms, and kitchens, or the relevant functions were performed outdoors. The water source was usually far from the houses. There was no electricity in any of the camps, in spite of the fact that all plantation operations are automated and the electrical lines passed over the workers' houses. Even the newer houses were inadequate for a medium-size family, which caused a lot of strain in the household. The cooking place was often in the sitting-room. Some people avoided being in the house for much of the day. Various cultural practices were difficult in the houses. There were problems with
extended family members and respected visitors, for the houses were inadequate for receiving them according to custom. On the other hand, there was no gender bias in the allocation of housing, which was determined solely on the basis of the job, a fact that partly explains the attraction of the plantation for female heads of households.
Table 4. Family types on the coffee plantation (percentages)
Extended
Nuclear
Other
Undecided
Actual living arrangement
Preferred living arrangement
Households and Families
The households on the plantation have been stamped with the indelible mark of the plantation system and the exploitation of its labour force. The changing patterns of relationships, and the forms, composition' attitudes, and aspirations of the households bore its impact to the extent that there were few similarities between households there and those in the pert-urban and rural areas. By accepting work on the plantation, the workers tacitly accepted a whole range of conditions that were not compatible with their cultural practices. Parents and grown children frequently had to live together in the restricted space of single living quarters, which often meant the family unit had to he broken up into nuclear households. Yet though the company's overt and covert policies usually discriminated against extended families, it could also take advantage of them as useful reserves of labour.
The size of the households varied greatly, from as few as two to as many as 12 people. Sometimes this depended on the age of the respondent: some young workers between 18 and 25 had smaller families, although others were still living with their parents and siblings in an extended family. People over 45 also had smaller households, as some of their offspring had already married or migrated and set up households of their own In some cases it was difficult to determine exactly how many residents there were, as children kept returning to live with parents or grandparents for extended periods. Respondents often counted all members of the family as members of the household. In some situations a male partner might or might not be included, depending on whether the co-residence arrangement was considered to be permanent or temporary. Needless to say, this approach affected a number of questions, particularly when women were asked about help with household expenses.
In the western region there was some polygamy and some male respondents who considered two or more families as members of their household. It was difficult to determine whether this was a household or not. Culturally, the households of a polygamous family reside within the same homestead, while conceptually the HGA project defined the household as a unit of co-residence. However, these families usually fulfilled most of the criteria for a single household in the sense that they had one male head who was responsible materially and in other ways for the well-being of the family.
Another unresolved question concerned wives who were left behind in the rural areas. The woman became de facto head of household in the absence of the husband, who remained the de jure head although he lived away from his family in his own household in urban areas or on the plantations. This represented a significant deviation from the cultural norm, in which migration had no place; nor was it possible to reconcile this situation with the usual concepts of household. There is a need to redefine the head of household in relation to contemporary realities.
Patterns of co-residence on the plantation were different to those which had prevailed in pre-colonial times and, to some extent, to the contemporary rural situation. They more closely resembled those in peri-urban areas, which were also under direct pressure from similar economic, social, and historical forces. Perhaps the most striking example of this was the phenomenon of the adult males who lived alone, having left their families elsewhere when they migrated to get work. These men, who represent the original composition of the plantation labour force, were excluded from the survey by virtue of the fact that their wives and children were not living on the plantation, but they would have made an interesting control group for the study of the allocation of domestic tasks. Observation suggested that the taboos that justify gender division of labour can evaporate in conditions that force males to undertake day-to-day tasks in the home.
The households included all ages from newborn infants to grandparents. Both observation and a rough count suggested that the ratio of young to old was heavily in favour of the former. This is consistent with the situation on the African continent as a whole, where nearly 50 per cent of the population is under 15 years of age. It was rare to find unemployed adults in the households on the coffee plantations. The low wages lead to the mobilization of every adult. Dependents were usually children or, occasionally, retired parents; extended families were very rare. In the tea zone, where they did exist, there were unemployed resident adults, usually offspring who had finished school or relatives who had come to stay for longer or shorter periods. The respondents themselves ranged from 18 to 50 and older, which was interesting for the project life-course approach. There were more older women than older men, an accurate reflection of the gender balance on the plantation.
One of the most striking findings of the survey was the proportion of female-headed households. Though some had been expected, as this has become a national phenomenon, 45.2 per cent of the female respondents stated that they were heads of household, which was unexpectedly high. However, given the unconventional family patterns and the economic forces and social pressures that impelled people to work on the plantations, perhaps this is not surprising. The existence of these independent female households was only possible because of the shift of the economic base from land and cattle to a cash wage. This economic alternative had ramifications which reverberated throughout the whole research project.
In the coffee zone there were relatively few male-headed family households. Whether by choice or necessity, most men had left their families in the rural areas. This perpetuated the colonial pattern in which the economic value of the worker was seen as more important than sustaining the social institution of the family. Because of the preponderance of nuclear family and female-headed households on the coffee plantations, the question of who headed the household and why produced little gender bias there. The ability to earn money and take the responsibility for decisions determined who headed the households. The gender and age criteria that were important in the rural areas were, in practical terms, irrelevant on the coffee plantations or in the pert-urban areas.
In contrast, there were dual criteria for determining the headship of the household on the tea plantations. Culturally, as in the rural models, gender and age were the important factors. However, since the workers had become part of the modern cash system, economic criteria were also important and any adult who earned money could be considered the head of household, regardless of gender or age. When both parents had retired and had nowhere else to go, or both were deceased, a son or daughter sometimes became the economic head of the household. In these cases, there was often a complex division of authority and power in the household, with a statutory head, a culturally recognized head, and someone else again in charge of financial or social matters.
Some women saw themselves as heads of households because they made all the decisions or were the sole providers in their households. Men saw themselves as heads of households because they "solve all the problems." It was also said that even in previous generations women were heads of households, but this was not substantiated. In any case, the whole issue of the role of head of household has changed since their grandparents' days because of the availability of new resources now and the stable marital relationships then.
Thus the concept and practical interpretation of head of household were problematic as there were varying criteria, cultural and economic, which might determine the position. In the case of polygynous families or women who had been previously married, it was sometimes even difficult to tell which household was headed by whom.
The preponderance of nuclear family households on the coffee plantations represented a major deviation from the rural life-styles. Economic constraints were said to be a major cause of their prevalence on the coffee plantations, where they had become the norm. The dominance of the nuclear family had both positive and negative effects and particular implications for the running of the household and the care of the children in both female- and male-headed households.
Some of the respondents expressed a desire for the social support of the extended family. For others, economic considerations overweighed any of the potential benefits. Emotional ties were put forward in favour of the extended family. Objections to it were generally summed up as "presenting too many problems."
Table 5. Marital status
Frequency
Single
Married
Other
Total
The views of some, though not the majority, of the respondents on the coffee plantations were suffused with nostalgia for the life-style of the past or the rural area where the extended family was envisaged to be. A small number of the respondents who actually lived in extended families affirmed that this was their preference.
There were many more extended families in the tea region. This was influenced by the cultural values of the ethnic groups from which the tea plantation draws its labour force. The workers were mainly Luo, Luhya, and Kalenjin, people noted for their strong kinship tics. In addition, the tea plantations were situated in a densely populated area where high unemployment contributed to the number of extended families. They were of two types: generation-based (with three generations living under one roof) or gender-based (for example a woman and her children living with her parents or an unmarried sister with other family members).
Changes in household composition over the past ten years, the most conspicuous of which was the number of children born, were more noticeable in the younger households. This obviously had a strong impact on household expenditure, time-budgeting, and balancing domestic and workforce duties. In the same period, separation, divorce, and widowhood had catapulted 11 per cent of the sample into becoming female heads of household.
Marital status was the category which proved the most difficult to deal with in the field, and it remained elusive and ambiguous in analysis, too. Marital relationships seemed to be in flux or transition for a good proportion of the respondents. Apart from the couples who had been married for decades, it was hard to classify a relationship as marriage in the conventional African sense. A lot of cohabitation was described as marriage although it had no legal basis, and many of the partners had not fulfilled the requirements for customary marriage. Some of the respondents, particularly among the female household heads, firmly stated that they had never been married. There were a number of examples of serial marriage. These ambiguities should be borne in mind when considering table 5.
The fact that marriage was difficult to define to a major change in the definition of the household as conventionally understood. In spite of the limitations already noted, co-residence was a more useful criterion, as it allowed for flexibility and open-endedness in dealing with marital status.
Eighty-nine per cent of the sample said they had married. Questions to establish marital profiles elicited a wider variety of responses than would have been found in a stable rural community. Monogamous marriage, serial marriage, temporary marriage, and polygyny were all found, though whether or not some of the data reflected the real situation is perhaps debatable. Young females who had not been married asserted that they intended to marry. Older female heads of households said they did not, a realistic response in their cultural and economic milieu. It was not possible to establish whether or not unmarried males intended to marry, as unlike the single females, who lived with their parents, their children, or both, the men were not living in households and were therefore beyond the scope of the interviews.
Serial marriages, consisting of a number of successive cohabitations or temporary unions, were reported by both men and women. Two sets of questions about polygyny were addressed to the men and women respectively. It was very rare on the coffee plantation, where none of the respondents were openly living in a polygynous situation. Female respondents whose husbands had taken on another wife considered themselves no longer married. Some of them had been separated for many years. Those who had been separated from their husbands for less than five years had some hope of reunion, but not in a polygynous form. Polygyny was more frequent and female-headed households less frequent on the tea plantations because of cultural and demographic factors in western Kenya, where most of the workers originated. The majority of the women living in polygynous arrangements were second or third wives; the first wife was usually at home in the rural area "taking care of the family property." In
some cases there was an age difference of 20 years between the husband and the young wives in these unions. Sometimes the first wife "divorced" the husband, and there were cases of first wives who had left their husbands and set up their own households on the plantation. Questions about how women felt when the husband took another wife drew some of the most profuse responses in the questionnaire. Their attitudes ranged from passive acceptance and indifference to rage and powerlessness. In a few cases the step was a joint decision between the first wife and the husband.
Patterns of reproduction and views on family planning reflected those in the rural rather than the pert-urban areas. The average number of children per household was four, though some female-headed households included as many as ten and twelve. The ages of these children varied: in some families the offspring were married while in others they were in their infancy.
In the coffee region most children lived with their parents, though a few were with grandparents in the rural areas. Some were grown up and had married and migrated to other plantations or the towns to set up their separate lives. In the tea region, the importance of the extended family emerged in shared responsibility for children. Many respondents not only had members of the extended family living with them, but a number had children staying with other members of the family. Although economic hardship predisposed people on the coffee plantations to the nuclear family, in the tea region the extended family was maintained in spite of the poverty.
Economic factors were seen as the only constraint on family size, and contemporary hard times were given as the reason for the preference for smaller families. The basic economic resource, family land, was perceived to be shrinking, while the prices of necessities were escalating. Many saw a more bleak, hard, and powerless future for their sons and daughters, so they thought that they should have fewer children than the respondents themselves had had. This applied particularly to sons who would be limited by dwindling family resources. Daughters were thought to have the possibility of marrying someone of better social and economic standing. However, there was not much gender distinction on this point: half the sample thought both their sons and daughters should have fewer children. For some, the pessimism expressed in "the coming days will be worse than today" was relieved by some gleam of hope of improvement through schooling and God's will. Between 15 and 18 per cent gave
emotional and social reasons for wanting many grandchildren. Some parents simply said that their children should be free to make their own decisions about family size. Eighteen and over 21 were seen as the best ages for a daughter to have her first child. This is older than the age at which many girls actually gave birth on the plantations, which was between 14 and 16.
There were a variety of responses on family planning, but generally the respondents did not see it as intrinsically good, and only 24.3 per cent of the women said they practiced it. Even when they thought it was "good," the women themselves did not necessarily use modern chemicals or devices; many said they did it their own way. Male respondents were divided on whether or not family planning was "good." However, they themselves to a man did not practice it. This was confirmed by the women who said that "men could not care less about family planning." Older men still preferred large families and most men were repulsed by the very idea of contraception. "Men around here do not want to hear anything about family planning. They just want to reproduce like rats," said a female respondent. The women, who felt the burden of large families more, preferred smaller families. National policies aimed at curbing the population by controlling fertility had created some confusion because
of the related concept of promoting better child care.
Obviously, only those women who had tried or observed modern forms of contraception were able to reply to questions about their advantages and disadvantages. Many thought there were no advantages; a few said that the ability to space and determine the number of children was beneficial. Some of the advantages listed sounded like undigested repetition of the slogans of the media and health workers. They referred to macro-level benefits like curbing the national population rather than the micro-level benefits to the household and the individual. Some respondents felt their fate was determined at the cosmic level and their reproduction was under divine control.
However, the disadvantages were perceived at the micro-level: they included fear of death, sterility, or abnormal babies as side-effects from the drugs. Serious side-effects observed with the use of chemical contraceptives had made many respondents opposed to family planning. Some people on the coffee plantation said that birth-control pills and pesticides that were absorbed into the body interacted badly, and there were complaints of nausea, dizziness, and fainting. Women in the tea region suffered intermittent bleeding, severe backache, and miscarriages, and some gave birth to weak children who later died. Some shunned family planning because they had lost many children whom they would have liked to have had. Lack of information led to resistance to contraception. The experience of many respondents suggests that promoting contraception without education, follow-up, and care means that most women do not continue with family planning. Depopulation was noted as a macro-level
disadvantage of an increase in mortality and decrease in fertility.
Some women rejected modern chemical and mechanical contraceptives, insisting that the knowledge and practices of their mothers' generation were just as good, and they continued to use traditional methods. Others said that knowledge about family planning had improved their lives. Even though many of them did not use modern contraceptives, they knew they had an alternative should they ever want to space or stop births.
Comparing the actual and preferred family size of the two age-groups shows that, a generation ago, families had more than six children and that they thought more than six were desirable. Clearly, there were more resources available to families then. Gender preference in offspring was also tested. Over 70 per cent wanted to have a son. They saw a son as the inheritor of their name and property, a leader in the family, and essential to its prestige. Others had no preference. A third group left the gender of a child to be determined by God.
Responses to questions about the preferred marital and reproductive status of women varied according to the experiences and observations of the respondents. They were asked to choose between having no children at all, being married without children, and being employed, rich, and having no children. Some female respondents thought it better to have children even without being married. The male respondents on the whole believed that women should be married and have children.
Domestic Responsibilities
The survey investigated the organization and time allocation of daily activities and the division of labour within the household by gender and age, and attempted to assess changes that had taken place in the households over the past ten years.
As the organization of household hours and tasks was inevitably linked to plantation activities, domestic duties had to be organized around the plantation work, which had assumed a central position in the lives of the workers. This represented a major shift from the focus of the household as the centre of society that prevailed in the pre-colonial era, even in contemporary rural areas.
In order to fit in the essential household activities, the women, whether married or unmarried, had "to make the day longer" by getting up very early, often as early as 4 a.m. Breakfast and lunch had to be cooked and child care organized in the early morning before setting off for work on the plantation. Half the domestic chores were done before 6.30 in the morning. The other half were done after four in the afternoon or even later during the peak picking season. The day was made to stretch until eleven at night in order to fit everything in. The best hours were devoted to plantation work; household responsibilities were relegated to the periphery of the workers' lives. The women, especially those with young children, were badly affected by this 15- to 18-hour day.
Of course the male respondents did not have this problem, as their wives took the burden of housework upon themselves. The married men whose wives lived with them devoted their time to themselves before going to work at 7 a. m. They went to bed earlier and got up later than the employed women respondents. Here, as in the peri-urban sector, the non-employed wives of working men had begun to acquire the characteristics of a Western housewife. Their task was to care for the children and the house, a much narrower role than that of their rural counterparts. The pattern of the single men's lives was observed to be closer to that of the women, in both the similarity and timing of domestic tasks. The phenomenon of a man living alone, apart from his family, was a legacy of colonialism particularly evident among the migrants on the plantations.
Questions about assistance with household tasks inevitably raised gender and age issues. Men who lived with their wives believed they had the option to help or not. When they did assist, which was indeed rare, they chose the type of tasks they did. Work in the household increased with the number of small children. However, the workload was lightened as they got older, especially when they were girls. Preadolescent children helped in the house, assuming responsibilities sometimes more on the basis of age than gender. The children's help ranged from small tasks like washing their own dishes to minding younger siblings all day or taking full charge of the household. However, as time went on the boys rebelled against this, and older boys asserted that they were above such duties, pointing to the traditional patriarchal division of labour by gender as their justification. In the female-headed households, adolescent and older boys began to assume the role of household head. Some
female heads of household said the responsibility was too much for one parent. Others declared that the absence of a husband was a blessing, as there was no man in the house to disrupt household work with demands for attention. Some of the female respondents liked the peace in the house when there was no husband there.
Many respondents regarded household activities as work because of the time and energy involved, but others perceived it as necessary to life and not wage-earning and therefore "non-work." In any case, the hours suggested that household activities should be taken into account when labour is being quantified.
Sickness was a great risk or threat to the employed woman with children. Should she fall sick, the organization of her household would disintegrate. When others were ill she had to look after them, draining her time and energy to carry out all her other duties. The married men said they had no difficulties here, since the household was the wife's sphere and therefore it was her responsibility to care for the sick. Maternity leave was cited as a recent new benefit for women. Permanent employees on the coffee plantation got two months with pay, but casuals got nothing. Some of the permanent workers said that the two months were inadequate and they would prefer to be able to take as long as they deemed necessary, like the casual workers. However, the casual employees envied the security of tenure which the others had. One respondent had lost her permanent status because she refused to go back to work after two months, preferring to take care of her infant twins. Her next birth
was also twins, whom she took time to breast-feed. She was married and had the back-up of her husband's wages; had she been the head of the household, she would not have had any alternative but to conform to regulations.
In the tea region maternity leave ranged from 23 to 90 days. However, there were discrepancies in payment: some respondents stated that they were given full pay, but others declared that only half of their wages were paid to them during maternity leave, while yet others said that they received no wages at all during this time. There was a similar confusion about maternity expenses, which could be financed by the worker, the employer, the welfare club, or the union. As with other employed women, the length of maternity leave and financial security during it could have a significant impact on the health of the baby and the mother, as well as on her decision to have more children.
Babies were breast-fed surreptitiously in the workplace; no time was officially allowed for this essential activity. The health of the infant was thus jeopardized by exposure to extreme temperatures, inclement weather, and pesticides. Some of the respondents said that women who attended to their children in the field risked being fired. Others said that some supervisors were willing to look the other way when mothers took breaks to see to their children. Older siblings sometimes had to leave school to look after the younger ones. The traditional support systems were not available for the plantation workers, although some did turn to their rural extended families for help. Sick leave, leave to care for children who were ill, and compassionate Ieave were all granted without pay, so income stopped when the worker needed it most. Mothers and female heads of household were particularly vulnerable.
On Nyakinyua, the company provided free nursery schooling, a policy as commendable as it was rare, since many other plantations did not provide any educational facilities. The children were not necessarily sent to nursery schools to learn, but they were considered an important alternative form of early child care for employed mothers. Many respondents sent their children to nursery school when they were three years old "since there is no one else to mind her" and it was better for the children to spend the day there rather than locked up in the house or unsupervised on the plantation.
The absence of an extended family to help with child care presented real problems to the working mothers. As most had come to the plantations expressly to seek employment and as the management declared its reliance on female workers as a stable workforce, the provision of child care would have seemed logical. As it was, many respondents had one person and, in a few cases, two adults, in the camp to whom they could entrust their children for an extended period.
The women, children, and a few of the men said alienation from the children was the major problem when it came to the division of time between the household and the plantation. This was expressed in various ways by different respondents, but it was always a matter of strong feelings. Lack of time to care for children, especially when they were ill, inadequate time for food preparation, older children having to take responsibility for younger siblings, and young children having to stay on their own the whole day were frequent complaints. Although the unit of production and the unit of reproduction were interdependent, their physical separation created stress and difficulties which exacerbated the problems arising from the traditional division of labour within the household.
As any stimuli that affect any part of a unit can have an impact on all the other components, the exploitation of the workers also imposed strains on the children, who had to aid household adjustment by contributing to work in an attempt to ease the burdens of their mothers; the plantations thus benefit indirectly from their labour. Yet the presence of children gave comfort and cohesion to parents, who in spite of the wretchedness of their own lives were not generally so pessimistic about their children's future.
Conditions on the plantation may actually hamper intellectual development. The children's progress and promotion in school was slow. They were often quite old for their class: there were some who were finishing primary school in their late teens. Most children dropped out after primary school because their parents could not afford secondary education for them. This usually meant that they then remained dependent on their families.
There was a unique though slight generation gap on the plantation: it was difficult to find young people between 18 and 24. The company was said to take advantage of the slightest reason to throw them out of the camps. Apart from this, they became a burden on the household and were encouraged to get jobs in other places at an early age.
There were marked strains between the young and the old. The whole situation was confusing, but what seemed to be spontaneous eruptions of tensions may have been sparked off by economic stress. The fact that parents did not control the means of production, were illiterate or semi-literate, and were themselves exploited eroded their authority over their children. They saw the children as indolent, cheeky and difficult to control, and lacking respect for the old. This lack of respect reflected the loss of communal traditions that emphasized the wisdom and philosophy of the elders. To the older cohort, there seemed to be a breakdown of values as young men cohabited with or married older women. Some workers perceived themselves as a generation isolated in an unmanageable environment over which they had no control. The young were full of enthusiasm and energy and hope for a better life.
There was general consensus that there had been great changes in the relationships between children and parents, though no group of respondents stood out as representing a majority view of the precise nature of the change. The responses were evenly divided between various opinions, such as: parents were freer with children; parents were not strict with children; parents wanted more education for their children; parents were unable to control their children; parents educated their daughters more nowadays; children spent more time studying; parents spent less time with their children; and children were more educated than their parents. Of course, it should be noted that many of these behavioural changes are common to other groups in contemporary Kenya.
The issue of changing attitudes to male and female roles elicited an array of responses which indeed reflect changes. These ranged from seeing boys and girls as equal in the home; acknowledging that equality between men and women is possible because they perform the same jobs on the plantation and earn equal money; to "women have their roles and position cut out for them by God and cannot in any way change this as even God himself is also a man." Gender discrimination was even more constant and manifest in the division of household labour than in technical employment and factory work. However, it was more than a question of psychological insensitivity or low levels of consciousness within households. It was also one of deep and long-standing exploitation.
Migration, Employment, and Income
The plantations were dependent on migration. Their workers could be divided into three categories of origin: those who were born on the plantation; those who were born in the same province and therefore did not have to go far to join the plantation labour force; and those who were born in other provinces and had to move long distances to either the tea or coffee plantations. Three of the country's seven provinces - Nyanza, Central, and Western - provide nearly all the plantation workforce. None of the respondents came from the eighth province, which is Nairobi.
The non-migrant workers in the first category were second- or third-generation plantation workers. These respondents said their forbears had been affected by the land policies of the colonial government, which had simultaneousIy created huge plantation areas on the one hand and a landless population on the other. This group included young and old, women and men; there were more of them in the coffee region than on the lea plantations.
The workers in the second category had migrated because they had no land. Here there was also a gender component, as this group included many of the female heads of households who had been driven from Central Province by the patriarchal inheritance system. The men had been the victims of land alienation. In the Western region, there were some respondents who had migrated because of poor, unproductive soil. Some migrants still had small pieces of land where their extended family lived and there were others who had managed, after years of labour, to purchase a small plot. Most were destined to be the parents of second-generation plantation workers.
The third category consisted of those who had come from other provinces, mainly to sell their labour in order to supplement their family income in other rural areas. This represented a pattern which has persisted since the colonial era. The men in this group had little in the way of land or resources at home. The women were pushed there by the combination of land poverty and patrilineal disinheritance by fathers or husbands. It is this last factor which has led to one of the most profound changes in Kenyan households, the female-headed household, which was as visible on the plantation as in urban centres large and small.
The patterns of migration tended to differ between the men and the women in categories two and three. The men generally left their home or place of origin in search of employment, a practice which they continued. Some of the women left home to join the workforce, but the majority passed through one or more marriages before they got to the plantation. Some were wives who followed husbands who had already migrated to the plantations, but many others came to the plantation as a refuge from broken marriages and husbands who no longer wanted them. Some who had not been married sought employment and a place to live with their children. Most respondents came to the plantation because they had no resources and hoped to meet their economic needs by joining the workforce there. Some had migrated to escape a criminal past, family disputes, the ill-will of neighbours, or witchcraft. A few had come in an attempt to leave or forget a tragic past. However, land problems were the major
impetus for migration.
Some of the respondents, most of them male, had passed through a number of other plantations, or held various kinds of unskilled or semi-skilled jobs in small towns and cities. Once the women found a job and a home for their family they were inclined to settle permanently on the plantation and were therefore recognized by the management as the more stable part of the workforce. The men moved in and out more freely, untethered by immediate family responsibilities. Women usually had nowhere else to go. The plantation offered these landless heads of households a livelihood and a place to stay and the employers benefited from their lack of choice.
When asked where they would go if their present job were suddenly terminated, many of the women said they would look for a job on another plantation. Few of those in the coffee region saw any possibility of returning to the rural areas. Though some had extended family there, they said it would be "impossible" to go and live with them, since land and money were so scarce. Besides, their patrilineal cultures forbade the women to return to their natal home with children, especially male children. Most of these respondents had no land themselves, apart from the few who had managed to buy an acre or two on which they hoped to build if they could save enough for the building materials.
Most respondents had no intention of working on the plantation for the rest of their lives. The plantation, like the city, was seen as a temporary place to work and live, where conditions were so difficult that they were comparable to slavery. Those who said they would stay there made it obvious that this was because they had no alternatives. All except a handful declared that working on a plantation was a miserable life, oppressive and exploitative. The workload was too heavy and the pay too little even to cover basic needs. The few whose views were less negative simply said their jobs gave them some income.
Aspirations for their children were unanimously oriented "away from the plantation." All the respondents wanted their children to live, in order of preference, in the rural area, in a big city, or in a small town. None of them wanted their children to live on the plantation, and some were outright in their aversion to this. The predominant hope was for land to settle down on in the country or stable employment in the towns or city. For themselves, nearly all the respondents wanted a piece of land they could call their own so they could control their working hours and reap the benefits of their own work. Some of the younger respondents were attracted to the big city. Others realized they would have nowhere else to go if they had to leave the plantation. All in all, the research revealed the plantation workers as a people who, though deracinated from their rural areas, would prefer to settle back there or in the towns. The plantation was merely a place of economic survival.
It was therefore essential to explore various factors relevant to this, including schooling and training, employment history, work schedules, and income. The educational levels of the respondents were low. Occasionally someone had advanced as far as high school, but this was indeed rare. Some (36 per cent) had no formal education at all, many had only lower primary and a few had upper primary schooling. Most of the more educated respondents had left school at unusually high ages. Many were in upper primary school in their late teens.
The same constraints which confined other Kenyans to low educational levels also operated here. These included lack of financial resources in the family (37.4 per cent), the need to work in order to support younger siblings, forced marriage, and teenage pregnancy. Many of the respondents stated that they had liked school very much, and quite a number of them had done well academically during their time there. Almost without exception they considered their education had not been completed.
Gender discrimination in educational opportunity certainly existed, though it was mostly expressed by the female respondents. Most men did not seem to perceive it. The women were often very bitter about discrimination against them as daughters and sisters. Some said that they had excelled in class and felt that given the opportunity they would have gone far. This gender bias was exacerbated by poverty, which had forced many parents to choose between which children they could put through school.
School was perceived as necessary and as a key to better job opportunities by 68.6 per cent of the sample. Yet most of them had only learnt rudimentary reading, writing, and arithmetic. The older women lacked even this basic literacy and numeracy, though some had attempted to rectify this by attending adult literacy classes. Over and over again, their limited educational background and lack of rural resources like land or cattle were given as the major factor in the respondents' decision to work on the plantation. The vast majority of them had unskilled or semi-skilled jobs.
A few respondents had picked up some skills, mainly in informal ways, in odd places here and there. Some were mechanics, some could sew. However, the vast majority, regardless of gender and age, had never had any type of training, formal or informal. Their only marketable skill was tea- or coffee-picking, which they had learnt on the job.
It was surprising to find that some of the respondents with specific skills were employed as unskilled workers. There were carpenters, cobblers, drivers, painters, bookkeepers, typists, and dressmakers who were all overqualified for picking tea leaves or coffee berries. Here the survey was inadequate, as it did not include a follow-up question on why these respondents were not employed or self-employed in the herds in which they were trained. Lack of opportunities in specific areas and the inability to raise the capital necessary to set up in self-employment may have been major constraints.
The employment histories showed gender differentiation which was consistent with the patterns of migration. Men had taken jobs earlier than the female respondents, some of whom had been married first and only joined the labour force after the marriage had broken up, often in their mid-thirties. An older cadre of female respondents had joined the workforce in their late forties and fifties after their mothering role had diminished.
Most of the respondents (61.7 per cent), regardless of gender or age, did not like their present work or would prefer any other kind of job. When they were asked about this, some of them thought the question was either ridiculous or cynical, as conditions on the plantation made the answer so obvious. Those who said they liked their jobs did so with stoical resignation. Preferences for other work ranged from unskilled jobs like office cleaner to skilled work like tailoring and mechanics. Many said that anything which was not as demanding as plantation work would be all right. Some wanted their own farms.
Questions about labour contracts aroused bitter responses, as casual workers were employed by verbal agreement and could be dismissed on the spot. Permanent employees had a written contract, but most of the respondents assumed that they were in the position of the casual employee. It was not clear how they acquired permanent status. It seemed to be based on some sort of managerial preference. There were some cases of workers who had been born on the plantation but were still working on casual terms, which kept the entire household in a precarious situation.
In the coffee region everyone felt insecure; the respondents said that if their jobs were terminated their families would starve and have no roof over their heads. This was a general anxiety with no significant difference according to gender or age. Men and women, young and old, felt forced to remain on the plantation so they could provide for the basic needs of their families. However, some of the men and married women on the tea plantations said that if they lost their jobs they would return to the rural areas where they had some land or relatives.
Responses to questions about the problems encountered in the workplace varied according to gender, age, and class. Young women generally experienced the greatest difficulties, as they struggled to balance and cope with their responsibilities as mothers, wives, wage-earners and, at times, heads of household. Whether single or married, their work left them exhausted and ill-prepared for the next day. At peak season their ability to carry out domestic work was often reduced to a minimum or even to zero. Where there were older children in the family they were sometimes put in charge of the household; occasionally husbands who had regular shift work assisted with the care of children in the evening, though the mother still had to do the heavier chores when she came home from work. The older women felt the physical strains of plantation work more and more as their strength ebbed with age. Some women said they had been victimized by supervisors to whom they refused sexual favours.
One of the central foci of this research was the interaction between the household, the unit of co-residence and reproduction, and the plantation, the unit of production. The compatibility of work schedules and domestic demands was therefore a fundamental question.
The poor living and working conditions and the inadequate wages were clear indications of the failure of collective bargaining. The Kenya Plantation and Agricultural Workers' Union has been a weak and incompetent guardian of the workers' interests. In sharp contrast to the active part the trade unions played in the struggle against colonialism, its current role seemed to be to pacify the workers. This was perhaps inevitable because the union officials were co-opted by the management and imposed on the workers, which meant that they lacked commitment to union ideals and obligations. There seemed to be a covert alliance between the union and the management against the workers. As one of the women said: "The trade union in the plantation is dormant and useless. They have not had cases like we hear of other unions. . . . Their major concerns have been to have workers as members and telling us to be loyal to the employer." The level of participation had actually dropped and the
workers no longer understood the role of the union; most of the respondents thought it should be abolished. Some called for government intervention to revitalize the union but others saw the government as a passive observer in the struggle between labour and capital. One respondent felt there was an urgent need "to get someone who is more learned and powerful and cannot be bribed. The union leaders here are corrupt and semi-literate. The government should also give us a free forum where we can challenge these 'Boers' without intimidation at all."
The study also looked at individual wages and, where applicable, combined wages, income from informal activities, savings and expenditure, employment benefits, statutory deductions, remittances, and credit facilities. The economic base of the plantation worker was the income from her or his wages, augmented during peak season by money for extra hours worked at triple the normal rate. Yet these did not cover all their basic needs on either the tea or coffee plantations. Their food was low in quality and quantity, their children dressed in tatters, and even the very precious hope of education to provide a better life for the next generation often came to nought when they could not meet school fees. Apart from cigarettes and alcohol, there were no luxuries for the men. There were none at all for the women. In other words, their work did not even bring them those things for which they had entered the labour force.
Indeed, many respondents, men and women, had to supplement their wages by petty trading in surplus vegetables (where growing them was not forbidden in monocrop areas) or making and selling handicrafts like mats, kiondo (basket-ware), sweaters, or tablecloths. Others, like mothers with young families, had no time available for these activities and so no way to supplement their income. Those who did were asked whether or not these activities affected their jobs. The responses suggested that it was rather the excessively heavy work and long hours on the plantation that impaired their ability to attend to other things. Those who engaged in extra income-generating activities said they were often so exhausted after their plantation work that they could not see to these activities although they were essential to the household.
The extended household in the rural area also suffered, as there was little to be sent back to the wives, children, and parents there. Though respondents wanted to maintain their kinship ties and obligations, their support was gradually becoming confined to the nuclear households because their income was so meagre. Remittances to the rural areas were therefore rare.
Those remittances that were met on a regular basis revealed rural linkages which were not easily perceived at first. They also indicated new patterns of rural dependence on external economic support and a hidden extended family structure that was persisting although the respondent lived in a nuclear household on a plantation. There was a long history of male migrants sending money back to the wives and children left in the rural areas. The remittances women sent to rural extended families not only showed that they were recognized as having an economic base, however slight, of their own, but sometimes reversed old patterns of female-male dependence as they supported their mothers and even stepmothers, thus shouldering responsibilities normally assigned to their fathers and brothers. Sometimes they actually supported male relatives as well. The remittances to the rural areas often prevented the workers saving, but it was clear that they were regarded as necessary and not to be
put off or ignored. Perhaps they were considered a form of social insurance and security in a precarious situation. Certainly, participation in the workforce would not provide this in old age. The workers' entitlement to be housed ended with their employment. There was said to be a pension scheme available to permanent employees, though this did not come up in the study, as workers who had retired were not included in the survey.
Economic difficulties had led to the creation of credit agencies, which were also agents of poverty. Shops, bars, butcheries, posh mills, and maize stores sold to the workers on credit and recovered the debt through the management each payday. The existing co-operative union served only the senior staff. Although the tea-pickers felt they also needed a co-operative, they lacked the necessary capital and managerial skills. In any case, it was thought that the company would probably not have allowed one to operate, as it seemed to repress any form of organization which might be used against it.
The workers lent each other money in times of crisis, and debts were a common cause of friction among the workers. Money also caused much household tension, though where the workers shared houses the major cause of dissension was always the use of personal effects without consent. The extended family still played an important role in resolving household conflicts. There were also "money sharks" on the plantation who cashed in on the squalid situation, but at an interest rate of 50 per cent the cost of loans from the private sources was prohibitive, and so this source was mainly called on only to meet heavy expenditure such as school fees or emergencies. This dependence on strangers who were not kin was creating new patterns of relationships and interdependence.
If repaying small loans to private individuals or loan sharks was difficult, borrowing from banks, government agencies, and other formal financial institutions was impossible for young and old, male and female: the workers had neither property nor sufficient security of tenure against which to borrow. Their only assured source of credit was an advance or short-term loan from their employers, church leaders, or nyaparas (supervisors).
On the coffee plantations it was rare to find other family members contributing to household income, since most of the families were nuclear and there was only one working adult. Female-headed households in particular had to survive on the one income, as did many households with very young families when the need for intensive child care prevented much informal economic activity. A couple of the female respondents said that "men friends" who came and lived with them for brief periods contributed to household income. This situation, in which the woman was the more permanent occupant of the house, was quite alien to the traditional patriarchal social system.
In most cases, even the combined income from wages, extra cash-generating activities, and contributions from other sources still did not cover essential expenditure on food, clothing, and education. It was surprisingly easy to break down monthly household expenditure, as most respondents knew how much money they spent on various items, partly because wages were paid fortnightly and partly because purchases were few, basic, and recurrent. The heavy expense of school fees was often met by borrowing. Although this was mainly for their own children, many respondents had to support brothers and sisters still in school.
Expenditure on clothing was irregular and infrequent, even for small children. Compulsory school uniforms accounted for much of this. Clothing was bought twice or thrice a year, mostly during the peak season when extra money was available. Many respondents also had to buy clothing for mothers, fathers, wives, and children in the rural areas. In the coffee region this sometimes intermittent form of remittance was one of the few manifestations of extended family exchange and maintenance.
It was impossible for many of the respondents to accumulate any savings. Those who did so in the coffee region had several alternatives for their deposits: the post office savings bank, keeping them at home, or joining a women's welfare savings group. Banks and co-operatives were beyond their reach. The amounts saved were small. Things were slightly different in the tea region, where some workers had invested in livestock to cover school fees: one respondent said that his bank was a goat and a cow. Another respondent said that she wanted to save Ksh50 (US$3.30) per month, but so far had been unable to do so.
In some cases a women's group which functioned as a savings circle had enabled some of the respondents to buy property, which they would never have been able to do otherwise. Women spoke of having purchased, or intending to purchase, a building co-operatively, either as part of a women's group or with their families. Some had plans to acquire some land either Individually or with others. This struggle to acquire an economic base collectively replicated a pattern all over the country, for consciousness of the new power of women's groups had penetrated even the plantation enclave. Though the groups were few there, their goals and achievements were similar to those in rural and pert-urban Kenya. However, those on the plantations were different in that their membership reflected the diverse ethnic origins of the plantation workers. Male respondents saved individually, when they had something to save. There was no sign of group savings among them, which also corresponds to
patterns in the rural and pert-urban areas.
<section>Conclusions</section>
Development meant little to these plantation workers, except in their aspirations for their children, and even these were dampened by the harsh realities of plantation life. Though they were aware of the important economic role of the plantations, which produce the country's most lucrative cash crops, most of them felt that their future was bleak. They that produce Kenya's main source of foreign exchange gain little but their paltry wages from their contribution to their country's development. There was a tremendous gap between their labour input and the wages the workers received. Most complained of heavy-handed oppression and excessive exploitation. The plantations remain enclaves barely touched by the positive policies and progress in the rest of the country. Though they provide employment, the poverty and desolation inherent in the present system call for radical change. It was debatable whether being a plantation worker represented an improvement in the economic
circumstances of the respondents or not. The fact that women were able to have their own economic base and so provide for their children, whether alone or jointly with husbands, was important in practical terms as well as potentially providing a base for eventually increasing their autonomy. The study showed that they were much more likely to be decision-makers when they headed their own households. Yet employment was a mixed blessing for the women, as there were no social support services to alleviate the double burden of productive and reproductive duties.
The quality of the workers' lives was reflected in their health and nutrition. Though all the workers were adversely affected by the extreme poverty there, the women and children suffered most. Pesticides, poor housing, and scanty clothing affected them more. Thus there was a longing for rural life as an alternative that would provide a better environment for health and nutrition.
All the plantation workers suffer from a system of exploitation typical of colonialism, but the women's lives also reflect the continuing influence of patriarchal and patrilineal social and economic relations.
In 1979, conservative government statistics indicated that women headed 40 per cent of the households in Kenya. These households were composed of mothers who had never been married, separated and divorced women, and widows. This situation of the women who arc de jure heads of households was highly visible on the plantation. By implication the study also draws attention to the women left behind as de facto heads of households in rural areas. These women have a new and different role, one which was unknown in Kenyan society before transformations in the structure of the African family caused by colonial and post-colonial land alienation, migration, and the advent of waged employment. Theirs is a new kind of household and one whose significance should be stressed, as it has a bearing on the division of labour, decision-making, and property ownership. Their history, conditions, and prospects need further research as a basis for action to support them in this transition.
The proportion of female heads of households on the plantations was above the national figure of 40 per cent. They were totally dependent on their wages: patrilineal bias has disinherited them as daughters and sisters, and in the absence of traditional or statutory affiliations with the fathers of their children, they have been dispossessed as mothers and wives. The fact that they took refuge in the plantation workforce, where they have the lowest turnover rates, shows how few options they have. Once there, they have nowhere else to go. Women were more visible in the workforce on both the tea and coffee plantations than they were in other sectors of the modern economy, and they remained part of it for longer. The men retired to other places between the ages of 40 and 50, but many female heads of households continued to work and live on the plantation until death. It was rare to find a man over 50 on the plantation, whereas women of 60 could be seen struggling with heavy and
difficult work. The pattern tends to be self-perpetuating: since they own no land to which they can retire, or which their children can inherit, their children, too, may be tied to the camps, destined to become the next generation of plantation workers.
The emerging nuclear family also represents a new type of household formation here. Polygamy and extended families survive, but with the indelible mark of the plantation on them. The polygynous homestead is no longer in one location, and while the extended family alleviates some of the stress of plantation life, plantation life puts a heavy strain on kinship ties. The changing composition and structure of all these household types has important implications for their functioning and the wellbeing of their individual members.
At present there are few data on the situation and problems of plantation workers in Kenya. This study should help to focus national attention on their specific needs. Clearly, action to improve their conditions would raise their productivity and so enhance the sector's contribution to the economy. For example, though both government and management have lamented high labour turnover on the plantations, little research has been done to determine the causes of this. In fact, social and economic conditions on the plantations have deteriorated in comparison to the colonial and post-independence periods. Now the workers suffer the impact of the international economic problems and crises that made the country devalue its currency and the gap between wages and the cost of basic needs has widened. The survey shows many only worked on plantations as a last resort. There is little motivation to go there or to stay there, especially as the remuneration was barely enough for survival.
The fact that women were the most stable workers was an indication of their desperation. The implementation of oft-heard plans to improve the wages and contractual conditions of rural workers would go a long way to create incentives for working on the plantations.
Since the plantation workers fit into neither the rural nor the urban scenario for development planning, a new focus and perspective which includes them should be devised so that workers there can share in the nation's development. They should be singled out as a specific target group for programmes, much as pastoralists, women, those in the informal sector, and small agriculturalists have been identified. This would help to counteract the feeling of futility and isolation that most of them expressed about their situation and enable them to reap the benefits of their productivity.
Both management and the union need to put improving the quality of life of these workers first and foremost on their list of priorities. Unions could utilize the findings of this study to understand the problems of their members better and so strive more effectively for the improvement their conditions and welfare. Apart from its negotiations for maternity leave the Kenya Agricultural and Plantation Workers' Union has yet to make any significant impact on their lives. Most of the workers did not even know of its existence. Some had never heard of the idea of unionization. Members and others who were aware of the union expressed great disappointment at its ineffective performance in disputes. Some of the women suggested it would be stronger if more women participated.
The owners and management of the plantations need to sensitize themselves to the workers' conditions and aspirations as a preliminary to affecting change. Although some have carried out their own research (indeed, Brooke Bond officials thought this study superfluous), there is much they could do to bring the workers into the mainstream of development projects and planning. Housing, nutrition, clothing, and education for the workers and their families need overall upgrading. Such improvements would in part depend on the workers having a greater share, through better wages, in the profits from the crops they produce. It is also necessary to facilitate their participation in projects that would ameliorate their lives: some of their apathy could be alleviated if they were to perceive themselves as active agents of change. The formation of a women's group on Nyakinyua and the efforts of the workers on Kericho plantation to build their own nursery school on a harambee (self-help)
basis were examples of this kind of active involvement. The workers felt powerless since, unlike their rural counterparts, they did not own the land on which they worked, nor did they have the skills or cash base opportunities of urban dwellers. Their continual struggle for survival left them with little hope or energy for projects that might benefit them.
The health status of the workforce is clearly linked to the substandard housing as well as to the effects of pesticides, the monocropping system, and the inadequate wages. Instead of praising the durability of the huts which were built in 1920, the management should make a concerted effort to bring plantation accommodation into line with policies for improved housing. As things stand, housing there remains a starkly visible symbol of the plantation system as a colonial legacy. A multi-sectoral approach is needed to raise health standards among the workers, particularly the women, as this must be the permanent residence of those with no land to return to elsewhere.
Most, if not all, the national education and information programmes usually bypass the plantations. As they arc often designed for either urban dwellers or rural peasant populations, the plantation is excluded by its very nature. The workers there, too, should be able to benefit from and participate in national programmes and other means of positive social change.
The Women's Bureau and other relevant offices should address themselves to the needs of the women there, especially the landless and sole heads of households among them. The needs of the dispossessed, displaced, and alienated sections of the population, as well as the particular requirements of the aged, the young, and women must be incorporated into national planning programmes. Lasting solutions to the problems of squatters must be developed.
At the household level, the research came up with useful information and data on the division of labour and domestic roles that could form the basis for education and motivation towards more equitable co-operation and distribution of tasks. It provides grounds for challenging stereotyped views and beliefs about individual roles and indicates possibilities for reorganization that would lead to the practical recognition of the rights of each member of the household. This in turn should lead to greater household stability. However, it is also necessary to remember that the rural poverty that the workers talked about so much is an aspect of the gross imbalance in development between the urban centres and rural areas in Kenya.
While the plantation economy provides a refuge for those women who cannot survive elsewhere in a patriarchal society, it also provides a clear rationale for modifying the inequalities of patrilineal systems so that women do not have to run to the plantations in desperation. The women of Kenya need improved economic opportunities and a social milieu in which they can take advantage of them. The division of labour within households discriminates against women and the perpetuation of traditional gender roles on the plantations has an unfair and unfortunate impact on them. Their burdens become heavier as they are forced to undertake modern wage employment while the supports traditionally provided by the extended family and a strong sense of community are breaking down.
The study team feels that training and research should go hand in hand in this type of project. The advantages of this were emphasized by the enhanced skills of those who had attended an HGA course. It is also to be hoped that the women who have had training and experience in such projects can be further utilized in the interests of quality research. A situation in which there are trained personnel without projects and project teams without training is a shameful waste in a developing country.
Members of our research team reacted to what they discovered with varying degrees of intensity. Some young members of the team from middle-class backgrounds were moved to tears by the abject social and economic deprivation. Each research assistant recorded her or his impressions: all the reports emphasized the extreme poverty of the plantation worker in general and the situation of the female head of household in particular. Many commented on how much their awareness of gender issues in contemporary society had been raised and their knowledge of conditions in one of their country's most important economic sectors broadened. The project also had a great impact on the respondents. It was a novelty for them; many said that no one had ever bothered to ask them about their lives, thoughts, feelings, or reasons for being on the plantation before. When the management was asked about a sample of women for the interviews, it was immediately assumed that we had come to teach
family-planning techniques. Apparently the only officials who had ever paid the women any kind of attention before were in this field. It took a lot of explanation to clear the air. The respondents were often briefed in groups prior to the interviews in order to change their perceptions of themselves as passive recipients of information to that of active informants who could analyse their own situation. The research involved the coming together of two sections of the population that were usually isolated and insulated from the rest of society. The shared experience was one of discovery for all concerned and we were constantly conscious of its significance.
It sometimes seems that respondents in projects like this are placed under a microscope for the purpose of gathering data but, when the research is finished, their situation remains unchanged. The analysis sits on library shelves among similar studies, but the subjects gain nothing. It is high time that research projects were more action-oriented so that they could effect change, even in a limited way, instead of passively examining it.
<section>Other UNU Press titles of interest</section>
Textile Workers in Brazil and Argentina A Study of the
Interrelationships between Work and Households
by Liliana Acero
In collaboration with Claudia Minoliti, Alejandra Rotania and Irma Nora Perez
Vichich
The two studies presented here investigate how structural changes in industrialization in developing countries influence changes in relationships within households; particularly, how these structural transformations affect the distribution of power between men and women and between age groups within the domestic unit. The studies point to the need for policy makers to consider how new technologies affect the quality of work and life among different occupational categories end between genders.
ISBN 92-808-0753-6; 320 pages; paper
US$35, airmail US$40
Developing country price: US$ 1750
The Demographic Transition and Women's Life-course in Colombia
by Carmen Elisa Flórez N.
In collaboration with Elssy Bonilla C and Rafael Echeverri P.
This comparative study of the impact of recent demographic transition in Colombia on the lives and families of women in rural and urban areas and of different socioeconomic strata analyses the processes of family formation and expansion and the socioeconomic determinants bearing on those processes. The analysis also looks at the relationships between women working and family formation, at how women see their lives and their role in the family, and how gender and age define the household division of labour.
ISBN 92-808-0719-6; 162 pages; paper
US$30, airmail US$35
Developing country price: US$15
Intra-household Resource Allocation: Issues and Methods for Development Policy and Planning
Edited by Beatrice Lorge Rogers and Nina P. Schlossman
Emphasizing the importance of understanding how resources are distributed within the household in order to design successful and effective development programmes, the authors of this 3-part study first consider various conceptual approaches to the subject, examine different methods for collecting the information needed for analysing household resource allocation, and, finally, focus on such key variables as how members allocate time, individual food consumption, and household flexibility in adapting to external economic and social changes.
ISBN 92-808-0733-1; 214 pages; paper
US$35, airmail US$40
Developing country price: US$17.50
This book by women in developing countries on women, the household, and society in developing countries is the synthesis volume of a United Nations University research project on household, gender, and age. The project's aim was the promotion of research on the effects at the micro and macro-levels of significant social/economic changes in developing countries.
In the first part of this volume, the reader is introduced to the life-course and time-allocation approaches that were used in undertaking the research for this study. The second part consists of case-studies on the impact of macro-events on women and households in 7 countries - Colombia, Brazil, Argentina, Chile, Sri Lanka, China, and Kenya. The China study considers first the impact of the 1979 economic reforms on rural women and, in a second part, what micro-level changes have occurred in the lives of 5 Tibetan women as a result of recent social and economic reforms. The final chapter examines the changing structure and dynamics of households on plantations in Kenya.
Unique for its ground-breaking methodological approach and as the first book to contain data on women's life experiences for the range of countries considered, this volume also makes an important contribution to the International Year of the Family (1994).
HGA-3/UNUP-766
ISBN 92-808-0766-5
United Nations Sales No. E.91.III.A.3
04500 P
United Nations University Press
Tokyo, Japan
