<title>Freshwater Resources in Arid Lands</title>
UNU Global Environmental Forum V
Edited by Juha I. Uitto and Jutta Schneider
United Nations University Press
TOKYO - NEW YORK - PARIS
© The United Nations University, 1997
The UNU Global Environmental Forum V, Freshwater Resources in Arid Lands, was organized at the United Nations University Headquarters, Tokyo, 13 June 1996. It was sponsored by Obayashi Corporation.
The views expressed in this publication are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the United Nations University.
United Nations University Press
The United Nations University, 53-70, Jingumae 5-chome,
Shibuya-ku, Tokyo 150, Japan
Tel: (03) 3499-281 1
Telex: J25442
Fax: (03) 3406-7345
Cable: UNATUNIV TOKYO
UNU Office in North America
2 United Nations Plaza, Room DC2-1462-70, New York, NY 10017
Tel: (212) 963-6387
Fax: (212) 371-9454
Telex: 422311 UN UI
United Nations University Press is the publishing division of the United Nations University.
Cover design by Takashi Suzuki
UNUP-982
ISBN 92-8080982-2
The United Nations University is an organ of the United Nations established by the General Assembly in 1972 to be an international community of scholars engaged in research, advanced training, and the dissemination of knowledge related to the pressing global problems of human survival, development, and welfare. Its activities focus mainly on peace and conflict resolution, development in a changing world, and science and technology in relation to human welfare. The University operates through a worldwide network of research and postgraduate training centres, with its planning and coordinating headquarters in Tokyo.
The United Nations University Press, the publishing division of the UNU, publishes scholarly books and periodicals in the social sciences, humanities, and pure and applied natural sciences related to the University's research.
<section>Preface</section>
Juha I. Uitto
The annual United Nations University (UNU) Global Environmental forums have been organized since 1991, with the objective of highlighting issues pertaining to global environmental change and of disseminating research results to a wider public. This function falls squarely within the mandate of the UNU, an autonomous academic organization under the United Nations umbrella. According to its Charter, the UNU shall be an international community of scholars engaged in research, postgraduate training, and dissemination of knowledge on issues that are the pressing global problems of human survival, development, and welfare, including the environment and the proper use of resources. The Charter further states that the University shall disseminate the knowledge gained in its activities to the United Nations and its agencies, to scholars, and to the public, in order to increase dynamic interaction in the worldwide community of learning and research.
The UNU Global Environmental Forum series responds to this mandate given to the University. The previous forums have dealt with various important dimensions of global environmental change and possible strategies to cope with it. The first one, entitled "Monitoring and Action for the Earth," was concerned with new technologies for monitoring and observation of the changes occurring in the terrestrial and oceanic ecosystems. The second forum, in 1993, entitled "Environmental Change in Rainforests and Drylands," analysed case studies from South-East Asia, sub-Saharan Africa, and the Chinese drylands. The third forum's title was posed in the form of a question: "Will Tropical Forests Change in a Global Greenhouse?" It examined the complex and multi-faceted interlinkages between global warming and the sustainability of tropical rain-forest ecosystems and their biological diversity. The fourth forum that took place in 1995 had the theme "Population, Land Management and
Environmental Change," focusing on sustainable management of land and biota in smallholder agricultural regions subjected to increasing pressures from population growth, urbanization, and social and economic change.
The UNU Global Environmental Forum V on "Freshwater Resources in Arid Lands" took place at the UNU headquarters building on 13 June 1996. The present report reproduces the papers presented at the forum in an edited form. It also contains a summary of the panel discussion held with audience participation. The order of the papers has been revised in order to achieve better flow of the text. The first chapter contains the keynote speech by Iwao Kobori, outlining the broad issues involved in the development of freshwater resources for arid lands. The following two chapters, by Daniel Hillel and Mohamed Abdulrazzak, focus on an arid part of the world, the Middle East, where water often is the limiting factor for social and economic development. The chapter by Wang Tao and Wu Wei is concerned with a different, yet equally significant, arid land area in China, and especially the requirements for bringing it into productive use in a sustainable manner. Kimio Osuga presents a
specific technological option for the development of freshwater resources, the underground dam, that is being utilized in small islands facing water shortages in Japan. Finally, Isamu Kayane considers the impact of global climate change on groundwater resources. These chapters are followed by a summary of the panel discussion that took place before the closing of the forum.
The forum was organized with the cooperation of our sister organization, the United Nations Environment Programme's International Environmental Technology Centre (UNEP/IETC). The organization of the forum, like all those held previously, was made possible by the generous sponsorship of Obayashi Corporation.
<section>Opening address</section>
Takashi lnoguchi
Fresh water is essential for human survival and development, yet it is becoming an increasingly scarce resource. Providing drinking water for the world's fast-growing cities and water for irrigation to produce food for the burgeoning population is one of the great challenges facing mankind in the decades to come. Fresh water is distributed very unevenly over the Earth's surface. In the vast arid and semi-arid areas of the world, the supply of fresh water is increasingly precarious. These are often the areas where population growth is the highest. Unsustainable and excessive utilization of underground water, for example for irrigation, has in many instances led to serious ecological disturbances. The water-tables have sunk, and the soils have become salinized and mineralized, with serious social, economic, and health consequences. Furthermore, the world's limited freshwater resources are often shared between two or more nations. When water becomes a scarce resource, it also
becomes a source of conflict. It has been said that water, more than oil, will be the resource around which most conflicts will centre in the next century.
The United Nations system considers water from a number of entry points. It is recognized that fresh water is a critical resource, although an international water convention is still awaited. The policies and actions of the United Nations and its various agencies are guided by Agenda 21, adopted at the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development - the so-called Earth Summit organized in Rio de Janeiro four years ago (UN 1992). One of the all-permeating themes of Agenda 21 is water. Although only one chapter (chap. 18) is directly concerned with the protection of the quality and supply of freshwater resources, virtually all the other chapters dealing with the conservation and management of resources for development deal with water issues. Water is an inseparable aspect of life that determines the potential and possibilities of human activities in an environment. Whether we discuss how to combat deforestation, desertification, and drought, or the sustainable
management of fragile mountain ecosystems, where much of the fresh water available for human consumption is stored and generated, water is an unavoidable theme. Similarly, promotion of sustainable agriculture and rural development are contingent on the efficient and economical utilization of freshwater resources. Needless to say, prevention of the pollution of these precious water resources by toxic chemicals or by hazardous and other wastes is equally important.
In response to the UN system-wide Agenda 21, the UNU prepared its own blueprint for the University's actions to promote environmentally sound development - the UNU Agenda 21 (UNU 1993). The main purpose was for the University to build upon its mandate and strengths to adopt a bold, policy-oriented agenda to develop the human resources and build up the capacity of countries and of the international community to plan and implement the environmentally sustainable development strategies postulated by the Earth Summit.
The UNU Agenda 21 identifies water as a critical resource and directs the University to focus its work on the supply and quality of water for human consumption, as well as for agriculture, energy production, and industry, and for the preservation of biodiversity. It is believed that the UNU, operating at the global level and within a context of academic freedom, should be able to deal with the sensitive political and legal issues arising, for instance, with regard to the sharing of international water bodies, including aquifers and groundwater resources. It is also recognized that the UNU should pay attention to water quality assessment and monitoring, especially in the growing number of large cities in the developing world, which are already experiencing serious water shortages.
The University's current research and training programmes approach water issues by reflecting the above considerations. On the one hand, the UNU is concerned with the management of international water bodies, such as rivers and lakes falling within the jurisdiction of more than one country. This approach combines environmental aspects with those of international politics into a project that we call "Hydropolitics and Eco-Political Decision-Making." The project aims at a comprehensive and objective study of water as a limiting factor for regions sharing major international water bodies, with the view of providing bases for sustainable environmental and political management of the critical resources. The project aims to identify not only the issues in disputes concerning water resources but also alternative scenarios that could lead to the solution of complex problems related to water and environment, and to recommend processes through which the concerned countries are likely
to agree on mutually satisfactory solutions to the problems by sharing resources and benefits. The project is also intended to provide a comprehensive and objective environmental management setting for the sustainable development of international water bodies.
In this context, earlier UNU work has focused on water as a critical resource and a potential source of conflict in the Middle East (Biswas 1994). The project looked into hydropolitics, as well as technological options, for policymaking for sustainable development in the region (Wolf 1995; Murakami 1995). It is generally recognized that the UNU's efforts in this field, especially the 1993 Middle East Water Forum, contributed to the Middle East peace process. In other areas, the UNU has studied the peaceful development, in an environmentally sound way, of major Asian rivers (including the Mekong, Ganges-Brahmaputra, and the Salween) and Central Eurasian waters (including the Caspian Sea and the Aral Sea), and their environmental management and rehabilitation (Glazovsky 1995; Wolf and Biswas 1995).
On the other hand, the UNU's work is concerned with environmental governance, which is the entrance point to the projects on the Asia-Pacific phase of the "International Mussel Watch," and "Environmental Monitoring and Analysis." The goal of the "International Mussel Watch" is to provide an assessment of the status and trends of chemical contaminants in the world's coastal waters. These data are critical for protecting both the health of people who consume seafood and the health of coastal ecosystems. Bivalve molluscs are good monitors for several reasons, including their ability to bioconcentrate chemical contaminants and their sedentary nature, which makes them representative of a specific place. The project on "Environmental Monitoring and Analysis" is concerned with capacity building and implementation of regional monitoring systems for improved data and information. The main part of this project focuses on technology transfer and environmental governance in the East
Asian region. The objective of the project is to standardize and calibrate analytical methodologies in the East Asian region, as well as providing high-level training to scientists in the region. The project focuses on technology and knowledge transfer and capacity building, in instructing participants in the generation of reference materials and analyses for a variety of materials, including water. The ultimate objective will be to contribute to monitoring compliance with international environmental accords and to strengthen national environmental laws and policies as they relate to international environmental obligations.
The theme of today's meeting is Freshwater Resources in Arid Lands. This is the fifth annual UNU Global Environmental Forum organized since the commencement of the series in 1991. The purpose of these forums is to highlight contemporary environmental issues and to disseminate research results to a wider interested public, thereby creating greater awareness of the challenges that lie ahead of us. Today we have brought together a group of internationally renowned experts on the management of freshwater resources, particularly in drylands. I trust that their presentations, and the panel discussion this afternoon that will provide an opportunity for audience interaction, will prove thought-provoking and stimulating.
I would like to take this opportunity to thank Obayashi Corporation for their generous sponsorship of this forum, as well as those that have taken place previously. This, to my mind, provides an excellent example of cooperation between the public and private sectors in working together towards a more sustainable world.
<section>References</section>
Biswas, A.K. (ed.). 1994. International Waters of the Middle East: From Euphrates-Tigris to Nile. Oxford University Press, Bombay.
Glazovsky, N.F. 1995. The Aral Sea basin. In: J.X. Kasperson, R.E. Kasperson, and B.L. Turner 11 (eds.), Regions at Risk: Comparisons of Threatened Environments, 92-139. United Nations University Press, Tokyo.
Murakami, M. 1995. Managing Water for Peace in the Middle East: Alternative Strategies. United Nations University Press, Tokyo.
UN. 1992. Agenda 21. United Nations, New York.
UNU. 1993. Programme on Environmentally Sustainable Development: UNU Agenda 21. Advisory Team Report. The United Nations University, Tokyo.
Wolf, A.T. 1995. Hydropolitics Along the Jordan River: Scarce Water and Its Impact on the Arab-lsraeli Conflict. United Nations University Press, Tokyo.
Wolf, A.T. and A.K. Biswas. 1995. Asian Water Forum: Summary Report. The United Nations University, Tokyo.
<section>Welcoming address</section>
Habib N. El-Habr
Water is a scarce resource. Thus, its development, conservation, management, and utilization is a priority for all of us. Freshwater resources constitute fundamental requirements for advancing the human condition on this planet. In recognizing this reality, the United Nations has given considerable emphasis to assisting nations to use these resources in a rational manner, so that they do not degrade the human environment, they are not depleted in an unsustainable manner, and the ultimate result will be the material well-being of humanity on a global scale. It is for goals such as these that we are all here gathered today.
The United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) has a long and rewarding association with the United Nations University (UNU) on the management of fresh water. UNEP and the UNU have co-organized various forums to discuss the same burning topic that is bringing us here together today. In January 1995 together we sponsored the Asian Water Forum; in March of the same year we gathered in Tokyo and Shiga for the Eurasian Forum, and here today we are again looking at the importance of fresh water in the arid lands. From UNEP's perspective, a major goal is to enhance the economic development process in a drainage basin while at the same time ensuring that the environment - aquatic, atmospheric, and terrestrial - does not suffer significant degradation as a result. Put another way, our goal is the effective management of these systems within the context of sustainable development.
This attitude certainly is not unique to UNEP. It was the major topic of the famous Dublin Conference on Water and Environment in 1992 as well as a substantial focus of the UN Conference on Environment and Development in Rio de Janeiro, and a major component of chapter 18 of Agenda 21 (UN 1992). In broadest terms, the concept of sustainable development encompasses the following:
1. The idea of self-reliant development, i.e. within natural resource constraints;
2. The idea of cost-effective development using non-traditional economic criteria;
3. The perception that development should not degrade the environment nor decrease productivity in the long run;
4. Help for the very poor because they are left with no option other than to destroy their own environment;
5. The issues of health control, appropriate technologies, self-reliance in food, clean water, and shelter for all;
6. Concentrating on the environmental systems at greatest risk, whether they be arid lands, watersheds, moist forests, or urban areas of rapid expansion. UNEP was recently designated focal point for water within the UN Secretariat, an exciting and challenging new role we expect to perform in collaboration with all our UN colleagues, especially the UNU. UNEP will also expect to have proactive working relationships with the institutions you represent, be it universities, laboratories, regional organizations, or private sector, in advancing the serious work you are advocating. I wish you all the best in this endeavour and, on behalf of UNEP, promise our continued support and collaboration.
<section>Reference</section>
UN. 1992. Agenda 21. United Nations, New York.
<section>1: Fresh water - A scarce resource in arid lands</section>
Iwao Kobori
In connection with the importation of useful things and conveniences into towns, one must see to a number of matters. There is the water (problem). The place should be on a river, or springs with plenty of fresh water should be facing it. The existence of water near the place simplifies the water problem for the inhabitants, which is urgent. The existence of (water) will be a general convenience to them.
Ibn Khaldun, The Muqqadimah
<section>Introduction</section>
The International Conference on Water and Environment (ICWE) held in Dublin in January 1992 provided the major input on freshwater problems to the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED), calling attention to the serious problem of optimizing the use of freshwater resources in the years ahead.
The Dublin Statement on Water and Sustainable Development
Scarcity and misuse of freshwater pose a serious threat to sustainable development and protection of the environment. Human health and welfare, food security, industrial development and the ecosystem on which they depend, are managed more effectively in the present decade and beyond than they have been in the past.
The problems highlighted are not speculative in nature; nor are they likely to affect our planet only in the distant future. They are here and they affect humanity now. The future survival of many millions of people demands immediate and effective action.
The conference participants call for fundamental new approaches to the assessment, development and management of freshwater resources, which can only be brought about through political commitment and involvement from the highest levels of government to the smallest communities. Commitment will need to be backed by substantial and immediate investments, public awareness campaigns, legislative and institutional changes, technology development, and capacity building programmes. Underlying all these must be a greater recognition of the interdependence of all peoples, and of their place in the natural world.
The Conference also stated that concrete action is needed to reverse the present trends of over-consumption, pollution, and rising threats from droughts and floods. Recommendations for action at the local, national, and international levels were set out based on four guiding principles:
o Principle No. 1: fresh water is a finite and vulnerable resource, essential to sustain life, development, and the environment.
o Principle No. 2: water development and management should be based on a participatory approach, involving users, planners, and policy makers at all levels.
o Principle No. 3
: women play a central part in the provision, management, and safeguarding of water.
o Principle No. 4: Water has an economic value in all its competing uses and should be recognized as an economic good.
Based on these principles, the Conference developed a series of recommendations that also form a framework for the planning of the International Hydrological Programme.
Freshwater issues also came up at the International Conference on an Agenda of Science for Environment and Development into the Twenty-first Century (ASCEND 21) which was convened by the International Commission for Scientific Union (ICSU) in Vienna in November 1991 in order to make a contribution to the formulation of the future directions of world science as well as to the preparation of UNCED. Amongst the major problems that affect the environment and hinder sustainable development, and that are to be of the highest scientific priority, the problem of water scarcity was also pinpointed. ASCEND recommended, inter alia:
o Strengthened support for international global environmental research and observation of the total earth system;
o Research and studies at the local and regional scale on the hydrologic cycle, impacts of climate change, coastal zones, loss of biodiversity, vulnerability of fragile ecosystems, and on the impacts of changing land use, of waste, and of human attitudes and behaviour;
o Special efforts in education and in building up of scientific institutions, as well as involvement of a wide segment of the population in environment and development problem solving.
After UNCED, Agenda 21 was concluded and chapter 18 (Protection of the quality and supply of fresh water) was presented to all nations concerned. Chapter 18 contains the following text:
Protection of the quality and supply of freshwater resources: Application of integrated approaches to the development, management and use of water resources
18.1 Freshwater resources are an essential component of the Earth's hydrosphere and an indispensable part of all terrestrial ecosystems. The freshwater environment is characterized by the hydrological cycle, including floods and droughts, which in some regions have become more extreme and dramatic in their consequences. Global climate change and atmospheric pollution could also have an impact on freshwater resources and their availability and, through sea level rise, threaten low-lying coastal areas and small island ecosystems.
18.2 Water is needed in all aspects of life. The general objective is to make certain that adequate supplies of water of good quality are maintained for the entire population of this planet, while preserving the hydrological, biological and chemical functions of ecosystems, adapting human activities within the capacity limits of nature and combating vectors of water-related diseases. Innovative technologies, including the improvement of indigenous technologies, are needed to fully utilize water resources and to safeguard those resources against pollution.
18.3 The widespread scarcity, gradual destruction and aggravated pollution of freshwater resources in many world regions, along with the progressive encroachment of incompatible activities, demand integrated water resources planning and management. Such integration must cover all types of interrelated freshwater bodies, including both surface water and groundwater should consider water quantity and quality aspects. The multisectoral nature of water resources development in the context of socio-economic development must be recognized, as well as the multi-interest utilization of water resources for water supply and sanitation, agriculture, industry, urban development, hydropower generation, inland fisheries, transportation, recreation, low and flat lands management and other activities. Rational water utilization schemes for the development of surface and underground water-supply sources and other potential sources have to be supported by concurrent water conservation and
wastage minimization measures. Priority, however, must be accorded to flood prevention and control measures, as well as sedimentation control, where required.
18.4 Transboundary water resources and their use are of great importance to riparian States. In this connection, cooperation among States may be desirable in conformity with existing agreements and/or other relevant arrangements, taking into account the interests of all riparian States concerned.
18.5 The following programme areas are proposed for the freshwater sector:
(a) Integrated water resources development and management;
(b) Water resources assessment;
(c) Protection of water resources, water quality and aquatic ecosystems;
(d) Drinking water supply and sanitation;
(e) Water and sustainable urban development;
(f) Water for sustainable food production and rural development;
(g) Impacts of climate change on water resources.
<section>International efforts</section>
Besides those general reminders, independent organizations have executed their own programmes, for example the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), the World Bank, and the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO). UNEP has been one of the main organs to deal with "desertification" and many other activities including water problems. UNEP is not an executing agency, like the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), but has given many recommendations for research and project-making. Concerning desertification, other agencies such as the United Nations Sudano-Sahelian Office (UNSO) or the Club du Sahel and the Comité Permanent Inter-Etats de Lutte contre la Sécheresse dans le Sahel (CILSS) are also interested in water problems. Needless to say, water shortage is one of the main causes of desertification. FAO, as a representative agency for agriculture, considers water for agriculture as one of the important research items, next to soil.
UNESCO created its Arid Land Programmes (1955-1985) and subsequent global programmes such as the IBP (International Biosphere Programme). The Man and the Biosphere programme (MAB) also includes many topics on arid lands and water.
For potable water and sanitation, the role of the World Health Organization (WHO) and the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) should not be forgotten. Of course, for meteorological data and analysis of climate change, the role of the World Meteorological Organization (WMO) is very important.
Since UNCED, the process of each government's reconsideration of Agenda 21 for individual action plans has become a political issue. Although we achieved consensus about Agenda 21, the subsequent practical actions need much funding from each UN member. Especially on issues such as arid lands, that are addressed in the Agenda's chapter 12 on desertification, we have to overcome various barriers including politico-economic issues.
The United Nations University (UNU) started operations in 1975 and is a young family member in comparison with other UN organs, but it has pursued a good number of programmes from the beginning, and its series of publications and independent books on water issues are well disseminated.
We also have a good team on the subject of arid lands. Recently, a group on hydropolitics has become active in organizing a series of forums on various international water bodies. For this purpose, UNU networks extensively with global academic institutions and individuals. Furthermore, UNU, with its complete academic freedom and neutral atmosphere, should be able to contribute in a useful way within the realm of the UN family.
Besides the international organizations mentioned above, we must refer to international organs such as the Consultative Group for International Agricultural Research (CGIAR), within which we have research centres, such as the International Center for Agricultural Research in Dry Areas (ICARDA) and the International Crop Research Institute for the Semi-Arid Tropics (ICRISAT), that are working for the improvement of crops in arid and semi-arid areas.
If we talk about non-governmental organizations (NGOs), we have several international groups such as IHP (International Hydrological Programme), IWRA (International Water Resources Association), IIID (International Institute of Irrigation and Drainage) and IDDA (International Drylands Development Association), and of course in each region and country there are many associations as well. In Japan, few associations of arid land studies exist, but the liaison committee of the Water Sciences Associations in the Japan Science Council is to coordinate those international and national activities. We must also mention grass-roots activities sponsored by non-profit NGOs who carry out several water-related projects (for example in the Sahel).
Table 1 Global Population and Water Use Trends
Year
Water use
Population (billions)
Water withdrawal per capita (m³/year)
Water withdrawal total (km³/year)
Source
: Raskin et al. (1995).
<section>Fresh water - A limited resource</section>
Fresh water is a fundamental resource, integral to all environmental and societal processes. However, fresh water is only a small component of the total water resources. Lakes, rivers, reservoirs, and groundwater aquifers account for less than one-third of all fresh water, with the rest locked in glaciers and permanent snow covers (Raskin et al. 1995). Arid and semi-arid lands are essentially a diverse group of regions with a variety of social, economic, cultural, and environmental problems, the common feature being a shortage of water at certain times. The danger in treating arid lands as a single geographical region is that an experience in a single arid land might be inappropriately applied to another arid land with dissimilar characteristics.
The mobilization of freshwater resources for human use has grown rapidly during the past century. This growth in water use was closely tied to the Industrial Revolution, which ushered in a period of unprecedented growth in population, consumption and resource use. Referring to table 1, total water use since 1900 has increased by a factor of five, owing to increases in both population and use per capita. Since 1950 alone, global population and water use have more than doubled, while economic output has increased by a factor of five.
The myriad natural and human uses of fresh water are linked by the unitary character of the water cycle (Rogers and Lydon 1995). The use and misuse of water in one location can have far-flung effects, altering downstream resources, affecting the reliability of water flows, and degrading water quality and aquatic ecosystems. As the competition for limited resources increases with expanding water use, water quality often deteriorates and ecosystem maintenance is compromised. In the absence of policies to address these tensions, water competition can evolve into discord between groups dependent on the same resources. Inadequate or degraded water is a matter of life and death in developing regions, where perhaps 25,000 people die daily from water-related diseases. Finally, global climate change has the perilous potential to alter precipitation patterns, to increase the incidence and severity of water problems in coastal areas.
Reconciling the objectives of socio-economic development, environmental quality, and ecosystem preservation into a resilient foundation for the future is the essence of the concept of sustainable development. There are three dimensions to sustainable water development: these are (a) meeting human requirements today and in the future, (b) ensuring water security and conflict resolution, and (c) satisfying ecosystem requirements.
Freshwater resources in arid and semi-arid lands have three components: rainfall, surface water, and groundwater. For these variable water supplies, data collection and analysis are important tasks for enhancing water supplies by such means as irrigation, desalination, precipitation enhancement, and water storage.
Furthermore, management of water resources, especially of interstate aquifers, is an essential issue to the people concerned (from decision makers to farmers). This issue may include hydropolitics on international river basins or lakes.
<section>A personal history</section>
During over 50 years of field research, my concern has always been water problems in arid lands. The reason is very simple: without solving water problems, no progress has ever been made in arid lands. Starting from field experiences in Mongolia, crossing the steppe and desert areas of Eurasia, and on to Africa and the Americas, I have observed many regional critical issues about freshwater resources.
For example, in 1944 in Manchu-Mongolia, I learned about the scarcity of domestic water, including drinking water. In 1956-1957, I observed in situ traditional systems of water harvesting (dew irrigation, flood irrigation. .. ), unique underground water supply systems (qanat or karez), large irrigation systems (Nile, Tigris, Euphrates), and lack of sufficient infrastructure for potable water and sewage. In 1958, when I was able to participate in the first Tokyo University scientific mission to the Andes, the world of cold deserts gave me a comparative view of another area of water problems. In 1961, when I visited the other side of the Jordan River and the Sahara, observations in these extremely arid lands, especially in oases with qanat or foggara, gave me a still ongoing research target.
After those experiences, I organized three missions for the comparative study of subterranean irrigation systems on the old continent of Eurasia (1977-1980 and 1988-1990), and I am now engaged in another Sahara project to look for the influence of technology transfer on the evolution of oases. Since my affiliation with the UNU (from June 1995), I have been engaged mainly in the hydropolitics of international water basins and related environmental issues.
Through those experiences, I learned much about the wisdom of the inhabitants of arid and semi-arid lands and also found several questions to be answered with ongoing development projects.
<section>Traditional wisdom</section>
Dew Irrigation and Flood Irrigation
Using condensed dew water from the surface of piled stones arranged in a circle, arid-land inhabitants were able to cultivate vegetables inside the circle. Constructing small dykes dams in the flood plain, they could catch the flood water and send it to the fields. Those traditional methods can still be seen in Mesopotamia or Arabia.
Qanat
Since 1956, I have been working mainly on this topic. The research field has already covered, inter alia, Xinjiang, Turkmenistan, Iraq, Syria, Jordan, Israel, the Arabian Peninsula, Egypt, Libya, Tunisia, Algeria, Morocco, Majorca, Andalusia, Mexico, Peru, and Chile.
Qanat
is genuine civil engineering to transport groundwater via underground channels to the surface in the villages. The diffusion of qanat (also known as karez or foggara) is found mainly in the arid and semi-arid regions of Eurasia and, to a limited extent, in South America, but the origin of the technique is still obscure. However, even now, in small parts of the Sahara, Iran, Afghanistan, Turfan, and Oman, the system is still useful and operating to get fresh water using only gravity. Nevertheless, because of difficult construction works and the need for much manpower for maintenance, the qanat system is now almost extinct. However, the technique is very sustainable and gentle to the environment. The modernization of digging technology may sustain the qanat system in suitable areas.
<section>Problems of major continental aquifers</section>
There are enormous aquifers to be exploited in the Sahara and the Arabian Peninsula. For those aquifers, especially the Sahara ones, UNESCO and FAO have done continuous research since the 1960s (Tunisia, Algeria), and the Observatory of the Sahara and Sahel (OSS) has recently started an enormous monitoring network that includes all available, already existing, national and international monitoring stations. Generally speaking, the problem of the continental aquifer is the number of years that the groundwater can be exploited.
The problem can be illustrated by the following example. The search for alternative water sources has led the country of Libya to pursue an ambitious plan, using the continental aquifer for one of the longest long-distance water transfers, from the middle of the Libyan Sahara to coastal cities along the Mediterranean - a project that is now partially completed and that will exploit the fossil groundwater by focusing on water demand while disregarding its non-renewability.
<section>The Aral crisis - Ecocide in arid lands</section>
Although I have seen many arid lands, my observations at Mouinak on the southern shore of the Aral Sea made the biggest impression on me. Because of misuse of water in the Amudaria and Syrdaria rivers (that is, excessive construction of canals to irrigate cotton fields since the 1960s), the influx from the two rivers to the Aral Sea decreased dramatically and fishermen were obliged to abandon their livelihoods. Abandoned fishing boats remain on the dried-up beach as historical ruins. A decrease in water and a shortage of drainage canals produced saline soils, and, during the windy season, the salt is blown toward the surrounding villages. The mortality rate of children is very high, and the shortage of fresh water gives the inhabitants desperate sanitary conditions. This is one of the worst man-made degradations in arid lands. The urgent need for the Aral area - fresh water!
It may be difficult to restore the sea level to the elevations of the early 1960s. The best way for the international community to help the people may be to cooperate for the rehabilitation of degraded lands and to support the establishment of a freshwater supply for the inhabitants. For this purpose, experts from the Japan International Cooperation Agency (JICA) are now carrying out a feasibility study around Nukus on the possibility of utilizing fresh groundwater as a drinking-water supply.
<section>Hydropolitics along the Jordan river basin and the Dead Sea</section>
Although the area is not so vast, one of the world's most acute freshwater issues will be the Israel-Palestine one. To be sure, since 1993 when the Peace Treaty was signed, bilateral communication has been improving and traffic between Israel and Jordan is now open. However, despite the transboundary Jordan River Project (which includes the Yarmouk River), the imbalance of the water supply between Palestinians and Israelis presents a big problem for the future. The recent Israeli Jordanian rapprochement included an agreement on rights to the Jordan and Yarmouk rivers, paying no heed to Palestinian rights to these waters. The Peace Treaty represents a further denial of the Palestinian water needs, and only exacerbates Palestinian fears that their minimal water requirements will remain unmet.
The Palestinian-Israeli water dispute could be resolved - but only if the issues of water allocation, water supply, and water conservation are addressed as an interrelated whole. Each party's rights, needs, and interests must be met; if they are not, any settlement will prove to be unsustainable. In terms of rights, the needs and interests of Palestine must be met, because water availability currently fails to meet even minimal requirements for social and economic well-being (Issac and Selby 1996).
Also, from early in the twentieth century there has been the ambitious plan to divert water from the Mediterranean to the Dead Sea. This kind of megaengineering is now feasible with the use of new technology. For example, an important contribution on this topic of a Mediterranean Sea-Dead Sea canal, using newly developed reverse osmosis technology, has been proposed recently (Murakami 1995). However, we have not yet done an environmental assessment, and the fundamental issue in the region remains the imbalance of the water supply.
<section>Conclusions</section>
We now have a large variety of advanced technologies. In connection with water resources, progress in remote sensing technology and geographic information systems (GIS) is giving us more global access to hidden resources. Progress in environmental engineering gives us more chances to recycle used and waste water. Desalination technology is advancing quickly, and utilization of solar energy for water lifting is a dream no more.
However, the scarcity of fresh water in arid lands is an inescapable reality. Under those physical circumstances, the legal aspects of water rights are very complicated. In some regions, there is no perception of the economic value of irrigation water. Furthermore, women carry a disproportionately high burden in transporting water in arid lands. To meet the rapid growth of the world population, we are now obliged to spend more efforts to conserve precious freshwater resources for our children. This is a matter not only of technical decision-making but also of political decision-making for the eternal peaceful use of fresh water. In this sense, international and national organizations concerned with freshwater resources are now becoming very important and responsible. On every level (global, continental, zonal, regional, national, local), we have to learn from our ancestors' wisdom and combine it with today's sophisticated technology to meet the challenge of sustainable
development of freshwater resources.
<section>References</section>
Issac, J., and J. Selby. 1996. The Palestinian water crisis: Status, projection and potential for resolution. Natural Resources Forum 20(1): 17-26.
Murakami, M. 1995. Managing Water for Peace in the Middle East: Alternative Strategies. United Nations University Press, Tokyo.
Raskin, P., E. Hansen, and R. Margdis. 1995. Water and Sustainability: A Global Outlook. Stockholm Environment Institute, Stockholm.
Rogers, P., and P. Lydon (eds.). 1995. Water in the Arab World: Perspectives and Prognosis. Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass.
<section>2: Negev: land, water, and civilization in a desert environment</section>
Daniel Hillel
<section>Introduction</section>
In antiquity the desert was regarded as a world unto itself, an extraterritorial realm separate from and additional to the other two known realms - the seas and the habitable rain-fed lands. The settled and "civilized" residents of the latter viewed the nomadic and "wild" people of the desert with fear and hostility, perceiving them to be a threat to civilization - as, indeed, they often were. The desert itself was held in awe as a place of terror, a largely useless and dangerous domain. One ventured into its mysterious vastness only at great risk. The desert's forbidding character has also been a challenge: a defiance of civilized mankind's self-proclaimed mastery of the earth; a barrier to human expansion, to progress, to economic development; a fortress holding out against colonization, against life itself.
But just what do we mean by the term desert? In what sense does it differ from what is commonly called an arid zone? Aridity in general is an imbalance between the demand for water and its supply, the supply being too scarce to meet the demand. Obviously, there can be different degrees of aridity. Such are the vagaries of climate that even so-called humid regions can experience occasional drought and even prolonged dry spells, though a humid region, by definition, is one in which annual precipitation is generally sufficient to sustain crop plants and, at times, may even be excessive. A semi-arid region is one in which precipitation is sufficient in most seasons but in which droughts (causing crop failure) occur frequently enough to make rain-fed farming a somewhat hazardous venture. An arid zone is one in which rain-fed farming is marginal successful in a few years but so frequently unsuccessful as to make the practice of rain-fed farming a highly insecure venture.
In arid regions, ironically, the crop plants' requirements for water are greatest just where the supplies by natural precipitation are the least. In such regions, therefore, the scales are weighted heavily against agriculture from the outset. The imbalance must be rectified by augmentation of water supply (i.e. irrigation), whenever possible, and by strict water conservation at all times. Despite the ever-present hazard of drought, farming populations can and do exist there, however precarious their economy. Extensive grazing - in addition to crop production and, occasionally, in preference to it - becomes a major form of land use in such areas.
The situation is fundamentally different in real desert areas, which are extremely arid. Here, even the precipitation in an average year - let alone in a drought - is definitely insufficient to sustain agricultural crops, so regular rain-fed farming is impossible. Hence, the biblical definition of the desert as "the land unsown." Even extensive grazing is marginal or submarginal. For humans to subsist in a desert without having to import most of their vital requirements, they must devise ingenious stratagems to obtain supplementary supplies of water, either by wresting the precious fluid from underground aquifers, if available, or by collecting it off the slopes of barren ground during brief episodes of rainfall, or by conveying it from another region. Only by such means can agriculture become possible, and then only on a fraction of the land area.
<section>Civilization in the Negev</section>
Though the word is derived from the Latin term for "deserted" or "abandoned," deserts are not totally useless wastelands. In fact, some deserts were settled by extraordinarily diligent and ingenious people, who proved that civilization can be established even in extremely difficult circumstances. Evidence of such civilizations can be found in the American South-West, in North Africa, in Arabia, in Jordan, and - notably - in the Negev Desert of southern Israel.
In the original Hebrew, the name Negev denotes dryness. As deserts go, it is rather small, constituting only a minuscule part of the great desert belt of North Africa and South-West Asia. Being on the fringe of this desert belt, much of the Negev is not an exceedingly dry desert. The mean annual rainfall varies from 200 mm in the north-west to about 25 mm in the far south, and is confined to the winter months, November to April. The distribution of rainfall within the rainy season is highly irregular, and the total seasonal amount fluctuates widely from year to year.
The Negev's historical importance derives from its geographical position as a narrow land bridge connecting Asia and Europe on the one hand, with Africa (Egypt) on the other. Hence, it has always served as a crossroads of trade and traffic between the continents. The advantages of controlling the region, however, were frequently offset by the disadvantages. The same routes that made trade possible and opened up cultivable areas to civilized settlement in times of peace were the ones followed by invading armies in times of war.
Moreover, neighbouring desert nomads were always ready to plunder the settled land and its inhabitants. Thus, to the difficulties posed by the paucity of water, the erodible soil, and the fragile vegetation, was added the requirement of constant vigilance against the danger of encroachment by hostile forces.
The long history of human habitation in the Negev began, evidently, during the Chalcolithic Age, and continued, intermittently, throughout the Bronze and Iron Ages. It includes the early Israelite period, as reflected in the biblical accounts of King Solomon and his Judaean successors - Asa, Jehoshaphat, and Uzziah. Some time after the destruction of the Kingdom of Judah by the Babylonians (in the sixth century before the Christian era [B.C.E.]), a new nation took possession of the Negev - the Nabateans. They built a magnificent civilization there, the achievements of which excite the imagination and admiration of visitors to the region to this day. Starting as nomadic traders, the Nabateans in time became superb architects and engineers, as well as expert hydrologists and diligent cultivators.
The Nabatean domain lay astride the important ancient trade routes between Arabia in the south and Syria in the north, and between the Orient, including India, and the Mediterranean world. These were the routes along which camel caravans transported spices and silks, ivory and incense, frankincense and myrrh, and medicinal herbs- commodities as prized in antiquity as are perfumes, cosmetics, and drugs today. Spices were more highly prized then than now, not so much because people in ancient times had preferred stronger tastes than we do, but because canning, refrigeration, and other means of food preservation that we take for granted were then unknown, and food could quickly become inedible without a heavy dosage of spice.
Caravans passing through the desert needed stopping places where they might rest and obtain water and provisions. To secure and supply their trade, the Nabateans therefore had to establish and maintain regularly spaced bases along their main routes, at important crossroads with secure sources of water. These bases gradually grew into permanent self-supporting villages and eventually into towns, and the Negev became more densely populated than ever before. Although the Nabateans' capital, the fabled red city of Petra, was built in the Edomean mountains (in what is today the Kingdom of Jordan), their population was centred in the Negev, where they built six major cities and numerous smaller villages. To maintain a population of many thousands, the Nabateans perforce had to develop agriculture in order to ensure a livelihood for their people. The same population continued even after the Romans annexed the region and made it a frontier province. And after the division of the
Roman Empire and the establishment of Byzantium, the entire eastern realm of the empire enjoyed a period of stability. The Negev became still more densely populated, and the technical achievements of the era surpassed even those of the Nabateans when they were independent.
The eclipse of that civilization in the Negev came in the seventh century. Following the Moslem conquest in 636 C.E., the disruption of the old order and its links to the Mediterranean world caused the population to dwindle. Desert nomads took over and ushered in a long period of retrogression and poverty. Where thousands once prospered, a few hundred now eked out a bare subsistence. Magnificent monuments were prised apart, or crumbled gradually into haphazard heaps of stone. Great cisterns were choked by dust, and strongly built dykes were loosened by time and left unrepaired. Complete farm systems were left untended and allowed to disintegrate. Overgrazing the dry stream beds caused erosion, so that the formerly wide bottomlands irrigated by waterspreading methods became narrow, gouged-out gullies. Terraces once green with crops were left high and dry while torrential floods rushed uncontrolled through breached dykes and scoured the creeks. Thus, the best efforts and
experience of generations of diligent people were wasted by neglect and abuse. The casual visitor to the Negev finds it difficult to understand how the ancients could have developed so grand a civilization in the midst of such barrenness. Only a careful study of their techniques can reveal the answer.
<section>Freshwater utilization</section>
Permanent rivers are totally absent in the Negev, and even springs or proper locations for digging shallow wells are few and far between. Hence, the major source of water for humans and animals could only be the collection of surface run-off obtained from sloping ground during winter rains, a task that has been called "water harvesting." The ability to collect and store potable water from runoff was the first imperative of desert settlement. This was done by means of cisterns, which are artificially constructed reservoirs filled by directed surface flows during each infrequent rainstorm. Building efficient cisterns became possible after the advent of watertight plaster, the recognition of suitable rock formations, and the proper construction of channels to collect and divert overland flow.
Where cisterns could be located along the rim of a natural watercourse, they were filled by flash floods. However, most cisterns in the Negev were hewn into hillsides and depended on the direct collection of run-off. Many hundreds of such cisterns were built in the Negev, and they are clearly discernible landmarks even today. A typical hillside cistern resembles a giant necklace, with the glistening white pile of excavated rock seeming to hang as a pendant from the two collection channels that ring the hill and curve down its sides from opposite directions. To the thirsty ancient traveller, to whom these cisterns beckoned from afar, no sight could be more gladdening.
Run-off water was also used for irrigating crops. The run-off from winter rains falling on adjacent slopes was gathered and directed to bottomland fields for periodic soakings, to accumulate and store sufficient moisture in the soil to produce crops. Although the Negev's average winter rainfall is only about 100 mm, the run-off farmers were able to gather and concentrate sufficient run-off from the barren slopes to develop intensive agriculture in the depressions and bottomlands, which constituted only some 5 per cent of the total area in the northern Negev Highlands subregion.
This ingenious type of agriculture is called "run-off farming." Whereas farmers in more humid regions aim to have the soil absorb all the rain where it falls, thus preventing run-off, the desert farmers worked on the opposite principle: their aim was to prevent the rain from penetrating the soil on the slopes, so as to produce the maximum possible amount of run-off. They then collected this run-off from a large area of slopes and directed it to a relatively small cultivated area in the bottomlands.
The cultivated area was usually divided into small field plots, which were levelled and terraced to ensure the efficient spreading of water as well as the conservation of both water and soil. The oldest version of run-off farming probably consisted of terracing the small creek beds that collected the run-off naturally. Terracing transformed the entire length of each creek into a continuous stairway, with stairs perhaps 10-40 metres wide and 20-50 centimetres high. The terrace walls were designed to spread the flood and to prevent erosion. The slowed-down cascade from one terrace to the next could thus irrigate the field plots sufficiently for a crop to be grown. Distinct groups or series of terraced plots, having definable catchment areas and surrounded by stone walls, formed integral farming units of perhaps several hectares of cultivated land. The remains of hundreds of such farm units are spread throughout the Negev Highlands, most commonly around the principal ancient
towns.
Detailed observation of ancient run-off farm units reveals that each unit was served by a particular well-delineated portion of the watershed. An elaborate system of conduits was constructed to collect run-off from specific sections of the adjacent slopes, not merely for each farm but, indeed, for each terraced field within the farm. The complete farm unit comprised both the slope catchment (the run-off-contributing area) and the bottomland fields (the run-off-receiving area). Fields could be made productive only if associated with a catchment from slopes, since the meagre rainfall alone was far from sufficient for any crop. The larger the catchment, the greater the water supply one could expect and the corresponding plot of land that could be irrigated. Clearly defined catchment areas, allocated to serve particular farm units, constituted "water rights," as specified in the ancient documents found in the region.
Typical farm units consisting of 0.5-5 hectares were associated with 10-150 hectares of sloping watershed. The ratio of run-off-contributing catchment to runoff-receiving crop land varied from 20:1 to 30:1. If each hectare of sloping land contributed only 10 per cent of its annual rainfall of 100 mm, then the receiving crop land would have gotten approximately 25 x 10 mm = 250 mm. Added to its own reception of the annual 100 mm of rainfall, the plot would thus have received a total of 35 mm, just enough to produce a crop. If, however, the run-off yield constituted 20 per cent of annual rainfall, the amount of water received by the field could equal 500 plus 100, for a total of 600 mm, an amount equivalent to the rainfall of the relatively humid habitats along the Mediterranean coast of Israel.
The fraction of rainfall yielded by any given watershed varied, of course, from rainstorm to rainstorm and hence from year to year. Gentle showers contributed practically no run-off, whereas intense squalls might yield 30 per cent or more of their rain. So, even with all the alertness, ingenuity, skill, and diligence they could muster, the run-off-farmers of the Negev operated a risky business and had to face new uncertainties each season. It is all the more remarkable, therefore, that they were able to cope with all the difficulties and to sustain a viable agricultural economy for so long on such a scale. That scale is worth emphasizing: during its period of maximal development in the Byzantine era, the system of run-off farming encompassed practically all of the usable land in the northern Negev Highlands.
The Negev run-off farmers apparently did more than merely gather natural runoff: we have clear evidence that they actually tried to induce more of it. The hillsides in the Negev, as in many other deserts, are naturally strewn with a pavement of stones and gravel, and this covering inhibits and detains the flow of run-off over the surface. The ancient Negevites deliberately cleared the stones off the slopes and thus smoothed the surface and exposed the finer soil, to facilitate the formation of a self-sealing crust. Consequently, we find countless heaps, mounds, and strips of gravel on many hillsides, particularly in the vicinity of the old towns of Shivta, Ovdat, and Nitzana. Our own field trials in that region have shown that the practice of removing the surface gravel can increase the run-off yield by 8-20 per cent.
The ancient Negev dwellers also carried out larger-scale works to divert flood water from regional streams onto adjacent flat lands. However, such works were inherently more difficult to construct and maintain. Moreover, because of the totally unpredictable and occasionally violent nature of the flash floods, the harnessing of such floods was fraught with much greater risk than the handling of small and controllable flows off hillsides.
The ancient desert civilization of the Negev, however remarkable, is not entirely unique. Other deserts in the Middle East and elsewhere witnessed similar (though not identical) developments. One example is that of the Anasazi (Pueblo) Indians of the American South-West. Though removed in space and time from the Nabateans, the Anasazi had to contend with similar environmental conditions. The Anasazi (meaning "Ancient Ones" in Navajo) developed from about 100 C.E. in the area where the boundaries of Arizona, New Mexico, Colorado, and Utah intersect. The early Anasazis supplemented hunting and wild-seed gathering with the cultivation of maize, pumpkins, and beans. Later, hunting and gathering were abandoned and agriculture became the major occupation, and this included the production of cotton. The Anasazi developed a system of run-off utilization that resembled that of the Negevites to a remarkable degree.
Notwithstanding its early success, the Anasazi civilization began to decline in the twelfth century. Not much later, these remarkable people abandoned their great cliff houses, storage pits, and ceremonial chambers, and no one to this day is quite sure why. The demise may have resulted from the incursion of nomadic tribes from the north. Another possibility is that denudation of the catchments may have led to depletion of game and to accelerated erosion, gullying, and subsequent lowering of the water-table, all of which might have reduced the productivity of the land. More plausibly, the Anasazi may have succumbed to the worst enemy of all people living in arid regions - a severe and prolonged drought. The Anasazi system of run-off farming and grain storage was capable of coping with short-term periods of dryness, but probably could not survive a decades-long span of water deficiency. Such a prolonged drought would have been especially debilitating if it were preceded by an
extended period of abundance and prosperity, during which the population might have grown beyond the number that could be sustained indefinitely in such a basically arid region.
<section>Conclusions</section>
Whatever the circumstances attending the decline of the ancient civilizations of the desert, the basic principles of their pioneering methods of land and water husbandry may well be relevant today. In many of the desert fringelands around the world, where more people than ever are now struggling with the age-old problems of aridity, the old principles can be adapted and applied to great benefit. Much can be done to improve water harvesting and storage by means of modern technology. Power-driven earth-shaping machinery can be used to build parallel dykes across the slope, and to direct and spread overland flow. Moreover, stable chemical agents can be used to seal, waterproof, and stabilize run-off-yielding surfaces, as well as water reservoirs. Provision can be made for the eventuality of drought by storage of water and grain, by conservation and judicious tapping of underground water resources (aquifers) for supplementary irrigation, and by keeping range-land reserves.
We end with a word of caution. Modern means should be employed with great care, so that the localized utilization of land and water resources in restricted areas for the benefit of humans will not endanger the larger desert environment with its inherently fragile ecology and diverse biota. Humanity and nature can and must coexist, in the desert as elsewhere.
<section>Bibliography</section>
Evenari, M., L. Shanan, and N. Tadmor. 1971. The Negev: The Challenge of a Desert.
Harvard University Press, Cambridge, Mass.
Hillel, D. 1982. Negev: Land, Water, and Life in a Desert Environment. Praeger, New
York.
Hillel, D. 1992. Out of the Earth: Civilization and the Life of the Soil. University of
California Press, Berkeley.
Hillel, D. 1994. Rivers of Eden: The Struggle for Water and the Quest for Peace in the Middle East. Oxford University Press, New York.
<section>3: The future of freshwater resources in the Arabian peninsula</section>
Mohamed Abdulrazzak
<section>Introduction</section>
Throughout history, the unavailability of water in the Arab world has affected the lives and livelihood of inhabitants. A remarkable variety of adjustments to water supply fluctuations and deficits have been made by indigenous people over the years. More recently, however, socio-economic development, high population growth, the availability of modern water pumping and irrigation technology, as well as expanded urbanization and agricultural activity, have placed substantial strains on the water resources, particularly in the countries of the Arabian Peninsula, namely Bahrain, Kuwait, Qatar, Oman, the United Arab Emirates, Saudi Arabia, and Yemen. High population growth in combination with increases in per capita water consumption have contributed to increases in water consumption. The population in the countries of the Arabian Peninsula has increased almost twofold during the period 1970-1990, from 17.8 to 33.5 million. This number is expected to reach 45.5 and 95.6 million,
respectively, by the years 2000 and 2025, as shown in table 1 (UN 1994).
An important aspect of the region's water supply shortage is the fact that all the countries are situated in arid and extremely arid zones. These areas are characterized by large variability in rainfall, limited renewable groundwater resources, problems with groundwater salinity, and the absence of rivers and lakes.
The intensive use of groundwater resources from shallow and deep aquifers to meet rising demand has led to further exploitation of water resources in excess of natural renewability and has contributed towards water-quality deterioration, especially in the coastal zones. This has compelled all the countries, with the exception of Yemen, to invest in the construction of sea-water desalination plants. By necessity, desalination has become a major component of the water-supply system in these countries for providing water to satisfy domestic requirements. Competition among sectors over utilization of available groundwater sources in some of the countries has created water deficits. Rising demand is not only placing pressure on water resources, especially the most easily accessible sources, but also brings about an entirely new progression of environmental concerns and their associated development costs.
Table 1 Population Growth (millions) of the Arabian Peninsula Countries
Year
Country
Saudi Arabia
Kuwait
Bahrain
Qatar
UAE
Oman
Yemen
Total
Source
: United Nations (1994).
Overcoming future water-supply limitation problems and increasing water demand in all countries of the Arabian Peninsula requires the implementation and enhancement of water-management practices and investment in efficient low-cost water-desalination and waste-water-treatment technologies to provide additional sources. Efficient management of water resources in each of the countries of the Arabian Peninsula may include supply-and-demand control, strengthening of both institutional arrangements and capacity building, and integrated planning, in order to formulate and implement water policies and strategies. In this paper, the water supply-and-demand situation in the Arabian Peninsula is examined, and options for reducing water deficits are suggested.
<section>Water resources</section>
The countries of the Arabian Peninsula have similar physiographic, social, and economic characteristics, including extremely arid climates, sparse natural vegetation, and fragile soil conditions. The natural water resources consist of limited quantities of run-off resulting from floods, groundwater in the alluvial aquifers, and extensive groundwater reserves in the deep sedimentary aquifers. The supplementary non-conventional sources include desalination of sea and brackish water, and renovated waste water. Water availability is governed by rainfall distribution in time and space, in relation to run-off generation, as well as topographic and geological features that influence water movement and storage.
The peninsula is largely desert with the exception of the coastal strips and mountain ranges. The climate is characterized by long, hot, dry summers and short, cool winters for the interior regions, and hot, somewhat more humid, summers and mild winters for coastal regions. Hydrometeorological parameters exhibit great variation: seasonal temperatures may range from -5° to 46°C in the north, central, and eastern parts of the peninsula. The coastal areas and mountainous highlands have lower and less extreme temperatures, ranging from 5° to 35°C. Humidity is generally low in the interior, ranging from 10 to 30 per cent, while in the coastal areas it may range between 60 and 95 per cent. The low percentage of cloudy days and the high solar radiation over the region result in high evaporation rates. The total annual potential evaporation ranges from 2,500 mm in the coastal areas to more than 4,500 mm inland.
The Arabian Peninsula generally has scanty and irregular rainfall. The average annual rainfall ranges from 70 to 130 mm, except in the mountain ranges of southwestern Saudi Arabia, Yemen, and southern Oman, where rainfall may reach more than 500 mm. Average rainfall has little meaning, however, since many desert areas receive no rainfall for months or years owing to extremely random storm patterns. Rainfall throughout the area is generally governed by regional Mediterranean and Indian subcontinental aircirculation patterns. Cyclonic lifting associated with the eastward passage of depressions from the Mediterranean region causes winter rainfall in the months of November and April over the northern and eastern parts of the peninsula. Spring rainfall sometimes occurs over the central and south-western parts of Saudi Arabia, Yemen, and Oman. The Indian subcontinent monsoons influence the weather over the southern region of the peninsula, resulting in summer rainfall that occurs
mostly over the southern parts of Saudi Arabia, Oman, the United Arab Emirates, and most of Yemen. All these circulation patterns are modified by local topographic relief and distance from the sea. In general, rainfall amount decreases sharply with distance from the sea and in a northerly direction. The steep relief of the mountain ranges in the Asir High-lands in south-western Saudi Arabia, the Sarat Mountains in western Yemen, and the Hajar and Dhofar mountains in the southern regions of Oman that run parallel to the Red Sea and the Gulf, usually causes orographic rainfall that frequently leads to flash flooding, particularly in the summer months. Most rainfall in these areas is of high intensity and short duration, producing a large volume of surface run-off that gathers in wadis and stream beds that are normally dry. Run-off is then utilized directly for irrigation, and/or is impounded behind dams and later released for flood-plain irrigation and for increasing recharge
to the alluvial aquifers beneath the wadi channel.
The main topographic features of the Arabian Peninsula are the western, southwestern, and south-eastern mountain ridges, as well as the central plateau. The mountain ridges divide numerous moderate-sized drainage basins that empty towards the Red Sea, Arabian Sea, and the Gulf of Oman, as well as larger basins that drain towards the central plateau and, in some cases, continue eastward towards the Gulf. Generally, the coastal drainage basins have steep reliefs and narrow coastal plains compared with the mild slope and large catchment area of the inland region. Steep slopes and well-defined topographic features control the availability of surface run-off as well as the modes of groundwater recharge. The remainder of the peninsula is characterized by low relief and poor drainage.
The other major features that influence the availability of groundwater resources are the peninsula's igneous and metamorphic basement rock known as the "Arabian Shield," and the sequences of sedimentary layers known as the "Arabian Shelf," shown in figures 1 and 2. The shield, which covers one-third of the peninsula, consists of an outcrop of hard rock that begins in the western part of Saudi Arabia and extends from the Gulf of Aqaba in the north to the Gulf of Aden in the south. The shield has limited groundwater stores in the alluvial deposits of wadi channels, and weathered joints and fracture zones.
The dependable groundwater reserves are those stored in the thick extensive sequences of sedimentary formations of the Arabian Shelf, underlying two-thirds of the peninsula, as shown in figure 2. The outcrops of these formations, where recharge may take place, are located in the western part of the peninsula. The formations slope gently, and increase in thickness, as they extend eastward under the Gulf, north-easterly into Jordan and Iraq, and south-west to Yemen. In combination with rainfall distribution, these topographic and geological features control surface and groundwater availability and use in different parts of the peninsula.
Surface Water
Run-off occurs mainly in the form of intermittent flash floods, and is governed by rainfall patterns and topographic features over the Arabian Peninsula. Intermittent surface run-off volume in the peninsula is estimated at 5.3 billion cubic metres (bcm) (Abdulrazzak 1995; Saad 1995; Bahrain Country Report 1995; Qatar Country Report 1995; UAE Country Report 1986; Yemen Country Report 1995). Run-off variation and utilization in each country of the peninsula is shown in table 2. The annual run-off volume generated in south-western Saudi Arabia and Yemen is estimated to be 1,450 million cubic metres (mom) and 1,200 mcm, respectively. The national totals for Saudi Arabia (Authman 1983; BAAC 1980) and Yemen (Mohamed 1986; Al-Fusail et al. 1991; Yemen Country Report 1995) are estimated at 2,230 mcm and 2,000 mcm, respectively. Amounts of surface water available in Oman (El-Zawahry and Ibrahim 1992) and the United Arab Emirates (Al-Asam 1992; Uqba 1992; UAE Country Report 1986) were
estimated at 918 mcm and 125 mcm, respectively. The remaining countries have only negligible amounts of surface run-off.
In general, utilization of surface run-off is directed towards traditional flood irrigation, especially in the south-western region of Saudi Arabia and most of Yemen. Also, regulated and unregulated flood flow is the main source of groundwater recharge to the aquifers. Approximately 195 dams of various sizes, with a combined storage capacity of 475 mcm, have been constructed in Saudi Arabia for the purposes of flood protection and groundwater recharge. Fifty-two dams have been (or are being) constructed in Yemen, the United Arab Emirates, and Oman.
<section>p21.jpg Figure 1 General Geological Map and Aquifers of the Arabian Peninsula (Source: Modified after MAW 1984)</section>
<section>p22.jpg Figure 2 Schematic Geological Section of Deep Aquifers (Source: MAW 1984)</section>
Table 2 Water Resources in the Arabian Peninsula
Country
Area (km²)
Average annual rainfall(m)
Run-off(mcm)
Shallow groundwater reserves(mm)
Run-off utilization (mcm)
Groundwater recharge (mcm)
Groundwater use (mcm)
Desalination (mcm)
Waste-water reuse (mcm)
Saudi Arabia
Kuwait
Bahrain
Qatar
United Arab Emirates
Oman
Yemen
Total
Sources
: Saad (1995), Abdulrazzak (1995), UAE Country Report (1986), Bahrain Country Report (1995), Qatar Country Report (1995) and Yemen Country Report (1995).
Shallow Alluvial Aquifers
Alluvial deposits along the main wadi channels and the flood plains of drainage basins make up the shallow groundwater system in the peninsula. Groundwater in the shallow aquifers is the only renewable water source for these countries. The shallow aquifers in the eastern part of the peninsula, particularly in the United Arab Emirates and Oman, are generally thicker and wider than in the west, while alluvial thickness in the inland basins is greater than in those of the coastal basins. Alluvial aquifer thicknesses generally range from 20 to 200 metres, with the exception of the coastal areas of Oman where thicknesses may reach 400 metres. The width of these alluvial aquifers may range from a few hundred metres to several kilometres. The widths of the aquifers decrease in a southerly direction for basins on both the western and eastern coasts. The coastal alluvial aquifers are subject to salt-water intrusion, especially on the Gulf, owing to extensive groundwater withdrawals.
Shallow aquifer water quality is generally good, with total dissolved solids ranging from 300 ppm to 3,000 ppm. Combined reserves of the alluvial aquifers shown in table 2 are estimated at 131 bcm (Abdulrazzak 1992 and 1995; Shahin 1989; Khoury et al. 1986), with the largest reserves for the numerous basins in Saudi Arabia, estimated at 84 bcm (BAAC 1980; MAW 1984; Ukayli and Husain 1988). Groundwater from the shallow alluvials is sometimes used for domestic and irrigation purposes. However, poor groundwater quality in the downstream areas may limit its use for meeting domestic needs.
Fossil Groundwater Aquifers
The other main source of water for the countries of the Arabian Peninsula is the non-renewable fossil groundwater stored in the sedimentary deep aquifers. The sandstone and limestone geological formations of the Arabian Shelf, shown in figures 1 and 2, store significant amounts of groundwater that are thousands of years old (Burdon 1973; Edgell 1987). The sedimentary aquifers have been classified as either primary or secondary, based on their areal extent, groundwater volume, water quality, and development potential (MAW 1984). The primary aquifers are the Saq, Tabuk, Wajid, Minjur-Druma, Wasia-Biyadh, Dammam, Um er-Radhuma, and Neogene. The latter two are carbonate aquifers while the remainder are sandstone. Secondary aquifers are the Aruma, Jauf, Khuff, Jilh, Sakaka, the upper Jurassic, the lower Cretaceous, and Buwaib. These aquifers cover two-thirds of Saudi Arabia and some of them extend into Kuwait, Bahrain, Qatar, the United Arab Emirates, Oman, and Yemen, as well as
into Jordan, Syria, and Iraq.
Vast amounts of groundwater stored in the primary deep aquifers serve as a dependable source of water for the central and northern regions of Saudi Arabia, and, to a lesser extent, the other countries of the peninsula. Deep groundwater reserves for the aquifers in the peninsula are estimated at 2,175 bcm, with the major portion (1,919 bcm) located in Saudi Arabia. Recharge for all the deep aquifers is estimated at a very limited 2.7 bcm per year. This reserve represents groundwater exploitable by lowering the water level to 300 metres below the ground surface, the maximum depth currently possible with modern pumping technology.
Although water in the deep aquifers is ample in quantity, the quality varies greatly and is suitable for domestic consumption in only a few areas. Total dissolved solids range from 400 to 20,000 ppm. Good-quality water is stored in only a few aquifers: the Saq, Tabuk, and Wajid in Saudi Arabia, and the Dammam in Bahrain and Kuwait (Bahrain Country Report 1995; Kuwait Country Report 1986). Brackish water from the Minjur, Wasia, Biyadh, and Um er-Radhuma aquifers usually requires treatment in most of the countries for hardness and high temperature. Water temperatures vary between 40° and 65°C, depending on the depth of extraction. Water from these deep aquifers tends to be saturated with calcium and magnesium salts and has high concentrations of sulphate and chloride ions; it also contains relatively large quantities of hydrogen sulphide and carbon dioxide gases. The brackish water from some of these deep aquifers is usually used without treatment for agricultural purposes,
and for limited domestic purposes in some locations in Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, Qatar, and the United Arab Emirates. The groundwater of most of the deep aquifers requires treatment such as cooling, aeration to remove hydrogen sulphide and carbon dioxide gases, and lime soda processing.
Desalination
Experience with desalination in many of the Gulf States, particularly Saudi Arabia and Kuwait, began as early as 1938. During the last twenty years, the countries of the Arabian Peninsula, with the exception of Yemen, have become increasingly dependent on desalination to meet their water-supply requirements. Several of the Gulf countries, however, have no option but to rely on the desalination of sea water or brackish groundwater. This is because renewable groundwater supplies are very small, and often the quality is poor owing to limited recharge magnitude and salt-water intrusion. In addition, the deep aquifers, particularly those near the coastal zones, usually contain highly saline water requiring desalination. The same conditions exist for the western coastal areas of Saudi Arabia, and southern regions of the Arabian Peninsula. Most of the deep aquifers with good water quality are located at great depths and in remote areas far from the urban centres where the water is
needed.
Table 3 Desalination Capacity Installed in Arab Countries, 1963 - 1993
Country
Total capacity (m³/day)
Bahrain
Egypt
Jordan
Iraq
Kuwait
Oman
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
Syria
United Arab Emirates
Yemen
Algeria
Djibouti
Libya
Morocco
Mauritania
Somalia
Sudan
Tunisia
Total
Source
: Bushnak (1995).
Capacity installed: 63% of world total; remainder: North America 13%, Europe 5%, Asia 8 %, others 11 %.
Costs associated with the development of deep fossil groundwater sources, including drilling, casings, pumping, transportation, and treatment, may be high.
Water desalination in the Gulf States has constituted a flexible means of alleviating water-supply shortages over the past two decades. In addition, desalination provides water of excellent quality, which in turn contributes to the well-being of society in relation to sanitation, health, and better quality of life. At the present time, two-thirds of the world's total desalination capacity is installed in the Arab countries, mainly in the Arabian Peninsula, as shown in table 3. Out of 18.8 mcm per day of desalination capacity, the countries of the Arabian Gulf account for over one-half of the production (53 per cent). Saudi Arabia alone accounts for one-quarter of world capacity in desalination. Three Arab countries Saudi Arabia, Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates - rate first, third, and fourth, respectively, in desalination capacity. The present annual designed desalination capacity of the seven countries of the peninsula has reached 2.02 bcm, compared with a worldwide
capacity of 5.68 bcm (Wagnick 1992; Bushnak 1995). These capacities cover all desalination plants and include numerous units in private sector ownership for industrial or other purposes. Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, and the United Arab Emirates, in particular, rely on large-scale plants capable of producing up to 500 mcm per year.
Desalination production efficiency ranges between 70 and 85 per cent of designed plant capacity. The total regional volume of desalinized water produced in 1992 was estimated at 1,628 mcm (Al-Sufy 1992; Bushnak 1992 and 1995), as shown in table 2. Desalinated water provided 51 per cent of urban and industrial water demand in 1990. The major producers of desalinated water are Saudi Arabia (51 per cent), the United Arab Emirates (22 per cent), Kuwait (15 per cent), Qatar (5 per cent), Bahrain (4 per cent), Oman (2 per cent), and Yemen (1 per cent) (Bushnak 1992 and 1995).
The total number of desalination plants in operation as of 1992 reached 45, with 23 in Saudi Arabia, 8 in the United Arab Emirates, 6 in Kuwait, 3 in Bahrain, 2 each in Oman and Qatar, and 1 in Yemen (Al-Sufy 1992). In Saudi Arabia, 17 plants are located on the Red Sea coast and 6 on the Gulf. Three large-scale multistage flash (MSF) plants are located at Al-Jubail, Jeddah, and Al-Khobar, with annual production capacities of 394 mcm, 217 mcm, and 83 mcm, respectively.
Currently, the largest desalination centre in the world is located in Al-Jubail, in the eastern province of Saudi Arabia. One-third of the desalinated water for Saudi Arabia is produced at this plant, equivalent to 7.5 per cent of world capacity. The plant consists of 40 MSF units producing approximately one million cubic metres of desalinated water. The desalinated water is transferred through pipelines with a total capacity of 1.8 x 108 cubic metres per day. One of these pipelines runs as far as Riyadh, which is 465 km from Al-Jubail, and the other delivers water to Qasim. A considerable number of urban centres are being supplied with desalinated water through this system. Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates have a large number of desalination plants.
Cost comparisons using different desalination processes range between US$1 and US$3.5 per cubic metre for sea water, and between US$0.4 and US$1.5 per cubic metre for brackish water. A survey of water production costs indicates wide variation, depending on plant size and energy prices. Usually, costs decrease with increased plant capacity. Costs reported by the Gulf countries are usually less than for countries in the rest of the world because of minimal energy charges. For example, the cost of producing one cubic metre of water in Saudi Arabia ranges from US$0.48 to US$2.2; in the United Arab Emirates, water costs range from US$1 to US$1.45; in Qatar the range is US$1.14 to US$1.64, and in Bahrain the cost is US$0.56.
In other parts of the world, where energy costs are not subsidized, production costs are somewhat higher; for example, in Florida and the US Virgin Islands, costs range from US$2.06 to US$2.60; in Malta the cost is US$1.18, and in the Canary Islands it is US$1.62. In general, water production costs in countries of the Peninsula where desalination is used extensively are distributed as follows: 38 per cent for capital investment; 20.5 per cent for energy; 21.3 per cent for labour; 16.2 per cent for maintenance, and 4 per cent for chemicals.
Brackish groundwater desalination is being used more nowadays near major urban centres because the cost of production is less than for that of sea water. Small desalination plants for brackish groundwater are usually found inland near urban centres, especially in Saudi Arabia. Plants generally have smaller capacities of up to 2O,000 cubic metres per day, in comparison to large sea-water-desalination plants where capacities may exceed 100,000 cubic metres. Small plants are common, owing to the limited volume of extraction possible from a large number of wells. Brackish water desalination usually involves the reverse osmosis (RO) process. However, the cost of treatment is much less than for sea-water desalination, owing to low salinity, and usually ranges from US$0.3 to US$0.65 per cubic metre. The cost of water production depends on plant size and also on the concentration of certain salts, heavy metals, and organic materials. The major cost components consist of investment
in well drilling and pumping, and brine-water disposal. The disposal of brine presents a major environmental constraint of brackish-water desalination. Careful consideration is usually needed to avoid contamination of groundwater sources.
More than 80 per cent of desalinated water in the Gulf region is produced through MSF distillation; RO accounts for 16.1 per cent. This translates into three-quarters of the world capacity for MSF desalination, and about one-quarter of RO production. The Gulf countries share in multi-effect distillation (MED), electrodialysis (ED) and vapour compression (VC), as well as other processes, at the respective rates of 16.4 per cent, 16.6 per cent, and 5.5 per cent.
Desalination of sea and brackish water has become an essential water-supply component for many urban centres in these regions. This has compelled these countries to make substantial investments in desalination technology. The availability of financial resources from oil income, and free energy sources, has further encouraged reliance on water desalination as a primary source to meet domestic water requirements. These factors, in conjunction with natural supply limitations, make it likely that reliance on desalination will continue to increase in the future. Future projections indicate that more investments in desalination technology will be required to offset overexploitation of water resources and increased public demand.
For the countries of the Arabian Peninsula, desalination is the easiest means of meeting the ever-increasing demand for water in the region. Most of the countries are constructing and planning significant expansion of their desalination capacity to meet future water requirements, as shown in table 4. Saudi Arabia is constructing additional plants with combined capacities of 126 mcm for the major cities of Medina, Yanbu, Jeddah and Al-Jubail. Future plans call for an additional capacity of 213 mcm for the cities of Jeddah and Al-Khobar. The United Arab Emirates is also expected to increase its desalination capacity by 270 mcm in the near future for its urban centres at Abu Dhabi and Dubai. Kuwait is planning to increase its desalination capacity by 110 mcm by 1997. In Qatar, the present desalination capacity of 112 mcm at Ras Abu Fontas will be raised by 16 mcm in the near future, and an additional capacity of 88 mcm will be added to the system by the end of the twentieth
century. In Bahrain, desalination capacity has reached 75 mcm in 1993 and 25 mcm of further capacity is proposed for Maharraq City, while a further 40 mcm of capacity is being studied as a part of a privatization scheme for power and water. In Oman, the present desalination capacity is 55 mcm and will be increased by 13 mcm with the construction of several smaller units by 1995. Present and future combined capacities for the countries of the peninsula are expected to reach 2.92 bcm by the year 2000. Desalinated water will constitute a main source of water for domestic requirements for most of the countries of the peninsula, particularly Kuwait, Bahrain, Qatar, and the United Arab Emirates, as shown in table 4.
Table 4 Desalination Schemes in Each Country of the Arabian Peninsula
Country
Installed desalination capacity (mcm)
Desalination production (mcm)
Domestic/ industrial demand (mcm)
Desalination/ demand ratio (%)
Planned desalination capacity (mcm)
Total desalination capacity (mcm)
Domestic/ industrial demand (mcm)
Desalination/ demand ratio(%)
Bahrain
Kuwait
Oman
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
United Arab Emirates
Yemen
Total
Renovated Waste Water
Existing waste-water treatment facilities in the Arabian Peninsula face difficulties in handling the ever-increasing volumes of waste water generated by increased water consumption and urbanization. Waste-water discharge from major urban centres is polluting shallow alluvial aquifers and the coastline, and has caused urban water-tables to rise. The main emphasis to date in these countries has been on simple disposal of waste water, rather than on treating and reusing effluent, owing to the extensive capital investment required. Planning for the full utilization of treated effluent remains in the early stages, and the regional treatment capacity is sufficient to handle only 40 per cent of the domestic waste water generated. The total volume of renovated waste water used in the Arabian Peninsula is estimated as about 433 mcm, which is far less than the volumes treated. The reuse volumes are shown in table 2, which represent approximately 25 per cent of the available treated
waste water.
Waste-water reuse ranges between 217 mcm in Saudi Arabia and 6 mcm in Yemen. The ratios of reuse to the domestic and industrial water requirements range from 27.7 to 30 per cent. In the region as a whole, renovated waste water meets about 2 per cent of total water demand or 14 per cent of domestic and industrial demand. In Saudi Arabia, reclaimed waste water is used for irrigation of non-cash crops, landscape irrigation, and industrial cooling. In Kuwait, Bahrain, the United Arab Emirates, and Oman it is used for municipal irrigation of landscaped areas, while in Qatar it is used to irrigate animal-food crops.
<section>Water requirements</section>
Imbalances between increasing water demand and existing limited water resources are being experienced by the countries of the Arabian Peninsula. During the last decade, water demand in all sectors has increased dramatically as a result of high population growth, improvement in the standard of living, efforts to establish self-sufficiency in food, and promotion of industrial development. The deficit is being met through sea-water desalination and mining of groundwater resources. Currently, agriculture is the primary water consumer, particularly in Saudi Arabia, Yemen, the United Arab Emirates, and Oman. Industrial water demand is very small in comparison to the domestic sector.
Domestic and industrial water requirements for the countries of Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, Kuwait, Qatar, Oman, and the United Arab Emirates, are satisfied through desalination and a limited amount of groundwater from both shallow and deep aquifers; Yemen relies solely on groundwater resources for all sectors. In all Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC) countries and Yemen, agricultural requirements are met through abstraction of water from shallow alluvial aquifers located in the coastal strips and inland basins, and from deep aquifers covering most of the Arabian Peninsula. In Saudi Arabia, rapid expansion of agricultural activities has resulted in substantial increases in water demand, leading to extensive mining of the deep aquifers. Likewise, agricultural water demand has sharply increased in the countries of Bahrain, Qatar, Oman, and the United Arab Emirates, where groundwater reserves are being mined. This agricultural development is a direct result of government policies
encouraging self-sufficiency in food production. Government incentives and subsidies have made it possible for large areas to be cultivated, placing great strain on the existing groundwater resources.
Total water demand for agricultural, industrial, and domestic purposes for all the countries in the region increased, during the period 1980-1990, from 6.6 to 22.5 bcm, an almost fourfold increase, resulting from high population growth, and the need for food production. The major consumers were Saudi Arabia, Yemen, the United Arab Emirates, and Oman. Water requirements are expected to reach 26.2 bcm by the end of the twentieth century, and 36.7 bcm by the year 2025, as shown in table 5. Agriculture accounts for the majority of water use, followed by the domestic sector.
For the peninsula as a whole, the demand for agricultural water requirements is estimated at 19.7 bcm in 1990, with demands of 14.6, 2.7,1.2, and 0.95 bcm in Saudi Arabia, Yemen, Oman, and the United Arab Emirates, respectively. In 1990, the percentage of agricultural demand ranged from 21 to 93 per cent of the total water demand, as shown in table 6. Agricultural water demand is expected to reach 21.2 hem and 24.3 bcm in the years 2000 and 2025, as shown in table 5.
Industrial activities in most of the countries of the Arabian Peninsula are limited and have contributed to only small increases in total water requirements, when compared with the domestic and agricultural sectors. Industrial water demand in 1990 reached 0.30 bcm, with percentages ranging between 0.4 and 7.6 per cent. Industrial demand is projected to reach 0.7 bcm and 2.3 bcm in the years 2000 and 2025, respectively, with the highest demands being in the countries of Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, and Oman.
Industrial production structure in the peninsula is geared towards consumer goods and petroleum refinement. Major industries in Saudi Arabia, the United Arab Emirates, and Oman consist of petrochemicals, cement, and limited food and beverage production. Countries with relatively well-established petrochemical industries and refineries are Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, and Bahrain. Most industrial activities are confined close to major urban centres, requiring competition with the domestic sector to satisfy water requirements. In urban areas with concentrated industrial activities, industrial water requirements represent the major aspect of water consumption in relation to domestic requirements. In most of the GCC countries, field development and petro-chemical industries are considered to be water-use intensive, and rely on groundwater supplemented with surface water, desalination, and a limited amount of recycled water.
Table 5 Past and Projected Water Demand (mcm) in the Arabian Peninsula for the Years 1990, 2000, and 2025
Total demand
Country
Domestic
Agriculture
Industrial
Domestic
Agriculture
Industrial
Domestic
Agriculture
Industrial
Bahrain
Kuwait
Qatar
Oman
UAE
Saudi Arabia
Yemen
Total
Source:
Compiled by ESCWA (Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia) secretariat from country reports and international sources, 1994 and 1995.
Table 6 Proportion and Water Demand by Sectors to Total Demand in the Arabian Peninsula for the Years 1990, 2000, and 2025 (Percentage)
Country
Domestic
Agricultural
Industrial
Domestic
Agricultural
Industrial
Domestic
Agricultural
Industrial
Bahrain
Kuwait
Qatar
Oman
UAE
Saudi Arabia
Yemen
Average
Domestic water requirements represent only a small fraction of total water requirements. Most countries of the peninsula, with the exception of Yemen, have a high per capita water consumption rate resulting not only from the provision of good-quality water from desalination plants, delivered at minimal cost, but also from lack of conservation measures. In 1990, domestic requirements were estimated at 2.7 bcm, which is expected to reach 4.3 and 10.2 bcm in the years 2000 and 2025, respectively, as a result of increased population growth and improved standards of living. Domestic demand is very high in all the GCC countries with respect to their populations, and ranges between 6.5 and 77 per cent of total demand, as shown in tables 5 and 6.
Water demand for each individual country, based on current trends and projections, is shown in table 5. Water shortages are expected to increase as a result of increased demand and limited renewable supplies. Water resources from renewable groundwater, desalination, and reclaimed waste water are already insufficient to meet expected demand. It is expected that, in order to offset the imbalance between supply and demand, mining of groundwater, especially from the deep aquifers, may be required to meet agricultural and other demands. Expected domestic and industrial demand increases in the next thirty years may also necessitate the construction of additional desalination and treatment plants to produce water and treat waste water, for most of the countries in the region, especially the GCC countries, unless strict integrated management approaches, including water-conservation measures and effective management schemes, are implemented and good-quality groundwater is used solely
for domestic and industrial use. The volumes of water from deep groundwater reserves, desalination, and reuse of renovated waste water that are needed to offset deficits are shown in table 7.
If present domestic consumption patterns continue unaltered, most countries of the peninsula will be required to mine their groundwater resources further and to allocate financial resources towards the construction of new desalination plants and support facilities with capacities capable of handling increasing demands. A large number of waste-treatment plants will also be required to handle the resulting wastes. This huge investment may result in considerable economic strain, especially in those countries with limited financial resources.
<section>Management options</section>
The increasing imbalance between water supply and demand has compelled many countries of the Arabian Peninsula to augment supplies through sea-water and brackish-water desalination, reuse of renovated waste water, groundwater-recharge schemes, and the implementation of conservative water-conservation measures. In order to alleviate future water shortages, current supply-augmentation schemes and demand-management measures need to be enhanced with respect to coverage and enforcement. In addition, further efforts need to be made towards the development and management of water resources, based on an integrated approach. Viable options for the development and management of water resources may involve some or all of the measures discussed below.
Table 7 Projected Water Supply Availability in Million Cubic Metres (mcm) for the Years 2000 and 2010
Water sources (mcm)
Year 2000
Year 2010
Country
Surface ^a
Reclaimed
Desalinization
Groundwater^b
Surface^a
Reclaimed
Desalinization
Groundwater^b
Bahrain
Kuwait
Oman
Qatar
Saudi Arabia
United Arab Emirates
Yemen
Total
a
. Diversion of surface run-off.
b
. Mainly deep aquifers.
Desalination of sea water presents a feasible solution to water shortages for countries with inexpensive energy sources. This water source will continue to provide water for domestic purposes for the foreseeable future. The current practice of constructing large-scale desalination plants has contributed to a reduction in costs and the production of large volumes of water.
Research and development efforts in the field of desalination are expected to reduce the production and maintenance costs associated with desalination, making it possible to produce increased volumes of desalinated sea and brackish water at reasonable prices. Major development efforts over the last ten years have focused on the improvement of energy efficiency and membrane performance and replacement. Current technological trends are oriented towards the use of hybrid processes, with emphasis on innovative combinations of chemical-physical and electrochemical methods. The integration of desalination and energy-production facilities provides an incentive for reduced desalination energy costs. Energy costs represent a major portion of the total cost of the desalination process. The Gulf countries report lower production costs, in comparison to the rest of the world, due to energy subsidies. Efforts are currently being geared towards the use of a single energy source for
performing several functions within the plant, a process known as cogeneration. Hybrid desalination processes have been developed in which sea-water plants using various processes are built at the same site, making use of the electrical and thermal energy produced in the process. Such plants use evaporation processes in combination with RO. Electrical energy is supplied by local power facilities or by gas turbine generation, and heat from the power plant is used for preheating feed water for the desalination plant. A portion of the generated electricity and exhaust heat from the turbine would power the desalination plant. This combination improves the efficiency of energy utilization. A cogeneration scheme involving an RO plant would include using part of the generated electricity to power the desalination plant, with the remainder being sold to the public. Exhaust heat from the gas turbine could be used to provide steam to operate thermal MED units. This scheme allows
optimum energy use while providing flexibility to meet variable water demand. The cogeneration arrangement also allows the RO units to operate at maximum capacity in conjunction with the operation of the thermal plant.
The principles of building energy-production and desalination plants jointly, and integrating the different desalination processes in one plant, is the focus of future development in desalination throughout the world. Efforts are also being invested in further improvements in the process, equipment, and knowledge of the desalination process.
There is a consensus in the desalination industry that MSF distillation has reached maturity, and no further substantial progress is expected to be achieved. Other thermal methods, however, will continue to be refined and improved. Work is being done to create reliable large-size, low-temperature alternatives, using MED or VC (vapour compression) units. Lower-cost material is also expected to be used in the construction of MED and VC distillation processes.
Technical advancements are expected in membrane processing, and concentrated efforts are under way in many countries where membrane separation is used. The combined experience of owners and manufacturers of RO plants will lead to improved product design and operational procedures. Improvements are still needed in pre-treatment of feed water, especially for surface sea-water intakes. The development of low-cost UF (ultrafiltration) membranes is expected to result in an economical alternative to feed-water pre-treatment.
Other aspects of the desalination process that are being studied and further refined include the use of chemicals to reduce scale deposits, and improved structure and materials for heat-transfer surfaces in the evaporation process. They also include the use of corrosion-resistant materials, improved membrane selectivity, improved water production per unit area of membrane, and improvements in the efficiency of auxiliary equipment involved in the RO process. Substantial progress has already been made in the improvement of the MSF process. Nevertheless, further perfection in processes such as enhanced heat transfer will make continuous operation possible. Improved scale and corrosion control, flow range, workmanship, and automated monitoring and control will also improve desalination efficiency and longevity using this method. The MED process is also well developed, although specific aspects such as the use of thin titanium tubing need to be improved to maximize efficient heat
transfer. Further improvement is also needed in the area of raw sea water entering from outside the plant. VC in combination with MED units need further development in compressor design to enhance their efficiency and reliability and to provide higher capacities.
The membrane processes of RO and ED are potentially applicable to large-scale sea-water desalination. Improved membrane efficiency and technology are expected to lower production costs and make these processes more reliable. New membrane-manufacturing processes, such as plasma polymerization or radiation-induced grafting, may result in new membranes with higher specific fluxes, higher temperature tolerance, and high chemical stability, as well as anti-fouling mechanisms. Improved backing materials will allow production of compaction resistant membranes that will enable operation at higher pressures. It is expected that these improvements will result in conversion rates as high as 50 per cent, thereby decreasing production costs.
In addition to the availability of low-cost water desalination, the reuse of treated waste water can alleviate water shortage in industrial and agricultural sectors. Its use in the domestic sector is not feasible, owing to uncertainty about viruses, prohibitive costs for tertiary treatment, and general non-acceptance by the public in the majority of the Gulf countries.
Increases in the volume of groundwater recharge from surface run-off and renovated waste water that meets internationally accepted standards can provide additional water to be used in times of need. The large volume of surface run-off that is being lost to the sea from coastal drainage basins and evaporation from inland basins can be utilized for recharging purposes. Available renovated waste water can be used to increase the magnitude of groundwater recharge. Low-cost imported water can be used for recharge purposes to enhance groundwater storage or strategic groundwater reserves for domestic purposes. Merging surface water and groundwater from countries with abundant sources would contribute to better water allocation. There is a need to increase the efficiency of recharge dams that have been built in different areas, through better dam operation and silt and clay removal. The building of such groundwater reserves provides a stand-by source that can be used in emergency
conditions. Such schemes have been used in many parts of the world and, under appropriate design and operation, the same volume of water stored can usually be recovered. A series of recharge dams or injection-recharging well fields can store excess run-off, especially in the south and southwestern parts of the peninsula.
Another viable alternative for increasing rainfall amount is the modification of weather by cloud seeding, which has been experimented with in Syria, Jordan, and Saudi Arabia. This option may be of benefit in Saudi Arabia, as well as in Yemen and Oman, where potential benefits include frequent cultivation of terraces and spate irrigation basins, increased magnitude of groundwater recharge, additional water supply for rural communities, improvement in vegetative cover, and hail suppression. The availability of additional run-off will encourage continuation of farming, which in turn will discourage urban migration and increase local incomes. The presence of mountain ridges in the south-western region of Saudi Arabia, Yemen, and southern Oman, forces moist air masses to rise, making weather modification a viable means of increasing the amount of rainfall. Cloud-seeding programmes can be considered as an option for increasing rainfall; however, social, economic, and
environmental aspects of such programmes should be considered.
There are a number of proposals for augmenting the water supply of the Arabian Peninsula by the importation of fresh water from outside the region. The best known is the Turkish "Peace Pipeline" scheme. Through the construction of two pipelines, it would transfer water to the Arabian Gulf states from rivers of Turkey that flow toward the Mediterranean. The proposed projects will move 2.2 bcm per year, with approximately one-half of the volume for Syria and Jordan and one-half to the Arabian Peninsula. The cost of the project is estimated at US$20 billion, and its construction time is estimated to be between 8 and 10 years. The large western pipeline would pass through Syria and Jordan and terminate at Mecca in western Saudi Arabia. The smaller eastern pipeline would cross Syria and Iraq and then pass down the west side of the Gulf, supplying water to Kuwait, the Eastern province of Saudi Arabia, Bahrain, Qatar, the United Arab Emirates, and Oman. Saudi
Arabia and Kuwait would be supplied with 840 and 220 mcm, Although this importation of water would ease the shortfall situation in the region, the Arabian Peninsula countries are concerned about the political implications of becoming dependent on upstream states for the security of their water supply, as well as the potential vulnerability of the pipelines to sabotage or attack, and therefore this importation proposal is not currently active.
Two other importation proposals involve pipelines under the Arabian Gulf, one from the Garon River of Iran to Qatar and the other from Pakistan to the United Arab Emirates. The Iran-Qatar scheme involves a gravity pipeline, 1.5 metres in diameter, extending 770 kilometres, of which 560 kilometres would be within Iranian territory. It would provide Qatar with an estimated annual volume of 135 mcm. The cost is estimated at US$1.5 billion, and completion time at three years. Other proposals for importing water to the region include towing icebergs from the Arctic and utilizing the empty holds of incoming petroleum tankers.
A long-term solution to the water-deficit problem may involve the implementation of demand-management measures. Viable options consist of consumption and waste reduction, and increases in use efficiency. Formulation and implementation of water-management plans that include conservation programmes as one of the major components can contribute significantly to decreasing water consumption.
Conservation efforts need to be concentrated in all sectors, with emphasis on the agricultural sector, where current consumption is six times the amount of water used for domestic and industrial purposes. Incentives, and agricultural and industrial subsidies, especially for countries that depend highly on desalination, may be used as leverage to implement such conservation measures as improving irrigation efficiency through sprinkler and drip systems, laser levelling, canal lining, farmer education, and recycling in industries. A significant reduction in overall water consumption in the region could be achieved by a reappraisal of agricultural policies for water allocation according to market value.
Desalinated water in most of the region has been used almost exclusively for domestic purposes, and reduced consumption in this sector would have a corresponding impact on future desalination and waste-water schemes. High per capita water consumption reflects the need for urban water conservation. Reduction in domestic consumption can be achieved through increasing public awareness of the value of water as a scarce resource, the installation of water-saving devices, and the continued enforcement of water conservation through modified building codes. Water metering and charging for water has been widely practised throughout the region; however, the ineffectiveness in reducing water consumption is due to extremely low water tariffs that do not provide effective mechanisms for discouraging excessive water use or wastage. Conservation needs to be encouraged through price incentives mandated through regulations in the domestic and industrial sectors.
Another possibility for reducing demand is leak detection within the delivery system and pipeline rehabilitation. In Qatar, Bahrain, and many cities in Saudi Arabia, leakage from the delivery system caused losses ranging from 20 to 50 per cent. In some of the countries, lack of funds for comprehensive leak detection and maintenance prevent systematic monitoring of the system; consequently, reductions in leakage are small compared with the potential overall water savings that could be realized. Implementation of leak-detection programmes should be the responsibility of every water-distribution authority.
The implementation of some specific conservation measures in the domestic and industrial sector, on a voluntary or regulatory basis, needs to be an integral component of any management activities implemented by water authorities. Programmes should focus on public education, use of water-saving technologies, rebates for retrofitting, modification of existing building codes that promote the use of water-efficient fixtures, the use of grey water for landscaping and industrial cooling, using water-conserving plants, and import restrictions. Existing housing and industrial subsidies and loans that have proved feasible in most countries can be used as incentives to enforce regulations. A system of restrictions and/or penalties designed to enforce compliance with regulations is required to ensure successful reduction in water consumption. High priority should be given to implementation of conservation programmes on a continuous basis and to evaluation of their effectiveness.
Industrial water recycling should be given due consideration.
Weakness in institutional arrangements is one of the major constraints in the management of water resources in the region. Strength can be achieved through comprehensive water legislation that defines water allocation, development, monitoring, and protection measures, as well as the responsibilities of each organization, and mechanisms to facilitate the exchange and dissemination of information. Regulations and laws need to include provisions for project coordination on a local, national, and regional level, both within each country and between countries. Plans should include water laws governing the development and protection of groundwater resources, water allocation, and pricing. It would be appropriate for each country to set up a single coordinating body, such as a national water-resource committee or council. This organization, with delegated power, would ensure coordination of activities within and between countries and timely exchange of information, and would be
responsible for determining optimal water-resource development and management, especially for water resources shared between countries.
Finally, further efforts by each country of the Arabian Peninsula are needed to develop and manage water resources using an integrated approach as envisaged in Agenda 21. Such integration of resources must include both conventional surface and groundwater resources, as well as non-conventional water resources such as desalination and waste-water reuse, while taking into consideration both quality and quantity requirements. National water plans need to be formulated and/or revised to accommodate an integrated approach as well as legal frameworks for optimal allocation of water resources.
<section>Conclusions</section>
The countries of the Arabian Peninsula have limited renewable freshwater supplies, which have been nearly fully developed, and the only dependable source is fossil groundwater reserves. In some regions, depletion of these nonrenewable groundwater resources is taking place at an alarming rate, owing to overpumping in order to meet agricultural requirements.
Improvements in the standard of living and urban migration, coupled with the absence of conservation programmes, have brought about high domestic water consumption, which itself increased by three times from 1980 to 1990. Programmes currently in force in many of the countries have focused mainly on the development of water resources rather than management, in order to meet rising water demand. To overcome water shortages, many of the countries of the peninsula have come to rely on desalination and mining of groundwater resources. Conservative forecasts indicate that demand during the period 1995-2025 for all sectors is expected to increase almost twofold.
To cope with future water demands there is a need thoroughly to evaluate and implement means of augmenting supplies, devoting serious effort to management approaches that will provide optimal allocation and efficient utilization of water resources. Emphasis must be placed on efficient management of water resources in the region. To meet future demand, water supplies may require augmentation with desalinated sea and brackish water, increased magnitude of renovated waste water, and groundwater recharge. Concurrently, serious efforts need to be made towards reducing water requirements through demand-management measures. The effectiveness of demand-management measures has been demonstrated in many parts of the world.
It is essential that each country of the region establish an up-to-date water plan that emphasizes integrated water-resource development and management. Water policies and strategies should address the allocation of water in accordance with market values, conservation, pollution control, and improvement of the coordination of efforts between water institutions. Technical research and development, as well as manpower development and training, are also essential aspects of any water programme. Key policies should address short- and long-term programmes for agricultural development, capacity building, review of water-pricing subsidies, development and application of appropriate technology, institutional arrangements, and water importation.
<section>References</section>
Abdulrazzak, M.J. 1992. Water resources assessment and management for the Gulf Cooperation Council Countries. Proceedings of the First Gulf Water Conference, 10-14 October 1992, Dubai.
Abdulrazzak, M.J. 1995. Water supplies versus demand in countries of the Arabian Peninsula. Journal of Water Resources Planning and Management, May/June 1995.
Al-Asam, S.M. 1992. Modern irrigation systems and their role in water conservation in the United Arab Emirates. Proceedings of the First Gulf Water Conference, 10-14 October 1992, Dubai.
Al-Fusail, A.M., B.M. Al-Selwi, G.A. Said, and A. Badr. 1991. Water resources and population distribution in the Republic of Yemen. Proceedings of the First National Population Policy Conference, 20-29 October 1991, Sanaa.
Al-Sufy, A.M. 1992. Development of water resources suitable for consumption. Proceedings of the First Gulf Water Conference, 10 14 October 1992, Dubai.
Authman, M.N. 1983. Water and Development Processes in Saudi Arabia. Tihama Press, Jeddah.
Bahrain Country Report. 1995. Implications of Agenda 21 for Integrated Water Resource Management in the ESCWA Region. Presented at the Expert Group Meeting, 2-5 October 1995, Amman.
BAAC (British Arabian Advisory Company). 1980. Water Resources of Saudi Arabia, Vol. 1. Prepared for the Ministry of Agriculture and Water, Riyadh.
Burdon, D.J. 1973. Hydrogeological conditions in the Middle East. Journal of Engineering Geology (15), 71-82.
Bushnak, A.A. 1992. Water supply challenge in the Gulf Region. Journal of Desalination (78),133-145.
Bushnak, A.A. 1995. Desalination Opportunities in the Arab World. Sixth Regional Meeting of the International Hydrology Programme Meeting, National Committee of the Arab Region, 30 December 1995, Amman.
Edgell, H.J. 1987. Geological framework of Saudi Arabia-groundwater resources. Journal of Earth Sciences 3:267-285.
El-Zawahry, A.E., and A.A. Ibrahim. 1992. Management of irrigation water in Oman. Proceedings of the First Gulf Water Conference, 10-14 October 1992, Dubai.
Khoury, J., W.R. Aga, and A. Al-Derouby. 1986. Water resources in the Arab world and their future projection. Proceedings of the Symposium on Water Resources and Utilization in the Arab World, Kuwait. pp. 577-634.
Kuwait Country Report. 1986. Water resources and utilization in Kuwait. Proceedings of the Symposium on Water Resources and Utilization in the Arab World, Kuwait. pp. 331 360.
MAW (Ministry of Agriculture and Water). 1984. Water Atlas of Saudi Arabia. MAW, Riyadh.
Mohamed, A.K. 1986. Water resources and development in the Republic of Yemen. Proceedings of the Symposium on Water Resources and Utilization in the Arab World, Kuwait.
Qatar Country Report. 1995. Implications of Agenda 21 for Integrated Water Resource Management in the ESCWA Region. Presented at the Expert Group Meeting, 2 5 October 1995, Amman.
Saad, K. 1995. Background document "Implications of Agenda 21 for Integrated Water Management in the ESCWA Region." Presented at the Expert Group Meeting, 2-5 October 1995, Amman.
Shahin, M. 1989. Review and assessment of water resources in the Arab region. Water International 14: 206-219.
UAE Country Report. 1986. Water Resources and Utilization in the United Arab Emirates. (Arabic) Proceedings of the Symposium on Water Resources and Utilization in the Arab World, Kuwait. pp. 141-157.
Ukayli, M.A., and T. Husain. 1988. Evaluation of surface water availability, wastewater reuse and desalination in Saudi Arabia. Water International 13: 218 225.
UN. 1994. Department of Economic, Social Information and Policy Analysis. Population Division. United Nations, New York.
Uqba, A.K. 1992. The need for national and regional integrated water resources management in the Gulf Cooperation Council region. Proceedings of the First Gulf Water Conference, 10-14 October 1992, Dubai.
Wagnick, K. 1992. Worldwide Desalting Plants Inventory, Report 12. Wagnick Consulting, Gnarrenburg.
Yemen Country Report. 1995. Implications of Agenda 21 for Integrated Water Resource Management in the ESCWA Region. Presented at the Expert Group Meeting, 2-5 October 1995, Amman.
<section>4: Water resources and agricultural environment in arid regions of China</section>
Wang Tao and Wu Wei
<section>Introduction</section>
In arid regions, water is one of the most challenging current and future natural-resources issues. For a sustainable agriculture and, hence, a healthy economy, water is the key to success. The importance of water in arid regions is self-evident indeed.
The arid regions occupy a vast area in north-western China that mainly includes the Alxa Plateau in the western part of Inner Mongolia, the northern part of Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region, most of Qinhai and Gansu provinces and the Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region - about 2.5 million km² or one-quarter of the Chinese territory. In these regions, mean annual rainfall is less than 250 mm, and even less in the western plains (50-150 mm) and the Taklimakan Desert (less than 25 mm). The annual evaporation is more than 1,400 mm in general, and about 2,000-3,000 mm in desert areas. Because of the arid climate, about 70 per cent of the total arid regions are unusable areas such as sandy deserts, gravel deserts, and other wildernesses. Although there are enough wasteland, light, and heat resources, the local economy depends only on irrigated agriculture and animal husbandry because of the limited water supply.
Water is not only the most precious natural resource in arid regions but also the most important environmental factor of the ecosystem. Human impact on the water supply will certainly cause a chain reaction within the ecosystem. Since ancient times, water utilization has always had a decisive impact on local socioeconomic development. But the increased intensity of human activities and overuse or misuse of water resources caused, and quickly spread, agroenvironmental degradation, including salinization, vegetation degeneration, and sandy desertification. Water resources are already under great pressure to support agricultural production in the arid regions and will face a much more difficult situation in the future. Therefore, understanding the relationships between water and environment, and water and development, and recognizing how to practice sound water management, are crucial subjects to study for sustainable agriculture and a stable environment in the arid regions.
<section>Water resources</section>
In the arid regions of China, the water resources are present as rainfall, glaciers, surface water, and groundwater. Rainfall is the basic supply source for all kinds of water resources. Its variation in time and space controls the water conditions and glacial development, as well as directly influencing the formation and distribution of surface water and groundwater. Additionally, there are frequent transformations and interactions between surface water and groundwater.
Rainfall Resources
Rainfall varies from place to place in the arid regions of China (fig. 1). Most parts of the plains receive less than 100 mm annually, but some plains, like the Yinchuan Plain, the eastern part of the Hexi Corridor Region in Gansu, and the northern area of Xinjiang, receive from 100 to 250 mm. The extremely arid centres in China, as shown in table 1, obtain no more than 25 mm yearly. However, the mountain areas share much more rainfall during some periods. For instance, there are 500 mm or even 1,000 mm of rainfall in the western part of the Tianshan Mountains, and about 400 x 108 m³ surface run-off are formed and come down to the plains. In the Qilian Mountains of Gansu, 350400 mm can be expected, which results in 70 x 108 m³ of water being supplied to the Hexi Corridor Region every year.
According to the isohyets, the annual precipitation in China's arid regions (including mountain areas) is estimated at over 5,000 x 108 m³, which converts into an average rainfall of 175 mm and which constitutes the only reliable guarantee for subsistence and development in these regions.
Glacial Resources
Glaciers and permanent snow are special water resources preserved in the mountains of the arid regions, and they play an important role in regulating run-off. The glaciers cover a wide area of about 26,000 km² from the Qilian Mountains in the east to the Tianshan Mountains in the west, and from the Altayshan Mountains in the north to the Kulunshan Mountains in the south, with water reserves of 29,000 x 108 m³ (Qu 1986) supplying 230 x 108 m³ of water to the run-off annually (Gao and Shi 1992). The glacial run-off percentage of the surface run-off is 20.8 per cent in Xinjiang, 12.0 per cent in the Hexi
<section>p46.jpg Figure 1 Precipitation Isogram of the Arid Regions of China</section>
Table 1 The Centres Extreme Aridity in the Arid Regions of China
Arid centre
Annual precipitation(mm)
Minimum recorded ^a(mm)
Maximum recorded ^a(mm)
Period
Tuksun
Naomaohu
Lenghu
Ruoqiang
a
. Year recorded, in parentheses.
Table 2 River Run-off Resources in the Arid Regions of China
Region
Run-off volume(10^8 m³)
Percentage of total run-off volume (%)
Flow in from outside regions (10^8 m³)
Flow out to outside regions (10^8 m³)
North Xinjiang
South Xinjiang
Gansu
Qinhai
Ningxia
Alxa, Inner Mongolia
Total
Source
: Gao and Sui (1992).
Corridor Region, and 15.6 per cent in Qinghai Province. So it can be said that the glacial resources serve not only to store water in a certain quantity but also to improve the stability of the water supply and the efficiency of water utilization in the regions.
River Run-off-Resources
The rainfall in the mountains and melt water from the glaciers are the major supply sources to the surface run-off in the regions and can be used as water resources once they have been transformed to surface run-off and have flowed into the plains and basins. In other words, the usable water resources in the arid regions are the surface water and the groundwater in the plains. Based on the average annual runoff volume flowing through the mountain passes to the plains and basins, the amount of surface run-off was estimated at about 1,400 x 108 m³ (Gao and Shi 1992) in the arid regions of China (table 2).
The natural river flow in the regions provides high-quality fresh water that can meet any purpose of water use. The degree of mineralization generally ranges from 0.1-0.3 g/litre at the river heads in the mountains to 0.1-0.5 g/litre at the mountain passes. Table 3 shows the degree of mineralization in some rivers in Xinjiang in 1982 (Tarim River in 1983). The degree of mineralization obviously increases to 1.0-5.0 g/litre if the water is used for irrigation in the plains and permeates the ground, especially in the low reaches of rivers like the Tarim, Heihe, and Ulungurhe rivers. At present, although in some cities waste water is discharged directly into the nearby rivers and lakes and causes water quality pollution in varying degrees, industrial pollution is not yet serious in the regions
Table 3 Annual Changes of Degree of Mineralization in Some Rivers in Xinjiang
Degree of mineralization (mg/litre)
River
Station
Jan-Apr
May-Aug
Sep-Dec
Toutun
Hadibe
Urumqi
Yingxunqiao
Dina
Dinahe
Karakax
Uluwati
Tarim
Aral
2,040 (Jan-May)
576 (Jun-Sep)
1,020 (Oct Dec)
Source
: CAS (1989).
Groundwater Resources
Groundwater is a very important component of the water resources, and an indispensable form of movement, transformation, and utilization of water in the regions. Because of the arid climate conditions, only a very small part of the groundwater is supplied as rainfall and the largest portion stems from the permeation of surface water. When the rivers come down to the plains from the mountains, a great quantity of water seeps through the ground to become groundwater, and the groundwater spills over as springs in lower-lying areas. Such "seeping-spilling" forms the basic pattern of the water cycle between surface and groundwater in the arid regions. For example, in Xinjiang, about 185 x 108 m³ of river water seeps into the ground, and 60 x 108 m³ overflows to the surface again every year. Sometimes, the cycle seems to repeat itself in some places.
The groundwater resources are widely dispersed in the Piedmont plains, basins' fluvial plains, and desert areas. In the four biggest Piedmont plains, the annual natural supply of water to groundwater is about 316 x 108 m³ (table 4) and 60-90 per cent of that is transformed from surface water (Gao and Shi 1992).
The groundwater in lake basins and fluvial plains is provided mostly by underground flow and permeation of surface water. In the eight largest areas there are about 33 x 108 m³.. Since those areas are located in the lower reaches of the water supply and are seriously affected by human activities, some problems, such as the lowering of the groundwater level, the contraction of lake basins, and the exhaustion of groundwater supplies, have recently become more and more severe.
There are other kinds of water resources, such as soil water and phreatic water. Soil water depends on the water exchanges between rainfall, surface run-off, and groundwater in the soil, which are so complex that it is difficult to make a quantitative evaluation. The phreatic water can be found in deserts. Since most of the interior basins in the arid regions are occupied by deserts more than 694,000 km² and it is impossible for surface and groundwater from the outside to enter, rainfall is the main source for phreatic water here, which is estimated at about 50 x 108 m³ each year.
Table 4 Groundwater Resources in the Piedmont Plains of the Arid Regions of China
Plains
Recharged from river canal and field( x 10^8 m³)
Ground run-off( x 10^8 m³)
Permeated from rainfall( x 10^8 m³)
Total recharged volume( x 10^8 m³)
Hexi Corridor Region, Gansu
Caidam Basin, Qinhai
Junggar Basin, Xinjiang
Tarim Basin, Xinjiang
Total
Source
: Gao and Sui (1992).
<section>Water utilization and agricultural environment</section>
Water Utilization
In the arid regions of China, water utilization has a long history because of irrigation agriculture. Since the Han Dynasty (206 B.C. 220 A.D.), the regions have been opened up on a large scale. The people have accumulated rich experience and achieved phenomenal success in the development, utilization, and protection of water resources. A very good example is an ancient water conservation measure used in Xinjiang, the karez well, an irrigation system of wells connected by underground channels. This system can draw water automatically into the fields, just like artesian springs. There were more than 1,;'00 channels of the karez well, with an overall length of 5,000 km (3-4 km on average and 30 km the longest) in Xinjiang in the 1950s. According to 1985 statistics (CAS 1989), there were still 1,016 channels used to distribute 4 x 108 m³ of water to irrigate 20,000 ha of farm land (table 5).
Before the 1950s, there were just a few water-conservation facilities in the regions, and the total irrigated land area was only about 1.3 million ha in 1949. Since the 1950s, the construction of water-conservation facilities has achieved quite good results. Excepting the two biggest reservoirs of Liujiaxia and Longyangxia along the Yellow River, there are 1,168 reservoirs of different types with a storage capacity of 77 x 108 m³. Among them are 195 large and middle-sized reservoirs with a storage capacity of 67 x 108 m³.. Many different installations have been built, including 4,300 projects for diverting water automatically, 1,300 engineering facilities for pumping water, 75,700 power-driven wells, and 250,000 km channels on different scales (Gao and Shi 1992). Those installations can effectively irrigate 4.5 million ha of farm land, 127,000 ha of range land and 429,000 ha of orchards and gardens. Table 6 shows the situation of water utilization in the arid regions of
China in the 1980s
Table 5 Distribution and Flow Capacity of Karez Wells in Xinjiang in 1985
County
Channel
Flow capacity (10^8 m³)
Turpan
Toksun
Shanshan
Hami
Yiwu and Barkol
Muri
Total
Source
: CAS (1989).
Agricultural Environment
In the arid regions, the decisive factor in the ecosystem is water, which will directly affect the environment by the changes in its quantity, quality, and regional distribution. The reclamation and utilization of the water resources in the arid regions played a key role in the development of society and the economy. Certainly, the impact of human activities on water management has improved the environment to be favorable for agricultural development on a large scale, especially thanks to the construction of reservoirs and of irrigation and drainage systems. Several dreams have come true, such as expanding the agricultural areas of the old oases, exploiting the wasteland, and increasing the artificial woodland and range land. Those changes have brought about a great advance in agricultural production. But the management of water resources is still the most important task for sustainable development in the arid regions, not only because the promotion of economic prosperity is
limited by water scarcity but also because water management is involved in exploiting other natural resources and protecting the environment. In view of the laws governing water movement, transformation, and circulation, and the role of water in the arid ecosystem and in sustainable agriculture, there have been many harmful effects on the agricultural environment from poor water management, which can be summed up as follows.
Shortened Rivers, Shrunken or Dried Lakes and Degenerated Water Quality
Every continental river basin in the arid regions is a unit composed of surface water and groundwater forming an independent water-resources system and an integrated ecosystem. Given the limitation of water resources, if the channels and water storage were increased excessively in the upper reaches this would cause not only a decrease in the water supply, a river shortened in many cases, and the deterioration of water quality in the lower reaches, but also an imbalance in the ecosystem, degradation of the environment, and destruction of other resources.
Table 6 Water Utilization in the Arid Regions of China
Province
Agricultural irrigation(10^8 m³)
Range-land irrigation(10^8 m³)
Industrial water use(10^8 m³)
City use(10^8 m³)
Countryside use(10^8 m³)
Surface water use(10^8 m³)
Groundwater^a use(10^8 m³)
Xinjiang
Hexi Corridor Region, Gansu
Qinhai
Inner Mongolia
Yellow River^b
Total
Percentage
Source:
Gao and Sui (1992).
a. Includes water diverted from springs.
b. Up to the Hekou hydrometric station, Lanzhou.
Unfortunately, many rivers, such as the Tarim, Keriya, Hotan, Yarkant, Konqi, Shule, Heihe, and Shiyan, in the arid regions are facing such problems. For example, the Tarim River valleys converge to a river system originating from the Kulun and Tianshan Mountains. There used to be enough run-off so that Lake Taitema could survive for a long time at the end of the river. But, during the last five years, owing to a sharp increase in the water consumed for agriculture in the upper reaches, the water supply to the lower reaches has decreased constantly, as table 7 shows. The artificial Daixihaizi Reservoir has become "the end of the lake." Each decade, the lower reaches received less and less sluice water from the reservoir. From table 7 it can easily be seen that, during the last three decades, the run-off volume has shown only small variations compared with the average volume of 49.2 x 108 m³ at the Aral Hydrometric Station, which represents the volume of water supply
contributed to the upper reaches of the Tarim River by its tributaries, but has decreased station by station from the upper to the lower reaches until only about one-quarter of its original volume of 1957-1960 remains at Qara Station in 1986.
Even worse was the fact that more than 300 km of river bed and all of Lake Taitema have been dried up for many years. The groundwater level on both sides of the river bed declined quickly from 3-5 m to 8-10 m or more below the ground surface. For instance, the groundwater levels were 3-5 m in two wells of the Aragan Region in the 1950s and descended to 11-13 m in 1985 (Wang 1986). Table 8 displays another example of shortening of a seasonal section of the Keriya River in Xinjiang.
In the 1950s, there were 52 lakes of over 5 km² in area in Xinjiang, totalling 9,700 km², but that number had decreased to 4,700 km² by the early 1980s. The famous Lake Lup Nur (3,000 km²) dried up in 1964 and others, such as Lake Manas (550 km²) in 1960, Lake Taitema (88 km²) in 1972, and Lake Aydingkol (124 km²) in the 1980s, dried up in succession. Lake Ebinur (1,070 km²) and Lake Ulungur (745 km²) have been reduced to one-half and one-tenth their original size, respectively, since the 1950s. In the Alxa Plateau of Inner Mongolia, the Gaxun Nur Lake (262 km²) dried up in the 1970s and the Sogo Nur Lake in the 1980s.
Since expansion of the irrigation areas in the upper reaches has increased the proportion of backwater (recharged from the irrigated land), the degree of mineralization has increased in the lower reaches, which has caused water-quality deterioration. The degree of mineralization has changed at the Aral Station as follows: initially, 0.33-1.28 g/litre, with an average of less than 1 g/litre year-round except in May (the driest season) before the upper area was irrigated on a large scale; subsequently, more than 1 g/litre year-round except in the flood season, with 2.5-5.5 g/litre in the dry season. The degree of mineralization for groundwater from Aragan to Lake Taitema was raised from less than 1 g/litre in the 1950s to 2-10 g/litre in the 1980s along the Tarim River, and reached over 400 g/litre at Lake Taitema in 1982 (Zhou 1983). In
Table 7 Run-off Volume (108 m³) Passing the Main Hydrometric Stations (Points) along the Tarim River
Station (point)
Period
Aral
Qiman
Taba Luntai
Confluence one ^a
Confluence two^ b
Qara
Sluice from Daxihaizi Reservoir
Yengisu
Argan
Luobuzhuang Lake Taitema
Run-off perennial
flood water only
2 m³/s (Oct. 1965)
Dried up (1974)
Dried up
Dried up
No sluice
Dried up
Dried up
Dried up
Source
: CAS (1989).
a. Run-off flowed in the Tarim river from the Wushiman river.
b. From the Ogan river.
Table 8 Shortening Situation of a Seasonal Section of the Keriya River
Period
Type of run-off
Place reached
Distance from Yutian (km)
Extent of shortening (km)
1950s
Flood water
Xiabulak
Normal run-off
Tobkargan
1960s
Flood water
Xiaderan
Normal run-off
Yirake
1970s
Flood water
Aktuzi
Normal run-off
Xiakshimu
1980s
Flood water
Daiheyan
Normal run-off
Lianmaza
Source
: Tian (1986).
Table 9 Irrigation in Southern Xinjiang in 1985
Region
Water use(10^8 m³)
Irrigation area(ha)
Irrigation quota(m³/ha)
Canal utilization coefficient
Kizilsu
Kashgar
Nongsanshi
Hotan
Bayingolin
Lake Borten (1,019 km²), the degree of mineralization changed from 0.39 g/litre in the 1950s to 1.5 g/litre in the 1970s, and to over 1.8 g/litre in the 1980s; the lake level has descended from an elevation of 1,048.5 m in the 1950s to 1,047.5 m in the 1960s, 1,046.0 m in the 1970s, 1,045.6 m in 1985, and 1,044.8 m in 1986, a total drop of 3.70 m.
Salinization
Water conservation is an essential prerequisite for constructing new oasis agriculture in the arid regions. A vast area of wasteland has been opened up, dependent solely on the water-supply system. But if the water management is poor and inappropriate, the new productive oasis could become wasteland again. For a long time in the past, much attention was paid to broadening water sources, but less to reducing water wastage. The waste of water, or overuse of water resources, was a very common irrigation practice, resulting from the backwardness of such systems as flood irrigation. Channel permeation wasted water in great quantities, too, since only 0.5-1.0 per cent of the total number of channels had been treated to be waterproof. Under those conditions, a high irrigation quota was impossible to avoid. Table 9 shows the situation of irrigation in the southern part of Xinjiang in 1985. The gross irrigation quota in the area was more than 14,850 m³/ha and even reached 19,000
m³/ha. Very disadvantageous also was the fact that many of the irrigated areas were not fitted with drainage systems. Such a practice not only wasted water resources but also did not meet the water need for crops in good time and sufficient quantity, and caused the rising of groundwater levels and the creation and expansion of land affected by salinization. Up to the late 1980s, about 1.15 million ha of land had been salinized to a serious degree, one-third of the total irrigated farmland in the arid regions of China.
Table 10 Degradation of Populus Diversifolia Woodland in the Lower Reaches of Some Rivers in the Arid Regions of China
Period
River
1950s(ha)
1980s(ha)
Percentage decrease
Heihe
Shiyang
Yarkant
Tarim
Kaxgar
Kaxakax
Vegetation Degeneration
The unfavourable changes in the water supply and the degree of mineralization resulted in serious vegetation degeneration, especially of woodlands (mostly composed of Populus diversifolia), in the regions. Of course, felling the trees to open up wasteland and to gather firewood for heating and cooking destroyed the woodland even more quickly. But in the lower reaches of the rivers, a more important factor was the water. Table 10 shows examples of the degradation of P. diversifolia woodland in the lower reaches of some rivers in the region.
Vegetation has also been degraded by overuse of groundwater in oases that are located at the lower reaches of rivers. Take the Minqin Oasis of the Shiyang River as an example. Because the surface run-off to the oasis has been lowered continuously (5.46 X 108 m³ in the 1950s, 4.49 x 108 m³ in the 1960s, 3.23 x 108 m³ in the 1970s, and 2.22 x 108 m³ in the 1980s), groundwater has been pumped extensively since the 1970s (1-3 x 108 m³ annually), and the accumulated total for the following 15 years amounted to 36.28 X 108 m³, which greatly exceeded the quantity of recharged water in the same period. The utilization ratio of groundwater for agriculture has increased from 4-5 per cent in the 1950s to 50 per cent in the 1980s. For these reasons, the groundwater level has declined by a large margin, by about 4-17 m from place to place at the oasis. The natural and artificial vegetation has withered and died. There were 220,000 ha of arboreal and shrub woodland in the late 1950s, of
which 72,600 ha in good growth were left in the late 1980s; thus, about 67 per cent of the woodland has degraded. The vegetation cover has decreased from 44.8 per cent to 15 per cent (Zhu and Chen 1994).
Sandy Desertification
Sandy desertification is a major part of environmental degradation in the arid regions of China (Zhu and Chen 1994), and is mainly caused by excessive human activities facilitating wind erosion. Wind erosion damages the structure and composition of soil and leads to a rapid decline of biomass production and potential productivity of the land. The features of the land surface will deteriorate under the impact of wind erosion. Wind erosion occurs after the vegetation has been destroyed by overcultivation, overcollection of fuel wood, overgrazing, and misuse of water resources.
A very good example here can illustrate what constitutes misuse of water resources. Salinization was caused principally by the overuse of water in the upper and middle reaches of the rivers, while the sandy desertification spread because there was no more water available in the lower reaches. Many areas of farm land had to be abandoned along the lower reaches since the water supply had been cut off. Those areas were subject to erosion by wind and became decertified land some years later. Since the 1950s, more than 132,000 ha of farm land have been decertified in the regions along the lower reaches of the Tarim River and Konqi River, 25,400 ha along the Shiyang River and 30,000 ha along the Hotan River. Also, much range land and woodland has been degraded in the same period. In total, 343,000 ha of abandoned land have been decertified in the southern part of Xinjiang (Wang 1996) and much more in the arid regions as a whole. The degradation of the agricultural environment
because of misused water resources in the arid regions can be seen in summary in figure 2.
<section>Improving water management for sustainable agricultural development</section>
Water resources are the most important condition for agricultural development and hence economic development and progress of the society in arid regions. Water management and utilization have made great contributions to agriculture, but were accompanied by some environmental and social problems because of the misuse of water resources. At present, developing agricultural production is limited by the degree to which the water supply occurs in the right amount and at the right moment in the arid regions of China. Consequently, the urgent challenge before us is the improvement of water management and utilization, which not only is required to ensure the sustainable development of the economy, but also is needed to protect the agricultural environment. Some suggestions based on typical examples of good water management in the region can be made as follows.
1. Take the Continental River Basin As an Integrated Ecological System to Unify Water-Use Planning with Due Consideration for All Concerned
In the arid regions, the formation, distribution, and transformation of water resources originate from each continental river basin through the link between surface run-off and groundwater, which constitute an integrative valley ecosystem from the upper to the lower reaches of the river. The oasis agriculture in the river basin depends on the water supply. Any unsuitable water use will cause an imbalance of the ecosystem and environmental degradation, and consequently endanger the agricultural production. So it is a vital task to take the river basin as a whole ecosystem to unify the water-use plan. In accordance with the principles of overall consideration of all factors in the upper, middle, and lower reaches of the river, of unified management and utilization of surface and groundwater resources, and of centralized distribution of water supply along the river, the former intensive water use should be regulated and the scope of land use should be maintained at the level of
the maximum water capability for irrigation. A good example is the well management of the Manas River basin in the south-western fringe of the Gurbantunggut Desert in Xinjiang in the aspects of water use and water-conservation projects.
2. Increase the Utilization Ratio of Water Use and Establish a Stable and Highly Efficient Artificial Ecosystem in Each River Basin
In the arid regions, agriculture can be practiced only in the oases, and over 90 per cent of farmland relies on irrigation. The average grain yield is 2,100-2,500 kg/ha, but 3,700-4,000 kg/ha in many high-yield fields (Wang and Zhu 1989).
The land's productivity has a great potential to be exploited. Under the present conditions of available water and favourable heat and light resources, along with gigantic efforts to increase the production so as to increase the multiple crop index, to choose crops in the light of water-supply variation in different seasons, to ameliorate the soil, and to control salinization, a stable and highly efficient artificial ecosystem will not be so difficult to establish. Again, the example is the artificial oasis ecosystem in the Manas River basin in Xinjiang. Here, the utilization ratio of water use was increased to as high as 85 per cent in the 1980s. The areas of artificial oasis agriculture expanded from 1,200 km² in the 1950s to 7,200 km² in the 1980s.
3. Improve the Conveyance System and Irrigation Technique
Although many water-conservation facilities have been constructed, most of them still need to be completed by adding conveyance systems, and the trunk and branch canals also have to be treated with seepage-proof materials, so that more benefits of water use can be obtained. For example, in the Shihezhi reclamation area of Xinjiang, the irrigation system with over 40 per cent seepage-proof canals has effectively saved water since the canal utilization coefficient reached 0.63 and the irrigation quota decreased to 5,460 m³/ha.
The irrigation techniques, such as flood and string irrigation, are very backward in the arid regions, too, which results in the large gross quota of irrigation (table 9); capital construction on farmland and better techniques (furrow and border method of irrigation) should therefore be carried out. A series of experiments on the Yarkant River of Xinjiang shows that the gross quota of irrigation could be decreased on average to 2,300 m³/ha when the better technique was practiced, and about 3.87 x 108 m³ of water could be saved annually over a total of 167,000 ha land if spring-sown crops were adapted to the border method of irrigation along the river only. Information regarding the advanced technique of spray and drip irrigation should be spread and applied, although we would not expect that to be on a large scale at present because of the higher cost.
4. Protect the Natural Vegetation and Develop an Artificial Shelter Belt for a Better Agricultural Environment
The oasis is the foundation of agriculture. But only 3-15 per cent of the river basin area is constituted by oases in the arid regions, which are surrounded by deserts and face many natural disasters such as drought damage, frost injury, hail, flooding, sandstorms, dry and hot winds, and wind erosion. Vegetation serves to withstand these disasters; thus, on the one hand, it is a foundation to safeguard the stability of the oasis and on the other hand it is the most stable part of production in the arid ecosystem. It is, consequently, very necessary to ensure a volume of water for use on woodland and range land, which will certainly have the effect of protecting the oasis ecosystem.
Based on the experience of oasis shelter-belt construction in the arid regions, the forestry should keep a certain proportion in the oasis area. In the Shihezhi reclamation area of Xinjiang, the shelter-belt covers 7-15 per cent of the irrigation area on the edge of deserts and 5-10 per cent in the oases. In the Hexi Corridor Region the proportion is 5-10 per cent. Under normal conditions, the shelter forest is planted along the canal or around the crop land, so the seepage water from the canal and land can be used by the forest. That being the case, the forest can fully save and utilize the farmland irrigation water, as well as providing biological drainage to avoid salinization. At present, the total forest land in the arid regions comprises about 5-10 per cent of irrigation land, which still should continue to increase. The water supply for the shelter-belt and woodland should be about 10 15 per cent of total irrigation water in the oases.
<section>Conclusions</section>
Water is one of the most challenging current and future natural resources issues in the arid regions of China. For sustainable agricultural development and, hence, economic growth and society's progress, water is the key to success. Although there are vast wastelands and light and heat resources, the local economy depends only on irrigated agriculture and animal husbandry because of the water limitations. In the arid regions of China, water utilization has a long history and human activities in water management have improved the agricultural environment to be favourable for subsistence and development on a large scale. Along with the construction of reservoirs, irrigation and drainage systems, and other water-conservation facilities, the old oases have been expanded and new oases and artificial woodland and range land have been created. These have brought about great advances in agricultural production. But, owing to increased human requirements and overused and misused
water resources, agro-environmental degradation, such as salinization, vegetation degeneration, and sandy desertification, has been caused and spread quickly. The existing water resources are already under great pressure from agriculture, and will face a much more difficult situation in the future. However, some typical examples have proved that agricultural development could be sustained if water management was improved. But how to conduct sound water management is still the most important question for sustainable development when we face agriculture that is limited by water.
<section>References</section>
CAS. 1989. Water-use and Its Balance between Supply and Demand in Xinjiang. Study Group on Xinjiang Resources Exploitation, Chinese Academy of Sciences. Science Press, Beijing.
Gao Qianzhao and Shi Shengshen. 1992. Water resources in the arid zone of northwest China. Journal of Desert Research (Lanzhou) 12-4:1-12.
Qu Ningshu. 1986. Land-use problem in China's arid and semi-arid region. Journal of Desert Research (Lanzhou) 6-1:1 5.
TianYuzhao. 1986. Tugayi in the delta and lower reaches of the Kerya river - A natural complex reflecting ecological degradation. Journal of Desert Research (Lanzhou) 8-2:1 24.
Wang Tao. 1986. Process in desertification and predicting its developmental trends in Argan region in the lower reaches of Tarim River, Xinjiang. Journal of Desert Research (Lanzhou) 6-2:16-26.
Wang Tao. 1996. Land use and land degradation in the Tarim basin, Xinjiang, China. Journal of Arid Land Studies, 5:137-144.
Wang Tao and Zhu Zhenda. 1989. Comparative study on desertification of the typical areas in northern China. Journal of Desert Research (Lanzhou) 9-1:113-137.
Zhou Xinjia. 1983. The desert features and the desert environmental evaluation in Xinjiang. In: The Desertification and its Control in Xinjiang, pp. 1-40. Science Press, Beijing.
Zhu Zhenda and Chen Guanting. 1994. Sandy Desertification in China. Science Press, Beijing.
<section>5: The development of groundwater resources on the Miyakojima Islands</section>
Kimio Osuga
<section>Introduction</section>
An estimation of potential and available groundwater resources is very difficult because of their invisibility. In the case of the construction of underground dams that store the groundwater How, we need to consider many technical issues. Since 1990, on the Miyakojima Islands, the Japan Agricultural Land Development Agency (JALDA) has been implementing a project to construct two underground dams that will be the largest in the world. One of the two was completed in November 1993 and the other is now under construction. This report presents the concept of the underground dams on the Miyakojima Islands, the construction methods, and related technical issues.
<section>Outline of the Miyakojima Islands</section>
The Miyakojima Islands are located about 1,900 km south-west of Tokyo, comprising an area of 159 km². The climate is characteristically subtropical with a high annual average temperature of 23°C and high humidity of 79 per cent. Though annual rainfall is high, approximately 2,200 mm, it is unpredictable and fluctuating because much of it largely relies on rainy-season rainfall and typhoons. Besides this, all the islands are covered by a highly permeable Lyukyu limestone layer that shapes its flat plateau and has resulted in the absence of rivers on the islands.
The islands, with a population of about 48,000, are divided into four administrative areas, Hirara City, Shimoji Town, Gusukube Town and Ueno Village (fig. 1). The main industry on the islands is agriculture and its development strategy is mixed farming, with sugar cane as the main crop and cattle for meat. In recent years, crop diversification has been increased where, for example, vegetables are grown targeting the pre-season of the main island of Japan, and tropical fruits and tobacco are also grown. Furthermore, the now famous All Japan Triathlon Competition is held on Miyakojima every year in April and, since the inception of direct-flight services from Tokyo and Osaka to the islands, tourism has increased steadily.
<section>Geology and the hydrological cycle</section>
The Shimajiri mudstone layer of bedrock is an impermeable rock with an average hydraulic conductivity of 2 x 10-6 cm/sec. Over this, the highly permeable Lyukyu limestone layer with a hydraulic conductivity of 3.5 x 10-1 cm/ sec forms the aquifer with a thickness of between 10 and 70 m. The effective porosity of the Lyukyu limestone is estimated at between 10 and 15 per cent. Tectonic movements accompanied by several faults have formed underground valleys, and groundwater flows along these valleys.
Thus, 40 per cent of the abundant rainfall on Miyakojima penetrates underground and quickly flows out into the ocean unused. In addition, the strong subtropical sunshine evaporates as much as 50 per cent of the rainfall. The result is that only 10 per cent of the precipitation can flow along the surface (fig. 2). Using the water resources on Miyakojima has been quite difficult, owing to these natural conditions.
Before construction of the drinking-water supply system in the 1960s, obtaining drinking water was hard work for the women and children, owing to the above natural conditions. Agriculture, the main industry on the islands, still experiences frequent drought.
<section>Outline of the irrigation project on Miyakojima</section>
In order to reduce the burden of drought and to modernize agricultural management, an irrigation project has been implemented since 1987. The area benefiting from the project is 8,400 ha, which occupies half of the total surface area of the islands and about 90 per cent of the arable land. The total project cost was estimated at ¥89 billion in 1986.
The irrigation project is divided into the following three parts (table 1):
1. The construction of two underground dams, named Sunagawa and Fukuzato, and intake facilities (a number of wells with submergible motor pumps) installed in the storage area of those dams, which will be implemented by the JALDA Project;
2. The construction of farm ponds and the main pipelines, which will be implemented by the Japanese National Irrigation Project;
3. The construction of irrigation facilities on the farm and the field consolidation, which will be implemented by the Prefectural and Local Government Project.
The water sources for the project depend on two underground dams, one experimental underground dam (Minafuku) and one natural groundwater basin (Nakahara). The total amount of developed groundwater resources in this project will be 24 million cubic metres (mcm), which constitutes 40 per cent of the total unused groundwater returning to the ocean per annum, an estimated 60 mcm (table 2).
Table 1 Planned Infrastructure Facilities of Irrigation Project
Administrative organization
Planned infrastructure facilities
Quantity
Cost^a (million $)
JALDA
Underground dam (incl intakes)
Government of Japan
Irrigation canal (km)
Water compressing facility
Farm pond
Water management facility
Local government
On-farm irrigation facility (ha)
Land consolidation (ha)
Total
a
. Estimated costs based on 1986 prices ($1 = ¥150).
Table 2 Water Resources Development Plan
Underground basin^a
Sunagawa
Nakahara
Fukuzato
Minafuku
Underground dam
Sunagawa: main dam
(Natural basin)
Fukuzato: main dam, 2 sub-dams
Minafuku Dam
Basin area (km²)
Reservoir area (km²)
Total capacity (mcm)
Effective capacity (mcm)
Water utilization capacity (mcm)
a
. mcm = million cubic metres.
<section>The construction and concept of the underground dam</section>
Widely fluctuating groundwater levels throughout the year and salt-water infiltration along the coastline heavily constrain the use of groundwater. If we could control the groundwater level at a constant level, the available groundwater resources would increase enormously. The idea mentioned above has led to the underground dam project, which dams up groundwater flow within an aquifer so that a great amount of water which up until now returned to the ocean unused can now be used for irrigation (figs. 3 and 4).
The underground dam cannot be constructed just anywhere. The following appropriate conditions are necessary:
o An aquifer with high effective porosity, sufficient thickness needs and great areal extent;
o An impermeable bedrock layer under the aquifer;
o Sufficient groundwater inflow to the underground area;
o An underground valley where an underground barrier can be built;
o Land-use practices that do not contribute to groundwater contamination.
Compared with conventional dams, underground dams have the following advantages:
o Since water is stored underground, submergence of houses and land can be avoided, and thus the land above the underground dam can be utilized as it was prior to the construction of the dam;
o Potential disasters caused by collapses of the barrier (cut-off wall) can be excluded;
o The construction cost of the cut-off wall can be lowered by thinning it, provided that it satisfies the necessary permeability requirement;
o The dam's life span can be semi-permanent because of the absence of the accumulation of sediments.
However, there are also the following disadvantages:
o Accurate estimation of the reserve volume of groundwater is very difficult;
o Construction control, such as control of the completed work and quality control of the cut-off walls, needs careful consideration because of its invisibility;
o The cost of the operation and maintenance of the intake facilities may be more expensive than that of conventional dams.
<section>The Construction of the Cut-off Walls</section>
The site of the cut-off walls was decided from the following points of view:
o The site needs to be located at the most downstream point to the extent that the necessary water volume can be stored;
o The site needs to be located at the narrowest point of the underground valley to reduce the construction cost;
o The site needs to be located at a place where no obstacles can impede construction;
o The site should not be situated over ground containing caverns;
o The depth of the cut-off walls should be less than 70 metres from the surface, taking into consideration the drilling capacity of machines.
As a construction method for the cut-off walls, the consecutive pillar wall using the in-site churning method is adopted in most parts, taking into consideration the geological conditions, the working efficiency, and cost performance. Many different machines are used in this method to make the best use of each machine's capabilities in constructing the cut-off walls. The procedures are as follows:
1. From the surface, augers with a casing are used to make holes down to the crest of the dam;
2. For places deeper than the crest of the dam, powerful augers with a single shaft are used to predrill into the hard limestone layer, making the remaining work easier;
3. Augers with three shafts are used in constructing the cut-off wall. This wall consists of pillars made of liquid cement and crushed limestone;
4. To form the shape of the crest of the dam, another machine with a rectangular-shaped bucket is used.
<section>p67.jpg Figure 5 The Construction Procedures of the Cut-off Wall</section>
A wall as deep as 65 metres from the surface was constructed as the Sunagawa Underground Dam by using this method (fig. 5). The depth, the continuity, and the quality are the most important aspects for the construction of the wall. A computer-aided system has been introduced to manage the construction. The data on the drilling depth, the verticality, and the amount of liquid cement injected were displayed in the control office where operators could issue very detailed and efficient directions.
<section>The construction of the intake facilities</section>
The other important facility of the underground dam is the water intake that pumps up the stored groundwater. Many wells are installed over a large area of the basin for effectively collecting the groundwater. The elevation of the bedrock, the space between the wells, and the permeability of the aquifer are examined carefully in order to decide on the arrangement of the wells. The permeability of Lyukyu limestone is not constant. As a result of a careful examination and analysis of the data on geology and pumping tests, it has become clear that the permeability of the Lyukyu limestone on the Miyakojima Islands is mostly affected by the content of the clay derived from near the surface layer. Based on this fact, a finite element method model of an aquifer was built up and then the intake possibility in each of the planned wells was calculated by using this model.
A submergible motor pump with the diameter of 125 mm and with a water intake of 0.023 m³/sec was designed. These intake wells are located directly under the facility road for easy maintenance. The water-intake facilities are controlled by the pumping station. The groundwater is pumped up from the wells to the farm ponds on the hills through pipelines and then distributed to the agricultural areas (fig. 6).
<section>p68.jpg Figure 6 Cross-section, from Upstream to Downstream, of the Underground Dam (GOJ, Government of Japan; JALDA, Japan Agricultural Land Development Agency)</section>
<section>The storage situation of the Sunagawa underground dam</section>
The groundwater level of the Sunagawa underground dam started to rise immediately after the completion of the cut-off wall in November 1993 and reached the full water level of 31.0 m on 30 September 1995. Since then it has remained at overflowing level, around 31.7 m (fig. 7). We have not seen any partial fluctuation of the groundwater level at upstream or downstream sites along the cutoff wall, either before or after reaching the full water level. Thus, the facts mentioned above verify that the impermeability of the cut-off wall is secured and so also is the permeability of the crest of the wall.
<section>Conclusion</section>
It is now possible to irrigate 914 ha using the water stored in the Sunagawa Dam (as of March 1996). This area will increase gradually according to the increase in the area of land consolidation and of irrigation facilities installed.
Construction of underground dams applying the same methods used on the Miyakojima Islands has started on the main island of Okinawa and on Kikaijima Island in Kagoshima Prefecture. Building underground dams has thus been verified as an effective way of water-resources development on these remote islands or in areas with no surface water. This method is also effective in arid lands, from the point of view that it can reduce high evaporation and store the fluctuating rainfall.
<section>Bibliography</section>
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry, and Fisheries. 1993. Technical Guidelines for the Planning and Designing of Underground Dams (in Japanese), 2 6. Natural Resource Division, Planning Department, Agricultural Structure Improvement Bureau.
Mori, K., M. Asano, and T. Shirakawa. 1996. Lithology and Permeability of Lyukyu Limestone in Sunagawa Subsurface Dam in Miyakojima (in Japanese). The Japan Geology Association.
Nagata, J. 1991. How are Underground Dams constructed? (in Japanese). Report of lecture meeting in autumn 1991. Japanese Society of Groundwater.
Nagata, J., S. Nagata, and M. Okamoto. 1991. Hydrogeology and Underground Dam Project on Miyakojima Islands (in Japanese). Report of lecture meeting in autumn 1991. Japanese Society of Groundwater.
Nilsson, A. 1988. Groundwater Dams for Small-scale Water Supply. Intermediate Technology Publications, London.
Okinawa Development Bureau. 1987. Basic Design Report on Miyako Irrigation Project (in Japanese).
Okinawa Development Bureau. 1983. Groundwater in Okinawa (in Japanese), 4, 5, 811, 67. Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries Department.
Okinawa Prefecture. 1995. Miyako Outlook (in Japanese), 2-4, 31-32. Miyako Branch Office.
Yamada, T. 1993. Construction of Underground Dams on Miyakojima (in Japanese). The Dam Digest, No. 580, pp. 81-95. The Japan Dam Foundation.
<section>6: Global warming and groundwater resources in arid lands</section>
Isamu Kayane
<section>Quaternary climate history</section>
Past stable-isotope records from the ice core and the deep ocean sediment core revealed that the earth has experienced a repeated climatic rhythm of glacials and interglacials with a cycle of about 100 ka (thousand years) after 800 ka BP (before the present). According to a climate history since 3.5 Ma (million years) BP reconstructed by a Chinese scientist based on analysis of loess deposits in northeastern China, the climate has experienced alternate periods of desertification and inter-desertification (Geng 1986). In his interpretation, the typical profile of loess deposits consists of a series of alternate depositions of the eolian yellow loess layer transported from the inland desert region during the dry period (desertification), and the brown-reddish palaeo-soil layer formed in situ during the wet period (inter-desertification). Although the glacial and the interglacial do not necessarily correspond to the inter-desertification and the desertification, respectively,
it may be said that the inland climate in China was drier during the interglacial, or warm, period than during the glacial, or cold, period. The present climate since 2 ka BP in northern China corresponds to a desertification.
Closed lake level records in the northern middle-latitude zone also suggest a drier climate during the hypsithermal interval (HI) at around 6 ka BP, the warmest period during the present interglacial, and a wetter climate during the last glacial maximum (LGM) at around 18 ka BP (Street-Perrott and Harrison 1985).
The saltiest lake water in the world, in the Dead Sea, is a result of rapid desiccation of the lake after the LGM to the HI, during which the lake level dropped by more than 200 m (Issar et al. 1989). However, in the Indus River basin on the same latitude of 30°N, the climate was drier during the LGM and wetter during the HI compared with the present climate. The Indus civilization flourished during the wetter climate following after the HI, and finally disappeared at around 3.3 ka BP (Khanna 1992) when a dramatic decrease in precipitation occurred during the course of global cooling after the HI (Lamb 1982). Climatic changes near the 30°N latitude were very variable and differed from region to region, as shown in table 1, because a small latitudinal shift of the position of the polar front could result in dramatic increases or decreases in local precipitation. It may be said that the climate in arid lands in the subtropical or middle-latitude zone is highly variable both in
time and space, as evidenced by many past climatic records.
Table 1 Climatic Changes in the Zone of Latitude 30°N
Period
Region
LGM^a(18 ka BP; cold)
Hl^b(8-6 ka BP; warmest)
Global cooling(ca. 4ka BP)
Ca. 650 AD
Global warming
Indus River
Dry à
Wet à
Drying
Wet à
Dry à
Wetting à
Drying à
a. Last glacial maximum.
b. Hypsithermal interval.
<section>Global warming and desertification</section>
The record from the polar ice core clearly shows that the increase in greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere started with the Industrial Revolution in the eighteenth century, though the rate of increase accelerated after the middle of the twentieth century. It is the general consensus that global warming has occurred because of the increase in atmospheric concentrations of greenhouse gases due to human activities (Houghton et al. 1996). Human activities may influence local precipitation directly through changes in local vegetation cover, and indirectly through global warming.
The direct influence of deforestation of the Amazonian tropical rain forest on Amazonian climate has been discussed (e.g. Shukla et al. 1990). Almost all research results suggest a positive feedback effect of the decrease in local evapotranspiration by deforestation on local precipitation, i.e. the local precipitation will decrease following deforestation, although quantitative evaluation is still the subject of future research. If desertification caused by overgrazing or by other means were to occur in arid lands, the same kind of feedback effect as in the deforestation of the humid Amazonian forest might appear and the local precipitation would decrease. But it is also necessary to take into account the indirect influence of global warming on local precipitation, as is discussed below. The effect of this indirect influence is, in many regions, greater than that of the direct influence.
The global climate system redistributes energy from lower to higher latitudes. The energy surplus in the lower latitudes, bounded roughly by latitudes 35° North and South, results from the latitudinal gradient of the Earth's energy budget. The total energy distributed by ocean currents is greater than that distributed by the atmosphere.
The mean time during which a water molecule passes through a hydrological system (such as a lake, the Pacific Ocean, or the troposphere) is termed the mean hydrological residence time. The "memory" of a hydrological system increases with a longer residence time. The mean residence time is about 10 days for atmospheric vapour, but about 3,000 years for ocean. The atmosphere has a very short memory compared with the longer memory of the ocean. If we could stop the energy supply to the atmosphere, its motion would cease within a month, but the ocean would continue its circulation for a longer period following such an energy cut-off.
The total heat stored in hydrological systems should also be taken into account in assessing the future evolution of the global environment. A short memory is synonymous with a small heat capacity. Thus, the atmosphere contains insufficient heat to act as the source of future dynamic changes in the global climate. It can only respond to changes in forcing, such as changes in solar irradiation or heat supply from the ocean. Future atmospheric behaviour not only depends on increases in greenhouse gas concentrations and earth orbital changes but also depends heavily on changes in the sea surface temperature (SST), global ocean circulation, and the increased atmospheric turbidity (Kayane 1996).
Figure 1 shows the distribution of the SST trend calculated by the SST database for 1930-1989 released from the United Kingdom Meteorological Office for areas of 5 degrees latitude by 5 degrees longitude. The average rate of the SST increase for the whole ocean is about 0.9°C/100 years, which is greater than the rate of the global air temperature increase. The increase in ground surface temperature in the eastern part of North America since the middle of the nineteenth century also exceeds the increase in the surface air temperature (Deming 1995). It is worth noting that the SST increase is predominant in the tropical ocean, but the SST in the Atlantic Ocean north of 30°N was markedly decreased, probably owing to an increased cloud amount caused by water vapour transported from the low-latitude zone. The effect of global warming on the SST and the air temperature does not appear to follow the same trend: the temperature decreases in some regions and increases in others owing
to global warming. This is also true for precipitation changes.
Figure 2 shows possible causal relations between global warming and hydrological processes, although the anthropogenic contribution to the SST remains the subject of ongoing research. Increases in ocean evaporation, ocean precipitation, and global precipitation, corresponding to the intensified global energy and water cycle, are processes directly deducible from the SST increase.
<section>p73a.jpg Figure 1 Global Trends of the Sea Surface Temperature (SST) for Each 5 by 5° Change in Latitude and Longitude Calculated Using the United Kingdom Meteorological Office (UKMO)/SST Database (Source: Kayane et al. 1995)</section>
The SST in the Indian Ocean increased by 0.5-1.0°C during 1930-1989. As a result of increased ocean evaporation due to the SST increase, the rainfall during the SW monsoon season from June to September at Colombo increased by about 30 per cent during 1869-1993. However, the rainfall at Nuwara Eliya, a station at an elevation of 1,895 m in the central high mountains in Sri Lanka, has decreased by about 40 per cent during the same period (fig. 3). An almost linear increase in rainfall during 1870-1970 was also observed at Calicut (Lengerke 1976), a coastal station in south-west India located to the west of the Western Ghats Mountains, where the same orographic effect on rainfall pattern is expected as on the Sri Lankan south-west coast. Such long-term changes in rainfall in Sri Lanka and southwest India can be interpreted as the result of intensified Indian monsoon circulation caused by global warming (Kayane et al. 1995). Changes in local rainfall may take opposite trends
within a relatively small island like Sri Lanka, owing to global warming.
If the Hadley (north-south) circulation were intensified by global warming, the subtropical high would also be intensified, resulting in a decrease in precipitation in arid lands in the middle latitudes. One such example has recently been reported by Liu and Zhao (1996) for the Tibetan Plateau. During the last 40 years, the annual precipitation had an increasing trend in south-east Tibet and had no obvious change in north-east Tibet, while it had a decreasing trend by 5-10 per cent in the north-west and central Tibetan Plateau. Because of the combined effects of the increase in evaporation due to temperature increase and the decrease in precipitation, the river discharge in the middle reaches of the Yarlung Zangbo River decreased by 10 per cent, at the Lancang River by 5 per cent, and at the Lhasa River and the Nyang Chu River also by about 5 per cent.
Brenes Vargas and Saborio Trejos (1994) reported that, generally speaking, the increase in rainfall in the windward side and the decrease in the leeward side of the central mountain range in Costa Rica might be a result of the intensified North Atlantic high, which would strengthen the north-east trade winds to Costa Rica. However, a part of the coastal area in the leeward side shows an increasing trend, presumably caused by the intensified local atmospheric circulation from ocean to coast induced by the strengthened trade winds.
In Patagonia, located in the westerly zone of the southern hemisphere, definite increasing trends in annual precipitation during the past 100 years are observed at Rio Colorado, Neuquen, and Paso de los Indios, all located in northern Patagonia, but stations in southern Patagonia show no obvious change and certainly no decreasing trend (Quintela et al. 1995).
There have also been substantial annual precipitation changes in certain latitudes and regions, most notably a decrease in the African Sahel in the middle latitudes after the 1960s, and a fairly steady increase in the former USSR in the polar frontal zone during the past 100 years (Folland et al. 1990).
The observed precipitation trends described above can be interpreted as the result of an intensified global energy and water cycle, i.e. as indirect effects of human activities on local precipitation through global warming. It may be concluded that the precipitation variability has increased globally both in time and space. This may raise serious problems with respect to water resources and food supply in the future, especially in arid lands.
<section>Characteristics of groundwater in arid lands</section>
Groundwater in arid lands is considered to be a stable water resource not influenced directly by year-to-year climatic variation. This may be true if it is used to a renewable degree, but may not be true if the abstraction rate exceeds the natural recharge rate. Deep groundwater being used in most arid lands was recharged under climatic and hydrological conditions in the past that were much wetter and very different from those of the present.
The mean residence time of groundwater in the world is about 1,000 years, which is far longer than the residence time of about 10 days for river water or the water vapour in the atmosphere. The mean residence time may also be defined as the ratio of the total water storage to the annual recharge rate for the hydrological system concerned. Longer residence time of groundwater in a groundwater basin implies a larger amount of groundwater storage in the groundwater basin, and a smaller rate of annual recharge to it. If the abstraction rate from a groundwater basin exceeds the annual recharge rate to it, the water-table will decline, indicating a decrease in total storage as experienced in many groundwater basins around the world.
The groundwater in the Great Artesian Basin in arid central Australia may be the oldest groundwater currently being used in the world. Its age, dated by the radioactive isotope of chlorine-36, is estimated to be older than 1 Ma (Bentley et al. 1986; Torgersen et al. 1991). The main groundwater resource in the Nubian sandstone in the eastern Sahara dated by carbon-14 was about 25 ka, although the groundwater in some oases was found to be of recent age recharged from the Nile Valley (Munnich and Vogel 1962). The above two cases are typical examples of groundwater resources in arid lands. The deep groundwater in arid lands is "fossil" and being "mined" in the same sense as petroleum.
The water quality of old groundwater is another issue to take into account. Generally speaking, the longer the residence time, the higher the concentration of dissolved ions in groundwater. Groundwater tends to evolve chemically toward the composition of sea water during the course of flow. It was found by Chebotarev in the Great Artesian Basin that this evolution is normally accompanied by the following regional changes in dominant anion species (Freeze and Cherry 1979):
The sequence above is termed the Chebotarev sequence. Therefore, the deeper groundwater is older and more saline than shallow groundwater. However, very saline groundwater is sometimes found in shallow aquifers in arid lands. Groundwater we investigated in the dry zone of Sri Lanka with marked dry and wet seasons is one such example. Figure 4 shows changes in electric conductivity (E.C.), which increases with increasing amounts of dissolved ions, in a groundwater profile from Puttalam in the dry zone to Kandy in the wet zone. The shallow groundwater has higher E.C. than the deep groundwater. Predominant ion species in the shallow groundwater in the dry zone of Sri Lanka are Cl^- in anions and Na+ in cations (Song and Kayane 1996).
The dry zone in Sri Lanka is not arid land in the strict climatological sense. Natural vegetation in the dry zone is tropical jungle. The annual rainfall is 9001,500 mm, but the annual evapotranspiration is as high as 1,300 mm, so that the annual run-off is small compared with the annual rainfall. Once the natural forest which had shaded the soil surface had been cleared by humans, the rate of soil evaporation during the dry season became very high. Then the soil water infiltrated during the preceding rainy season is easily evaporated, leaving dissolved salts near the soil surface. When the next rain comes, the infiltrated water dissolves the accumulated salts during the process of percolation to the water-table. These processes have been continuing for a long time, ever since the land was first deforested for agricultural use.
Salinity of shallow groundwater is very high in some localities of arid lands, although its age is young, as in the dry zone of Sri Lanka. The evolution of groundwater there does not start from the initial stage of the Chebotarev sequence, but starts from its last stage: i.e. the groundwater is highly saline there from the beginning. This is an example of groundwater-quality deterioration caused by humans in arid lands. Integrated management of soil and water is essential in arid lands.
<section>Utilization and conservation of groundwater</section>
In the middle-latitude zone, the natural vegetation changes from forests to grasslands near an isohyet of 500 mm/year, and from grasslands to deserts near that of 250 mm/year. The amount of recharge to the groundwater is the difference between the annual precipitation and the annual evaporation, provided that no surface run-off occurs. In the case of a dry climate with precipitation less than 500 mm/year and where the potential evaporation far exceeds the annual precipitation, as in drylands, the amount of groundwater recharge is heavily dependent on the actual evaporation lost from the land surface. Deforestation and desertification result in a decrease of local precipitation due to positive feedback effects, as discussed above. On the other hand, it is quite difficult, if not impossible, to increase the amount of local precipitation anthropogenically.
For the sustainable use of drylands, it is desirable to develop such methods that induce positive feedback effects to increase the amount of available water. The amount of actual evaporation lost from the soil surface is an issue of human intervention in drylands. Dry farming is a technique to maximize the input from meteoric water into the soil, and at the same time to minimize the evaporation loss from the soil surface. Deep cultivation of soil before the rainy or snowy season is a technique to introduce rain or snow-melt water into deep soil layers. The evaporation loss of soil moisture could be decreased by forming a loose surface layer in which capillary continuity of soil pores is discontinued by disturbing or crushing the surface soil.
Yamanaka et al. (1994) conducted an experiment that contributed to the increased understanding of the dynamic behaviour of water vapour in the soil layer and the role of a surface dry layer (SDL) on soil evaporation. When the SDL is formed during the evaporation process at the bare soil surface, the water vapour in the SDL plays an important role by connecting the liquid water in the soil and the water vapour in the atmosphere. The thickness of the SDL is about 4-5 cm, and the lower boundary of the SDL coincides with a surface where soil water vaporizes. The SDL acts as a strong barrier against the transport of the water vapour in the soil evaporated from the evaporation surface below the SDL.
Since the experimental result mentioned above is obtained for the diurnal change in water vapour concentration within a standard sand layer only, its applicability is of limited nature. Future progress in research on the dynamic behaviour of transport processes of heat and water near the soil surface, including the dynamic behaviour on a much longer time-scale of seasons and years, and for different soil types, may contribute to the proper management of soil and groundwater in arid lands.
Groundwater, soil water, river water, lake water, and mountain glaciers are linked through the regional hydrological cycle. However, in such hydrological characteristics as the residence time, water storage, water quality, and recharge and discharge processes, they are quite different from each other. For the proper use of groundwater in arid lands, the conjunctive use of waters with different hydrological characteristics is necessary. The science of hydrology may contribute to an increased understanding of hydrological processes and hydrological characteristics of natural waters, especially for groundwater in arid lands.
<section>Conclusions</section>
1. A history of the climate indicates that the present interglacial period corresponds to a desertification period in arid lands. There is much evidence that the climate of arid lands has been very variable since the last glacial maximum. Climatic changes are different from region to region, as indicated by changes in precipitation in the Dead Sea and the Indus River basin.
2. The SST has increased markedly in the low latitude ocean during the past 60 years. The global energy and water cycle has intensified in response to the increase in SST, resulting in an increase in precipitation in some regions and a decrease in other regions. Generally speaking, the precipitation in arid lands seems to be on a decreasing trend.
3. The residence time of groundwater in arid lands is very long, which suggests a relatively small amount of natural recharge compared with the huge amount of groundwater reserve. High salinity in groundwater is a result of long residence time in the aquifer but, in arid lands, shallow groundwater with shorter residence time is also highly saline in some cases.
4. Basic scientific research is needed for the proper management of soil and water in arid lands. Recently, interesting results about the role of surface dry layer that reduces evaporation loss from the soil surface have been obtained.
<section>References</section>
Bentley, H.W. , F.M . Phillips, A.N. Davies, M.A. Harbermehl , P.L. Airey, G. E. Calf, D. Elmore, H.E. Gove, and T. Torgersen. 1986. Chlorine 36 dating of very old groundwater. 1. The Great Artesian Basin, Australia. Water Resources Research 22: 1991-2001.
Brenes Vargas, A., and V.F. Saborio Trejos. 1994. Changes in general circulations and its influence on precipitation trends in Central America: Costa Rica. Ambio 23:87-90.
Deming, D. 1995. Climatic warming in North America: Analysis of borehole temperature. Science 268: 1576-1577.
Folland, C.K., T. Karl, and K.Y. Vinnikov. 1990. Observed climate variations and change. In: J.T. Houghton, G.J. Jenkins and J.J. Ephraums (eds.), Climate Change: The IPCC Scientific Assessment, 195 238. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Freeze, A.C., and J.A. Cherry. 1979. Groundwater. Prentice-Hall.
Geng, K.H. (ed.). 1986. Desert Climate in China. Scientific Publishing, Beijing.
Houghton, J.T., L.G. Meira Filho, B.A. Callander, N. Harris, A. Kattenberg, and K. Maskell (eds.). 1996. Climate Change 1995: Contribution of WGI to the Second Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
Issar, A.S., H. Tsoar, and D. Levin. 1989. Climatic change in Israel during historical times and their impact on hydrological, pedological and socio-economic systems. In: M. Leinen and M. Sarnthein (eds.), Paleoclimatology and Paleometeorology: Modern and Past Patterns of Global Atmospheric Transport, 525-541.
Khanna, A.N. 1992. Archaeology of India. Clarion Books, New Delhi.
Kayane, I. 1996. Interactions between the biospheric aspects of the hydrological cycle and land use/cover changes. Global Change Newsletter 25: 8-9.
Kayane, I., K. Nakagawa, H. Edagawa, and C.M. Madduma Bandara. 1995. Hydrological consequences of global warming revealed by the century-long climatological data in Sri Lanka and southwest India. An Interim Report of I GBP Activities in Japan 1990-1994, 65-81. Science Council of Japan, Tokyo.
Lamb, H.H. 1982. Climate History and Modern World. Methuen, London.
Lengerke, H.J. von. 1976. Climatological Survey of the Nilgiris Area (South India). Unpublished dissertation, University of Heidelberg.
Liu, T., and C. Zhao. 1996. Preliminary Research on the Response of Regimen to Climate Change in Tibet Plateau. Presented at the 28th International Geographical Congress, The Hague, 5-9 August 1996.
Münnich, K.O., and J.C. Vogel. 1962. Untersuchungen an Pluvialen Wassern der Ost Sahara. Geologische Rundschau 52: 611-624.
Quintela, R.M., O.K. Scarpati, L.B. Spescha, and A.D. Capriolo. 1995. The Probable Impact of Global Change on the Water Resources of Patagonia, Argentina. Presented at the lGU Conference on "Global Change and Geography," Moscow, 14-18 August 1995.
Shukla, J., C. Nobre, and P.J. Sellers. 1990. Amazon deforestation and climate change. Science 247: 1322-1325.
Song, X., and I. Kayane. 1996. Zonal characteristics of groundwater quality controlled by climate in Sri Lanka. Journal of the Japanese Association of Hydrological Sciences 26: 151-165.
Street-Perrott, F.A., and S.P. Harrison. 1985. Lake levels and climate reconstruction. In: A.D. Hecht (ed.), Paleoclimate Analysis and Modeling, 291-340. John Wiley and Sons, New York.
Torgersen, T., M.A. Habermehl, F.M. Phillips, D. Elmore, P. Kubik, B.G. Jones, T. Hemmick, and H.E. Gove. 1991. Chlorine 36 dating of very old groundwater. 3. Further studies in the Great Artesian Basin, Australia. Water Resources Research 27: 3201-3213.
Yamanaka, T., T. Hiyama, and J. Shimada. 1994. Behavior of the water vapor in the sandy soil during the bare soil evaporation. Journal of the Japanese Association of Hydrological Sciences 24: 31-46.
<section>7: Sustainable development of freshwater resources in arid lands: Panel discussion</section>
Moderator: Juha I. Uitto
Uitto
: We have heard presentations on a variety of water issues. Now I would like to ask each of the speakers for one more round of comments - after having heard the other speakers and having had time to reflect on the issues.
Hillel
: I would like to speak for a few minutes about the efficient use of water. For too long, the problem of water was regarded completely as a problem of supply. When there is a shortage, we get the engineers to build a dam and to design pipelines or canals to bring water to where it can be used. The problem of the use of water was ignored, and so we find that as water is becoming more and more scarce and precious, as the easily accessible water resources are subscribed, it is becoming more difficult to get more water for additional supplies. At the same time, the paradox is that we use water very inefficiently. Everywhere we go, we see that water is wasted, used excessively. That not only wastes a precious resource, but also produces environmental damage.
Applying too much water to the land causes the land to be saturated. There is a restriction of aeration in the soil and gradually the water-table rises, especially in river valleys, and then by capillary rise the water-table comes close to the surface. It suffuses the ground and evaporates on the surface, accumulating salt, and this salt poisons the soil. This has been the failure of past civilizations in Mesopotamia and other places, and it is still rampant today in many parts of the developing world and especially in the so-called developed world, in California and Arizona, and in Australia and in Israel. In many parts of the world that depend on irrigation, irrigation has become unsustainable, and about a third of the land under irrigation is subject to salinization and waterlogging. This also has the effect of increasing the cost of irrigation, because it requires the installation of very expensive drainage systems. Additionally, we then have the problem of how to
dispose of the effluent of drainage, which is loaded with salts and, when thrown into the river, poisons the river for users downstream.
So the problem is how to use water more efficiently in order to prevent environmental damage, in order to get a better return for the expense of water that we supply. Unfortunately, many irrigation systems have waste built into the system. They provide no incentive for the users to economize on the use of water, and no technology, no inducements, and no public awareness of the efficient use of water. As we come to the end of the twentieth century, the end of this millennium, the emphasis must shift from the supply side to the demand side. There is a great amount of water to be had from conservation, from more efficient use of water. We must create the administrative systems, the technological systems, and the frame of mind that induces water saving and efficient, more careful use of water in agriculture, in industry, and in the domestic sector. We all use water very inefficiently. There is a tendency of human beings to think that if a little bit of something is good, then
more must be better, and much more must be much better. That's wrong. In irrigation, as in many other activities in life, just enough is best. Too little is not good because it does not produce the desired effect. Too much is not good because it creates waste and damage. Fortunately, in the last 15-20 years there has been a revolution in the science of irrigation - in the water supply and water use for crops. We have been able to develop techniques for the precise application of water to the roots of crops in a quantity and at a rate that is exactly adjusted to meet the demand of the crop. As the crop grows from a very young crop to a greater coverage of the ground, its water requirements increase. As the temperature rises and hot air blows over the surface, the water requirements increase. As the crop matures, its water requirements diminish. And so an irrigation system must be very flexible and be based on precise measurements and knowledge of how much water to apply and
not to apply any more. We now have the devices to do this by applying the water drop by drop, or in very small volumes, rather than by flooding the land - which is the traditional form of agriculture - so that the soil never becomes saturated and the root zones are kept at an optimal condition of water. We also have the techniques to inject nutrients into the water supply to fertilize the crops precisely, so that we apply the fertilizer together with the water much more efficiently.
Because of the way these systems are developed in the industrial countries, they are very expensive. They are automated and computerized; there are such components as sensing devices, pressure regulators, filters, and sensors for wind direction. All this is helpful because it saves labour in the industrial countries, but it does not need to be so complicated and expensive. It is possible to take the principles of these systems and simplify them to fit the needs of farmers who are not rich. We can make irrigation a small-scale operation for farmers who do not have much money but who do have the need, and the intelligence, and the incentive of modern efficient irrigation to create enough food to feed the people of the coming generations. If we cannot mobilize water efficiently to enhance food security, we will have a terrible crisis as the population arid regions continues to increase and as the rain-fed supply continues to degrade through the processes of desertification. Not
only is the task now to make more water available but increasingly the task is to make better use of water, more precise use of water, by managing the demand side.
Wang:
First, poor water use and management already cause agricultural environment degradation in arid regions. In China, the water use is really very poor and much of the water resources is wasted by this unreasonable management. Flood irrigation uses a very great quantity of water for very small areas. If we improve the efficiency of water use, then we can have sustainable development in those regions. It is unacceptable to allow that kind of environmental degradation to continue, because there is no place for the people from arid lands to move to when the land becomes uninhabitable.
Secondly, the arid regions are considered by the central Chinese government to be important for development in the twenty-first century in order to accommodate the population increase expected in the eastern part of China. More space can be found in the arid waste area, which is a wide area and, under proper management, people can be moved from the east part of China to the west part of China.
Third, efficient water users should be rewarded with financial and technological advantages. Water management in the Negev Desert is a good example for China to follow.
Lastly, implementing sound water-management practices can sometimes be a problem. For example, traditionally the local people think that water is something that comes from the sky as God's gift to them. So the local government might have some regulation charging for water, but the farmer refuses to pay, saying "We have used the water for free, generation after generation why do you want to charge me now?" We have also shown them conservative ways to use water but they do not follow them. One reason is that they have too little education to determine which way is better. The second reason is that they are poor. They have no money to buy even very simple conservation equipment. These are also important issues regarding efficient water use.
Kayane
: I would like to add two points. One point is about the science of hydrology. The science of hydrology has progressed very rapidly during the past 10-20 years. Most important is the development of new techniques we can use - specifically the isotope technique - which can tell us about changes in climate. For example, the record in the deep ocean sediment cores: microcreatures built their skeleton structure in ancient ocean waters using hydrogen and oxygen, of which we can analyse the isotopic ratio. Past climate changes can also be revealed by analysing the isotopic ratio of continental glaciers. This technique can also be used to study groundwater movement or the hydrological cycle. To utilize these techniques fully, engineers and hydrologists must cooperate closely.
The second point is the data issue. The amount of data in the world is steadily increasing. Observation methods have improved: for example, remote-sensing methods have become very useful in obtaining more precise data. To store and analyse these data properly, it is very important to create a database, which should also include isotopic compositions.
Abdulrazzak
: In the Arabian Peninsula, overdevelopment of water resources has created many environmental problems, especially in terms of groundwater resources that are non-renewable. So the region has to look to the future, decide for how long this resource needs to be used - 20, 50 or 100 years - and minimize pumping to accommodate that decision.
The second point is management. I think the management of water resources is overdue. The problem that I see in our region is that sometimes there is poor communication between scientists and decision makers, and sometimes management is fragmented. In our part of this arid environment, management has to be integrated. Capacity building has to begin at the lowest level by educating the public. You have to introduce laws and regulations and modify them so that they can be monitored. All kinds of incentives could be implemented to reduce demand. Domestic demand is very small, but more effort is needed. The local agriculture sector is consuming substantial groundwater resources in that area we can have better efforts to save that water for future generations. For better management, we need a better assessment of our resources. We have to see which available technology assists our resources better, so that we can manage it properly. The more we know how the system works,
especially for this delicate environment, the better. We need to understand the system so we can manage it much better. We need to put more emphasis on supply augmentation, we have to encourage research and development, and we have to give more weight to technological development.
The last point I want to make is that the countries in that region have to exchange information and know-how. Some countries have more experience than others and we all have to learn from each other. There is much work in this arid environment to integrate the resource management for development for the future.
Osuga
: A point that I could not cover sufficiently earlier is that the efficient use of construction of underground dams in arid areas is not absolute. Certain requirements are to be satisfied if you were to implement this technique. There should be an aquifer of wide areal extent and below that an impermeable area supporting the aquifer. There should be an ample amount of recharge and an underground valley should exist where the underground dam can be constructed. The underground reservoir should have no interference from poor-quality water.
The benefit of this approach of using an underground dam is that you are able to maintain the use of the land above ground, for example elementary schools and facilities and fields. They don't have to be removed and the people don't have to be evacuated during construction of this dam because existing facilities and buildings above ground can be maintained.
In case of damage caused by an earthquake, such as cracks in the wall, there will be no overall detrimental effect or injuries to people. There is only a rather limited effect of the wall, which does not have to be bulky - a sheet of vinyl can be a cut-off wall. Regarding the dam's impact on the water cycle or deteriorating the quality of the water through seepage or storing the water, take nitrous oxide as an example. The limit is 10 ppm. Prior to the Sunagawa Dam construction, the concentration was above 10 ppm; after completion it went down to 6-7 ppm. We may need to conduct a comprehensive study on the proper use of fertilizer and maybe switch over to organic fertilizer and treatment of household organic wastewater.
El-Habr
: We have heard a lot of talk about agriculture in arid lands, demand management, sustainable development, but let me remind you that thousands of people, especially children, die every day due to lack of safe water, due to lack of sanitation - that is also something that we have to think about. It is the equivalent of 75 jumbo jet crashes a day. People are dying from lack of water in arid lands. We cannot continue to do business as usual. We should think in a holistic manner. Sustainable development and use of this precious resource should be on a basin scale.
Kobori
: I must speak as a scientist living in Japan where there are no arid lands, so the Japanese experience arid lands only outside Japan. The point of Japanese cooperation in all kinds of freshwater issues in arid lands is that we have several tools, for example a research satellite with radar which gives us very good images for research for case studies in countries such as Saudi Arabia and China.
As to the desalinization efforts on the Arabian Peninsula, currently there is enough revenue to finance such large-scale projects. But what if the revenue disappears in one or two centuries? We must also look at cheaper methods like reverse osmosis that will be feasible in the future.
Concerning water research, we have many institutions. For example, in Japan they number two or three for groundwater only. We also have a liaison committee for water issues. Internationally speaking, there are some international groups, but no regional or global associations covering all aspects of water research. I understand that international committees are now being established, and this effort needs to be supported.
I would also like to mention a big philosophical problem - people in arid regions often need so-called government (or even non-government) aid, but in the final analysis they need to become self-sufficient. To what extent should we support international cooperation or projects in developing countries?
Finally, I think we need more money, a big budget. It would be easier if we stopped armament and wars completely. These moneys could then be used to protect resources, not only water but all resources for our children. In this light, I would like to conclude with a quote from the ancient prophet Isaiah: "Nation shall not lift up sword against nation."
Uitto
: I hope your wish comes true. Unfortunately, it looks as if some nations might go to war because of water. I would now like to open the floor to discussion.
Mr. Takashi
(Irrigation Engineer, International Development Center of Japan) to Hillel: You said that these ancient water-harvesting methods are applicable today no less than in the past, as evidenced by the effort of constructing ancient farm units in the Negev. Is that still at the concept stage or has it been realized as a full-scale project? If it has been realized, what is your experience with the pilot project? Specifically, where did a salinity problem occur, and how much cost did occur in addition to a similar irrigation project built in a humid zone? These techniques could be applied to the entire Sahara region or other desert areas to solve the global food problem, so what do you propose to agencies concerned with food production?
Hillel
: Has water harvesting been proven sufficiently to be put to use in Israel or elsewhere? The answer is not so simple, because where water is available for irrigation by inter-basin transfer or by drawing from groundwater, it is easier to put in perennial irrigation. The system of water harvesting becomes necessary when there is no other water any more, when water resources are depleted, or when all of the available water is already put to efficient use, and that is not yet the case in Israel. We know that it is a possibility but it is not being done on an economic scale for crop production. However, it is being done in Israel now to reverse the process of desertification, a process called savannafication. It is taking desert fringelands and building structures to trap natural run-off and to encourage the growth of vegetation in areas that have been denuded of vegetation through many generations of overgrazing. This is turning a bare landscape into a savanna-like area of some
trees, some shrubs, some grass, on land that would otherwise be completely naked.
The real question is whether this type of approach can help to reverse the process of land degradation in Africa south of the Sahara, because this is where desertification is most extreme and this is where many people are now deprived of livelihood and moving off the land and aggregating in big cities without infrastructure, employment... We see the results in such countries as Somalia, Rwanda, Liberia, and Burkina Faso, where we are facing a crisis. I believe these systems can help but they have not been applied on an appropriate scale. Some agencies of the United Nations are aware of this; the Food and Agriculture Organization is very aware of it. The World Bank, which is the biggest agency for international development, is unfortunately biased in the direction of large-scale projects. The World Bank is a lending agency, it has to turn around money every year - so it does not have the patience for small-scale development for small farmers, which is the traditional mode of
the countries in sub-Saharan Africa. We need an approach that is more patient, more flexible, less grandiose. Local politicians, too, favour grandiose schemes, because they can be very proud of these schemes rather than small-scale projects which are fitted to the ecology of the land and to the people living on the land. We know much can be done, we know that there are resources that can be used better, so it calls for a new approach.
The question of cost is a very difficult one, because costs vary from place to place. From time to time there is drought and people are deprived of a livelihood and there is war or movement into cities - how can you assess the cost of that compared with the cost of facilitating local social, economic, and technical and educational development from the ground up? I believe the job needs to be done; it has not yet been done on a sufficient scale - not in water harvesting, not in rainfed farming and water conservation, and not in irrigation. Irrigation, for example in Africa, is extremely underdeveloped, except for North Africa and parts of East Africa. Most of the countries of the Sahel region and most of the countries south of the Sahara suffer from underdevelopment in the area of irrigation and water resources. That is the key to ensuring food security in the future.
In closing, I would like to refer to the prophecy of Isaiah mentioned by Professor Kobori, which is the motto of the United Nations - that nations should transform swords into ploughshares and that they shall learn war no more. But I must say, in the way of warning, that ploughshares can do as much harm as swords if they are used badly on the land and if they cause erosion and desertification. We have to use ploughs carefully, too, as they can be instruments of environmental destruction. So it is management of the land and the water that we must learn to do much better.
Dr. German T. Velasquez
(United Nations Centre for Regional Development): In the future it would be possible for countries to go to war because of the limited amount of water, but we also have to realize that it is also possible for countries to go to war because of mismanagement of an oversupply of water - for example, the cases of India, Nepal, and Bangladesh, which we also have to consider. It is unfortunate that, even though the United Nations considers both issues quite important, there has not been a chance to combine disaster management with environmental issues. Sustainable development is defined by three factors: economic viability, political acceptance, and environmental integrity. Maybe we can add a fourth, which is disaster mitigation capability. We have heard that water management is an important issue of the future. We might expand that to include not only the management of a limited amount of water but also the management of an intermittent oversupply of water.
Uitto
: The point about disaster management in the environmental context is a very valid one, especially in light of the degradation of the resource base. In some cases, this degradation has been so severe that it has created crisis conditions, giving rise to environmental refugees.
Hillel
: I have spent the last few years studying the potential and actual conflicts resulting from shared resources in the Middle East and the uncoordinated use of these resources, and I've come to the conclusion that in each case the problems of rivalry can be solved much more cheaply than going to war; that the cost of resolving the issues to the satisfaction of the parties by compromise and cooperation to make more water available and to make better use of the water - all these are much more economical than even a small war. War is the most expensive way to solve a problem, not just in terms of the material cost but also in terms of the human cost. The New York Times reported that Arab economists calculated the cost of the 1991 Gulf War as US$677 billion. That is only the assessable cost the bridges and roads that were destroyed, the armaments that were destroyed - but not the human suffering. How much good could US$677 billion do in terms of water-resources development and
research, and employment and education?
War is the most wasteful, the most expensive way to solve a problem. In Roman law, the term rival was a neutral term that meant a neighbour along a stream. They can either compete or cooperate. We have forgotten the option to cooperate and invested the word with the meaning of competition and conflict. We have to go back to the original meaning of the word, which gave the option of cooperation rather than competition and conflict. Through cooperation, of course, I believe, all of these problems can be solved.
Abdulrazzak
: With respect to the management of oversupply, I agree that management has to be done to reduce the impact of damage. Even in arid lands you sometimes have to deal with oversupply in terms of flash floods, which have to be managed to reduce the impact. Flash floods in arid environments can be quite disastrous because people are not prepared. So even in arid lands there is a requirement to develop flood plans and build dams in order to deal with a short-term oversupply of water.
<section>8: Closing remarks</section>
Juha I. Uitto
The theme of the fifth UNU Global Environmental Forum was "Freshwater Resources in Arid Lands." The title contains the two key phrases "freshwater" and "arid lands." Fresh water is a finite resource and highly unevenly distributed on the surface of the globe. Only 2.59 per cent of the total volume of water in the world is fresh water, and most of it is stored in polar ice masses and glaciers, while only 1 per cent is readily available for human use (Tolba et al. 1992). This small percentage is basically found in rivers, lakes, and reservoirs, and as groundwater.
Freshwater ecosystems are fragile and under severe pressure all over the world. The rapidly increasing population in the developing world is putting heavy pressure on the use of water for the burgeoning cities, domestic consumption, and irrigated agriculture, at the same time as effluents and waste from human settlements, industry, and agriculture are overloading their capacity to recuperate. In the more humid areas of the world, water quality becomes the main concern, with severe impacts on human and ecosystem health, and loss of natural biological diversity, for example. In drier environments, the plain availability of fresh water is the main issue.
Regional water shortages are now becoming commonplace. According to the Washington-based think-tank the Worldwatch Institute, in 26 countries in the world, with a total population of 230 million people, water scarcity limits food production and sanitation and has a negative impact on economic development and environmental protection. In ten of these countries the water balance is actually negative, meaning that they consume more water than is regenerated. With the rapidly increasing population, it is expected that the number of countries experiencing water shortages will increase to 35 by the year 2020 (Brown et al. 1996).
The United Nations estimates that 70 per cent of the world's drylands, amounting to 3.6 billion hectares or one-quarter of the total land area of the world, is experiencing desertification (UN 1992). Desertification is defined as land degradation in arid, semi-arid, and dry sub-humid areas resulting from various factors, including climatic variations and human activities. This negative process affects the livelihood of about one-sixth of the human population. Huge amounts of agricultural areas and range land are lost to land degradation and the encroaching deserts, thus undermining the potential of the people to feed themselves. It is estimated that 73 per cent of all range land with an already low potential for human- and animal-carrying capacity is being degraded. Similarly, 47 per cent of drylands at the margins of potential rainfed agriculture is facing declining soil structure and fertility. Land degradation is not an abstract scientific concern: it is very concrete to
those depending on the resources that are being degraded and leads to widespread poverty, malnutrition, and environmental refugee flows that can destabilize entire countries and regions.
Some of the worst effects of land degradation and salinization of soils can be seen in irrigated dryland areas where the population densities and agricultural potential are the highest. Declining production in these areas has particularly severe impacts on human life. Irrigated agriculture is, however, essential for feeding the growing world population. Some 40 per cent of the food is produced on the 16 per cent of crop land that is under irrigation (Brown et al. 1996). Without irrigation, the world could not be fed. Irrigation systems, however, are often designed and operated in an inappropriate manner, causing wastage of water and environmental problems. In India, for example, water is a free resource for the farmers and when it is available it is used in a careless and wasteful manner. Irrigation gates are opened, letting the water flood the fields; much of it runs off or evaporates. The availability of abundant under-priced water also encourages the cultivation of wrong
crops that are not naturally suitable to the relatively arid environments. Large-scale and inappropriate irrigation development can also result in increased soil salinity and other environmental problems.
A bad example of environmental degradation caused mostly by large-scale agricultural development is the Aral Sea region in the former Soviet Central Asia. This inland sea, that used to be amongst the largest in the world, has today two direct coastal nations, the newly independent states of Kazakhstan, and Uzbekistan. More countries in dry Central Asia, including Kyrgystan, Tajikistan, and Turmenistan, are nevertheless dependent on the water regimes surrounding the Aral Sea. Prior to the 1960s, the Aral Sea area amounted to 68,300 km², with a water surface of 66,100 km² and 2,200 km² of islands. The volume of water was then 1,066 km³ and the maximum depth of the sea was 69 metres (Glazovsky 1995). The water balance of the Aral Sea is dependent mainly on the run-off from two rivers, the Amu Daria and Syr Daria rivers, and on evaporation.
Beginning around the early 1960s, the inflow of water from the two rivers decreased sharply. The Aral Sea basin had been designated as a major cotton producing area by the planned economy of the Soviet Union. It experienced a dramatic population increase from 13.8 million in 1950 to 34 million people four decades later. At the same time, the production of cotton was dependent on irrigation and, consequently, the area under irrigation increased rapidly, with drastic impacts on the water balance of the entire region. By 1990, the sea area had decreased by close to 50 per cent to 34,800 km² and, even more dramatically, the water volume had shrunk by 70 per cent to 304 km³. The sea level dropped by more than 15 metres the same period (Glazovsky 1995). Today, the once-thriving area, where the impressive fishing fleet was the pride of the people and nations, has been reduced to barren land where the fishing vessels lie abandoned, flat, on the dried bottom of what once used to be
the Aral Sea. The inappropriate irrigation methods have turned large areas into salinized deserts unable to support agriculture. And the health of the people has deteriorated alongside the environmental degradation and excessive use of chemicals in agriculture, resulting in dramatically increased mortality from cancer, cardiovascular diseases, tuberculosis, and gallbladder and gallstone diseases in the surrounding republics.
The extreme example of the Aral Sea basin demonstrates the vulnerability of drylands to mismanagement by humans. Indeed, while droughts, climatic fluctuations, and other physical factors play a role in the desertification process, the human use and abuse of the resources, including water, is at least as significant for the degradation of arid and semi-arid lands. It is difficult, if not impossible, to distinguish accurately between the relative share of physical and anthropogenic causes (Mainguet et al. 1996).
Aridity and water problems are not only limited to the continental drylands. Specific problems with the availability of fresh water resources are facing small islands. Ironically, islands, which are surrounded by water, are often very short of fresh water and must import much of their water at a high cost. Their limited groundwater resources are further threatened by infusions of salt water. While the islands of the industrialized world are generally in the process of being depopulated, population growth and industrialization are very high in many small island nations, especially in the Pacific. These processes put particular stress on fresh water.
The solutions to these looming and interrelated problems of water scarcity and land degradation must be found on many fronts. The earlier presentations have highlighted a variety of technologies with potential for dealing with these issues. Appropriate technologies can be traditional and low tech, such as the dew-irrigation and water-harvesting techniques utilized traditionally in the Middle East, as described by Professors Kobori and Hillel; or they can be modern, large-scale technologies of the kind of the underground dams built and managed in Okinawa and introduced in the paper by Mr. Osuga. Other technologies, such as reverse osmosis, have been developed and show potential for water desalinization - a technique that can produce water for domestic and agricultural use and reduce the pressure on the utilization of groundwater and surface fresh water in arid lands (Murakami 1995). The important issue is not the level of technology but its feasibility and sustainability.
Apart from technological and environmental concerns, it is important that the solutions are economically, financially, socially, and culturally acceptable. An important issue is correct pricing of water, for industrial, domestic, and agricultural uses. This is, however, a highly political issue and virtually no country has set water prices at the real level. The general feeling often is that how can mankind charge for what falls down from the heavens!
Land degradation and water scarcity have the potential of leading to conflicts between groups of people and between countries sharing the same limited resource. Notably in the Middle East, limited water resources play a central role in the conflict between and among Israel, the Palestinian nation, and the Arab countries. The approach promoted by the United Nations University is to find technically, economically, and socially feasible options that can form the basis of political decision-making. This approach was successfully applied, for instance, at the Middle East Water Forum that contributed to the peace process in the region (Biswas 1994; Wolf 1995).
The world community acknowledges the central importance of limited water resources to sustainable development and is now moving towards an International Water Convention, along the operational lines of the Convention to Combat Desertification already in existence. A holistic approach, encompassing all sectors of society, both technological and environmental, as well as socioeconomic and political approaches, will be necessary for coping with the challenges of fresh water, land degradation, and food production.
<section>References</section>
Biswas, A.K., ed. 1994. International Waters of the Middle East: From Euphrates
Tigris to Nile
. Oxford University Press, Bombay.
Brown, L.R., et al. 1996. State of the World 1996. W.W. Norton and Company, New York.
Glazovsky, N.F. 1995. The Aral Sea Basin. In: J.X. Kasperson, R.E. Kasperson, and B.L. Turner II (eds.), Regions at Risk: Comparisons of Threatened Environments, 92-139. United Nations University Press, Tokyo.
Mainguet, M., K. Mersmann, and M. Visser. 1996. Man-lnduced Desertification? UN University Lectures 12. The United Nations University, Tokyo.
Murakami, M. 1995. Managing Water for Peace in the Middle East: Alternative Scenarios. United Nations University Press, Tokyo.
Tolba, M.K., O.A. El-Kholy, E. El-Hinnawi, M.W. Holdgate, D.F. McMichael, and R.E. Munn (eds.). 1992. The World Environment 1972 1992: Two Decades of Challenge. Chapman and Hall, London.
UN. 1992. Agenda 21. United Nations, New York.
Wolf, A.T. 1995. Hydropolitics along the Jordan River: Scarce Water and Its Impact on the Arab-lsraeli Conflict. United Nations University Press, Tokyo.
<section>Contributors</section>
Dr. Mohamed Abdulrazzak
First Economic Affairs Officer
Energy, Natural Resources and
Environment Division
United Nations Economic and Social
Commission for Western Asia
(ESCWA)
Amman, Jordan
Dr. Habib N. El-Habr
Acting Deputy Director
International Environmental
Technology Centre (IETC)
United Nations Environment
Programme (UNEP)
Shiga, Japan
Dr. Daniel Hillel
Professor
Center for Environmental Studies
Karkur, Israel
Dr. Takashi Inoguchi
Senior Vice-Rector
The United Nations University
Tokyo, Japan
Dr. Isamu Kayane
Professor
Aichi University
Japan
Dr. Iwao Kobori
Affiliate Scholar
Academic Division
The United Nations University
Tokyo, Japan
Mr. Kimio Osuga
Deputy Manager
Miyako Underground Dam Project
Office
Japan Agricultural Land Development
Agency (JALDA)
Okinawa, Japan
Ms. Jutta Schneider
Hydrologist
Kanagawa, Japan
Dr. Juha I. Uitto
Academic Officer
Academic Division
The United Nations University
Tokyo, Japan
Dr. Wang Tao
Research Professor and Deputy Director
Institute of Desert Research
Chinese Academy of Sciences
Lanzhou, China
Dr. Wu Wei
Assistant Research Professor
Institute of Desert Research
Chinese Academy of Sciences
Lanzhou, China
<section>Other titles of interest</section>
Managing Water for Peace in the Middle East Alternative Strategies
By Masahiro Murakami
This volume evaluates some non-conventional approaches to resolving water resources issues in the Middle East. The text draws on studies involving Kuwait, Jordan, the Palestinian territories, and Israel
UNUP-858
ISBN 92-808-0858-3
US$35
Hydropolitics along the Jordan River
Scarce Water and Its Impact on the Arab-lsraeli Conflict
By Aaron T. Wolf
This book argues that the Jordan River watershed - a region where some of the worst Arab-lsraeli conflict has occurred - might be the very place to bury ancient hatreds and work to give birth to new and more enlightened environmental collaborations.
UNUP-859
ISBN 92-808-0859-1
US$35
Population, Land Management, and Environmental Change
Edited by Juha I. Uitto and Akiko Ono
This publication is based on the UNU Global Environmental Forum which brought together leading scholars from both the South and the North to address the issues of population, land management, and environmental change. The authors draw extensively upon field research carried out in the tropical and subtropical regions of South-East Asia, Sub-Saharan Africa, and the Amazon.
UNUP-956
ISBN 92-808-0956-3
US$15
Fresh water is a critical resource for all aspects of human existence and development. Demand for fresh water is growing rapidly worldwide, and since the beginning of this century its consumption has increased almost tenfold. As a consequence, fresh water is becoming an increasingly scarce resource. The driving forces of this extraordinary increase in water demand include the unprecedented population growth that the world has experienced in the past decades, urbanization, industrialization, and the development of irrigated agriculture. At the same time, as standards of living have risen, per capita water consumption has increased. These trends are likely to continue in the years to come, posing great challenges for sustainable development on a global scale.
Freshwater resources are also unequally distributed on the surface of the Earth. Arid lands today cover over a third of the Earth's surface, but a disproportionate share of them can be found in Africa, the Middle East, and the interior of Asia. These are the same areas where population growth is often the highest and economic development behind. Scarce water resources in these areas limit the potential for agriculture and development, cause sometimes serious environmental problems, and can become sources of conflict.
This publication, based on the UNU Global Environmental Forum V, focuses on the limited freshwater resources in arid lands, with emphasis on the Middle East and Asia. The issues covered include historical perspectives on how people in dry environments have developed ingenious survival strategies; modern technologies, such as desalinization of sea water and underground dams for waterscarce islands; and the impact of global warming on freshwater resources. The authors conclude that equally as important as improving the water supply is the efficient management of water demand; a more economical use of limited freshwater resources will be essential for reaching sustainable development.
Jim I. Tiffs is Academic Officer at the United Nations University, Tokyo. Jutta Schneider is a Hydrologist currently residing in Kanagawa, Japan.
UNUP-982
ISBN 92 808-982-2
