<title>Ocean governance: Sustainable development of the Seas</title>
Edited by Peter Bautista Payoyo
United Nations
University Press
TOKYO o NEW YORK o PARIS
© The United Nations University, 1994
The views expressed in this publication are those of the authors and do not necessarily reflect the views of the United Nations University.
United Nations University Press
The United Nations University, 53-70, Jingumae 5-chome,
Shibuya-ku, Tokyo 150, Japan
Tel: (03) 3499-2811
Fax: (03) 3406-7345
Telex: J25442
Cable: UNATUNIV TOKYO
UNUP-847
ISBN 92-808-0847-7
05000 P
<section>Note to the reader from UNU</section>
The United Nations University's (UNU) programme area on Sustaining Global Life-support Systems responds to the priorities identified in Agenda 21 emanating from the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, 1992. Within the programme area on Sustaining Global Life-support Systems, UNU's programme on Integrated Studies of Ecosystems aggregates issues of environmentally sustainable development from the entry point of the capacity of ecosystems and their ability to support, resist, or recuperate from the long-term impact of major transformations.
UNU's projects within this programme approach issues from three perspectives: one focus is on integrated studies of fragile ecosystems and other vulnerable regions in given geographical zones. A second set of projects covers improved methods of measuring and monitoring sustainability and environmental management. A third is sectoral studies of critical resources such as forests, biodiversity resources, waters, and oceans.
As part of its activities concerned with oceans as a critical resource, UNU undertakes a number of projects in the field of marine affairs: a major objective of which is to promote sustainable development in the oceans at policy level. Together with the International Ocean Institute (101), UNU has continued to involve itself in a number of Pacem in Maribus Conferences, concerned with ascertaining feasible mechanisms for promoting peace and sustainable development in the oceans. This book represents a collection of papers presented at the PIM XIX Conference held in Lisbon, Portugal.
<section>Preface</section>
Elisabeth Mann Borgese
The lapse of time since the staging of Pacem in Maribus XIX provides an opportunity for assessing the results of the conference in a somewhat more historic perspective.
These have been turbulent years of dramatic change in the international system, wrought by apparently conflicting, but in reality probably complementary trends of intranational disintegration and international integration, causing displacements, and untold human sufferings and deaths.
Environmental concerns reached an apex in the Rio Conference on Environment and Development of 1992, but have been on the decline since, under the impact of economic recession and turmoil and crisis management in too many places.
The real integration of environment and development concerns has not yet been achieved in people's minds or reflected in institutions, whether national or international. The task is still ahead of us. Pacem in Maribus XIX was intended to, and we feel, succeeded in, laying the foundations for our subsequent efforts, articulated in Pacem in Maribus XX and XXI.
Looking at the institutional evolution analysed by Pacem in Maribus XIX, PIM XX began to look at the wider applicability of the basic principles of the Law of the Sea Convention to sustainable development in general. Are there lessons to be learned from the ocean experience for the governance of other global, regional, and national issues? That the oceans are our great laboratory for the making of a new international order, has been a motto of the IOI since its very beginning over two decades ago.
Pacem in Maribus XXI is devoted to the implementation of sustainable development at the regional level which, it would appear, is the most important one in the whole global system of governance. A great deal of new thinking is needed to bring the Regional Seas Programme up from a still sectoral approach limited to the protection of the environment to an integrated approach covering ocean development together with the protection of the environment (horizontal integration) and to articulate the proper linkages between coastal management and national regimes on the one hand, and the emerging new structures at the level of the United Nations, on the other.
An informal meeting on "Agenda 21 for the Mediterranean" was held in Malta on 11-13 February 1993. Among the many facets of the new tasks this Agenda imposes, the meeting dealt explicitly with the institutional implications of moving the Mediterranean Action Plan and its institutional framework in the Barcelona Convention from "Stockholm" to "post-Rio."
Serious thought should be given to creating a regional Mediterranean United Nations entity that could be inspired and regulated, perhaps in its initial phases, from and through an expanded Barcelona Convention with terms of reference encompassing not only environment but social and economic interactions that will promote a process of sustainable development in the Mediterranean Region.^1
With the Barcelona Convention of 1976 and its Plan of Action and Protocols, the Mediterranean nations have been leaders in regional cooperation in the protection of the environment. They could now take the lead in shaping the new and coming phase of evolution of the regional seas programme. The Malta-based International Ocean Institute hopes to play its role in this process, and, it would seem, has laid a sound basis for this new work in Pacem in Maribus XIX.
"Governance in the twenty-first century" has become a widely and intensely discussed subject. The Club of Rome is studying it. The United Nations University is fostering projects on the subject. There is a spate of new publications on the concept of the Common Heritage of Mankind, from Ph.D dissertations^2 to lecture series^3 to new books^4.
New thinking on sustainable development, and new thinking on the Common Heritage concept are drawing closer together. Since the publication of Our Common Future,^5 it is becoming clearer to more people that sustainable development is simply not attainable without some reconceptualization of traditional concepts of ownership and sovereignty. To put it more bluntly: sustainable development must be based on the concept of the common heritage of mankind, which integrates development and environment, together with disarmament (reservation for peaceful purposes).
Since ideas and ideals do not work in a vacuum, but only if and when they coincide with economic interests, it is well to remember that in any case, sovereignty is not what it used to be, in our age of globalized production, banking systems, and the information and communication revolution, and that "ownership" is no longer a key factor in these systems, ever since the days of James Burnham's Managerial Revolution.^6
In the meantime, the Rio Conference on Environment and Development has begun to make its impact on the restructuring of the United Nations system. A whole new division has been added to take care of sustainable development: a Commission for Sustainable Development (CSD) within the Economic and Social Council of the United Nations; a Secretariat headed by a new Under-Secretary-General, and mechanisms for integrating the policies of all the specialized agencies involved have been strengthened in the Administrative Committee for Coordination (ACC) and its Inter-Agency Committee.
Whether the CSD will have the clout to cope effectively with the enormous issues of sustainable development and the implementation of Agenda 21 will depend, on the one hand, on the success or failure of restructuring and revitalizing the ECOSOC as a whole, and, on the other, on the strength of the leadership of CSD's own "High-Level Segment," that is, a meeting of Ministers, associated annually with the Commission and aspiring to a "High Political Profile" and a decision-making function. This might be seminal. This might be the beginning of something new.
Chapter 17 of Agenda 21, dealing with sustainable ocean development probably the strongest of all the chapters - is the link between the UNCED and the UNCLOS processes. Sustainable ocean development is a crucial part of the whole agenda. It cannot be implemented without the implementation of the Law of the Sea Convention which provides the necessary jurisdictional framework, the enforcement power and the dispute settlement system. The Law of the Sea Convention comes into force in November 1994, but the linkage between the CSD and the institutions emerging from the UNCLOS process, at global, regional, and national levels, is not yet clearly defined. There is a lot of work to be done.
It would appear that Pacem in Maribus XIX "holds water." It certainly has made its contribution to the preparation of UNCED and Chapter 17 of Agenda 21. As part of the more free-wheeling and unconstrained NGO sector, it could raise its sights over a somewhat longer term and wider horizon than governments can. But the developments of the last two years would seem to indicate that we are on the right track. From now on, the UNCLOS and the UNCED processes will evolve together, and they will largely determine the restructuring of the United Nations system and the emergence of a new world order. The NGO community will play an increasingly important role in this process and must throw all its weight into the effort to keep supranational integration ahead of, or in balance with intranational disintegration and to enhance sustainable development and comprehensive security intranationally and internationally, regionally, and globally. Pacem in Maribus hopes to remain in the
avant-garde of this effort.
<section>Notes</section>
1. Minister Guido de Marco of Malta, as quoted in MEDWAVES, News bulletin of the MAP Coordinating Unit. Athens: Spring, 1993.
2. For example, Payoyo, Peter, Dalhousie Law School.
3. For example, MccGwire, Michael, Cambridge University; St John Macdonald, Ronald, University of Toronto.
4. For example, Pardo, Arvid, The Common Heritage (Genoa, Ocean Change Publications, 1993).
5. The World Commission on Environment and Development, Our Common Future (Oxford/ New York, Oxford University Press, 1987).
6. Burnham, James, The Managerial Revolution (New York: Harper & Row, 1952). Burnham stressed, that it is not ownership, but management privileges and profit sharing, that determine power in business.
<section>Editor's introduction</section>
This is the report of the Pacem in Maribus XIX held in Lisbon, Portugal, on 18-21 November 1991. The Conference adopted for its theme "Ocean governance: National, regional, global institutional mechanisms for sustainable development in the oceans."
Pacem in Maribus (PIM) is the annual conference of the International Ocean Institute (IOI), a non-governmental organization established in 1972 dedicated to the systematic and integrative understanding of the oceans as common heritage of humankind. The term, which translates to "Peace in the Oceans," is a paraphrase of Pope John XXIII's famous encyclical Pacem in Terris, or "Peace on Earth," and indicates the broad inspiration it takes in relation to the purposes of the IOI. So far, there have been 18 PIM Conferences held in various locations around the world. One was even held on a vessel! The themes for these conferences have been as varied as they were momentous, each responding to the perennial challenges of the oceans, or, in the words of Professor Elisabeth Mann Borgese founder of the IOI and the moving spirit behind PIM - the knowledge and truth that can make a difference on Planet Water.
PIM XlX's theme logically emerges from an appreciation of the ocean experience that has gone before and will come after another landmark in contemporary world history: the 1992 United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED). While the theme meditates on the lessons of the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea in the area of "ocean governance?' - a term that accepts the fundamental necessity for planning and management in the oceans as elaborated in PIM XIX's Background Paper - it also looks forward to the rearrangement, creation, or evolution of institutions implied in the promise of sustainable development in the ocean sphere. Thus, the theme invites both reflection and practical strategy on the objectives and requirements of ocean governance. In the language of the Background Paper, PIM XIX has studied "the institutional requirements of sustainable development in the marine sector and of ocean governance in the twenty-first century."
The Background Paper for PIM XIX argues for the integration of ocean concerns at the institutional level. The framework for sustainable development in the oceans that demands this integration is defined by fundamental principles articulated in the 1982 Law of the Sea Convention and the 1987 Report of the World Commission on Environment and Development, Our Common Future. The 1982 Convention endorses the notion of the Common Heritage of Mankind and the concept that "the problems of ocean space are closely interrelated and need to be considered as a whole." Our Common Future advances the proposition that boundaries between sectoral concerns, between public and private sectors, and among territorial boundaries national, regional, and global - have become so porous that it is no longer feasible to maintain the traditional distinctions if the problems are to be dealt with meaningfully. Institutional and policy responses to these problems must, therefore, consider the need to
integrate sectoral (horizontal integration) and territorial (vertical integration) spheres.
Within this framework of integration PIM XIX, after reflecting on the "existing framework" of ocean management, explored the institutional implications of ocean governance on three levels: national, regional, and global. Indeed, the format of the Conference followed this characterization of levels of governance in order to project more adequately and fully appraise the institutional mechanisms involved. The ensuing Conclusions and Recommendations of PIM XIX, also structured according to the three levels of ocean governance, express an overall vision of, and agenda for, sustainable development in the oceans. No doubt PIM XIX will continue to contribute to the post-UNCED process.
Seventy-five participants from 35 countries attended the Conference. Inasmuch as special attention has invariably been given to the role played by developing countries in ocean governance, in general, and the IOI, in particular, 18 developing countries, or 51 per cent, have been represented in PIM XIX. There were, however, only 29 (39 per cent) out of 75 participants from these developing countries.
PIM XIX was organized jointly by the IOI and the United Nations University. Funding for the Conference was extended by the following sponsors, to whom grateful acknowledgements must be given: John D. and Catherina T. MacArthur Foundation; United Nations University; United Nations Environment Programmer the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development; International Oceanographic Commission; the World Bank; Canadian International Development Agency; and various Portuguese sources. A special note of appreciation goes to Portugal and the Conference's Portuguese hosts, especially Dr Mário Ruivo. As well, the success of the conference was due in large measure to the fine team of session Chairmen - consisting of Layashi Yaker, Carlos Sergio Duarte, Frank Njenga, Mário Ruivo, and Alexander Yankov - and Rapporteurs Nico Schrijver, Aldo Chircop, Sidney Holt, Uwe Jenisch, and Anna Mallia. The ever-dynamic role of Jan van Ettinger, coordinator of PIM XIX, is likewise warmly
remembered. Finally, it must be mentioned that this volume is a joint contribution of the United Nations University and the International Ocean Institute to the on-going process of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, a historic unfolding of which PIM XIX has modestly taken part.
<section>Report on the conference</section>
The papers presented for discussion during the conference have been organized around four main themes, each projecting unique yet closely-interwoven institutional implications for sustainable development in the oceans:
I. The existing framework for ocean governance
II. Ocean governance - National level
III. Ocean governance - Regional level
IV. Ocean governance - Global level
Six papers were read under the first theme. These papers examine various current aspects of the international setting from which a new era of ocean governance is emerging. In his paper, Ambassador Pinto enumerates the institutional implications of implementing "sustainable development" in marine affairs and argues that the Law of the Sea Convention supplies the needed approaches to institutional development, having anticipated the concept of sustainable development in many ways. UN Under-Secretary-General Satya Nandan for his part identifies global and regional institutions and mechanisms for cooperation and coordination in marine matters. In "Existing institutional framework and mechanisms" he notes the need to revitalize international institutions and their activities, this to be coupled with a comprehensive approach to the management of the oceans and their resources. He concludes with the suggestion that there be created within the UN General Assembly framework a new
global forum where all ocean issues can be discussed periodically with the participation of all relevant international institutions.
The paper of Ambassador Njenga of the Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee urges the ratification of the Convention by all states and underlines the necessity of preserving the total integrity of the 1982 Convention before its entry into force. Ratification and entry into force of the Convention, he further asserts to rebut contrary claims, do not entail a colossal financial cost on the part of State Parties. In "The role of indigenous peoples in ocean governance," Professor Van Dyke recounts the perspectives and claims of native peoples to offshore waters and resources. The ocean management approach of indigenous peoples built upon harmony, he argues, is certainly something to learn from.
In the floor discussion that followed, two general points are worth recalling. First, there was a general agreement concerning the need to establish a new global forum within the UN General Assembly framework where all oceans issues can be discussed. Certain caveats were, however, articulated. In the first place attention was called to three problems arising from the proposal. One, the question of power: whether the forum will have decision-making functions or whether it will be limited to consultative and advisory functions. Two, the problem of finding a suitable location for the forum. And three, the issue of the objectives of the forum, e.g., whether it will be involved in the implementation of the Law of the Sea Convention. Then, it was explained that the overall international picture characterized by rapid technological advances, on the one hand, and increasing regionalization outside the UN framework, on the other, must be reckoned with by any organization of ocean
governance built upon the Law of the Sea Convention. This was followed by the crucial role of the private or parastatal sector in policy-making being emphasized. Second, the debate about making the 1982 Law of the Sea Convention "universal" in character was revived. Different reactions put forward about the on-going efforts to make the Convention universally acceptable, nevertheless acknowledged the necessity for new ideas to address this predicament.
Two sets of papers were presented for the sessions devoted to the theme "Ocean governance - National level." The first deals with overview considerations on the nature of and problems associated with national institutions that address ocean concerns. Thus, Stella Maris Vallejo analyses a broad cross-section of national experiences in integrated ocean policy and concludes that there are no fixed institutional models in managing coastal, near-shore, and ocean environments but only options that should be tailored to the circumstances and institutional traditions of each country. For their part Ernst Lutz and Mohan Munasinghe invite attention on the prospects of environmental accounting which ought to inform national economy-wide policies for sound natural resource management, including managing the marine sector. On account of its supplementary explanations, the reaction of Dr Max Börlin to the paper of Lutz and Munasinghe during the conference, which elaborates further the
concept on environmental accounting in the marine sector, is included in this volume as an addendum to the main paper.
The second set of papers consist of case-studies on national ocean governance. The situation in India was presented by Dr Saigal who, among others, called the attention of the conference to the Ocean Policy Statement of the India Department of Ocean Development. The Indian model is impressive because it succeeded in proceeding from a fact-finding phase to the implementation of various R&D programmes within a period of only 12 years. Professor Tsutomu Fuse in presenting the next paper showed the characteristics of Japanese decision-making in ocean governance. The age-old tradition of consensus-making underlies the Japanese model.
Some major trends in the discussion on ocean governance at the national level can be identified. First, it was not doubted that marine affairs should be raised higher in the national political agenda. The importance of leadership in generating the political priorities deserved by the oceans was underlined. Second, the widely-practiced coastal area management can serve as a starting point in shaping national marine policy, provided that its linkage with ocean management is not ignored. Third, there was reiterated concern that scientific research, education, and training are national capabilities that call out for emphasis in policy-making and the widest possible constituency. Accordingly, a brief on the Portuguese initiatives on the establishment of an interdisciplinary marine centre and the joint Portuguese-UNESCO project on promoting ocean education, research, and teaching of particular significance to developing countries was welcomed by the Conference. Fourth, although it
was stressed that governments are compelled to intervene in order to safeguard basic environmental interests, the creative role of the private sector in national ocean governance was, however, amplified. Lastly, the need for a new accounting framework in national marine accounting systems logically calls also for supranational ocean accounting. The participants concurred that difficulties in the implementation of new accounting schemes should be an urgent item for study.
An African perspective on national ocean governance was shared by Ambassador Abdul Koroma. He reported that although some success has been achieved in the field of regional cooperation, African states are not yet reaping the benefits envisaged by the 1982 Law of the Sea Convention.
The most numerous papers received by the Conference dwelt on the subject of ocean governance at the regional level. This indicates in fact the consensus that the regional level in marine affairs is a most crucial bridge joining the national and global levels of sustainable development in the oceans. As at the national level, papers presented may be delineated into two sets: those that address the significant dimensions of regional governance, and case-studies.
Stjepan Keckes recalled the Regional Seas Programme experience of UNEP. In his paper, he makes a forecast of what lies ahead for existing regional action plans and the role that UNEP will play in the future. Among the many insights of Jean-Paul Troadec, he maintains that poor performances in fisheries, including inefficiencies in resource conservation, are caused by deficiencies in institutions regulating access. It is not, therefore, economics that need to be reconciled with ecology but those institutions that need to be adjusted to the new conditions of resource scarcity. Professor Vicuña's paper evaluated the role of joint development or joint management zones as a mode of regional cooperation in the exploration and exploitation of non-living marine resources and commended its expanding use. Drawing heavily from the initiative involving the Mediterranean Centre for Research and Development in Marine Industrial Technology, Dr. Saigal's paper formulates the institutional
ingredients for regional centres for marine science and technology. The paper by Gunnar Kullenberg and Agustin Ayala-Castañares addressed regional cooperation in marine science from the global framework provided by the International Oceanographic Commission. Finally, the peculiarities and possibilities of regional ocean governance in the Baltic Sea and the Indian Ocean are provided by Nikolaus Gelpke and Hiran W. Jayewardene respectively.
There was prolific discussion during the regional level Conference sessions. Because the papers presented highlighted the undisputed common denominator of indispensable regional approaches to ocean governance, the participants deliberated on the diverse aspects or possibilities of regional action. Initially, the difficulty of distinguishing regional and local scales was pointed out. This notwithstanding, management initiatives could still be realized. A Charter of Scientific Cooperation among developing countries containing a strategy for networking and cooperation among marine science and technology institutions was, for instance, proposed. Secondly, the intensifying regional focus of international organizations inside and outside of the UN system was acknowledged and commended. Thirdly, modalities for inviting and encouraging the participation of land-locked and hinterland states in marine environmental arrangements were put forward. Last but not the least, PIM XIX was
informed of efforts in the European Community to formulate an integrated ocean policy; an aide-mémoire by Uwe Jenisch of Germany concerning ocean governance at the European level was submitted as part of the Conference records.
Six papers were presented under the Conference theme "Ocean governance - Global level." In the paper "Ocean governance and the global picture" the authors propose the application of the principle of the common heritage of mankind and its institutional implications to other areas of global concern: energy, food, atmosphere, and outer space. Dr Thomas Mensah in his paper argues that there are certain changes, both internal and external, that have to take place with reference to competent international organizations if these institutions are to effectively discharge the new roles assigned to them by the 1982 Law of the Sea Convention. The contribution of Jacques Richardson suggests some practical approaches and guidelines for improved public communication about the law of the sea. Specific proposals are made on a medium intended to evoke both public reaction and decision-making concern at the highest governmental and intergovernmental levels.
Joseph Morgan, whose paper described navies and their peacetime roles, expresses apprehension about the world environment that continues to call on the combat mission of navies. The paper on the "Question of financing" by Dr Ruben Mendez proposes a system of international taxes, user fees, and other automatic revenue-generating mechanisms that could fund ocean-related programmes. Finally, Professors Alexander Yankov and Mário Ruivo develop the idea of a global ocean forum. An Ocean Assembly, they maintain, is the institutional response to the demand for integration in ocean governance.
The prevailing view that emerged from the subsequent discussion was that the regime for integrated management of ocean space in the 1982 Law of the Sea Convention, founded upon the common heritage of mankind principle, in many respects can serve as a model for the evolution of corresponding regimes for the governance of other natural entities, like food and energy systems, outer space, or atmosphere and climate. An appreciation of the deep interrelationships of these entities was communicated to the UNCED and the PIM XX held in November 1992. Also, it was perceived that the ambitious goal of developing new international institutions - arising from a recognition of the holistic character of the environment - like a Biosphere Security Council, international taxation, or the Ocean Assembly could only be feasible in the context of understanding the overall political features of the present world and the ways these might be evolving.
<section>Reports from the UN system</section>
An essential ingredient in the deliberation on institutional mechanisms for ocean governance at all levels has been the collective contribution of the United Nations agencies responsible for implementing, directly or indirectly, an ocean mandate. Their respective reports provide an insider's account of institutional perspectives, practices, and problems relevant to the subject of sustainable development in the oceans.
Not long before the Conference actually took place, questionnaires were sent to different UN bodies - particularly the Food and Agricultural Organization, the International Maritime Organization, the International Oceanographic Committee of UNESCO, and the United Nations Environment Programme - for them to react to three questions:
1. The Brundtland Report stresses the concept "sustainable development" has institutional implications. Do you anticipate that your organization will have to make internal adjustments to cope with these implications as well as the new tasks accruing from the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea?
2. Do you think the existing mechanisms for inter-agency cooperation are adequate for the formulation of an integrated ocean policy and a strategy for sustainable development? How could they be improved? Are new mechanisms needed?
3. Do you think the present financial infrastructure is adequate to pay for expansion of your activities? We hear more often now that the time has come for systems of international taxation. Would you agree? What are the alternatives?
Certain other UN agencies - the International Atomic Energy Agency, International Labour Organisation, United Nations Conference on Trade and Development, United Nations Development Programme, United Nations Industrial Development Organization, World Health Organization, and World Meteorological Organization - were asked to focus their contribution on survey question 2 above. Finally, three UN Economic Commissions, viz., for Africa; Latin America and the Caribbean; and also Asia and the Pacific, were requested to respond to this question:
Should your Economic Commission create a special "marine sector" division? In any case, how would your Economic Commission interact with the regional offices of the FAO, IOC/UNESCO, IMO, and UNEP so as to maintain at the regional level integration when implementing "an integrated ocean policy and a strategy for sustainable development"?
Ten out of fourteen agencies turned in reports. The reports are noticeably quite heterogeneous in quality and uneven in the way they have answered the question/s asked, perhaps revealing the diversity of approaches adopted by the agencies concerned to the issues of sustainable development and institutional integration in the oceans. Moreover, most reports have not altogether bothered to give a direct answer to the questions indicated, which are admittedly quite sensitive. Nevertheless, to the extent that they can be integrated into a common stream, these UN reports do overwhelmingly reveal the thesis of institutional integration, and confirm it as an idea whose time has come. The concrete problems of horizontal and vertical integration clearly emerge from these accounts. The highlights of each report are given in Annex I of this volume.
<section>Arrangement of the volume</section>
Following the programme of PIM XIX, this volume organizes its chapters basically into four parts. Part One consists of the papers on the "Existing framework for ocean governance." This part necessarily sets the context of the overall problem of institutional mechanisms for sustainable development in the oceans. Parts Two, Three, and Four are made up of those papers that expand on the meaning of ocean governance at the national, regional, and global levels, respectively. Due to space limitations, not all papers and documents circulated during the Conference have been reproduced. The Conclusions and Recommendations, which forms the gist of the PIM XIX is included before the main text in order to provide the reader with an overall impression of the discussions and debates that went into the Conference. The "Background paper" - the document which initially contemplated the general themes of PIM XIX - is included as Annex II.
<section>Conclusions and recommendations</section>
Pacem in Maribus XIX,
Convinced of the critical importance of the oceans: (a) in the global economy; (b) as a critical factor in determining our climate; (c) as a lead sector in international law and international relations; and (d) in providing a model for management of sustainable development.
Firmly believing, therefore, that ocean space and its resources must be considered a common heritage of mankind.
Aware that the problems of ocean space in turn are closely interrelated and need to be considered as a whole.
Bearing in mind that the World Commission on Environment and Development has called on all States to ratify and adhere to the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, as the most significant initial step they can take for the benefit of the marine environment.
Noting that the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) builds on the substantial achievements represented by the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea as the most advanced legal instrument for international cooperation in the management and development of resources, the protection of the environment, and the reservation of large parts of the globe for peaceful purposes.
Recognizing that the problems of ocean space are closely interrelated with those of land, the atmosphere, and outer space.
Conscious that the integrated and interdependent nature of the new challenges and issues contrasts sharply with the sectoral nature of the institutions that exist today.
Bearing in mind that processes previously contained within national boundaries are becoming so dynamic that traditional distinctions between national and international issues are becoming blurred, and that regional cooperation provides an indispensable link between global and national levels of activities.
Noting that "public" and "private" sectors are interdependent and complementary, and that new forms of public/private cooperation are needed, at the national, regional, and global levels.
Affirming that joint action must be based on true solidarity between nations and peoples.
Has adopted the following conclusions and recommendations^1:
<section>I. General</section>
1. Ocean governance should be examined as a possible pattern for the governance of other global concerns such as energy, food, atmosphere, outer space, environment, climate, and science and technology. The emerging institutional framework for sustainable development of ocean space and resources, which are the common heritage of mankind, must be part of and could be a model for global, regional, and national governance in the twenty-first century.
2. At each level: national, regional, global institutions must be restructured to reflect the shift from a sectoral to an intersectoral approach to planning and decision-making. Ocean policy must be integrated horizontally, across disciplines, departments, and specialized agencies, and between the public and private sectors, as well as vertically, across levels of governance, national, regional, and global, in a coherent system.
3. Human resources development, including the strengthening of scientific capabilities, must be a priority of national governments and should be pursued through national efforts as well as through regional and global cooperation. Without the capability of monitoring and of scientific research, ocean management and the conservation of the environment, responses to climate change, sealevel rise or other global environmental issues remain illusory.
4. The enhancement of the scientific and technological capabilities of developing countries is essential if they are to be active partners in the development and conservation of ocean space and its resources.
5. Environmental security is an essential component of common and comprehensive security, which has economic, environmental, political, and military dimensions. Measures of denuclearization of ocean space, naval arms control, cooperation of navies for peaceful purposes, and other confidence-building measures, must be taken at regional and global levels to complement the advancement of the peaceful uses of ocean space. The use of force makes havoc of development as well as of environment, as has been tragically demonstrated by recent events.
<section>II National</section>
6. States should integrate sustainable ocean development and the supporting research into their general development strategy. Improved knowledge and information are essential as a basis of management if States are to respond to the new challenge of integrating development and environment. An active planning infrastructure and inter-ministerial coordinating mechanisms could contribute to integrated policy-making in ocean affairs. Marine scientists, coastal communities, and producers and consumers of ocean-related goods and services should be involved in the policy-making process. They might be consulted through periodic national ocean assemblies.
7. Developed and developing countries should complete their legislation dealing with all uses of ocean space and harmonize it with the provisions of the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea.
8. Developing countries should endeavour to strengthen their scientific and technological infrastructures. For this purpose a percentage of their educational budget should be earmarked. Marine research and development should, in a balanced way, serve to enhance understanding of ocean resources and processes, as a basis for their management as well as for international negotiations and agreements.
9. Marine science teaching on the sustainability of ocean space and its resources should be strengthened at all levels, from primary to adult education: in curricula at university level; in adult education programmes for ocean users (fishermen, seamen, workers in the oil industry, coastal engineers) and for managers of ocean affairs.
10. Shortcomings of the present systems of national income accounting, such as the omission of the costs of pollution and depletion of natural resources, should be rectified. Ongoing activities aimed at incorporating environmental costs and benefits into national accounts should be extended to include the marine sector. This should also lead to the establishment of global ocean accounts for marine resources beyond the limits of national jurisdiction.
<section>III Regional</section>
11. Attention should focus on the next phase of regional cooperation so as to respond to the challenge of integrating development and environment.
12. The geographic scope of regional cooperation should be reexamined. Integrated water management and the protection of the marine environment from river-borne and atmospheric pollution require the participation of hinterlands.
13. Regional economic institutions should be encouraged to develop an integrated policy with respect to marine affairs. Recent efforts towards this goal by the Commission of the European Community are supported and their merits will be carefully analysed in the future.
14. For the advancement of marine sciences and environmentally sustainable technology, Regional Centres, in accordance with articles 276 and 277 of the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea, should be established. These should take into account the most advanced models for managing and financing high technology R&D, such as EUREKA and its proposed Latin American/ Caribbean counterpart in Project Bolivar, generating synergisms between public and private, national and international investment. In this context Pacem in Maribus XIX welcomed and supported the initiative of Venezuela to host a meeting of regional experts on the establishment of a Caribbean Centre for R&D in Marine Industrial Technology (Caracas, 2-5 December 1991).
15. Joint development and management zones can be established, even in situations of overlapping claims. They offer the most constructive and cost-effective way to bypass boundary disputes. Joint development and management zone concepts should be expanded in their geographical scope. Regional seas as a whole could benefit from such expanded concepts in the future. Coastal and non-coastal States should participate in these regimes. Existing models for exploration and exploitation systems and for institutional machinery should be adapted for this purpose and should include systematic ocean observations as part of the Global Ocean Observing System.
16. Denuclearization of ocean space, following the example of the Treaty of Rarotonga, should be applied to regional seas wherever possible. This would also enhance environmental security.
17. Wherever feasible and desirable, regional cooperation among navies for peaceful purposes should be encouraged. This may include joint monitoring and surveillance, inspection in cases of (threats of) serious pollution, enforcement of compliance with fishery and environmental regulations, disaster relief, search and rescue, and hydrological mapping.
<section>IV Global</section>
18. A global forum should be established within the United Nations system where all ocean issues may be discussed periodically, with the participation of all governments and relevant international bodies. Such a forum must also involve the economic and non-governmental sector. It could take a number of forms: Special Sessions of the United Nations General Assembly; a wider mandate to the envisaged periodic meetings of States Parties to the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea; a standing committee of ECOSOC; or some other form. But such a United Nations Ocean Assembly is essential for supervising and coordinating the institutional framework for ocean governance.
19. As part of the collective security system, the United Nations should have the capability to observe peace arrangements in the oceans. Such a peacekeeping component could also be deployed in emergencies as those outlined in paragraph 17 above, as well as be used for naval inspection of trade embargoes by the Security Council.
20. Global regimes as envisaged in the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea are essential for the effective management of the living resources of the high seas; this requirement is most explicitly stated in the case of the highly migratory species. The 1946 Convention for the Regulation of Whaling and the Convention for Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources, provide useful models in this regard. Negotiation on new instruments for other highly migratory species and high sea fisheries should be initiated immediately.
21. International assistance, which relies almost completely on unpredictable voluntary contributions, is woefully inadequate. A new approach to international public finance is needed. Systems of international taxation should be introduced. A tax of just 0.1 per cent on international trade, for example, could yield over $3 billion per annum. In addition, a tax on tourism and corrective taxes on other uses of ocean space, such as energy tax, are desirable for sustainable development in the oceans.
22. The entry into force and the effective implementation of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea are essential for the orderly, sustainable development of ocean space and resources and the progressive development of the law of the sea.^2 They will also contribute substantially to the UNCED process.
23. The Conference welcomed the joint initiative of President Mario Soares of Portugal and Professor Federico Mayor, the Director-General of UNESCO, to convene in 1992 with the support of the Portuguese Government a high level meeting to raise awareness and promote a strategy for partnership in ocean research, through building up national and regional capabilities in marine science, ocean services, and human resources, particularly in developing countries.
<section>Notes</section>
1. These Conclusions and Recommendations do not necessarily carry the endorsement of the organizations, inside or outside the United Nations system, having officers at PIM XIX.
2. Some participants expressed their support for the UN Secretary-General's efforts to make the Convention universally acceptable.
<section>Opening addresses</section>
<section>H.E. Dr Mário Soares, president of the republic of Portugal</section>
H.E. Dr Mário Soares, President of the Republic of Portugal, Dr Alicia Barcena, UNCED, and Dr Joseph Warioba, Tanzania
Mr President of the "Pacem in Maribus" Conference,
Hon Minister of the Sea,
Ladies and Gentlemen,
When I first met Professor Elisabeth Mann Borgese, Chairperson of the International Ocean Institute, I was impressed by her intelligence and profound knowledge. Indeed, the daughter of Thomas Mann, whom I have always admired since the time of my youth, manages to build an exceptional scientific background on a broad humanistic culture which makes her personality unique and fascinating. I then invited her to deliver a lecture in Portugal, as part of a series of conferences called "Experiences of the World" which I had the pleasure to organize together with the University of Oporto. She came and "bewitched" us. Following conversations with my old friend Mário Ruivo, to whom I am so much indebted for having given me the honour to meet Elisabeth Mann, the idea of organizing in Portugal this important XIX Pacem in Maribus Conference that was to be devoted to ocean management issues came up. I did my best to encourage that idea, for the obvious reason that Portugal and the sea
have been linked together in an intimate centuries-old relationship which has laid an everlasting mark on the most outstanding events in our history and provided the mould where human adventure was to be cast.
I am extremely grateful for the honour that has been given to Portugal to welcome you here, at the "Torre do Tombo" National Archives, the home that preserves the memory of our nation? under the guidance of my old friend and illustrious historian Jorge de Macedo. I know that making this conference come into being has not been an easy task. May I therefore congratulate the International Ocean Institute, presided over by Ambassador Layashi Yaker, on the excellent preparation of this event in spite of such severe time constraints. All these efforts have made it possible, inter alia, to gather highly valuable documentation prepared by a number of world famous specialists here today and to whom I would like to extend a hearty welcome.
Stating that people are nowadays becoming more and more aware of the increasing importance of the ocean is almost a cliche. The future of the world or rather the future of mankind - heavily depends on the health of the oceans and on their natural ecological balance. Suffice it to mention that today oceans are recognized to have a decisive impact on the global changes now under way, particularly those concerning climatic and sealevel variations with serious ecological implications. These are extremely important issues that need increasing awareness and appropriate steps to be taken, if we wish mankind to avoid serious hazards, of which we need understanding so as to prevent or reduce them.
On the other hand, oceans are also increasingly important in terms of international cooperation and economic and social development of all countries, including the land-locked ones. One example of this is the participation of the Heads of Agencies and other institutions of the United Nations System in the Honorary Committee and the place that the oceans occupy on the national agendas of various states and in the concerns of the world community at large.
Broadly speaking, there is today increasing awareness of the risk that great ecological catastrophes may recur, as well as of the hazards arising from certain development models that are built into the modern industrialized societies. These do not provide sufficient protection for maintaining the equilibrium of the natural environment. Hence the urgent need to lay down an appropriate ethical and legal framework with a view to ensuring environmental protection worldwide.
Without frustrating the hopes of developing societies that are legitimately aspiring to achieve their own welfare by turning their resources to better account, it is imperative that in our time we safeguard the quality of life of peoples while protecting the rights of future generations, which naturally require new forms of solidarity and a legal framework which must be universally respected.
The concept of sustainable development respectful of ecological balance, which was advocated in the Brundtland Report and which is one of the objectives of the UN Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) to be held in Rio de Janeiro in 1992, seeks to respond to this problématique which is characteristic of contemporary societies.
"Pacem in Maribus" is therefore a highly commendable initiative trying to put forward ideas and suggestions meant to help identify new approaches to ocean management so as to strike the right balance between the requirements of development and of maintaining environmental quality, with the full participation and commitment of all parties involved.
The international community has come now to a turning point - an exciting and complex stage that is not devoid of great difficulties, contradictions, and risks. The need is being felt all over the world for a new order to be set up, now that we are entering the post-Yalta era with the world no longer being split into political and military blocs facing each other as irreconcilable enemies. A long-lasting peace, something more than the state of no-war, seems to be within men's reach. Some encouraging signs are a reinforcement of democracy and progress in the respect of human rights. However, we should not ignore all kinds of violations and atrocities such as the ones that, in 1991, horrified the international community, i.e. in East Timor, a martyrized people dominated by Indonesia in conditions of intolerable oppression.
Within this international setting, where some of the most serious regional conflicts are about to find a solution while, to our deep regret, other conflicts are emerging, it is imperative that the main issues challenging mankind at the turn of this millenary be widely disseminated and discussed with all the scientific and technical accuracy they require. It is vitally important to provide access to updated information and organize a far-ranging public debate tackling all these issues both nationwide - and worldwide.
It is precisely the normal course of the natural processes governing the habitability to live on this planet that is at stake. As shown in the very topic of this "Pacem in Maribus" Conference, there is an urgent need to analyse and redesign the ocean management schemes and mechanisms by taking an approach that should be both humanistic as to the values from which we should derive inspiration and pragmatic as to the rules governing our action. But this can never be achieved without reaching the required consensus.
May I take this opportunity to mention the United Nations Law of the Sea Convention, signed in 1982 but not yet ratified by a number of countries, including Portugal. I think it is timely to bring this issue back into the spotlight, in the context of UNCED, as a contribution to its success and to enhance the credibility of the measures to be taken there, specially relating to the Convention on Climate Change.
According to the philosophy underlying the United Nations Law of the Sea Convention (the Portuguese version of which has been worked out by consensus among the seven Portuguese-speaking countries), oceans are recognized to be an area that calls for an integrated management approach: an approach requiring some very sensitive but necessary institutional adjustments to be brought at all levels so as to avoid tackling these matters from a traditional and strictly national and sectorial viewpoint.
As I have mentioned before, Portugal holds all sea-related matters near to its heart. Indeed, throughout its history, Portugal has always been committed to the sea, which explains why we are so deeply concerned with such issues. I think the very fact that a Ministry of the Sea has been re-established recently speaks for itself as clear evidence of this commitment.
This "Pacem in Maribus" Conference will, I am sure, usher in a new approach to ocean-related issues. The agenda under consideration, the high scientific expertise of participants, its wealth of reference documentation, and the intellectual creativity of its organizers guarantee success.
May I voice my deepest satisfaction with Portugal having been chosen as the venue of this Conference. We furthermore hope to host the International Exhibition, scheduled for 1998, an event that will significantly be devoted to the ocean's heritage of humankind.
I take the view that there is a need to narrow the gap - unfortunately an increasing one - between the highly industrialized countries on the one hand, and the developing countries, on the other hand, as to research, utilization, and management of oceans. The technological gap is a decisive factor in this respect. I have exchanged ideas with the Director-General of UNESCO, Professor Federico Mayor, who shares the same concerns. Hence our intention to convene jointly next year in Lisbon (and counting, of course, on the Portuguese Government's support) a Conference aimed at bringing together world famous scientists, experts in ocean sciences, and world leaders concerned with these issues. In our view, this could make an appropriate contribution to the study, clarification, and diffusion of this issue, which, as much as it worries us, at the same time fascinates us.
We are looking to see how this idea is taken in hand and in what ways it can be realized.
Before I conclude, may I reiterate my thanks for your kind invitation to address the opening ceremony of this "Pacem in Maribus" Conference, and wish you all a pleasant stay in Portugal and every success in your work.
<section>Mr Maurice strong, UNEP (Dr Alicia Barcena, UNCED, on behalf of Mr Strong)</section>
Dr Alicia Barcena, UNCED, on behalf of Mr Maurice Strong, UNEP
The United Nations Conference on Environment and Development
The 1992 United Nations Conference on Environment and Development rests on the twin propositions that environmental management cannot be secured without addressing underlying causes in the nature and pattern of development, and equally, that the pursuit of development requires systematic attention to the environmental basis on which all production depends.
Integration is at the very heart of the UNCED. Individually, the issues considered in the UNCED cover a wide range and provide a forum for discussion of the linkages between issues being considered separately in different forums, and for the integration of environmental issues with related developmental problems, and vice versa. Beyond 1992, the main task of the UNCED process is to move the joint environment and development issues into the centre of economic policy and decision-making.
The journey to Rio, and from Rio, provides an opportunity for drawing together many strands of development in international cooperation. In preparing proposals for the leaders of the world, we necessarily draw upon a wide range of experience, knowledge, and capacity, not only of Governments and international organizations, but of scientists, leaders of business and industry, trade unions, educators, as well as such special constituencies as women, youth, indigenous peoples, and many others. All these organizations and groups have a primary, indeed decisive, role in implementing and following up the results of the UNCED.
In the case of the oceans, the very substantial achievements of the Law of the Sea Convention is most significant. As Elisabeth Mann Borgese stated in Pacem in Maribus XVI: "The Law of the Sea Convention, if properly interpreted and implemented, is, in fact, the most advanced legal instrument we have for international cooperation in the management and development of resources, the protection of the environment, and the reservation of the large part of the globe for peaceful purposes". The UNCED builds on these achievements.
In December 1989, the United Nations General Assembly, responding to the report of the Brundtland Commission, decided to hold a conference on environment and development in June 1992. It was decided, further, that nations would be represented at the conference by their Heads of State or Government. This will make it the first ever "Earth Summit."
Resolution 44/228, which established the mandate of the Conference, made it clear that "environment and development" must be dealt with on an integrated basis for every issue considered, from climate change to human settlements. A series of concrete measures evolved from the conference. These included:
1. An "Earth Charter" or Declaration of basic principles for the conduct of nations and peoples in respect of environment and development to ensure the future viability and integrity of the Earth as a hospitable home for human and other forms of life.
2. An agenda for action, "Agenda 21," establishing the agreed work programme of the international community into the twenty-first century in respect of the issues addressed by the Conference with priorities, targets, cost estimates, modalities, and assignment of responsibilities.
And the means to implement this agenda through:
3. New and additional financial resources.
4. Transfer of technology.
5. Strengthening of institutional capacities and processes, together with
6. Agreements on specific legal measures, e.g. conventions for the protection of the atmosphere, biological diversity, and possibly forests.
A set of new priorities
Within this agenda, governments will be called upon to act on a series of concrete measures which will literally change the basis of our economic life, our relations with each other and our prospects for the future. These will provide the basis for a new set of priorities for the world community:
- revitalization of the economies of the developing countries;
- reversing the outflow of resources from developing countries, and ensuring their access to the new and additional resources and technologies they will require to incorporate the environmental dimension into their own development and participate fully in international environmental cooperation;
- eradication of poverty, the principal source of the environmental problems of developing countries and a major threat to the achievement of global environmental security;
- reversal of the destruction of renewable resources, soil, forests, biological, and genetic resources;
- ensuring availability of energy supplies, particularly to developing countries under conditions that will safeguard the environment and contain risks of climate change;
- ensuring availability and protection of water supplies; ensuring food security;
- ensuring equitable access to, and use of, the global commons by all nations under conditions that will provide for their protection;
- changing the system of incentives and penalties which motivate economic behaviour, to ensure that they provide strong incentives to sustainability and changes in national accounts to reflect the real values of the environment and resources;
- transition to patterns of production and consumption in the industrialized countries which will drastically reduce their disproportionate contribution to the deterioration of the earth's environment and related global environmental risks.
Global cooperation: The different perspectives of developing and industrialized countries
In this important undertaking, the global challenge that sustainable development poses is one of cooperation, and cooperation can only be based on common interests. While there is widespread acknowledgement, at the level of principle, of the need to achieve a sustainable balance between environment and development, it should be no surprise that the perspectives of developing countries on the issues differ substantially from those of industrialized countries.
The industrialized countries must take the lead in effecting this transformation. For the unparalleled economic growth that has produced their wealth and power has also given rise to most of the major global environmental risks we face. This will involve significant changes in lifestyles as more people in the industrialized world opt for lives of sophisticated modesty, and people of developing countries receive greater support in their attempts to achieve livelihoods which do not undermine or destroy the environment and resource base on which their future livelihoods depend. There will be basic changes in consumer preferences and practices, the portents of which are already visible in the move towards green consumerism.
Developing countries share the risks we confront and indeed, are even more vulnerable to them, but they are only at the early stages of the economic development to which they aspire. Their right to grow cannot be denied, but their growth will clearly add immensely to global environmental pressures and risks unless they, too, can make the transition to more sustainable modes of development. Developing countries can neither afford nor be expected to do this unless they have access to the additional financial resources and technologies they require to integrate the environmental dimension into their development.
Of special importance is a massive attack on the vicious circle of poverty in which so many millions of people are caught up, driving them to meet their immediate survival needs by destroying the environmental and resource base on which their future survival and well-being depend and adding to global environmental risks. In economic and environmental, as well as in humanitarian terms, it will be far less costly and more effective to act now than to postpone action.
Sustainable development cannot be imposed by external pressures; it must be rooted in the culture, the values, the interests, and the priorities of the people concerned. While the transition to sustainability will require a supportive international economic environment, it must not provide a basis for external imposition of new conditions or constraints on development. Developing countries cannot be denied their right to grow, or to choose their own pathways to growth. Nor should that right be constrained by new conditions on financial flows or trade imposed in the name of environment.
But their transition to sustainability cannot be expected without the support of the international community. This is particularly needed to reverse the outflow of resources that has stifled the economic growth of the developing countries, and to ensure that these countries have access on a long-term basis to the resource flows they will need to revitalize their economic life and make the transition to environmentally sustainable development. Of critical importance in this is the need to deal more fundamentally with the debt issue. Debt for nature swaps may be useful in addressing particular needs, but are marginal in their overall effect. The principle behind them may, however, serve as a basis for the kind of basic reduction in debt servicing charges that is essential to the revitalization of development.
Sustainable development involves a process of deep and profound change in the political, social, economic, institutional, and technological order including the re-definition of relations between developing and more developed countries. Governments must take the lead and establish the basic policy framework, incentives, and infrastructures required for sustainability. But the primary actors are people, acting through the many non-governmental organizations and citizen groups through which societies function. The broader common interest that all governments and people share for the future of our planet provides a powerful incentive to bridge these difficulties. The 1992 UN Conference on Environment and Development - The Earth Summit - can only succeed if it has a sound base for the awareness and engagement of people.
Common and shared responsibilities
Everybody recognizes that the marine sector is a crucial element of any broad development strategy and that a new international order has been emerging from the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. Amongst the issues being addressed in preparation for the "Earth Summit", oceans is central to a variety of concerns. It will be, therefore, no surprise that oceans are also amongst the most sensitive and difficult of issues.
Technology and capacity building
Actions for sustainable development - as outlined in Agenda 21 will require a certain level of technology development and adaptation, as well as their transfer on a fair and affordable basis to developing countries. They will also need to be supported by major programmes of information, education, and training within all countries, and coordinated at the international level. Technologies will be needed for energy efficiency programmes, and for alternative, non - or low-greenhouse-gas supply options. One important element of this is the capacity of developing countries themselves to develop the technologies which are most appropriate to their needs.
Most developing countries are unable to obtain access to information on the range of technologies available from within their own country or externally, and the experience of others in using them. Nor do they themselves have the resources necessary to establish networks to access such information.
Closely linked to the issue of technology is that of capacity building. It is essential to ensure that a sound infrastructure is put in place to implement, maintain and adapt the technologies that are available. Improving upon the strengths of the developing countries and reducing their vulnerabilities requires a quantum increase in support for the development of their human resources and related institutional capacities, particularly in the fields of science, technology, management, and professional skills. The key to self-reliance is to foster a pool of indigenous talent that can adapt and innovate, in a world where knowledge is the primary basis of competitiveness. Human skills, institutions, information, and analytical capabilities should be built up not only to assess and absorb desirable technology from outside, but also to develop it locally.
The South Commission recognized that the primary responsibility for the future of developing countries rests, of course, with them, and their success will depend largely on their own efforts in strengthening their professional and institutional capacities, and realigning their budgetary priorities in order to improve their ability to innovate, absorb, adapt, and develop technologies in a world in which knowledge is the primary basis of competitiveness. But they deserve and require an international system that lends strong support to these efforts. This includes substantially increased financial assistance, and much better access to markets, private investment, and technology to enable them to build stronger and more diversified economies, to effect the transition to sustainable development and to reduce their vulnerability to changes in the international economy.
This will call for something much more than a mere extension of existing concepts of foreign aid which can no longer be seen as a satisfactory basis for relationships between rich and poor countries. It calls for a wholly new global partnership based on common and shared responsibilities, one in which developing countries will have the incentive and the means to cooperate fully in protecting the global environment while meeting their needs and aspirations for economic growth.
Conclusions
No single event can be expected in itself to resolve the many complex issues that confront the world community. But UNCED provided a unique opportunity for a major shift in inertia required to put us on the pathway to a more secure and sustainable future. At the core of this shift there will be changes in our economic life, a more careful and more caring use of the earth's resources and greater cooperation and equity in sharing the benefits as well as the risks of our technological civilization. The Conference provided a new basis for relations between North, South, East, and West: a new global partnership based on common interest, mutual need, and shared responsibility, including a concerted attack on poverty as a central priority for the twenty-first century. This is now as imperative in terms of our global environmental security as it is in moral and humanitarian terms. Together these will provide the basis for a more secure and hopeful future for our planet as a
hospitable home for our species and the other forms of life with which we share it.
The primary responsibility for our common future on this "Only One Earth" lies in a very real sense "in our hands."
<section>Dr Joseph Warioba, Tanzania</section>
Dr Joseph Warioba, Tanzania
It is now twenty-four years since Dr Pardo, on behalf of Malta, placed the issue of the Common Heritage of Mankind on the agenda of the General Assembly of the United Nations. It took fifteen years of discussion, preparation, and negotiation - from 1967 to 1982 - to adopt the Convention on the Law of the Sea. The 1970s was a decade of intensive activity and effort in an attempt to evolve a new international economic order and to establish a new order in the oceans. The negotiations on a new international order were virtually killed at the Cancun Summit in 1981, but the Law of the Sea negotiations were successfully concluded and the Law of the Sea Convention was adopted and opened for signature in December, 1982, at Montego Bay, Jamaica.
But even after so many years of intensive global discussion and great achievement, the full significance of the Law of the Sea Convention is yet to be acknowledged. In the early eighties an attempt was made to minimize the importance of the Convention by arguing that apart from Part XI the Convention simply codifies customary law or reflects existing international practice. Apart from the argument being false, the reality now is that state action relating to matters of the oceans has reference to the Convention. The evidence available shows clearly that States have accepted the Convention and national, regional, and international action relative to the ocean has reference to the Convention. The International Court of Justice now also bases its decisions on the Convention. With regard to Part XI, which deals with the global commons, States, even those which do not fully accept it, have acknowledged its importance. For example, major powers which did not sign the Convention
accepted the provisions of Resolution II of the Conference and resolved conflicts of overlap in accordance with the principles laid down by the Convention. Indeed they found it appropriate to do so under the good offices of the Preparatory Commission. Even the United States, which is neither a signatory of the Convention nor a participant in the Preparatory Commission, was interested in and implicitly accepted, the methods used to resolve the conflicts of overlap.
As it has been stated so many times, "the problems of ocean space are closely interrelated and need to be considered as a whole." Before 1982 matters relating to the oceans were scattered in several conventions, including the conventions resulting from the conference of 1958. The 1982 Convention is one comprehensive whole. It is indeed a world constitution for the oceans; and as such its ratification is very important.
The Convention is important because it is universal in every sense. Participation in its making was universal in a real sense. The number of participating states and countries was larger than the membership of the United Nations, and the participation of international organizations, both governmental and non-governmental, was probably the largest ever. Furthermore, the participation of every entity was very significant.
For developing countries one can say this was the first important international instrument where their contribution was most impressive and was so acknowledged. It is the one instrument where both the developed and developing worlds can point out clearly that such and such contribution came from the developing world.
Although the Convention is comprehensive and although most of the provisions are detailed and specific, especially in Part XI, there are areas where the provisions are very general in nature and there is a need to develop them further; for example, the chapters on marine scientific research, protection, and preservation of the marine environment and development and transfer of marine technology. Development in these areas would be best done within the framework and using the mechanisms set out in the Convention. This is particularly important in view of such events as the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development. The Law of the Sea Convention contains the only existing, comprehensive, binding, and enforceable international environmental law covering pollution from all sources, whether oceanic, land-based, or atmospheric. It is indeed the only existing legal instrument that effectively integrates the protection of the environment with development - development
of living and non-living resources, development of science and technology, and development of human resources. It is also the only existing legal instrument that imposes binding and enforceable peaceful settlement of disputes arising from, among other things, environmental issues.
Ratification is also important in order to consolidate the comprehensiveness of the Convention. The coming into force of the Convention will trigger into action the institutional framework and mechanism envisaged in its provisions. It is true that the institutional framework that is beginning to emerge as a consequence of the Convention is indeed the most advanced that has been conceived so far to meet the challenges put forward by the Report of the World Commission on Environment and Development. It is true also that there is now widespread agreement that a new forum is needed where the problems of ocean space can be considered as a whole. But the present situation needs to be improved. The progress that has been made so far is at the international level, particularly with regard to international governmental organizations. They have tried individually to incorporate and expand their ocean-related activities and they have also made commendable efforts to develop mechanisms
for close cooperation and coordination. But these efforts by themselves are not enough. Of crucial importance is the development of a coordinated approach at national and regional levels, particularly in developing countries.
At the national level, especially in the developing countries, the proper institutional framework and mechanisms are not in place to deal with ocean matters on a comprehensive basis. It is common to find in any government different departments dealing with different aspects of ocean matters in complete isolation. In my own country (Tanzania), for example, fisheries, mining, scientific research, environment, etc. are each under a different ministry and there is no proper coordinating mechanism. Decision-making is also done in an uncoordinated manner and participation at regional and international levels is similarly ineffective.
Although at the regional level some efforts have been, and are being made, to improve the situation, especially in areas where international organizations are active, there is still much to be done. The Convention is the only guide to a comprehensive approach and its coming into force will greatly influence action at all levels. The universal participation in the formulation of the provisions of the Convention greatly influenced States to consider issues of the oceans in a comprehensive and coordinated manner, and I believe the coming into force of the Convention will have a tremendous impact on State action and it will of necessity influence institutional frameworks and mechanisms at the national and the regional level, which will similarly have a comprehensive approach.
It is nine years since the Convention was concluded and signed. Sixty ratifications are required before it comes into force, and on the receipt of the sixtieth ratification a year will elapse before the Convention comes into force. In the meantime, two things ought to be done. The first is that States party to the Convention must agree on a very clear and practical policy with regard to what to do next. The Preparatory Commission, without fanfare, has done a commendable job in the preparation of the detailed rules and regulations. International organizations have also done a lot of useful work which will help a great deal when the Convention comes into force. But even with the commendable work done so far, the period between the sixtieth ratification and the coming into force of the Convention is of crucial importance for the future of the law of the sea and world order.
States that have ratified the Convention are mostly developing countries. This is not surprising. As already stated, the Convention is the first major international instrument in which the contribution of the developing countries was very significant. All developing countries participated actively and effectively in the negotiations. In the process they were able to understand not only the complexity of the issues and the importance of dealing with all the issues of the oceans as a comprehensive whole, but they also understood the importance of managing ocean affairs under a generally agreed international legal instrument. Taking into account their weak position in international relations, they stand to benefit in a fair manner if the Convention is the governing instrument.
The ratification and coming into force of the Convention is extremely important for developing countries, and they have, therefore, a heavier responsibility to bring the Convention into operation. There are of course some problems in the Convention coming into force without the effective participation of the major powers. For example, the establishment of the Council of the Seabed Authority and its various organs will not be possible under the formula laid down in the provisions of the Convention. The composition and procedure of voting of the Council requires consideration of various special interests, something which will not be possible if the Convention will come into effect on the ratification of only developing countries. But this should not be an obstacle, article 308 anticipated this sort of situation by providing that the first Council would be constituted in a manner consistent with the purpose of article 161 if the provisions of that article (which require a
composition of the Council to conform to special interests) cannot be strictly applied. The establishment and maintenance of the Secretariat and the convening of the Assembly may also not be easy, mainly because of the inability of ratifying States to foot the expenses, but this can easily be resolved by evolving a procedure within the United Nations system to enable these organs to function with minimal expenses. All in all the developing States that have ratified the Convention should not shy away from bringing the Convention into operation.
The coming into operation of the Convention is equally important to the international community as a whole. In the first place it is important for all States to maintain peace in the oceans. The Convention is the only instrument generally accepted internationally. It has set out clearly the rights and obligations of every national and international entity, and it has also set up an elaborate system of peaceful settlement of disputes. In a word, the Convention is an instrument of peace in the oceans.
Furthermore, current and upcoming international initiatives in this field take the Convention as an indispensable framework. For example, the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development and its follow up activities draw heavily on the provisions of the Convention. The results of these initiatives will have a greater impact with the Convention in force.
The theme of this Conference is "Ocean Governance" at all levels: national, regional, and global. It covers many aspects of ocean affairs, the required framework and mechanisms, structures for decision-making at all levels, structures for cooperation at all levels, structures for special areas such as the environment, transfer of technology, marine scientific research, and modes of cooperation and coordination. The agenda has been carefully prepared and all the speakers and discussants are highly qualified and experienced people in the field. I have no doubt in my mind that the results of this Conference will make a great contribution and give a new impetus to the ratification process in order to save the Convention from being dismantled and forgotten. And I believe also it will contribute to the development of new frameworks and mechanisms at national, regional, and international levels for the purpose of achieving better integration and coordination of ocean governance
that will be beneficial to all.
<section>Part I: The existing framework for ocean governance</section>
<section>The united nations convention on the law of the sea: sustainable development and institutional implications</section>
Christopher W. Pinto
<section>I. Introduction</section>
Sustainable development
The word "development," in its international setting too readily associated with "economic development," refers here to the use or exploitation of a natural resource. The word "sustainable," which conveys the idea of holding up or support, in this context means development that is conservative, and is conducive to continued viability of a resource.
The term "sustainable development" which appeared in the World Conservation Strategy published in 1980 by the International Union for the Conservation of Nature and was adopted by the World Commission on Environment and Development, is used to describe management (i.e. regulation of use and exploitation, and conservation) of a given resource in such a manner that the benefits of the resource are optimized, that is, made available on an equitable basis to the largest number over the longest term. It requires the sparing and economical use of non-renewable resources, and maintenance of the productivity of renewable resources, as well as avoidance of or compensation for, irreversible effects caused to the resource through use or exploitation that does not meet these standards.
Such equitable allocation of benefits from a resource necessarily implies regulation of access to the resource, whether that resource is a stock of fish, a deposit of minerals, or the air or water; and whether the resource is fixed, or mobile and fluctuating across national boundaries, or beyond national jurisdiction in areas sometimes referred to as "global commons." The Report of the World Commission declares that
... physical sustainability cannot be secured unless development policies pay attention to such considerations as changes in access to resources and in the distribution of costs and benefits. Even the narrow notion or physical sustainability implies a concern for social equity between generations, a concern that must logically be extended to equity within each generation. (emphasis added)^1
Thus, according to the Report, "sustainable development" requires, inter alia, (1) "that [the] poor get their fair share of the resources required to sustain [economic] growth"; and (2) "that those who are more affluent adopt lifestyles within the planet's ecological means.... Painful choices have to be made...." The Report is right to conclude, therefore, that "sustainable development" implies nothing less than the "progressive transformation of economy and society"; and to emphasize that "in the final analysis, sustainable development must rest on political will."^2
It follows that "changes in access to resources and in the distribution of costs and benefits" can be accomplished equitably only through the establishment of objective standards and the corresponding regulative practices applicable to a comprehensive range of activities having an impact on these resources; and further, that such standards and practices should be based on the best available scientific evidence. The establishment of such standards and practices, as well as the evaluation of scientific evidence, the monitoring of compliance, and the application of the corresponding sanctions do, however, call for decisions based on judgement, and judgement, in turn, is necessarily influenced by the dominant system or values being applied. Inevitably, grave disparities in the economic needs of populations and their capacity for implementing action, will result in wide variations among the judgements arrived at (as articulated by their governments) and accordingly, the basis for
regulating and monitoring access and applying sanctions should be some agreed system of values. That system could be one derived from a single dominant and effective ideology, for example free enterprise; or the system might be based on a synthesis of values arrived at after negotiation among the adherents of different ideologies. The latter may be more difficult to achieve, but could enjoy wider support and may be worth striving for.
As the Minister for Development Cooperation of the Netherlands observed:
We need a global mixed economy including a strong and clear international framework of powerful public institutions, a kind of global public sector. We need an internationalization of the concept of the welfare state with international transfers to correct gross inequalities. We need an international pluralistic democracy within which developing countries can participate effectively in international decision-making.^3
The principles and rules of law which are to be derived from the concept of sustainable development,^4 as well as the institutions created to implement them, must take account of existing variations and disparities in the economic needs and capacities of populations as reflected in the different policies articulated by States. Sustainable development is not to be understood, after all, as merely implying "sustainable economic development," for then one must surely ask "which country's economic development is involved"? Clearly, to "sustain" the economy of a highly industrialized country, dependent on escalating consumption, it would take proportionately much more from a given resource than it would to "sustain" the economy of one of the least developed countries, so that such a meaning for the term would merely contemplate perpetuation of the environmentally less-than-satisfactory status quo. Similarly, the term "sustainable" is apt to mislead if it is used, as is done
occasionally, in such contexts as "sustainable industrial development" or again, "sustainable energy strategy." Such uses merely raise questions: whose industrial development? whose energy strategy? and make us forget that it is sustaining the environment, sustaining the resource, that is called for, and not the sustaining of any one country or group of countries, perhaps in the very pattern of production and consumption that has brought some parts of the environment to the threshold of collapse.
Institutional implications
These thoughts on the concept of sustainable development suggest four sets of implications as regards its implementation in the field of marine affairs, or indeed in any other. First, the holistic approach adopted by the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea in declaring at the outset that "the problems of ocean space are closely interrelated and need to be considered as a whole,"^5 is of particular importance in formulating principles and rules of law for achievement of the aims of sustainable development, given (a) the multiplicity of factors, scientific, economic, social, and political which need to be taken into account in the process; and (b) the number and variety of marine resources, management of each of which must be conceived and carried out after taking into account management requirements of the others.
A second set of implications which follows from the first, is that there must be universal participation in that endeavour: every State, irrespective of its social and economic system, and its level of economic development must be recognized as having both the right and the duty to contribute to achieving sustainable development of a resource.^6 Three implications derived from the principle of universal participation are of special importance:
a. Participation by States must be based on the principle of the sovereign equality of States proclaimed in the Charter of the United Nations and repeatedly reaffirmed through its organs.^7
b. Universal participation is optimized when all States are enabled to possess the essential equipment and capacities (finance, technology, science) to take part effectively in making and implementing decisions.^8
c. Since the capacities of States to participate may be expected, in the short and medium term, to vary considerably, equity would prescribe that implementing sustainable development allows for a system or balanced differential obligation, that is each State would be called upon to undertake obligations to contribute to the process which takes into account its capacity to do so.^9
Thirdly, for development of a resource to be sustainable there must be regulation of access to it. The rules governing access to the resource, which must reflect, in the words of the Brundtland Report "a concern for social equity between generations, a concern that must logically be extended to equity within each generation,"^10 should (a) seek to give effect to these equities in a manner determined by universal participation, (b) be devised, formulated, and applied in a timely manner so as to prevent, rather than merely be the response to, irreversible depletion or degradation of the resource, as well as personal injury and damage to property (preventive or "precautionary" principle);^11 and (c) be based on the best scientific information and data available.^12
Finally, the implementation of the holistic approach, universal participation and regulation of access to the resource require orderly cooperation at global, regional, State, and community levels. The promotion and ordering of wills, whether of States or individuals, to cooperate require the application of at least two institutions: organization and law. As to organization, as one authority puts it:
By binding people together in a long-term multilevel game, organizations increase the number and importance of future interactions and thereby promote the emergence of co-operation among groups too large to interact individually.^13
Law, by establishing obligations through rules and mechanisms aimed at securing compliance, supports or substitutes the will to cooperate when changes in circumstances have weakened or removed the original impulse to do so freely. Law and organization must together provide for one or more systems for the orderly settlement of disputes, to deal with possible infractions of rules and the protection of the rights of affected individuals,^14 the latter aspect implying, in turn, the early development of rules relating to liability for damage, as well as of efficient and effective procedures for the presentation of claims.^15
<section>II. The 1982 un convention on the law of the sea</section>
In considering the extent to which existing international institutions are adequate to the task of making a reality of the concept of sustainable development in the field of marine resources, the obvious starting point is the 1982 UN Convention on the Law of the Sea. Designed to reflect elements of the "New International Economic Order" and to establish the legal content of the concept of the "common heritage of mankind," the Convention gives expression precisely to those elements of universal participation, equity and balanced reciprocal obligation, transference of funds, science and technology to the developing countries, and regulation of access to shared natural resources, that are also inherent in the concept of sustainable development. The Convention, moreover, adopts a holistic approach to marine resources. Recognizing that "the problems of ocean space are closely interrelated and need to be considered as a whole," it deals with a comprehensive range of subjects and
issues of the law of the sea. Some (for example concerning seabed mining) are treated in detail, while in respect of others (e.g. marine environment, marine science, and technology) the Convention serves as an "umbrella" or "framework" treaty, laying down broad cooperative undertakings, foreseeing that detailed commitments would be negotiated and included in supplementary agreements.
The Convention is replete with provisions which call for cooperation among States, among States and international organizations, as well as among international organizations themselves, that have as their overall objective the conservation of marine resources to ensure their optimum utilization. For example, a coastal State's rights for the purpose of exploring and exploiting the natural resources of an "exclusive economic zone" are recognized, but only in conjunction with rights for the purpose of conserving and managing those resources.^16 A coastal State's rights are further balanced with countervailing duties,^17 to an extent that its role may be interpreted as being, in some respects, that of a trustee in relation to those resources. In its provisions on the living resources of the high seas, including "straddling stocks," highly migratory species, marine mammals, and anadromous and catadromous species, in which conservation is the dominant theme,^18 the Convention
clearly anticipates the concept of sustainable development. As to part XII of the Convention, its express objective is the protection and preservation of the marine environment and restates, for the first time in what is intended to become a binding legal instrument, general and specific obligations of States directed to that end.^19 Provisions on navigational safety^20 have, in part, the same objective, in addition to those of protecting life and property at sea. Through providing, in part XI and annexes III and IV, for implementation of the concept "common heritage of mankind," based on universal participation, regulated non-exclusive access to resources, and equitable sharing of benefits, the Convention foreshadows to a remarkable degree principles associated with sustainable development.
As to institutional support for implementing these provisions, the Convention adopts two basic approaches: in regard to more traditional marine activities - for example, fishing and the conservation of the living resources of the seas, navigation and communication, protection and preservation of the marine environment, and marine scientific research - the Convention assigns important roles to organizations within the UN family already active in these fields (FAO, IMO, UNEP, IOC/UNESCO); in regard to the non-traditional activity of deep seabed mining, the Convention establishes new institutions the International Seabed Authority, and its affiliate, the Enterprise.
Institutional support for traditional marine activities
Thus, IMO is given regulatory responsibilities with respect to the safety of navigation including designation of sea-lanes,^21 establishment of traffic separation schemes,^22 the construction, operation, and removal of artificial islands, installations and structures,^23 vessel source pollution^24 and dumping,^25 and maritime transport of noxious substances.^26 FAO is assigned a wide range of consultative functions in connection with the conservation and management of fish stocks both within national jurisdiction,^27 and outside it on the high seas,^28 as well as with the conservation of marine mammals.^29 Several responsibilities are to be undertaken by UNEP in connection with the protection and preservation of the marine environment,^30 while IOC/ UNESCO will be required to carry out a range of functions related to the promotion and regulation of marine scientific research.^31 In addition to the regulatory and promotional functions allocated to these "competent
international organizations," the Convention gives each of them a role with respect to the settlement of disputes arising within their respective fields.^32
Organizations not referred to in the Convention either directly or by necessary implication, also have roles of importance in bringing about sustainable development of marine resources and may, in time, be recognized as "competent international organizations" under the Convention. Some, of "universal" membership, have functions with a direct bearing on the utilization of marine resources:
- the International Labour Organisation, through its contribution to maritime safety resulting from its maritime labour conventions and recommendations;
- the World Meteorological Organization, through its contribution to maritime safety in providing meteorological and related geophysical information, supervised by its Commission for Marine Meteorology;
- the International Civil Aviation Organization, through regulating aspects of air navigation and air transport, activities which, carried out to a great extent across marine areas, influence, and are influenced by, the oceans and the laws that govern them;
- the International Maritime Satellite Organization, through improving significantly the efficiency of maritime communications;
- the International Whaling Commission, through regulating catches of whales so as to protect species threatened by over-exploitation, and promoting research on whales and related activities;
- and global environmental protection institutions established pursuant to agreements concluded under the auspices of UNEP.^33
Other institutions which may not be characterized as "universal," but which nevertheless contribute to the sustainable development of marine resources, include those established and supervised by the Consultative Parties to the 1959 Antarctic Treaty^34 and a number of regional institutions dealing with fisheries,^35 mineral exploitation,^36 preservation of the marine environment^37, and marine scientific research.^38
<section>III. The convention's new institutions: the international seabed authority and the enterprise</section>
Nowhere does the Convention more clearly anticipate the concept of "sustainable development" than in the new international institutions established by it to implement the concept of the "common heritage of mankind": the International Seabed Authority, which will regulate, supervise and administer mining of the seabed beyond the limits of national jurisdiction; and its affiliate, the Enterprise, which will actually carry on mining of that area in competition with States and state-sponsored miners. Nowhere in the Convention are the Brundtland Report's prescriptions regarding "changes in access to resources and in the distribution of costs and benefits," and concern for social equity "between generations" and "within each generation" more strikingly foreshadowed than in part XI and annex III. Those provisions regulate access to the area's resources as well as all resource exploration and exploitation activities therein, promote the transfer of scientific knowledge and
technology associated with seabed mining, and ensure to a feasible extent the equitable distribution of the costs and benefits of activity in the area. The Enterprise, established by article 170 and annex IV as an "organ of the Authority," and given a measure of autonomy to enable it to function on a commercial basis with a view to optimal utilization of the area's resources, is nevertheless "subject to the directives and control of the Council," so that its operations as a whole will be consistent with the common heritage concept as elaborated in the Convention.
The Convention's provisions illustrate three features of particular importance in the design of international institutions responsible for the sustainable development of a natural resource: universal participation, comprehensive powers, and legislative competence.
Universal participation
Part XI of the Convention, together with annex III are of particular importance from the institutional point of view, since they may represent the furthest attainable refinement of an inter-State management mechanism that remains faithful to the principle of the sovereign equality of States and is based firmly on the democratic ideal of one-State-one-vote, which the overwhelming majority of participants considered essential.
Thus, in the Assembly - the International Seabed Authority's "supreme organ"^39 - all States' Parties are represented, and the vote of each is equal in value to the vote of any other. A simple majority of all the members constitutes a quorum, and a majority of members present and voting is needed in order to decide a question of procedure. For a decision concerning a question of substance (and the decision whether a question is one of substance or not), a qualified majority is required, that is two-thirds of the members present and voting, provided that number includes two-thirds of the members participating in the session. Minority positions are safeguarded through provisions for postponement of voting on a question, pending negotiation; and postponement of voting on a proposal pending its referral to the Seabed Disputes Chamber of the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea for an advisory opinion on conformity of the proposal with the provisions of the
Convention.^40
The Council, the executive and supervisory organ of the Authority, also functions in accordance with the one-State-one-vote principle. A simple majority of its members constitutes a quorum, and a decision on a question of procedure requires a simple majority. As some of the Council's decisions on questions of substance are likely to be of economic and political significance to States' Parties, and may generate strongly held views among them, a delicate balance in decision-making power was achieved through combining:
1. Constitutional provisions which, while maintaining overall geographical distribution of seats on the Council, ensures that half its number (18) would be filled on the basis of equitable representation of States with special interests. These include the principal consumers of seabed minerals and the principal investors in seabed mining (thus guaranteeing representation of the most highly industrialized countries) as well as the principal land-based producers of the same minerals.^41
2. A procedure for voting on matters of substance that safeguards the integrity of the regime by protecting strongly-held minority positions through (a) requiring, with respect to specified categories of questions of substance, that decisions be taken by qualified majorities of two-thirds, or three-fourths of the members present and voting, or by a consensus among them, reflecting, in general, the economic or political significance attaching to each category of questions, together with residual application of the consensus rule to any question or category of questions not so specified; and (b) provisions for postponement of voting on a question pending the operation of a conciliation procedure aimed at achieving consensus.^42
With the emergence of this balanced system for the exercise of executive and supervisory authority out of a rigorous negotiation which took into account the concerns of States with widely different economic and political interests, the Conference avoided having to adopt devices such as guaranteeing one or more seats for States by name. This was to assure appropriate representation of States with the highest level of economic interest and contributory capacity; grant of the power of veto to any State or group of States; or, again, making a State's voting strength proportionate to its budgetary contribution (weighted voting).
Comprehensive powers
Article 137 of the convention declares that "All rights in the resources of the Area are vested in mankind as a whole, on whose behalf the Authority shall act ..." laying the foundation for the Authority's comprehensive powers. Thus, article 153 empowers the Authority to organize and control seabed mining in the Area, and also to carry out seabed mining by the Enterprise, or through contracts with States, or with State enterprises or natural or juridical persons sponsored by States. Article 150 gives the Authority important roles, on the one hand, in increasing the availability of minerals from the Area, and expanding the opportunities for participation by all States in the development of the Area's mineral resources; and, on the other hand, in regulating the production of seabed minerals so as to protect land-based mineral producers from "adverse effects on their economies or on their export earnings resulting from a reduction in the price of an affected mineral, or in the
volume of exports of that mineral ..." caused by seabed mining in the area. Article 140 requires the Authority to provide for the equitable sharing of financial and economic benefits derived from activities in the area on a non-discriminatory basis.
Other provisions of the Convention empower the Authority to carry out, as well as to promote and encourage the conduct of, marine scientific research concerning the Area and its resources, as well as to coordinate such research and disseminate its results;^43 to regulate activities in the Area so as to prevent, reduce and control pollution and other hazards to the marine environment, and to protect and conserve the Area's mineral resources, its flora and fauna;^44 to regulate activities in the Area for the protection of human life, where necessary, supplementing the existing treaty law on the subject;^45 to regulate the emplacement, safe utilization, and eventual removal of installations in the Area, so as to ensure the safety of navigation;^46 to take measures to acquire technology and scientific knowledge relating to seabed mining and to promote, encourage, and facilitate its transfer to the developing countries;^47 and to promote, through measures including transfers of
financial and other benefits from deep seabed mining, and the results of scientific research and the relevant technology, the "effective participation of developing countries in activities in the Area...."^48
Legislative competence
The Council, which is required to meet at least three times a year, has policymaking power as well as legislative and supervisory competence in all questions and matters within the competence of the Authority. Although it is the Assembly that must actually adopt the rules, regulations, and procedures applicable over the range of the Authority's functions, it may do so only on the recommendation of the Council,^49 and it does not appear likely that the Assembly would, as a rule, assert its "supremacy" over the Council.^50 When adopted by the Council by consensus,^51 and by the Assembly by a two-thirds majority,^52 the provisions of the Authority's mining code will become applicable without the need for additional separate consent by States' Parties. Similarly, action taken in emergencies,^53 in cases of noncompliance,^54 or in the exercise of the power to disapprove areas for exploitation on environmental grounds,^55 bind States' Parties and seabed miners directly, although
it may be open to an aggrieved party in an appropriate case to have recourse to dispute settlement procedures.^56 Amendments "relating exclusively to activities in the Area" approved by the Council (by consensus) and by the Assembly (by a two-thirds majority) would be considered adopted and submitted to all parties for ratification.^57 On the other hand, article 155 of the Convention on decisions on amendments at the Review Conference provide a controversial mechanism that would permit the Review Conference to circumvent the legislative competence of the Authority's organs, with their safeguards for minority positions: if efforts at consensus were to fail, amendments would enter into force for all parties following adoption by a three-fourths majority of States' Parties, and ratification or accession by a similar majority.
<section>IV. Legislative competence</section>
Legislative competence is a feature of such critical significance in the design of international institutions intended to bring about or foster sustainable development that it warrants more detailed discussion. As used in this context, the term "legislative competence" implies an institution's capacity to make rules that are binding on its membership, and to change those rules; to promote and monitor the application of the rules at all levels, including the national level; and to develop and codify international law on subjects related to its area of activity. Agreement on granting an international institution a measure of legislative competence usually becomes feasible when the adverse consequences of unregulated conduct of an activity within its operational scope:
1. are clearly demonstrable by reference to scientific information and data sufficient to counter views inspired by prejudice or vested interest;
2. are generally recognized at the State level, in particular by those States within whose jurisdictions the activity in question is principally conducted; and
3. are generally recognized by private commercial interests forming significant political constituencies.
Precedents
The International Civil Aviation Organization is a prime example of an institution to which States have granted broad legislative competence. The adverse consequences of the unregulated or sub standard conduct of air navigation and air transport hardly need proof: they are quite simply matters of life or death, a fact abundantly clear to those in authority, who are called upon increasingly to engage in air travel in pursuance of some important and urgent international mission. No need here, to extol the virtues of the "precautionary principle."^58 The Council of ICAO is thus empowered to adopt by a two-thirds majority and submit to all States Members of the organization,^59 international standards and recommended practices and procedures dealing with a comprehensive range of subjects^60 including communications systems and air navigation aids, the rules of the air and air traffic control, licensing of operating and mechanical personnel, and airworthiness of aircraft, and to
designate them annexes to the Convention.^61
The Council's decisions on adoption of international standards take effect for all States Parties to the ICAO Convention three months after submission to them, unless a majority "register their disapproval with the Council."^62 A Member State of the organization is required to notify the Council immediately if it "finds it impracticable to comply in all respects" with an international standard or practice, specifying the differences between its own practice and that established by the international standard adopted by the Council.^63 The Council is, moreover, empowered to report to States Parties any infraction of the Convention, and failure to carry out recommendations or determinations of the Council;^64 and to report to the ICAO Assembly failure of a State to take appropriate action within a reasonable time after notice of an infraction of the Convention.^65 The Council also has important regulatory functions with impacts at the national level, over a range of matters
concerning the safety of air navigation,^66 as well as an important role in the Convention's dispute settlement procedure.^67 The Council and the Assembly respectively have powers concerning the imposition of sanctions in the event of "non-conformity" by an airline, and by a Member State.^68
Another example of an institution dealing with an area in which unregulated or substandard conduct could have dire consequences, and is thus endowed with substantial legislative competence, is the World Health Organization. The World Health Assembly is empowered to adopt regulations concerning sanitary and quarantine requirements and other preventive procedures, as well as standards with respect to such matters as diagnostic procedures, and the safety, purity, and potency of biological, pharmaceutical, and similar "products moving in international commerce."^69 Such regulations come into force for all States' Members after due notice of their adoption, except for Members who notify the organization of rejection or reservations within the period stated in the notice.^70 The Assembly is also empowered to:
1. make non-binding recommendations to the membership;^71 as well as to
2. adopt conventions or agreements, on any matter within the competence of the organization.
Conventions are to be adopted by the Assembly by "a two-thirds vote" and are to come into force "for each member when accepted by it in accordance with its constitutional processes."^72
Several organizations exercise indirect legislative competence through being empowered to adopt international agreements within a prescribed area of competence.^73
Legislative competence of institutions referred to in the Convention on the Law of the Sea
Section III above outlined the extensive legislative competence granted to the International Seabed Authority under part XI and annex III of the Convention with a view to achieving both the optimal utilization of seabed mineral resources as well as their conservation. The Convention gives the Authority not only broad legislative competence, but also empowers it to monitor compliance with its rules, regulations, and procedures,^74 and to deal with noncompliance with its rules and decisions.^75 While such powers are appropriate, if not necessary, for the promotion of sustainable development of the resources dealt with, they were the result of an uncharacteristic attempt by States to adopt a precautionary approach and ensure rational and equitable utilization of the resources of the seabed through regulating the mining industry before the need for regulation had been generally recognized.^76 Part XI was thus ahead of its time, and the scope of the Authority's legislative
competence merely contributed to the reluctance of the developed countries to ratify the Convention.
Appropriate as the provisions of part XI may be for the achievement of sustainable development, they govern only a discrete topic of the Law of the Sea: mining the deep seabed. Other international organizations given responsibilities under the Convention, while satisfying the criterion of universality, have varying levels of legislative competence, and in that respect differ markedly from the International Seabed Authority. Thus, while the Authority may make rules, regulations and procedures binding on its members and is given broad competence to develop and codify international law on activities in the area, IMO is authorized to recommend to members for adoption, regulations and guidelines concerning maritime safety and the prevention and control of marine pollution from ships, and to adopt and place before its members international conventions on subjects within the scope of its activity.^77 Although not intended to enlarge that scope, the UN Convention on the Law of the
Sea may well have had the effect of enhancing IMO's impact on national legislation, for example, through conferring on the organization regulatory functions as the "competent international organization" for the establishment of "global and regional rules, standards, and recommended practices and procedures to prevent, reduce, and control [marine] pollution" from ships; and for the adoption of proposals for designating sea-lanes and prescribing traffic separation schemes, made by States bordering straits used for international navigation.^78
The rule-making and regulatory competence of FAO, IOC, and UNEP are limited to organizational matters and do not extend to their respective operational areas. While the Convention does not purport to broaden the legislative authority of these organizations it may have, as with IMO, significantly enhanced their capacity to influence the legislative programmes of their members through their roles as "competent international organizations." Although the functions of FAO, IOC, and UNEP are essentially consultative and coordinative, the impact of these organizations as "catalysts" of international regulatory activity in their respective fields cannot be overstated. Few international treaties regulating fishing, whether concluded under UN auspices or on a regional basis could have been achieved without the information and advice furnished by FAO, while IOC's role has been comparable in the regulation of marine scientific research. The results of studies carried out by UNEP may be
said to have a direct bearing both on national legislation and international cooperation, with the aim of laying the foundations of future treaty law, for example guidelines and principles, on offshore mining and drilling,^79 and on marine pollution from land-based sources.^80 UNEP's Montevideo Programme for the Development and Periodic Review of Environmental Law, is a survey of a comprehensive range of subject areas in which legislative action would facilitate the achievement of certain environmental objectives and strategies many of which have a bearing on the sustainable development of marine resources.
Recent legislative trend
A legislative technique involving conclusion of an "umbrella" or "framework" treaty setting out general obligations, and "protocols" or supplementary agreements on discrete issues concerning the subject-matter of the treaty, was used by the United Nations Economic Commission for Europe in dealing with air pollution. The pattern of ECE's "Convention on Long-range Transboundary Air Pollution," adopted in 1979,81 has been followed and developed in subsequent environmental treaties adopted under the auspices of UNEP, namely the 1985 "Vienna Convention for the protection of the ozone layer"^82 and its 1987 "Montreal Protocol on substances that deplete the ozone layer,"^83 and the 1989 "Baser Convention on the control of transboundary movements of hazardous wastes and their disposal,"^84 and may indicate an evolving trend.
Thus, scientific study of problems concerning development of a resource leads to
1. "determination of a particular threat" to the resource; followed by
2. negotiation of an "umbrella" or "framework" treaty, providing for
(a) "general obligations" of parties directed to meeting that threat, including undertakings to cooperate in carrying out systematic observations, research, and information exchange, and to adopt appropriate legislative and administrative measures;^85
(b) establishment of a plenary organ, the "Conference of the Parties," and secretariat;^86 and
(c) "technical commitments" in one or more annexes to the Convention; and
3. adoption by the Conference of the Parties, of one or more "Protocols"^87 or supplementary agreements dealing with aspects of the threat, each with its own plenary organ, the "meeting of the Parties" and secretariat,^88 and technical commitments in annexes to a Protocol.
Entry into force of "Convention and Protocol" follow the traditional pattern: i.e., it is dependent upon ratification by a specified number of States - roughly twice the number being required for the umbrella convention, as for one of its protocols.^89 As to decisions, parties to both categories of agreement, agree to adopt rules of procedure and financial rules by consensus.^90 As to amendment of framework treaty and protocol, the parties, following the practice developed in connection with the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea, are first directed to "make every effort to reach agreement ... by consensus." However, each State has one vote, and, "If all efforts at consensus have been exhausted, and no agreement reached, ... as a last resort" a decision is to be taken by vote, a proportionately higher qualified majority being required for adoption of amendments to the Convention, as for amendments to a Protocol. Amendments to the Convention or a Protocol require
ratification following the same pattern of differentional qualified majorities, and bind ratifying States only.^91
With regard to "annexes" to the Convention or a Protocol, which would contain technical commitments and are thus intended to be sensitive to changes in relevant scientific and technical considerations, the procedure takes account of the need for rapid response: an amendment, once adopted and ratified, is to enter into force for "all Parties" following a period to be specified when the decision is communicated to them. However, following the "opting out" precedents noted above, the procedure provides that a Party would not be bound if, within that period, it declares in writing that it is "unable to approve" the subject matter of the decision.^92 A certain autonomy foreseen for Protocols would allow omission of provisions on "opting out," but such a broadening of legislative reach may need to be balanced by a more stringent voting procedure for adoption, designed to attract the support and participation of a dominant industrialized minority.^93
Other essential features of the institutional architecture evolving under UNEP auspices likely to facilitate legislation consistent with sustainable development, include:
1. universal participation, covering participation not only by States, but also by intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations as observers;^94
2. general undertakings on cooperation over a range of scientific, technical, socio-economic, commercial, and legal matters, including provisions on transfers of funds and technology to the developing countries to enhance their participatory capacity;^95 and
3. establishment of separate secretariats to administer each regulatory Convention and each Protocol, and granting to them extensive responsibilities with respect to administrative services, coordination, reporting, and information-exchange.^96
While a strategy of dealing piecemeal with the vast range of complex problems affecting utilization of a common resource, and establishing a new institution to regulate each portion of them that appears separable, might be the only practical one for the time being, it would seem to lead inevitably to creation of a multiplicity of such institutions, with the attendant risks of duplication of effort and rivalry, and ultimately of inefficiency and waste. Accordingly, timely measures aimed at coordination of institutional action are of critical importance.
<section>V. Coordination of marine resource institution</section>
The 1982 Convention on the Law of the Sea, although dealing comprehensively with marine resources, provides no directions as to the manner in which the activities generated or inspired by it should be coordinated. Although coordinating roles are foreseen for the International Seabed Authority and other "competent international organizations" within their respective areas of competence, no overarching coordinating mechanism is provided. While the Convention confers on the Secretary-General of the United Nations certain depositary functions and powers of appointment, neither he nor the organization itself is given an overall coordinating competence among the institutions involved.
Useful coordinating functions were earlier assumed by the United Nations Secretariat through its Office for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea (OALOS) as the result of its factual connection with the Convention through having provided the services needed by the Third UN Conference on the Law of the Sea, and its continuance of that role in relation to the Preparatory Commission. Following restructuring of the UN Secretariat, some of those functions may now be undertaken by the Office of Legal Counsel. The immense variety and complexity of the subjects and issues dealt with in the Convention are such as to make it extremely unlikely that any significant level of institutional coordination could be achieved, even with the best of intentions, through that Office or the UN's existing, already overextended, system-wide coordinating mechanisms such as the Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC), the Committee on Programme Coordination (CPC), the Administrative Committee on
Coordination (ACC), the Consultative Committee on Substantive Questions (CCSQ), or the Office for Programme Planning and Coordination. Nor is it likely that such coordination could be achieved through other technical inter-agency mechanisms established for limited purposes over the years, including such distinguished examples as the Group of Experts on Scientific Aspects of Marine Pollution (GESAMP) and the ACC Inter-Secretariat Committee on Scientific Programmes Relating to Oceanography (ICSPRO).
A measure of overall coordination of the activities of institutions concerned with marine affairs would seem necessary at the international level, and indeed at the regional and national levels, if the Convention's twin goals of conservation and optimal utilization of marine resources (or, in a word, their "sustainable development") are to be realized. For many countries, particularly the less developed, it was the external stimulus of the Third UN Conference on the Law of the Sea, brought about through exchange of technical information and informed debate, rather than any internal generation of interest, that focused awareness of the potential of marine resources. One way to maintain that awareness, and to build upon it, might be to create a forum in which discussion of issues related to marine resources could take place regularly in a similar setting.
Established as a subsidiary organ of the United Nations, the functions of such a forum would be essentially consultative, deliberative, and recommendatory. Thus, it would have no legislative capacities of its own, but would be able to influence the regulatory programmes of "competent international organizations" which, in turn, would have a corresponding impact at the regional and national levels. Its vision unrestricted by constituent instruments of limited scope, the forum would be free to scan the entire range of activities associated with marine resources, determining areas where regulatory action might be necessary, recommending cooperative and coordinative measures, and evaluating progress in their implementation at regular annual or biennial sessions. The cost of such meetings would be minimal if they were to be served by a staff consisting of officers assigned to such duties on a regular basis by the "competent international organizations," and coordinated by the
Office of Legal Counsel.
Essential features of the forum should include:
1. universal participation open to States, "competent international organizations," non-governmental organizations and private sector representatives, and organized in a manner that would reflect the quadripartite composition of the membership;
2. strong scientific and technical support from a committee of experts appointed for specified terms by the Secretary-General so as to ensure that the forum's recommendations might be based upon the best scientific and technical knowledge available; and
3. a committee of legal experts appointed by the Secretary-General for specified terms who would carry out studies of the legal and organizational issues associated with sustainable development of marine resources, and assist in the preparation of new regulatory measures or the establishment of new institutions.
<section>VI. Conclusion</section>
Sustainable development implies management of a resource for the purpose of maintaining a balance between conservation of the resource and its optimal utilization. Vigilance is called for, as well as the capacity and readiness to take regulatory measures to redress imbalances. This in turn requires organization brought about through legal commitment at the global, regional, and national levels, and based on (1) a holistic approach to the problems of ocean space; (2) universal participation which would require resource transfers to enhance participatory capacities that are less developed, and undertakings that reflect balanced differential obligation; and (3) timely equitable regulation of access to a resource, aimed at preventing its depletion or degradation, taking into account the best available scientific information.
Many of the institutional and legal implications of sustainable development were foreshadowed in the 1982 Convention on the Law of the Sea. In particular, the provisions of part XI on seabed mining beyond the limits of national jurisdiction represent a self-contained regulatory system, including an institution endowed with a high level of legislative competence, the International Seabed Authority.
Legislative competence, a feature of critical importance in the architecture of institutions with regulatory functions, is conferred in varying degrees on the other "competent international organizations" indicated by the Convention as having responsibilities with respect to the more traditional marine resource activities such as shipping (IMO), fishing (FAO), protection and preservation of the marine environment (UNEP), and marine scientific research (IOC/ UNESCO), as well as by several other institutions with such marine-related responsibilities but are not expressly indicated as such. Recent institutional developments in the field of the environment indicate the following:
1. That the scope of the legislative competence of an international institution may be expected to vary directly with the degree to which the problem dealt with has been demonstrated scientifically and is, accordingly, recognized by participating governments and their important industrial constituencies.
2. A trend towards conclusion of "umbrella" treaties containing general undertakings, which are to be supplemented by Protocols with technical annexes dealing with particular problems, each with its own institutional apparatus.
The 1982 UN Convention on the Law of the Sea is in many respects an "umbrella" treaty that calls for implementation through supplementary agreements. Fragmentation of institutional responsibilities under the Convention make it necessary to establish a mechanism that could coordinate and monitor the implementation of institutional programmes, and the creation of a deliberative forum for the purpose within the United Nations system may offer a solution at minimal cost.
A holistic approach to resolving economic problems, universal participation, and notions of equity and balanced differential obligation, and of interdependence and cooperation among nations, which must be taken to inform "sustainable development" as this term is used in the Brundtland Report were, we should recall, considered equally fundamental for the implementation of two other great concepts of our time: the seabed beyond national jurisdiction as the "common heritage of mankind" (1970) and the "New International Economic Order" (1974). In those days of hope and enthusiasm, some believed that the industrialized countries' great hunger for oil and the developing countries' possession of that resource, would induce at least the perception that nations were, in fact, interdependent, and thereby generate relationships of constructive reciprocity that would be the foundation for a new era of cooperation among States. Viewed with suspicion by the industrialized countries, as
being likely to undermine free market prescriptions of proven efficacy, those initiatives seem to have been turned into stone, as by the eye of Medusa. Today groups of States contend again, this time to determine the practical content of a concept which all seem to believe - each interpreting it according to its own view of the world - could offer durable solutions: "sustainable development." Will the efforts of States to translate this concept into usable and beneficial form fare better than those that preceded it? If "sustainable development" is indeed the concept that does at last inspire and rally the will of States to action, it is perhaps because it was introduced and promoted as the key to prevention of scientifically demonstrated and universally apprehended physical danger: the threat of environmental collapse. Human beings, having fouled their nest, may have realized that the trend may be irreversible unless all, even the weak and less significant among them
cooperate actively - each according to its capacity - to avert the impending catastrophe. This in turn may have generated the will to do so, always provided that the costs (painful choices) are not perceived as being too high for national political constituencies to bear.
<section>Notes</section>
1. World Commission on Environment and Development (WCED), Our Common Future (Oxford: Oxford University Press 1987), p. 43.
2. Ibid., pp. 8-9.
3. Minister Jan Pronk, speaking at the UN General Assembly's Special Session on "International Economic Cooperation, in Particular the Revitalization of Economic Growth and Development of the Developing Countries," 1990, reported in American Journal of International Law, vol. 85 (1991), p. 196.
4. See "Summary of Proposed Legal Principles for Environmental Protection and Sustainable Development," adopted by the WCED Experts Group on Environmental Law in annex I to Our Common Future. The full text of the legal principles and recommendations adopted by the Experts Group, with commentary, was published by Martinus Nijhoff, Dordrecht, 1986. See also the "Programme for the Development and Periodic Review of Environmental Law" drawn up by the Meeting of Senior Government Officials Expert in Environmental Law, Montevideo, 6 November 1981, and Decision 10/21 of UNEP's Governing Council, 31 May 1982.
5. Preamble, third para.
6. Compare: Declaration on the Establishment of a New International Economic Order, para. 4, sub-para. (c), which calls for "Full and effective participation on the basis of equality of all countries in the solving of world economic problems in the common interest of all countries ... "; Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States, art. 10, states:
All States are juridically equal and, as equal members of the international community, have the right to participate fully and effectively in the international decision-making process in the solution of world economic, financial and monetary problems....
7. United Nations Charter, art. 2, para. 1; see also Declaration on the NIEO, para. 4, sub-para. (a). By art. 157, para. 3 of the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea, the International Seabed Authority is "based on the principle of the sovereign equality of all its members."
8. As emphasized in Our Common Future, " ... economic partners must be satisfied that the basis of exchange is equitable; relationships that are unequal and based on dominance of one kind or another are not a sound and durable basis for interdependence.... The asymmetry in international economic relations compounds the imbalance ...," p. 67. Compare: Declaration on the NIEO, para. 4, sub-pares. (j) and ff., directed at achieving balanced economic relations.
9. What is implied is a network of complementary responsibilities. For the developing countries, revitalization of economic growth would be of the first importance; but subject to that priority they should be willing to undertake environmental protection responsibilities which are, or are enabled to be, within their capacities. This in turn implies a responsibility on the industrialized nations to bring about the transfer of advanced and environmentally sound technologies to the developing countries, so as to enable them to fulfil their environmental commitments. On the current need to recognize asymmetrical rights and obligations, see Sand, P. Lessons Learned in Global Governance. New York: World Resources Institute (1990), pp. 6-8.
10. As to the responsibility of the present generation to exercise restraint for the benefit of future generations, see Brown Weiss, E. In Fairness to Future Generations. Tokyo: United Nations University (1989), and "Our rights and obligations to future generations," American Journal of International Law, vol. 84, (1990) p. 198. As one writer observes "... without equity within the present generation, we will not be able to achieve equity among generations." Gündling, L., "The status in international law of the principle of precautionary action." International Journal of Estuarine and Coastal Law, vol. 5 (1990), p. 23.
11. The principle of "preventive action" is incorporated in the Single European Act (1987) amending the Treaty of Rome, art. 130r, para. 2. Text in 25 International Legal Materials 503 (1986); entered into force 1 July 1987. As to the "precautionary principle," the Bergen Declaration on Sustainable Development of 14 May 1990 adopted within the framework of the UN's Economic Commission for Europe states:
7. In order to achieve sustainable development, policies must be based on the precautionary principle. Environmental measures must anticipate, prevent and attack the causes of environmental degradation. Where there are threats of serious or irreversible damage, lack of full scientific certainty should not be used as a reason for postponing measures to prevent environmental degradation.
Reproduced in Environmental Policy and Law vol. 20 (1990) pp. 100-103. See also: Gündling, L., op. cit. above, note 10. For a summary of the current stage of development of the principle in the context of international law, see Handl, G., "Environmental security and global change: the challenge to international law." Yearbook of International Environmental Law, vol. 1, London: Graham & Trotman (1990) p. 20 ff.
12. 8. Environmental problems require greater and more systematic use of science and scientific knowledge..." ibid., para. 8. On the question of climate change and the gradual reduction or elimination of greenhouse gases, the accompanying "Joint Agenda for Action" requires that "The formulation of quantitative targets should be based on the best scientific evidence available..." (para. 7(c)).
13. Axelrod, R., The Evolution of Co-operation. New York: Basic Books (1984) p. 131.
14. See, for example, treaties formulated within organizations of the United Nations family: International Labour Organisation, for example protecting workers against occupational hazards in the working environment due to air pollution, noise, and vibration (1977, EIF 1979), occupational safety and health and the working environment (1981, EIF 1983); International Atomic Energy Agency, for example Paris Convention on Third Party Liability in the Field of Nuclear Energy (1960), Vienna Convention on Civil Liability for Nuclear Damage (1963), Convention on Early Notification in the Event of a Nuclear Accident (1986, EIF 1986), Convention on Assistance in the Case of a Nuclear Accident or Radiological Emergency (1986, EIF 1987), e.g. art. 235 (responsibility and liability). See Kiss, A., and D. Shelton, International Environmental Law. New York: Transnational Publishers (1991) pp. 360376. See also Caron, D., "Liability for transnational pollution arising from off-shore oil
development." Ecology Law Quarterly, vol. 10 (1983) pp. 641 ff.
15. For a survey of current developments, see Francioni, F., and T. Scovazzi, eds International Responsibility for Environmental Harm. London: Graham & Trotman (1991); Kiss, A., and D. Shelton, op.cit. above, note 14.
16. 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) art. 56, para. 1 (a).
17. UNCLOS, arts. 56, para. 2; 60, para. 3; 61; 62; 69-70.
18. UNCLOS, arts. 63-67. See also arts. 116-120.
19. UNCLOS, arts. 192-196.
20. UNCLOS, arts. 22, 23, 41, 43, 53, 60, 94, 147.
21. UNCLOS, arts. 22, para. 3 (a); 41, pares. 4 and 5; 53, para. 9.
22. UNCLOS, arts. 22, para. 3 (a); 41, pares. 4 and 5; 53, para. 9.
23. UNCLOS, arts. 60, pares. 3 and 5; 80.
24. UNCLOS, art. 211.
25. UNCLOS, arts. 210, 216.
26. UNCLOS, arts. 22, 23; and compare arts. 194, 207.
27. UNCLOS, arts. 61-67.
28. UNCLOS, arts. 116-119.
29. UNCLOS, arts. 65, 120.
30. UNCLOS, arts. 207 (213), 208, 212 (222).
31. UNCLOS, arts. 238-265.
32. UNCLOS, annex Vlll.
33. For example, Conference of the Parties established by art. 6 of the 1985 Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer; Meeting of Parties provided for by art. 11 of the 1987 Montreal Protocol on Substances that deplete the Ozone Layer.
34. 1972 Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals; 1980 Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources; 1988 Convention on the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resource Activities.
35. For example South Pacific Forum Fisheries Agency (FFA), FAO's Indian Ocean Fisheries Commission (IOFC).
36. ESCAP's Committee for Coordination of Joint Prospecting for Mineral Resources in Asian Offshore Areas is an example.
37. Regional Convention for Cooperation on the Protection of the Marine Environment (Kuwait, 1978); Abidjan Convention for Cooperation in the Protection and Development of the Marine and Coastal Environment of the West and Central African Region (1981), and others in UNEP's Regional Seas Programme.
38. Scientific Committee on Antarctic Research (SCAR); the marine scientific organization for the North Pacific region established by the PISCES Convention (1990); and the Organization for Indian Ocean Marine Affairs Cooperation (IOMAC).
39. UNCLOS, art. 160, para. 1.
40. UNCLOS, art. 159, pares. 9 and 10.
41. UNCLOS, art. 161, pares. 1 and 2.
42. UNCLOS, art. 161, para. 8.
43. UNCLOS, arts. 143, 247, 256.
44. UNCLOS, arts. 145, 204, 208-209, 215.
45. UNCLOS, art. 146.
46. UNCLOS, art. 147.
47. UNCLOS, arts. 144, 272-274, 278.
48. UNCLOS, art. 148.
49. UNCLOS, art. 160, sub-para. 1(f); art. 161, sub-para. 2(o).
50. Note UNCLOS, art. 158, para. 4, which incorporates a principle of "separation of powers" as among the principal organs of the Authority.
51. UNCLOS, art. 161, sub-para. 8 (d); art. 162, sub-para. 2(o)(ii).
52. UNCLOS, art. 159, para. 8; art. 160, sub-para. 1(f)(ii).
53. UNCLOS, art. 162, sub-para. 2(w).
54. UNCLOS, art. 153, pares. 4 and 5; art. 160, sub-para. 2 (m); art. 161, sub-para. 8(c); art. 162, sub-para. 2(t). See also art. 162, sub-para. 2 (1).
55. UNCLOS, art. 162, sub-para. 2(x).
56. UNCLOS, arts. 186-91, and annex VI, arts. 35-40.
57. UNCLOS, art. 314; art. 161, sub-para. 8(d); art 158, para. 8.
58. Above, footnote 11.
59. Convention on International Civil Aviation (1944, EIF 1947), art. 90, para. (a).
60. Ibid. art. 37.
61. Ibid. art. 54, sub-para. (1).
62. Ibid. art. 90, para. (a).
63. Ibid. art. 38.
64. Ibid. art. 54, sub-para. ( j).
65. Ibid. art. 54, sub-para. (k).
66. Ibid. chapter XV.
67. Ibid. art. 84. See also Appeal relating to the Jurisdiction of the ICAO Council (India v. Pakistan), ICJ Reports (1972), pp. 46 ff.
68. Ibid. arts. 87-88.
69. Constitution of the World Health Organization (1946, EIF 1948), art. 21.
70. Ibid. art. 22.
71. Ibid. art. 23.
72. Ibid. arts. 19-20.
73. For example ILO, IMO, UNEP.
74. UNCLOS, art. 153, pares. 4 and 5; art. 162, sub-para. 2(1).
75. UNCLOS, art. 162, sub-pares. (t), (u), (w); annex III, art. 18 and annex Vl, section 4.
76. While, for historical reasons, the Convention places emphasis on the mining of polymetallic nodules, its provisions cover all seabed mining activity: see UNCLOS, art. 151, para. 9, art. 161, para. 8, and art. 162, sub-para. 2(o)(ii).
77. Convention on the International Maritime Organization, art. 16, sub-pares. (f) and (k); arts. 30, 35, 40.
78. Above, notes 22-27.
79. "Guidelines for Drilling and Mining Activities conducted Within the Limits of National Jurisdiction," reproduced in Environmental Policy and Law, vol. 7 (1981) pp. 50-52.
80. Montreal Guidelines for the Protection of the Marine Environment against Pollution from Land-based Sources, Decision 13/18/II of the Governing Council of UNEP, 24 May 1985.
81. Reproduced in International Legal Materials (ILM) vol. 18 (1979) p. 1442.
82. Reproduced in 26 ILM (1987) p. 1516.
83. Reproduced in 26 ILM (1987) p. 1550.
84. Reproduced in 28 ILM (1989) p. 657.
85. 1985 Vienna Convention for the Protection of the Ozone Layer (VOL), art. 1.
86. VOL, arts. 6-7.
87. 1987 Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer (MPOL).
88. MPOL, arts. 11 -12.
89. VOL (the "framework" treaty) required deposit of 20 instruments of ratification, acceptance, approval or accession, for its entry into force (art. 17), while MPOL would enter into force following deposit of 11 such instruments (art. 16).
90. VOL, art. 6, para. 3; MPOL, art. 11, sub-pares. 3 (a) and (b).
91. VOL, art. 9, pares. 3 and 5.
92. VOL, art. 10, sub-para. 2(b).
93. VOL, art. 9, para. 5.
94. VOL, art. 6, para. 5; MPOL, art. 11, para. 5.
95. VOL, arts. 2-5; MPOL, arts. 7, 9-10.
96. VOL, arts. 6-7; MPOL, arts. 11-12.
<section>Existing institutional framework and mechanisms</section>
Satya N. Nandan
As the uses of the oceans expanded rapidly and the need for international cooperation in ocean governance grew stronger, particularly since World War II, international institutions having mandate on various aspects of ocean resources and ocean-related activities, started to proliferate. These institutions mostly dealt with the traditional uses of the oceans such as shipping and navigation, fishing, protection of certain living resources, marine scientific research, and transoceanic communications. Subsequently, more institutions were set up as new needs and problems arose, as in the field of the protection of the marine environment.
Some of these institutions are global and others are regional in the coverage of their competence and/or membership. The mandate of most of these institutions covers certain marine sectors only, and most of them precede the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
The Convention provides the comprehensive framework for law and institutions for all marine resources and uses of the seas. It establishes distinct zones of sovereignty and jurisdiction for coastal States, rules for the high seas and an entirely new regime for the deep seabed beyond the limits of national jurisdiction. It also lays down rights and duties of States for navigation through certain straits, the protection of the marine environment and the conduct of marine scientific research. A delicate two-tier balance is achieved by the Convention: first, among all types of uses and resource exploitation in a comprehensive manner; and second, among various rights and duties of States with respect to such uses and resource exploitation. All these elements of the Convention are finally cemented together by detailed procedures for the compulsory settlement of disputes.
The 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea has generally been accepted by all States as evidenced by the practice of States and international organizations, the only exception being certain provisions of part XI of the Convention dealing with the regime for deep seabed resources.
With regard to the institutional aspects, the Convention confirms, and in many cases expands, the tasks of existing international organizations with a view to assisting States to implement its provisions and especially to reap the individual and collective benefits from the Convention for sustainable development of the oceans and their resources. A number of international organizations have already adjusted themselves to the new responsibilities under the Convention, and in addition, several new institutions have been created. A short summary of activities of the main organizations and coordinating mechanisms are set out later in this chapter.
Some of the new institutional developments reflect more and more the need for a comprehensive approach to the management of oceans and their resources under the Convention, as illustrated by the activities of the new UN Secretariat Unit, the Office for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea, responsible for promoting the widespread acceptance and consistent application of the Convention, as well as those of the new trans-sectoral institutions such as that for the wider Indian Ocean region.
Another new trend to be noted is the growing emphasis being placed on ocean-related activities by some of the global and regional institutions, such as the World Bank, the United Nations Development Programme, the European community, and the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development, which traditionally have not been so active in those areas.
Looking back on the evolution of international organizations in the field of ocean affairs in the post-World War II era, it is noticed that their functions and activities grew most vigorously in the 1970s and early 1980s. This was due most probably to the two epoch-making events of truly global dimensions, that is, the 1972 United Nations Conference on the Human Environment and the (1973-1982) Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea which resulted in the adoption in 1982 of the comprehensive Convention. It appears now, however, that institutional developments have come to a somewhat stagnant period. One reason for this may be the fact that all basic institutional needs have already been filled. Also, the existing programmes and activities of international organizations may have become fairly comprehensive in terms of the needs perceived by the international community in the 1980s. These organizations are inherently sectoral in their approaches to maritime
issues.
Nevertheless, in view of the new challenges posed particularly by environmental problems, and in order to achieve sustainable development of ocean resources for the benefit of the entire mankind, it is now necessary to revitalize international institutions and their activities. The 1992 United Nations Conference on Environment and Development was a timely occasion for stimulating such revitalization. An important factor to be taken into account in such a process is the need to narrow the gap between policymaking and actions which appear to be growing in recent years.
In addition to the efforts of individual institutions to reinvigorate themselves, existing mechanisms for coordinating their activities must be strengthened and new mechanisms for securing more integrated and comprehensive coordination must be explored. The latter requirement is particularly crucial in the context of ocean governance since, as recognized in the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, the "problems of ocean space are closely interrelated and need to be considered as a whole."
In order to improve the coordinating mechanism, it would be necessary first to expand and institutionalize the current ad hoc interagency consultations convened by UN/OALOS and UNEP at global level. These are, however, limited to the level of secretariats of international organizations. To ensure a more effective and integrated coordination, it would be advisable to start the process at the fundamental policy-making stage. For this purpose, it is suggested that a new global forum be created within the United Nations General Assembly framework, where all ocean issues can be discussed periodically with the participation of all relevant international institutions. The forum could either be special Assembly meetings or a Committee, or expanded meetings of the current plenary debate on the law of the sea. It is also desirable that similar integrated mechanisms be established at appropriate regional or subregional levels.
<section>Cooperation and coordination among institutions</section>
The international institutions described later in this chapter have developed various degrees of cooperative relationships and coordination between their activities. Numerous projects, programmes, action plans, etc. are being worked out and executed by two or more institutions. This is particularly true among agencies and bodies within the United Nations family, but such cooperation is also common among UN and non-UN institutions. It should also be pointed out that those non-governmental organizations (NGOs) which are active in ocean affairs and ocean-related science often take part in such cooperative endeavours.
Cooperation and coordination among institutions are frequent features specially in the fields of large-scale scientific research and monitoring, the protection of the marine environment, the conservation and development of living resources, as well as the development of shipping and related industry and facilities. In some cases, United Nations agencies and bodies conclude agreements, in the form of memoranda of understanding, in order to ensure long-term cooperative relationships.
As far as the global-level coordination is concerned, two types of mechanisms exist currently: general and specialized or sectoral. Those belonging to the latter are the Inter-Secretariat Committee on Scientific Programmes Relating to Oceanography (ICSPRO), and GESAMP, both of which deal primarily with scientific matters, and the periodic Inter-Agency Consultations on Oceans and Coastal Areas Programme convened by UNEP to review the ocean and coastal area programmes it sponsors. Seven such consultations have been held since 1976. The only existing global mechanism of a general nature is the ad hoc Inter-Agency Consultations on Ocean Affairs convened by UN/OALOS following a recommendation by ICSPRO - two such consultations have been held since 1988. At the regional level, no mechanism exists for generally coordinating the activities of all relevant institutions within a region, nor is there any systematic arrangement for coordinating activities among two or more regions.
<section>Main existing institutions and mechanisms for cooperation and coordination</section>
Global institutions
There are currently about a score of global institutions which are exclusively or partially engaged in activities concerning some aspects of ocean management in a broad sense. Most of them belong to the United Nations family. The nature of these activities will be reviewed below in two groups: (i) five major agencies and bodies, which are devoted exclusively to, or have a substantial component on, marine affairs; and (ii) others, whose activities cover some aspects of marine affairs. Then the one global institution outside the UN family will be discussed.
Major UN agencies and bodies
INTERNATIONAL MARITIME ORGANIZATION (IMO). The first global institution established to deal uniquely with marine affairs and marine environmental protection. It was created in 1959 as a specialized agency of the United Nations in accordance with the terms of the Convention on the Inter-Governmental Maritime Consultative Organization of 1948. It changed its name to International Maritime Organization in 1982.
IMO's main objective is to facilitate cooperation among States on technical matters affecting international shipping, in order to achieve the highest practicable standards of maritime safety and efficiency in navigation. It has also a special responsibility for safety of life at sea, and for the protection of the marine environment through prevention of pollution of the sea caused by ships and other craft.
Among the main committees of IMO, the Maritime Safety Committee is responsible for a variety of technical work, including the safety of navigation, radio communication, life-saving arrangements, search and rescue, ship design and equipment, fire protection, standards of training and watchkeeping, containers and cargoes, and the carriage of dangerous goods. The Marine Environment Protection Committee is engaged in administering and coordinating the activities concerning the prevention and control of marine pollution. A unique aspect of the Committee is that it functions as the secretariat of a number of treaties which have been adopted under IMO sponsorship, and thus the Committee is attended not only by the members of IMO but also by those non-members who are parties to such treaties. The Legal Committee considers any legal matters within the mandate of the Organization and prepares draft legal instruments for the Council. The activities of the Technical Cooperation
Committee are particularly important for sustainable development in the marine sector, considering among other matters, the establishment of directives and guidelines for the execution and review of the programme of assistance to developing countries in maritime transport. IMO sponsors the World Maritime University in Malmö, Sweden, as part of its technical cooperation activities.
FOOD AND AGRICULTURE ORGANIZATION (FAO) OF THE UNITED NATIONS. FAO was established in 1945 as a specialized agency with the aims, among others, of raising levels of nutrition and standards of living; improving the production, processing, marketing and distribution of all food and agricultural products from farms, forests, and fisheries; promoting rural development and improving the living conditions of rural populations; and eliminating hunger by these means.
One of the five major committees, the Committee on Fisheries (COFI), reviews FAO's work in the field of fisheries, conducts periodic general reviews of international fishery problems and appraises possible solutions thereto, discusses other specific matters relating to fisheries and makes recommendations as appropriate. Much of FAO's fishery activity is carried out through its regional commissions, and this will be discussed below under "Regional institutions." COFI also cooperates with a number of regional fishery bodies that are not formally part of FAO.
UNITED NATIONS ENVIRONMENT PROGRAMME (UNEP). In 1972, taking account of the "Action Plan" adopted by the United Nations Conference on Human Environment held in Stockholm, the General Assembly of the United Nations established four new mechanisms. These were: a Governing Council of UNEP; a Secretariat to serve as a focal point for environmental action and coordination within the United Nations system; an Environmental Fund to provide for additional financing for environmental programmes on a voluntary basis; and an Environment Coordination Board, to be chaired by the Executive Director of UNEP, within the framework of the Administrative Committee on Coordination, in order to provide for the most efficient coordination of environment programmes within the United Nations system.
UNEP has been a catalyst for the establishment of ten Regional Seas Programmes, covering the Mediterranean, the Kuwait region, the Red Sea, the wider Caribbean, the Atlantic coast of West and Central Africa, the eastern African seaboard, the Pacific coast of South America, the islands of the South Pacific, the east Asian region and the south Asian seas. Over 120 countries take part in these programmes. Each programme is tailored to the specific needs of its participants, but is made up of similar components, that is, an Action Plan for cooperation, research, monitoring, pollution control, and resource development; a framework convention embodying general commitments; and detailed protocols dealing with specific issues, such as oil spills, dumping, emergency cooperation, and protected areas. Funds were initially provided by UNEP and then by a trust fund set up by the governments involved.
In the field of the conservation and management of marine living resources, mention should be made of the Global Plan of Action for the Conservation, Management and Utilization of Marine Mammals which UNEP initiated in 1977 in cooperation with FAO.
UNEP has also developed principles and guidelines on a number of ocean-related topics, including the control of pollution from land-based sources and seabed activities, coastal tourism development, shared natural resources, and environmental impact assessment. In addition to implementing the Governing Council's decisions, the UNEP Secretariat provides secretariat services to: the 1973 Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora (CITES); the 1989 Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal (Baser Convention); as well as some of the regional seas agreements, which have been adopted under the UNEP sponsorship.
INTERGOVERNMENTAL OCEANOGRAPHIC COMMISSION (IOC). IOC was created in 1960 by the UNESCO General Conference in order to promote scientific investigation of the nature and resources of the oceans with the aim of understanding the oceans better and providing for optimum utilization of their resources. It is a body having functional autonomy within UNESCO, a division of its secretariat providing secretariat service to the IOC.
IOC has two regional subcommissions, one for the Caribbean and another for the western Pacific. Additional regional committees have been formed for the central Indian Ocean, the north and central western Indian Ocean, the Southern Ocean, and the central eastern Atlantic.
IOC is mandated to define those problems, the solutions of which require international cooperation in scientific investigation of the oceans, and develop, recommend, and coordinate international programmes for such investigations. It is also responsible for promoting the exchange of oceanographic data, and developing assistance programmes in marine science and technology, as well as promoting, observing and monitoring systems on the properties and quality of the marine environment.
UNITED NATIONS DIVISION OF OCEAN AFFAIRS AND THE LAW OF THE SEA (UN/OALOS). Initially established as the secretariat of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea, UN/OALOS has since 1983, been carrying out the tasks entrusted to the Secretary-General as a consequence of the adoption of the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea and the related General Assembly resolutions. Through subsequent organizational and programmatic consolidation of marine affairs activities within the United Nations, the organization's diverse efforts in marine affairs are now integrated in, and coordinated through, the "core office" of UN/OALOS.
Among the major activities of the office are: the promotion of uniform and consistent application of the Convention and the provision of advice and information to States; the servicing of the Preparatory Commission for the International Seabed Authority and for the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea; the provision of assistance to States for marine policy development and integrated ocean and coastal zone management in the context of the comprehensive ocean regime; and the provision of support to United Nations agencies and bodies and the harmonization of marine affairs in the context of the Convention.
Other UN organizations and bodies
WORLD METEOROLOGICAL ORGANIZATION (WMO). WMO commenced its operations in 1951 as successor to the International Meteorological Organization, with the mandate of facilitating international cooperation in various aspects of meteorological and related services and observations, as well as furthering the application of meteorology to aviation, shipping, water problems, and other human activities. In the marine sector, WMO is responsible for the coordination and promotion of the provision by Member States of predicted, current and climatological information of weather and sea conditions in all ocean and sea areas; the study of marine climate and air-surface interaction phenomenon; and the collection and exchange of data.
INTERNATIONAL ATOMIC ENERGY AGENCY (IAEA). IAEA began its operation in 1957 with a broad mandate in the field of peaceful uses of atomic energy and the establishment of an environment safe from pollution by nuclear substances, and marine scientific research as well as the development and transfer of related technology. It has established in Monaco an international laboratory for studying radioactivity in the sea, and to train scientists and technicians for Member States. It gives guidelines and recommendations to individual States and parties to relevant conventions regarding the prevention of marine pollution by radioactive materials.
UNITED NATIONS INDUSTRIAL DEVELOPMENT ORGANIZATION (UNIDO). UNIDO existed as an autonomous body in the United Nations Secretariat from 1966, until 1986 when it became a specialized agency. Its main objectives include the assistance to developing countries for the development of their industries, particularly to achieve the full utilization of locally available natural and human resources. It has provided technical assistance in such marine-related projects as the construction of fishing vessels, the establishment of fish processing plants, and the development of fish distribution networks.
INTERNATIONAL LABOUR ORGANTSATION (ILO). Originally established in 1919 by the constitution forming part of the Treaty of Versailles, ILO became a specialized agency of the United Nations in 1946. The aims of ILO are to further world programmes directed towards full employment and raising the standard of living, provision of training facilities, establishing policies in regard to working conditions, etc. To these ends, it establishes policy guidelines and provides technical cooperation programmes and projects, and adopts international standards and supervises their application.
The activities of ILO also cover seafarers, dockworkers, and fishermen, particularly conditions of their employment, recruitment, welfare, training, and safety. In addition to generally applicable instruments, several conventions and recommendations have been adopted on certain specific questions regarding the working conditions and training of ocean-related workers.
WORLD HEALTH ORGANIZATION (WHO). WHO was established as a specialized agency of the United Nations in 1948, with the objective defined as "the attainment by all peoples of the highest possible level of health." The marine-related activities of WHO have been primarily in the control of the quality of coastal waters, and hence, the prevention and control of land-based sources of pollution.
UNITED NATIONS CONFERENCE ON TRADE AND DEVELOPMENT (UNCTAD). Created in 1964 as a permanent organ of the General Assembly, UNCTAD has the main tasks of promoting international trade, particularly between countries at different stages of development, with a view to accelerating the economic growth of developing countries; formulating and implementing principles and policies on international trade and related problems of economic development; and facilitating the coordination of activities of other UN system organizations in the field.
The activities of UNCTAD in the marine sector have included the improvement of port operations and connected facilities; the establishment or expansion of merchant marines of developing countries; the promotion of technological progress in shipping; and the preparation of international legislation on shipping and related questions. The Committee on Shipping of the Trade and Development Board is responsible for many of the activities in these areas.
INTERNATIONAL TELECOMMUNICATION UNION (ITU). Originally founded in 1865, ITU took its present title in 1932, and became a specialized agency of the United Nations in 1947. ITU's main functions in the marine sector are: to adopt regulations governing marine radio communications, including distress calls; to coordinate the information necessary for the effective operation of international maritime radio communication services; and to allocate special frequencies for transmission of oceanographic and meteorological data.
INTERNATIONAL HYDROGRAPHIC ORGANIZATION (IHO). Founded in 1921 as the International Hydrographic Bureau, IHO assumed its current name in 1967. The main objectives of IHO are the coordination of the activities of national hydrographic offices, the securing of the greatest possible uniformity in nautical charts and documents, and the promotion of efficient methods for hydrographic surveys.
GROUP OF EXPERTS ON THE SCIENTIFIC ASPECTS OF MARINE POLLUTION (GESAMP). Established in 1969, GESAMP is currently sponsored jointly by the UN, UNEP, FAO, UNESCO, WHO, WMO, IMO and IAEA. The experts are appointed by the sponsoring organizations in their individual capacities. In addition to the periodic report on the state of the marine environment, GESAMP gives advice on scientific aspects of marine environmental protection at the request of sponsoring organizations.
UNITED NATIONS DEVELOPMENT PROGRAMME (UNDP). UNDP began its operations in 1966 pursuant to a General Assembly resolution which consolidated two earlier funds for development. Its mandate is to assist developing countries to accelerate their development by providing assistance geared to their development objectives, with a view to promoting their economic and political independence and ensuring the attainment of higher levels of development for their entire populations. It administers and coordinates the great majority of the technical assistance provided through the UN system.
UNDP activities in the marine sector have included numerous projects relating to fisheries, particularly those executed by FAO. They also include a number of projects in the fields of marine scientific research and the protection of the marine environment. UNDP also gives assistance to the World Maritime University.
THE WORLD BANK GROUP. The World Bank Group is comprised of the International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD), the International Finance Corporation (IFC) and the International Development Association (IDA), established respectively in 1946,1956 and 1960. IBRD's main function is to promote the international flow of capital for productive purposes, and in particular to finance reform programmes which will lead to economic growth in its less developed member countries. IFC invests in productive private or partly governmental enterprises. IDA has similar objectives, but its financing is on more concessionary terms.
The loans provided by the Group, particularly IBRD, in the marine sector have been mainly for fishing and related activities and infrastructure, mineral resource exploitation, protection of the marine environment, aviation and shipping, as well as communication and related installations.
In 1990, a Global Environment Facility (GEF) was established, to be run jointly by IBRD, UNDP and UNEP, as a three-year pilot programme to provide resources to help finance innovative projects affecting the global environment. One of the four areas selected for the operation of GEF is the protection of international watercourses, including contingency planning for marine oil spills, and improvement of reception facilities for removing ballast from ships in ports.
Global institutions outside the UN system
INTERNATIONAL WHALING COMMISSION (IWC). IWC was established in 1948 with the entry into force of the International Whaling Convention, which had been concluded in order to provide for the proper conservation of whale stocks and thus make possible the orderly development of the whaling industry.
The main task of IWC is to keep under review, and revise as needed, the conservation measures laid down in the Convention governing the conduct of whaling. IWC is also responsible for promoting and carrying out studies and research, collecting and analyzing statistics, publishing reports, and providing information on the maintenance and increase of stocks. Recent important measures of IWC include the moratorium on all commercial whaling since its decision in 1982.
Regional institutions
Institutions having responsibilities for aspects of ocean affairs at the regional level take many forms with differing mandates. Some are devoted exclusively to ocean-related activities; others conduct such activities as part of their much broader functions. While one regional institution has a comprehensive trans-sectoral mandate in marine affairs, all other existing bodies for ocean affairs are engaged in one or a few sectors only.
Some organizations cited here are not regional in a geographical sense, but are groups of States with common interests or with special legal or political ties. Such organizations are also discussed here since they are not global in membership nor in mandate.
Comprehensive Marine Affairs Organization
Following the first Conference on Economic, Scientific and Technical Cooperation in Marine Affairs in the Indian Ocean in 1987, the only existing comprehensive regional institution in ocean affairs, the Indian Ocean Marine Affairs Cooperation Conference (IOMAC), started its work as a conference, with a standing committee and a secretariat, aimed at facilitating implementation of the new ocean regime under the UN Convention of the Law of the Sea among coastal and hinterland States of the Indian Ocean.
In September 1990, the Second Ministerial Conference adopted the Agreement on the Organization for Indian Ocean Marine Affairs Cooperation (IOMAC), which has the effect of turning the conference mechanism into a permanent organization. The new Organization's objectives are to promote cooperation among the States of the region, bearing in mind the ocean regime embodied in the Law of the Sea Convention; to provide a forum where the States in the region and other interested States could consider the economic uses of the Indian Ocean, its resources and related activities; and to enhance the economic and social development of the States in the region through integration of ocean-related activities in their respective development processes, and further a policy of integrated ocean management through dialogue and cooperative international action.
The competence of the Organisation is extensive, covering marine science, ocean services, and technology; living and non-living resources; ocean law, policy and management; marine transport and communication; marine environment; and "other fields relevant to cooperation in marine affairs."
Specialized marine affairs organizations and bodies
FISHERIES. In the field of fisheries, there are six regional bodies established by FAO, which provides secretariat services. These are: the Indo-Pacific Fishery Commission (IPFC); General Fisheries Council for the Mediterranean (GFCM), covering the Mediterranean, the Black Sea and connecting waters; the Regional Fisheries Advisory Commission for the Southwest Atlantic (CARPAS); the Fishery Committee for the Eastern Southwest Atlantic (CECAF); the Indian Ocean Fishery Commission (IOFC); and the Western Central Atlantic Fishery Commission (WECAFC). These bodies share, by and large, the common objectives of promoting, coordinating and assisting national and regional programmes of research and development aimed at rational utilization of the resources; formulating measures for the management and conservation of the resources; and encouraging exchange of information and studies as well as training.
Apart from the FAO-affiliated bodies, the following are the principal bodies dealing with fisheries:
1. For the Atlantic Ocean and adjacent seas: the North-East Atlantic Fisheries Commission (NEAFC), the North Atlantic Salmon Conservation Organization (NASCO), the Northwest Atlantic Fisheries Organization (NAFO), the International Commission for the Conservation of Atlantic Tunas (ICCAT), and the International Commission for the Southeast Atlantic Fisheries (ICSEAF). A new Regional Convention on Fisheries Cooperation among African States Bordering the Atlantic Ocean was adopted on 5 July 1991 by 22 African States at Dakar, Senegal, establishing a Conference for Ministers, with a view to promoting active cooperation for achieving harmonized policies regarding fishery resources exploitation, conservation, and processing.
2. For the Pacific Ocean: The International North Pacific Fisheries Commission (INPFC), the Inter-American Tropical Tuna Commission (IATTC), the Council of the Eastern Pacific Tuna Fishing Agreement (CEPTFA), the Eastern Pacific Tuna Fishing Organization (OAPO), the South Pacific Permanent Commission (PCSP) (which is also active recently in the protection of the marine environment), and the South Pacific Forum Fisheries Agency (FFA).
For other regions, a Latin American Organization for the Development of Fisheries (OLDEPESCA) has been established among members of the Latin American Economic System. Another unique body is the Commission for the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources (CCAMLR) covering the resources in the area south of the Antarctic convergence.
ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION. As it was stated earlier, UNEP has been a catalyst in the promotion of the protection of the marine environment in various regions of the world. Apart from the UNEP regional seas bodies mentioned above, the principal regional bodies and mechanisms in this field are the following:
1. The Baltic Marine Environment Protection Commission (Helsinki Commission), which was established in 1980 with the entry into force of the Convention on the Protection of the Marine Environment of the Baltic Sea Area. The Commission is responsible for preparing proposals and recommendations to the Convention parties for measures to prevent and reduce pollution and protect the Baltic Sea area environment from all sources of pollution.
2. The Oslo and Paris Commissions, which were established, respectively, by the Convention for the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping from Ships and Aircraft (the Oslo Convention), and the Convention for the Prevention of Marine Pollution from Land-based Sources (the Paris Convention). The Commissions, covering the same geographical area, normally conduct their work jointly and are in fact considering a merger. In addition to the two conventions, the Commissions also administer the Agreement for Cooperation in Dealing with Pollution of the North Sea by Oil.
3. The International Conference for the Protection of the North Sea, with the main objective of protecting the marine environment of the North Sea from all sources, which first met in 1984 and subsequently in 1987 and 1990. The Conference reviews measures taken with regard to dumping and incineration at sea; monitors other activities affecting the health of the marine environment; and adopts an agenda for common actions in reducing pollutants, in enforcing obligations, and in advancing scientific research.
4. The Regional Organization for the Protection of the Marine Environment (ROPME), which was established in 1982 among the states bordering the Gulf, has the mandate of protecting the marine environment, implementing regional action plans, applying the Kuwait Regional Convention, and coordinating and cooperating in cases of pollution by oil or other harmful substances in the marine environment resulting from emergencies.
SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH. In the field of purely scientific investigation of the oceans and resources, an International Council for the Exploration of the Sea (ICES) was founded in 1902 to promote and coordinate such international investigations in the North Atlantic and adjacent seas, and provide scientific information and advice to governments, as well as regional fishery managements, and pollution control bodies. The original constitutional arrangement was replaced in 1968 by the Convention for the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea.
A similar body, the International Commission for the Scientific Exploration of the Mediterranean Sea, was created in 1919 for the Mediterranean and the tributary seas.
A North Pacific version of ICES has been envisaged and in 1990, Canada, China, Japan, United States and the USSR agreed to set up the North Pacific Marine Science Organization (PICKS). Its functions include the exchange and evaluation of data and information on the status of stocks, the collaborative studies on the health of the marine environment, facilitating collaboration in research on the role of the ocean in modulating weather and climate, and the planning and coordination of multinational oceanographic and fishery research programmes.
In the South Pacific region, the South Pacific Applied Geoscience Commission (SOPAC) has been active in investigating the resource potential for coastal and offshore minerals, coordinating marine geological and geophysical research, and providing information on the physical environment of coastal and nearshore areas, for various purposes. Originally established in 1972 as the Committee for Coordination of Joint Prospecting for Mineral Resources in South Pacific Offshore Areas (COOP/SOPAC) under the sponsorship of the United Nations Economic and Social Commission for Asia and Pacific (ESCAP), it became an independent body in 1984 and adopted its current name in 1989.
Regional Economic Commissions of the United Nations
The Economic and Social Council has established five regional economic commissions: the Economic Commission for Africa (ECA), the Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP), the Economic Commission for Europe (ECE), the Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC), and the Economic and Social Commission for Western Asia (ESCWA). The commissions are subject to general supervision of ECOSOC, but are empowered to make recommendations directly to member governments, with broad mandates for the economic and social development in the region concerned. Activities in the marine sector play important roles in some of these commissions, particularly ESCAP and ECLAC.
Organizations for economic cooperation and integration
EUROPEAN ECONOMIC COMMUNITY (EEC). EEC has the competence over fisheries in the exclusive economic or fishery zones established by its members. Under its common Fisheries Policy, EEC manages the fisheries within the zones, regulates the fish marketing and concludes agreement with non-member countries. EEC has established special cooperative links with the African, Caribbean and Pacific Group of States (ACP) through the Lomé Conventions, which covers the fields of fisheries development and environmental protection, the most recent one being Lomé IV Convention concluded in 1989.
ORGANIZATION FOR ECONOMIC CO-OPERATION AND DEVELOPMENT (OECD). Established in 1961 as an institution for promoting worldwide economic expansion and the highest sustainable economic growth and employment, OECD, mainly through its Fisheries Committee, coordinates the activities and policies of Member States in the exploitation of living resources, and reviews their fishery policies, fish trade and markets. OECD also assists in the development of policies with regard to hazardous wastes and their disposal.
CARIBBEAN COMMUNITY (CARICOM). CARICOM has been stressing the significance the Law of the Sea Convention as the basis for strengthening cooperation in its region. Two standing committees, one on fisheries and the other on transportation, are active in the marine sector.
Multi-purpose organizations
ORGANISATION OF AFRICAN UNITY (OAU). OAU had an important role to play in the 1970s in formulating African positions on the law of the sea, particularly with regard to the exclusive economic zone. In recent years, it has been active in the development of fisheries and the control of transboundary movement of hazardous wastes, an important pathway of which is the sea.
COMMONWEALTH SECRETARIAT. As an association of 49 States, mostly developing, the Commonwealth Secretariat has created the Commonwealth Fund for Technical Cooperation and the Technical Assistance Group to provide assistance to its developing members in the areas of fisheries, access agreements and offshore petroleum contracts, and pollution control. It is also promoting integrated coastal and ocean management.
ASSOCIATION OF SOUTH-EAST ASIAN NATIONS (ASEAN). ASEAN has been giving a great deal of attention to the protection of the marine environment, for that purpose setting up such bodies as the ASEAN Senior Officials on Environment, the Expert Group on Environment, the Coordinating Body on the Seas of East Asia, and the Committee on Science and Technology Working Group on Marine Science. An ASEAN Committee on Transportation and Communication promotes collaborative efforts in the area of shipping and ports. Its Committee on Food, Agriculture and Forestry is also responsible for fisheries.
ORGANIZATION OF AMERICAN STATES (OAS). One of the goals of OAS, which is a general forum for economic, political, and social cooperation, is to promote and strengthen local capabilities for managing natural resources, mapping and baseline studies, tourism development, etc., in the coastal and ocean areas. It provides advisory services and training in these and other related fields.
ORGANIZATION OF EASTERN CARIBBEAN STATES (OECS). OECS has a wide mandate ranging from defence to economic integration. In the marine sector, it has been harmonizing fisheries legislation, developing regional mechanism for fisheries management, and promoting regional agreements for foreign access to fisheries.
<section>The significance and cost of ratification of the law of the sea convention 1982</section>
F.X. Njenga
When UNCLOS III adopted the Convention on the Law of the Sea in December 1982, it was viewed largely as a codifying Convention which, however, also provided for the regulation of almost every aspect of maritime activity.^1 The Convention has reached a crossroads in that it has already received over two-thirds of the required 60 instruments of ratification or accession. It is, however, regrettable that almost all industrialized countries have so far refused to ratify. An overwhelming majority of those who have hitherto ratified are developing countries.
The international community is, indeed, at the crossroads in so far as orderly management of the seas is concerned. It is the function of law to create order, to avoid conflict and to provide for the resolution of conflicts in accordance with the principles and norms of the law and in due process thereof. The Convention on the Law of the Sea was intended to conform to that universal acceptance of the function of law. It is therefore vital that the Convention becomes legally binding, even if the entry into force is brought about through the ratification or accession mainly of developing countries.
The function of law in respect of resolution of conflicts has been emphasized above. However, it is equally important to bear in mind that consensus too must be arrived at in accordance with the due process of law. The rejection of the Convention by industrialized countries, merely because of a handful of the provisions - in part XI - would not only erode the confidence which the members of the family of nations have hitherto placed in multilateral negotiations but would pose a grave and severe setback to the process of the progressive development and codification of international law. It would be particularly unfortunate at this time when the United Nations has embarked on the Decade of International Law.
<section>Significance and urgency of ratification</section>
The significance of ratifying the Convention and bringing it into force at the earliest possible moment cannot be overemphasized for several reasons. The provisions of the Convention have been categorized under two broad headings, namely, those that are said to have passed into the realm of customary international law, and those that are deemed to be constitutive, having been developed and incorporated in the process negotiated at UNCLOS III. Such categorization of norms, while attractive, is in many respects misleading and could contribute to the unfortunate fragmentation of the Convention.
According to this approach, the limits of 12 nautical miles for the territorial sea, the 200 nautical mile exclusive economic zone, the regime of the continental shelf, and the freedom of the high seas are now part of customary international law. It has even been argued that transit passage through straits comes under customary international law, although this is at best a dubious contention. In this context it is our view that the principle of the common heritage of mankind has also entered into the realm of customary international law due to its almost universal acceptance. Without the guarantees provided by the provisions of the Convention, however, each State will be free to interpret these concepts unilaterally, particularly vis-à-vis the States not parties to the Convention.
It should also be emphasized that many of the recognizable traditional customary principles of international law of the oceans have undergone fundamental change in the process of negotiation leading to the adoption of the Convention. A comparative study of traditional customary principles now codified in the Convention, such as those of innocent passage or freedom of the high seas, shows that the Convention incorporates some very significant developments which can only be invoked within the framework of a binding Convention and not on the basis of customary international law.
One of the basic canons of interpretation of statutes is the principle that a statute must be read as a whole. The Convention therefore must be read as a whole and applied in its entirety. States cannot, and should not, be encouraged to pick and choose areas and parts of the provisions of the Convention which they find convenient, on the basis that they have become customary international law. It should always be remembered that the Convention as a whole is a delicate balance of rights and obligations. All rights claimed must be subject to the fulfilment of their concomitant obligations as provided for in the Convention.
The Convention has, among other things, enhanced the importance of baselines. It is from the baselines that the limits of the territorial sea, contiguous zone, exclusive economic zone, and the continental shelf are measured. Similarly, the Convention, in clarifying the status of atolls and of islands having fringed reefs, has made provisions legitimizing the drawing of baselines where coastlines are very unstable because of deltas and other natural conditions. Thus the importance of concretizing the baselines principle in a binding convention for various purposes can hardly be overemphasized if conflicts on delineation of respective national and international zones are to be minimized.
Significant new principles of law of the sea have been substantially developed by the Convention. The concept of transit passage through straits is an instance of an innovative principle which has no roots in customary international law. In customary international law, as it obtained before the Convention, the maritime areas or corridors within territorial seas in which transit passage is now conceded by the Convention, only allowed the regime of innocent passage with all its ramifications. The transit passage regime is an instance of the spirit of give and take that prevailed at UNCLOS III. The right of transit passage stipulated in the Convention cannot be availed of except within the context of the Convention. It cannot be assumed to have become part of customary international law.
While it is true that the Convention embodies several concepts of customary international law, these have in the process of negotiation undergone significant development. These concepts can today, strictly speaking, be deemed customary only in that the legal concepts themselves can be traced back to some date or event in the past. However, the mechanisms and systems incorporated in the Convention for the implementation of these "customary principles," such as those of territorial waters, contiguous zone, exclusive economic zone, and the continental shelf, are to be found, not in customary law, but in the provisions of the Convention.
Thus claims and determination of the extent of the rights and obligations within these maritime zones and the regime of transit passage are to be found in the provisions of the Convention. Similarly, though the concept of the Exclusive Economic Zone may be deemed to have become part of customary international law, in view of its almost universal acceptance, the details of rights and obligations in it can only be invoked within the 1982 Convention. Ratification of the Convention is therefore sine qua non in the claiming of these maritime zones, particularly the claim and exercise of the right of transit passage which has never been a part of customary international law, and whose acceptance in the Convention was in the concept of the overall package deal.
It should be noted that six of the sixty States that have so far ratified the Convention (December, 1993) are landlocked States. These landlocked States, including three Member States of the Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee (AALCC), are Botswana, Paraguay, Uganda, Zaire, Zambia, and Zimbabwe. It is hoped that other landlocked States, including other members of the AALCC, would consider ratifying the Convention in the near future. Their ratification of the Convention is a reflection in part on the faith they repose in part X of the Convention which provides for the right of access of landlocked states to and from the seas and freedom of transit. Once the Convention comes into force, the right of access to and from the seas and the freedom of transit of these landlocked States - and other ratifying States would cease to be a matter of bilateral arrangement with the neighbouring coastal States and would thereafter be governed and regulated by the provisions of
articles 124 to 132.
The landlocked States also shall have the right to participate, on an equitable basis, in the exploitation of the living resources of the exclusive economic zone(s) of neighbouring coastal States. Article 69(1) of the Convention stipulates that the landlocked States shall have the right to participate, on an equitable basis, in the exploitation of an appropriate part of the surplus of the living resources of the exclusive economic zones of coastal States of the same subregion or region, taking into account the relevant economic and geographical circumstances of all the States concerned and in conformity with the provisions of this article and of articles 61 and 62. While the benefits to be enjoyed by these States under these provisions are somewhat problematic, they nevertheless provide new rights which they cannot attain outside the 1982 Convention.
The Convention also constitutes a blueprint for the preservation and protection of the marine environment. Preambular paragraph 4 of the Convention explicitly states that the objectives of the Convention, inter alia, are the establishment of a legal order designed to facilitate international communication, and to promote the peaceful uses of the seas and oceans, "the equitable and efficient utilization of their resources, the conservation of their living resources and the study, protection, and preservation of the marine environment" (emphasis added). The emphasis that the Convention, particularly in part XII, places on protecting and preserving the environment brings into sharp focus the primordial importance of the oceans in maintaining the global ecological balance as well as controlling and moderating the world climate. It is also one of the most coherent bases for sustainable development of marine resources.
As the international community prepares to negotiate a new social contract for the protection and preservation of the environment which has already been accepted as being a common concern of mankind, it may be proper to dwell at some length on part XII of the Convention to underline the significance - and the urgency - of ratifying it.
Even a cursory reading of the provisions of articles 192 to 237, comprising part XII of the Convention, would show that they are not merely a restatement of existing conventional law or practice but are fundamental or constitutional in character in that they are the first comprehensive statement of basic international legal norms on the subject. In fact they have already become widely accepted so as to be considered as a part of "customary international law." Those provisions mark a movement to regulation based upon a holistic conception of the oceans as an exhaustible and finite resource. Part XII of the Convention is thus a maiden venture towards a global response to the problems of combating marine pollution.
It is also the first codification of the principles on marine pollution as articulated in the Stockholm Declaration. In spite of the fact that the provisions of part XII impose extensive obligations, which perforce restrict state autonomy, consensus on these obligations was achieved at an early stage during the UNCLOS negotiations. This, it may be stated, is illustrative of the unanimous concern of the global community about marine pollution problems and the relatively non-controversial nature of the solutions required. Yet these provisions will only become legally binding on the coming into force of the Convention.
Part XII and allied provisions of the Convention are significant for the general development of international law because they comprise the first such endeavour to develop a public international law framework in response to the deterioration of, and threats to, the marine environment. More significantly they are reflective of the nature of the subject matter, and part XII is expressly designed to operate as an "umbrella" or framework for further global and regional actions. Besides the traditional norm-setting function, regional approaches are expressly recognized and indeed mandated. Thus section 2 of part XII is entitled "Global and Regional Cooperation" and, inter alia, directs the States to cooperate on a global and as appropriate, on a regional basis, "taking into account characteristic regional features."
The Convention, as a whole, by striking a balance between the protection of the marine environment and the rational exploitation and sound conservation of both the living and non-living resources of the sea, endeavours to protect marine ecosystems from abusive activities and harm. It also incorporates a system of exploitation which could contribute to sustainable development, that is, development which meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability for future generations to meet their needs. Adherence to the Law of the Sea Convention is considered, therefore, the most significant initial action that nations can take in the interests of the ocean's threatened life-support system.
It is significant also that among the 60 states that have ratified the Convention there are 20 island and archipelagic States, including 3 members of the AALCC. For these island and archipelagic States besides their expanded jurisdiction over living and non-living resources - the provisions of part XII of the Convention on the preservation of the marine environment could be, in view of the adoption and coming into force of the Convention on Climate Change, a very significant first line of defence against the "heat trap" caused by the greenhouse effect. The significance of ratification of the Convention and bringing it into force at an early date for the island and archipelagic States can hardly be overemphasized. It is hoped, therefore, that more of these States would consider ratifying the Convention.
It is therefore necessary to urge all States, who have not already done so, to ratify or accede to the Convention to enable them to claim and exercise the rights stipulated therein. The process of ratification leading to early entry into force would contribute to lending to the Convention the legal and moral authority of the Law which is so necessary to guarantee particularly the rights of developing countries vis-à-vis the encroachment from the maritime powers which have in the past been the hallmark of the regime of the oceans.
At this juncture it may be pertinent to refer to some recent developments. The reluctance on the part of the industrialized countries to ratify the Law of the Sea Convention, or become bound by it, after all the concessions made at UNCLOS III to accommodate their then expressed concerns, has generated a feeling of frustration and betrayal among the developing countries. Recently, somewhat clandestine efforts have been made in some quarters to amend the Convention even before it comes into force. Those who have advocated and lobbied for such premature amendment have ignored the strong feelings of many developing countries in general, and Member States of the AALCC in particular.
The AALCC is generally of the view that under Resolution I and II of UNCLOS III it is neither permissible nor within the mandate of the Prepcom, as had been mooted, to make substantive changes to the Convention to be incorporated in a protocol to come into force simultaneously with the Convention. This is not to suggest that the Convention is sacrosanct and immutable. The Convention itself admits amendments of any of its provisions - except those concerning the Common Heritage of Mankind. But the procedure for amending is very clearly spelt out and can only be applied subsequent to the entry into force of the Convention, if the need arises.
It has been argued that the Convention can and must be amended to remove certain reservations of a number of industrialized countries. Last year the Secretary-General of the United Nations convened informal consultations on outstanding issues relating to the deep seabed mining part of the Convention. In the course of the first of these informal consultations in July 1990, to encourage States to enter into a dialogue in order to resolve the problems that some States have, the delegate of the United Kingdom identified seven areas of difficulties or reservations. These related to:
1. the Enterprise;
2. cost to States Parties;
3. production limitation;
4. compensation fund;
5. financial terms for commercial operations;
6. decision-making; and
7. the review conference.
In some instances the MARPOL Convention adopted under the auspices of the International Maritime Organization (IMO) has been cited as a precedent of an international instrument having been amended before its coming into force. This in itself is insufficient justification or rationale for amending the "Social Contract" for the oceans. Besides one of the provisions sought to be amended is the very procedure for amendment to be followed by the review conference which is to be convened fifteen years after the commencement of commercial exploitation in accordance with article 155 of the Convention.
The importance of a globally binding Law of the Sea Convention to the entire international community was the basis of the unique, and in many respects peculiar, negotiating procedures which characterized UNCLOS III. Realizing the need for a consensus, comprehensive package deal Convention, the developing countries seriously engaged in evolving compromise solutions with the maritime powers and other industrialized countries; and the result was the 1982 Convention. Indeed this Convention involved numerous concessions from the developing countries to meet the then expressed fears and concerns of the developed countries. Among these compromises and concessions are the very provisions in the Convention relating to each of the above-mentioned issues.
Nothing new has emerged since 1982 to justify tinkering with the above provisions. Neither the proposed amendments to the Convention nor the "empty chair" negotiating tactics hitherto adopted by one of the major maritime powers is therefore a solution to the reservations nursed by the developed countries. The United States attended the informal consultations convened by the Secretary-General of the United Nations in 1990, but has made no undertaking that, should the identified issues be resolved, she would accede to the Convention. It is not inconceivable that, if concessions were made on the above issues, new "problems" would be identified for further amendments.
Finally, it should be pointed out that a new international legal order will be built up in slow measures literally by placing one stone atop another. The Law of the Sea Convention is the cornerstone of the new international legal order in the oceans, and it is therefore imperative that it be placed firmly and squarely into the realm of binding international law. Several states have reiterated their conviction that the Law of the Sea Convention is indeed the cornerstone of a new and emerging order in all aspects relating to oceans from economic, ecological, and navigational perspectives.
<section>Financial obligations and cost of ratification</section>
Many developing countries have been cautioned by some quarters that the accession to, or ratification of, the Convention would entail colossal and increased financial obligations for them. It is important that such misconceptions be clarified and, where necessary, categorically refuted.
Ratification of the Convention by the developing coastal States by itself entails no financial obligation on the part of the ratifying States. Any significant financial obligations which may devolve to the States Parties would arise only when the deep seabed mining arm of the International Seabed Authority - the Enterprise - undertakes a venture for the exploration and exploitation of the polymetallic nodules in the area.
As the Chairman of the Group of 77 observed during the course of the summer meeting of the Seventh Session of the Precom, a "false impression has been conveyed and perpetuated, despite repeated statements by Members of the Group of 77 to the contrary, that the Group of 77 contemplated the establishment of a large bureaucratic organization, unrelated to the activities which the Authority is legitimately required to perform under the Convention from time to time. Nothing could be further from the truth. The Group of 77 is desirous of establishing an Authority which would be efficient and cost effective, the size of which would be no larger or smaller than is required to enable the Authority to carry out its functions efficiently."
It is now generally accepted that a commercial undertaking or venture is not likely in the foreseeable future. It should also be pointed out that there is nothing in the Convention which obligates States Parties to bring into being the entire machinery and bureaucracy foreseen in part XI on the exploration and exploitation of the Area of the Convention before commencement of commercial exploitation. A modest secretariat, such as the one already existing within the United Nations Secretariat, could be charged with the necessary functions of implementing whatever needs to be done before the Enterprise becomes fully operational. In the words of the Chairman of the Group of 77 at the Prepcom, "the costs of the Authority at any given moment will depend upon the activities it will be required to perform on a cost effective basis. The contribution of members will be related thereto and if the organization is initially established on a modest basis, because the activities at that
stage will not be enormous, so too the contributions of members will be correspondingly small." It should be pointed out that there is "a consensus among all regional groups and interest groups with regard to these guidelines."
In the event of the Enterprise commencing its ventures before the turn of the century, the financial obligations, if any, of the developing States would, therefore, not be of the astronomical proportions that they are made out to be. The financial obligations of the States Parties could in the initial stages be kept at the bare minimum through various options. For one, the entire machinery and system with all its paraphernalia, as envisaged by the Convention, need not be established immediately. In the initial stages, modalities for the functioning of the Nucleus Enterprise making use of the existing administrative and secretariat staff of the United Nations Division of Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea could be envisaged. The secretariat of the International Seabed Authority, and such other subsidiary organs as may be required, could be established in due course as and when the ventures of the Enterprise start bringing returns.
An endeavour is made below to show that the cost of ratification would not be as astronomical as has hitherto been made out. A study of the cost of ratification of the Convention made by the International Ocean Institute has rightly pointed out that the costs of ratification can be broken down into two parts, namely:
(a) costs arising from the new responsibilities which come together with the new rights over extended areas of jurisdiction; and
(b) payments for the establishment, and running, of the new institutions to be set up under the Convention: the International Seabed Authority; the Enterprise; the International Tribunal for the Law of the Seas; and the Commission on the limits of the continental shelf.
That study had, inter alia, observed that the costs arising from the new responsibilities which come together with new rights of resource jurisdiction may vary depending on the stage of technical and organizational preparedness of a State at the time the Convention comes into force. It had rightly recommended that "the amount to be spent should not be considered simply as a 'cost' and that it should be accepted as an investment in development." It had gone on to observe that the greatest benefit of the Convention may in fact consist in the stimulus it gives to this kind of investment in development of human resources, of infrastructure, and of technology.
As regards the implementation of part XI, the International Ocean Institute study had estimated that the recurring costs, of establishment and running the machinery envisaged, for the first five years would amount to some US$50 million per annum. That figure was based on some assumptions that activities will take place in Jamaica where the infrastructure is already in place, and in Hamburg where Germany would take care of establishment costs. It had also assumed that the Convention would come into force in 1990. The said study had accordingly concluded that "if the Convention were ratified by all States Members of the United Nations, the poorest States would have to contribute US$5,000 to the annual budget, the richest (USA), US$12.5 million: a very modest undertaking indeed, which, however, would be sufficient to globalize the most advanced concepts of international scientific/industrial cooperation, including the developing countries as equal partners."
During a seminar on "Alternative Cost-Effective Models for Pioneer Cooperation in Exploration and Technology Development and Training" organized jointly by the AALCC and the IOI during the Eighth Summer Session of the Prepcom in August 199O, it was, inter alia, pointed out that the proposal on joint ventures directed itself to the functional operations of joint ventures during the initial stages from the coming into force of the Convention to the commencement of the mining operations. This is important to ensure that the Enterprise would be able to keep pace with the activities of States and State enterprises in exploration and exploratory stages. It was underlined that an estimated 100 million dollars per annum are being spent on research and development on deep seabed mineral extraction technology and that it would be significant if a part of this amount could be brought under the auspices of the Prepcom or that of the International Seabed Authority when the Convention
comes into force. Needless to say, such pooling of resources in joint ventures could reduce costs by as much as 75 per cent if efforts on research and development were to be conducted jointly. The undertaking of joint ventures as proposed in the paper on "Alternative Cost-Effective Models for Pioneer Cooperation in Exploration, Technology Development, and Training," offers an approach whereby cost of implementation of part XI can be shared and thus the financial obligations both of the developing and developed countries kept at a minimum. Apart from the importance of reduction of costs of such developments through joint ventures, such an enterprise would also be instrumental in technology transfer and for training.
The proposal of AALCC and IOI had envisaged that about 50 per cent of the financing of such joint ventures would be made by private corporations or States Parties through the pioneer investors or other ventures while the remainder would be contributed by public financial institutions such as the World Bank and others such as UNDP. It was foreseen that such joint ventures would be most effective if some 200 million dollars over a period of four years could be made available.
The United Nations Office of Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea, recognizing the need for economy, the need to minimize the financial burden to States Parties, and the importance of taking into account "the likely developments in deep seabed mining" prepared a background note on Administrative Arrangements, Structure and Financial Implications of the International Seabed Authority. The note, inter alia, that the financial implications for States Parties are to be viewed within the overall institutional arrangements provided for in the Convention, involving the two new institutions: the Authority and the Tribunal, and the United Nations. The financial requirements of the United Nations for the fulfilment of the functions under the Convention will be met from the regular budget of the United Nations. The financial implications with regard to the Authority and the Tribunal are summarized in the following table:
Table 1 Financial implications for Authority and Tribunal institutions
Institution
US$ (Thousands)
Authority
1 Self-administered
(a) Recurrent annual expenditures
(b) Annual conference servicing costs
(c) Initial one-time capital outlay
Total
2 United Nations-linked
(a) Recurrent annual expenditure
(b) Annual conference servicing costs
(c) Initial one-time capital outlay
Total
Tribunal
(a) Recurrent annual expenditures
Grand total
(i) Authority: Self-administered + Tribunal
(ii) Authority: UN-linked + Tribunal
The self-administered Authority headed by a Secretary-General, comprises a total staff of 50 personnel including a deputy to the Secretary-General. The staff structure envisages a total of 20 personnel in the professional and technical category and 30 in the general services category. On the other hand, a UN-linked Authority headed by a Secretary-General shall comprise 10 personnel in the professional category and 17 in the general services category. The UN Office on Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea note envisages a one-time capital outlay for the self-administered institution (Authority) as US$100,000, and for the UN-linked institution as US$20,000. This capital outlay would be required for purchase of certain office equipment.
From the foregoing, therefore, the cost of ratification would not be of the astronomical proportions that it has been made to sound, and the cost for most developing countries is likely to range between US$2,000 to US$8,000 depending on policy choices made. Clearly joint ventures would also significantly help in reducing the costs, in promoting economy, and minimizing financial obligations of States.
<section>Note</section>
1. In the preparation of this paper, the author has received valuable research assistance from Mr. Kanwar Jeet Singh Ramdass Kapoor, Principal Legal Officer at the Secretariat of the AALCC. The paper is an abbreviated version of the brief prepared for the Thirtieth Session of the Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee, held in Cairo, April 1991.
<section>The role of indigenous peoples in ocean governance</section>
Jon M. Van Dyke
<section>Sharing the ocean's bounty in a spirit of kinship and harmony</section>
Although indigenous or native peoples vary markedly in their cultures and political situations, they share a common heritage of living in harmony with their natural environment. Those who have lived in continental areas have been hunters and gatherers, and later cultivators of crops, always with a sensitivity for the need to sustain and renew the soil and the forests so that future generations can continue to find sustenance there. Those who have lived along coasts or on islands have turned to the sea for its rich bounty, but again with a realization that the creatures of the sea are exhaustible and that they must be harvested with a sensitivity to the natural limits of their ability to reproduce.
Native peoples reflect this desire to live in harmony with their environment in the spiritual values, symbols, and stories of their religions. In the creation chant of the native Hawaiian people, the Kumulipo, the ocean is described as "more than just an 'environment' or a 'resource'.... [It] is a living being - a home for other living beings and of living gods." (Laenui 1993) The Hawaiians recognized that they "are connected ... biologically ... to all the creatures and plants of the earth," but more importantly they recognized that they are also "spiritually" bonded. (Ibid.)
Our relationship with ocean life ... is not merely the sharing of the same physical makeup. It is the sharing of a spiritual interrelationship as well. (Ibid.)
The protection of the ocean from pollution is thus essential, because the ocean is a part of the life-giving and living force that sustains us and connects us to other peoples.
The ocean is a great connector of countries and of peoples, the common amniotic fluid from which we have all come and that we continue to share. (Ibid.)
This vision of a kinship relationship with the oceans contrasts sharply with the standard Western view "that the oceans are simply another resource to be used for economic gain: either indirectly, as a passageway, or directly as a source of food or other wealth." (Jackson 1993) Under this view, which has been "the guiding principle behind the law of the sea," "nations were to be protected in their use of the sea, without any parallel protection for the sea itself." (Ibid.)
The Maori people in Aotearoa, or New Zealand, developed their own "te tikanga o te moana" or law of the sea, which is based on "four basic precepts deeply rooted in Maori cultural values," similar to those that guided the native Hawaiians:
First, the sea is part of a global environment in which all parts are interlinked.
Second, the sea, as one of the Taonga or treasures of Mother Earth, must be nurtured and protected.
Third, the protected sea is a koha or gift which humans may use.
Fourth, that use is to be controlled in a way that will sustain its bounty. (Ibid.)
These principles still guide the Maori, and they have drawn upon them in their recent claims before the Waitangi Tribunal to protest, for instance, against sewage discharges into the rivers, lakes, and estuaries that are part of their natural environment. (Ibid.) The Maori perspective is that pollution should not be attacked "by seeking more effective methods of waste disposal as is often advocated today, but by ensuring that any activity produces as little waste as possible at its source." (Ibid.)
It is sometimes argued that this view of the ways native peoples treat ocean resources is too romanticized or idealistic, and that one cannot always be sure that indigenous peoples will be environmentally sensitive. It is observed, for instance, that native people still seek to kill the bowhead whales in the Arctic area, even though this species is endangered. Similarly, Pacific islanders still occasionally harvest turtles that are endangered.
One response to these observations is, of course, that these species are not endangered because of native harvesting, but rather because of the exploitive practices of the industrialized world. The native take is still modest and would be insignificant if it was not for the high-tech harvesting practices of others.
In Hawaii, recently discovered remains have established that some species became extinct before Westerners came to the islands, notably some birds that were overhunted because of the beauty of their feathers. Certainly mistakes have been made by native peoples as well as by non-natives, frequently because of a lack of information about the effect of certain activities. But overall the traditions and practices of native peoples have been well designed to provide protection for the natural environment, and members of the modern industrialized world should be able to learn from the native peoples about the advantages of living in harmony with the creatures that surround us.
In an article presenting the view that Pacific islanders should have the power once again to control the oceans surrounding them, Governor Joseph Ada of Guam argued that the islanders were fully capable of protecting the oceans. To contrast the caring attitude of the islanders with the approach of the industrialized world, he observed that:
[T]he political leadership of Guam has never in its history issued permission for drift gill-net fishing, decimation of whale herds, ocean dumping of human garbage, open ocean incineration of hazardous materials, nuclear detonations on or under island atolls, dumping of nuclear waste and hazardous chemicals in degradable containers, ocean usage for practice bombing and missile targets, or resource exploitation without accountability to those most directly affected. (Ada 1991)
<section>Traditional native approaches to ocean governance</section>
How can these ideas of kinship and harmony be translated into Western notions of governance? What happens when the resources of the sea are scarce and need to be rationed through some system of allocation?
When the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea began its work in the early- and mid-1970s, a study was prepared under the auspices of the Congress of Micronesia, in part to illustrate the long history of Micronesian use of the surrounding sea and in part to address these questions of governance. (Nakayama and Ramp 1974) This report reaffirms that the sea is a controlling and transcendent part of the life of the islanders, who live on tiny land areas:
Though essential, the land is tiny and relatively barren. It provides people with protection from the elements and a place to eat and sleep in comfort. But the real focus of life is on the sea. The sea provides food and tools and the medium to transport an islander from one cluster of humanity to another. As compared to the power and moods of the sea, the land is insignificant, humble, dull. The rhythm of life is dictated by the sea. The turbulence of the sea tells people when they can travel and when they can't. It controls the habits of fish and the habits of the human seeking them. The sea sustains life with the food it provides, but also carries the potential to end it in the fury of one of its periodic rages. The sea challenges people, tests their character, provides life with drama and meaning.
The report examines the traditional practices in Micronesia and concludes that the basic concepts used throughout these islands are that "proximity determines ownership" and that there should be "pragmatic accommodations to competing interests among individuals and groups of people combined with a mutually understood but unspoken sense of fairness." (Ibid.)
Each island community has an area of exclusive rights in the lagoon, if it is an atoll, and in the nearby offshore area. This area extends to the point where the reef ecology gives way to the deep sea species of fish. Beyond this area is an area of non-exclusive rights, where others can fish, but even there it is clear that the closest island community has preferential rights. Other islanders passing through these non-exclusive zones can fish while they travel, and the fish is considered to be a gift to the intruding islanders. If their catch is excessive, they are expected to take their fish to the island and present it to the local chief, in recognition of the adjacent island's superior rights to the fish; the local chief will then return a portion to the intruders. (Ibid.)
A French scientific expedition led by Louis de Freycinet visited the waters around Guam in 1819 and confirmed that the islanders there had a keen sense of ownership of the offshore waters. He reported that fishers would sometimes drag behind their canoe a device called a "poio," consisting of a hollow half-coconut-shell and a hemispheric rock, filled with chewed coconut meat. The fish would be attracted to this device while the fisher canoed through the fishing grounds of others to his own ground, at which point he would harvest the fish with a net. If, however, the fisher was caught luring the fish away from the other areas, "he would receive the death penalty." (Amesbury and Hunter-Anderson 1989, describing the research of Freycinet 1824)
Thus, although the Micronesian islanders in traditional times had no concept of owning the sea in the Western sense, they did view the surrounding sea as their domain, just as native Americans in North America had a sense that the forests and plains were their hunting grounds.
Asking a Micronesian who owns the sea is like asking him who owns the lagoons or the land. Or like asking an inhabitant of a continental nation who owns the mountains, forests, deserts, lakes, or rivers. To a Micronesian the answer is obvious. A nation's territory is its surface habitat, and the sea is at least as important a part of a Micronesian's surface habitat as is the land. (Ibid.)
... Micronesians own the sea. They own it because they live in it. They own it because until this century they have been the only people to use it for purposes other than transit. They own it because they have sailed it for thousands of years. They own it because they learned how to tame it and cope with its awesome power before anyone else did. They own it because they are totally dependent upon it for survival - both the subsistence form of survival of days past and the more materialistic form of the uncertain future. They own it because over the past centuries they have devised a system for defining and allocating the rights in the sea and for passing those rights on from one generation to the next. (Ibid.)
The current Governor of Guam, Joseph Ada, has expressed this same view as follows:
Life and sea. Bread and water. Past and future. For islands, and particularly, for small islands, the elements of our lives cannot be easily or logically separated by that thin line where the ocean lies with the shore. Within our genes we carry the memory of our fathers and mothers as they explored and fished and birthed and died atop the bosom of the unfenced seas. Within our own memory, we carry the pain of the prison that is created when we are confined to the land because others, with other agendas, control our environmental heritage. (Ada 1991)
The native Hawaiians also had carefully delineated rules to govern access to the nearshore fisheries surrounding the main Hawaiian islands. These islands were divided into pie-shaped land divisions extending from the mountains to the coasts, which were called "ahupua'a." The community living in the ahupua'a had exclusive rights to the fish in the adjacent coastal area out to the reef area or to the point where the coastal waters turned into deep ocean waters. At many parts of the coast, artificial fish ponds were constructed and maintained to cultivate coastal fish for the benefit of the community living on the adjacent lands. These coastal fisheries were regulated by the "konohiki" who was the administrator for the chief.
The konohiki became familiar with the patterns and habits of each fish species and determined how and when fishing should take place to ensure the survival of the species, while also allowing the community to have regular access to fish for eating. During certain periods and at certain locations, the konohiki would establish a "kapu" to prohibit fishing, to allow the fish to replenish themselves or to protect a species during its reproductive period. Beyond the near-shore area, the regulation was less restrictive, and persons from other areas could fish for the deep-ocean species. (Meller 1985; Morgan 1986; Anders 1987; Murakami and Freitas 1987; Pacific Fisheries Consultants 1990; Murakami 1991)
Native Hawaiians fished actively far from their coasts. Families and communities found especially fertile areas above seamounts, information of which they passed on orally to their offspring but tried to keep secret from others. They also sent exhibitions to the northwest Hawaiian Islands to bring back fish from those distant areas. (Ibid.)
The Maori similarly restricted access to their fisheries in order to protect against overfishing. Among their traditions is "[a] tale of careless men robbing once rich reefs and an unforgiving Tangaroa claiming back the mauri of his bounty. And from that story came a certainty that created a tradition of respect for the gifts that are given to humans, and a realization of the need for balance in all things." (Jackson 1992)
<section>The pursuit of ocean claims</section>
In recent years, the native Hawaiian community has been active in asserting rights to the ocean and its resources. Native Hawaiians state, for instance, that the submerged lands surrounding Hawaii and the water column above these submerged lands were all part of the Crown and Government Lands illegally acquired by the United States in 1898 without the consent of, or compensation to, persons of Hawaiian ancestry. These illegally acquired properties are now commonly referred to as the "ceded lands" because they were ceded by the illegally constituted "Republic of Hawaii" to the United States at the time of annexation in 1898. A large portion of these properties were then transferred to the State of Hawaii at the time of statehood in 1959. The State of Hawaii has acknowledged that the submerged lands are part of these "ceded lands." (Attorney General of Hawaii 1982)
The Office of Hawaiian Affairs (OHA) has been active, together with other native Hawaiian groups, in asserting that the Hawaiian people are entitled to a substantial share of the ocean resources surrounding Hawaii. On 2 September 1989, the Office of Hawaiian Affairs issued a Draft Blueprint for Native Hawaiian Entitlements which included the following paragraph among the claimed entitlements:
4. Submerged Lands and Offshore Waters.
Native Hawaiians have an interest in the living and nonliving resources of submerged lands and offshore water in the exclusive economic zones and territorial seas surrounding the Hawaiian Islands, Johnston Atoll, Palmyra Island, and Midway Island. Native Hawaiians are entitled to half of all revenues received by the U.S. government from these resources. Native Hawaiians are also entitled to harvest half of all resources in these areas. Both the living and nonliving resources should be co-managed by appropriate federal and state agencies and OHA, or any successor Native Hawaiian entity developed pursuant to the process set forth below, in an environmentally sensitive manner designed to preserve these resources for future generations.
The phrasing of this claim has presented some interesting challenges, because some of the Trustees of the Office of Hawaiian Affairs have felt uncomfortable referring to "nonliving resources" in light of their spiritual heritage which sees all things as part of the life force. It has been decided that in future versions of this document, the phrase "living and nonliving" will be omitted, and the claim will be simply for the "resources" of the sea.
The idea that the claim should be for half of all the revenues and resources of the offshore area came from a 1974 decision in the case of United States v. Washington. That decision required the judge to give a modern interpretation to a nineteenth century treaty between the United States and the Indian tribes of the Pacific North-west in which the United States had confirmed that the tribe had an absolute right to take fish from certain rivers in the State of Washington, without any limitation in time, except as Congress might otherwise determine. Because the non-Indian population was fishing actively in these rivers, and thus depleting the fish stocks, Judge Boldt ruled that the Indians should be entitled to half of all the fish caught. This decision had the effect of sharply curtailing the fish that could be caught by non-Indians and protecting the rights guaranteed to the Indians in the earlier treaty.
Guam has similarly claimed jurisdiction over the resources of the seabed, subsoil, tidelands, and adjacent waters. This claim extends throughout the 200-mile exclusive economic zone, which the Guam Legislature claimed through Public Law 15-114, passed on 24 March 1980. (Ada 1991) The Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands (CNMI) has also made such a claim (King 1991), and both Guam and the CNMI are negotiating with the United States government to secure greater authority over their offshore resources. In 1990, the President's special representative to the CNMI agreed that the CNMI should have greater control over its offshore resources, but the US State Department has objected, and the matter remains unresolved. (Guerrero 1992)
The Maori have been pursuing their claims to the offshore resources through the Waitangi Tribunal, which was established to reexamine and restore the rights of the Maori under the 1840 Treaty of Waitangi between Great Britain and the Maori chiefs. That treaty states that the British Queen "confirms and guarantees" to the Maori chiefs and tribes "the full exclusive and undisturbed possession of their Lands, Estates, Forests, Fisheries and other properties." The history of New Zealand has, however, been otherwise, and the Maori have lost most of their resources. (Waitangi Tribunal 1988)
In recent years, the Maori tribes have been seeking to restore rights to the various fisheries in the bays and offshore waters around their islands. One recent report of the Waitangi Tribunal emphasized the importance of the offshore resources by noting that "the products of the aquatic economy provided Maori with their only animal food apart from birds, dogs and rats, and any portion of sea could hold for them much higher value than any equal area of land." (Ibid. at xiii.) The Maori were skilled at fishing and were active traders during the nineteenth century. The Maori fished far offshore, with fishing sites identified as far as 48 miles from the coast. (Ibid. at 197.) One European observer reported in 1886 seeing the Maori use a net 1,900 metres long in the Bay of Plenty, catching 37,000 "good sized" fish and many other smaller ones. Another observer during this period reported a shark hunt involving 50 canoes and 2 boats carrying 1,000 Maori which caught 7,000 sharks.
(Ibid. at xiv.) The current efforts to restore fishing rights to the Maori involve judicial challenges, legislative activities, and negotiations among the different parties. (The ocean claims of other native peoples, particularly those in the Arctic areas, are collected and summarized in Valencia and VanderZwaag 1989.)
<section>International recognition of the rights of indigenous peoples</section>
Coalitions of indigenous people have been working industriously to seek international recognition of their claims. The two principal forums for these discussions have been
1. the International Labour Organisation (ILO), which sponsored the 1989 Convention Concerning Indigenous and Tribal Peoples in Independent Countries, and
2. the Working Group on Indigenous Populations of the UN Human Rights Commission's Sub-Commission on Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities.
The 1989 ILO Convention is written in somewhat general terms, because it is designed for all indigenous peoples in all their different situations, but it has some provisions that make it clear that these peoples have real rights to resources that must be respected. The Convention uses the term "land" to cover "the total environment of the areas which the peoples concerned occupy or otherwise use." (Article 13(2).) Article 14(1) states that:
The rights of ownership and possession of the peoples concerned over the lands which they traditionally occupy shall be recognised. In addition, measures shall be taken in appropriate cases to safeguard the right of the peoples concerned to use lands not exclusively occupied by them, but to which they have traditionally had access for their subsistence and traditional activities....
Article 7(1) is also relevant:
The peoples concerned shall have the right to decide their own priorities for the process of development as it affects their lives, beliefs, institutions and spiritual well-being and the lands they occupy or otherwise use, and to exercise control, to the extent possible, over their own economic, social and cultural development. In addition, they shall participate in the formulation, implementation and evaluation of plans and programmes for national and regional development which may affect them directly.
At the meetings of the Working Group on Indigenous Peoples, efforts have been underway for the past several years to draft a Universal Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, which would be adopted by the UN General Assembly. (ECOSOC 1990) The 1989 draft's listing of rights contained several provisions that are related to the claims to ocean resources of indigenous peoples:
14 The right to special measures to ensure their ownership and control over surface and substance of resources pertaining to the territories they have traditionally occupied or otherwise used including flora and fauna, waters and ice sea.
15 The right to reclaim land and surface resources or where this is not possible, to seek just and fair compensation for the same, when the property has been taken away from them without consent, in particular, if such deprival has been based on theories such as those related to discovery, terra nullius, waste lands or idle lands....
<section>Summary and conclusion</section>
The idea that native peoples have rights to offshore waters and resources is gaining greater recognition. The traditional rights of these peoples to these areas justify their claims to continue to make use of the offshore resources. Their traditions will continue to guide them in these uses, and they will endeavour to use these resources in a manner that is harmonious with, and respectful of, the oceans and the creatures that live in it.
Because the claims of indigenous peoples to participate in the bounty of the ocean are just and linked closely to their historical uses, it is appropriate to support these claims and seek modern and innovative ways to allow native peoples to govern ocean areas once again. The rest of us will also benefit by being able to observe and learn from an approach toward resource use that is not exploitive but rather is designed to recognize the kinship links between all parts of the natural environment.
<section>References</section>
Ada, Joseph. "Guam's EELZ." Pacific Sunday News, 27 October 1991, p. 14.
Amesbury, Judith R., and Rosalind L. Hunter-Anderson (Micronesian Archaeological Research Services). Native Fishing Rights and Limited Entry in Guam. Prepared for Western Pacific Regional Fishery Management Council, Honolulu, September 1989.
Anders, Gary C. Native Hawaiian Rights in a Regulated Fishery: An Exploratory Analysis. (Pacific Islands Development Programme, East-West Centre, Honolulu, August 1987)
Attorney General of Hawaii. Opinion letter written by the Department of the Attorney General, Land Transportation Division, to the Chair of the Board of Land and Natural Resources, State of Hawaii, 24 June 1982.
Economic and Social Council (ECOSOC, United Nations). Discrimination Against Indigenous Peoples (analytical commentary on the draft declaration on the rights of indigenous peoples (E/CN.4/Sub.2/1989/36) by Erica-Irene A. Daes for the Sub-Commission on the Prevention of Discrimination and Protection of Minorities), E/CN.4/Sub.2/1990139 (11 July 1990).
Freycinet, Louis de . Voyage Autour du Monde . Paris : Pill et Aine, 1 824 . Unpublished translation by Sylvia Cheng, Micronesian Area Research Center, University of Guam, Mangilao.
Guerrero, Lorenzo I. de Leon. Testimony on H.R. 3842 before the House Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries, 4 February 1992.
International Labour Organisation. Convention Concerning Indigenous and Tribal Peoples in Independent Countries. Adopted by the General Conference, 27 June 1989.
Jackson, Moana. "Indigenous Law and the Sea." In: Van Dyke, J.M., G. Hewison, and D. Zaelke, eds Freedom for the Seas in the 21st Century: Ocean Governance and Environmental Harmony, pp. 41-48.
King, Victoria. "Comment, The Commonwealth of the Northern Marianas Islands' Rights Under United States and International Law to Control Its Exclusive Economic Zone." University of Hawaii Law Review (1991), 13: 477.
Laenui, Poka (Hayden Burgess). "An Introduction to Some Hawaiian Perspectives on the Ocean." In: Van Dyke, J.M., G. Hewison, and D. Zaelke, eds Freedom for the Seas in the 21st Century: Ocean Governance and Environmental Harmony, pp. 91102
Meller, Norman. Indigenous Ocean Rights in Hawaii. Sea Grant Marine Policy and Law Report, University of Hawaii, December 1985.
Morgan, Joseph R. "Watersheds in Hawaii: An Historical Example of Integrated Management." In: Easter, K.W., John Dixon, and M.M. Hufschmidt. Resources Management: An Integrated Framework with Studies from Asia and the Pacific. Boulder: Westview Press, 1986.
Murakami, Alan T. "Konohiki Fishing Rights and Marine Resources." In: Kapilialoha MacKenzie, Melody, ed. Native Hawaiian Rights Handbook, pp. 173-195, Honolulu: Native Hawaiian Legal Corporation/Office of Hawaiian Affairs, 1991.
Murakami, Alan T., and Bob Freitas. Native Hawaiian Claims Concerning Ocean Resources. Paper presented to the Hawaiian Ocean Affairs Conference, East-West Center, Honolulu, 7 August 1987.
Nakayama, Masao, and Fredrick L. Ramp. Micronesian Navigation, Island Empires and Traditional Concepts of Ownership of the Sea. Report prepared for the Fifth Congress of Micronesia, Saipan, 14 January 1974.
Pacific Fisheries Consultants. 1990. Native Hawaiian Fishing Rights (Phases 1 and 2). Honolulu, July 1990.
United States vs. Washington
, 384 F. Supp. 313 (W.D. Wash. 1974), aff'd 520 F.2d 676 (9th Cir. 1975), cert. denied, 423 U.S. 1086 (1976).
Valencia, Mark J., and David VanderZwaag. Maritime Claims and Management Rights of Indigenous Peoples: Rising Tides in the Pacific and Northern Waters. Ocean and Shoreline Management, 12 (1989):125-67.
Van Dyke, J.M., G. Hewison, and D. Zaelke, eds Freedom for the Seas in the 21st Century: Ocean Governance and Environmental Harmony. Washington, DC: Island Press, 1993.
Waitangi Tribunal. Muriwhenua Fishing Report. New Zealand Government Printing Office, (June 1988), 22
<section>Part II: Ocean governance: National level</section>
<section>New structures for decision-making in integrated ocean policy</section>
Stella Maris Vallejo
<section>Introduction</section>
Present and future use and management of coastal nearshore and ocean environments are of increasing concern to governments all over the world. This chapter examines only one portion of this complex subject: the problems, experiences, and challenges confronted by nations in developing policy and institutions for managing these areas.
It is widely recognized that traditional institutional arrangements have considerable limitations in handling the complex policy and management requirements involved in the integrated development of ocean and coastal resources and the protection of the marine environment. There is a growing awareness of the need to overcome these limitations by designing alternative institutional arrangements that facilitate and support the formulation of an integrated marine policy, capable of undertaking long-term planning for ocean resources and space, of developing approaches for the anticipation and/or resolution of multiple use conflicts, and of enhancing the decision-making processes.
This chapter has three objectives: first, to review the institutional problems that affect existing administrative structures in their ability to integrate the marine dimension into national development strategies; second, to examine the evolutionary process of institution building through a review of national experiences and to analyse the effectiveness of current organizational arrangements; third, to discuss alternative institutional arrangements that could effectively enhance and support the process of integrated ocean planning and management, through a discussion of specific measures needed to strengthen the institutional capabilities of nations in the field of ocean affairs.
<section>I. Major institutional problems</section>
In the majority of countries the framework within which marine policy and management decisions are made is organized under a ministerial system of government, with two separate levels: ministries and agencies. The former are primarily responsible for outlining national policies within their particular spheres of competence while the latter - under the responsibility of the ministries - are responsible for the implementation of sectoral, single-purpose national goals drawn up by the ministries and the representative bodies. A third very important component, is the central planning body or equivalent institution, which is usually located at the ministerial level and is responsible for coordinating the formulation and implementation of national economic and social policy across sectors and has a strong influence on the allocation of budgetary funds among all governmental institutions (Vallejo 1988).
Beyond the governmental actors, non-governmental institutions particularly those associated with the academic, industry, banking, and research - play an important role in the complex agenda of ocean development. It is within this broad framework that the major institutional problems, confronted by both developed and developing countries, will be examined. These problems are both of a structural and a functional nature.
Institutional problems of a structural nature
The structural problems fall into two broad categories:
- the location of ocean affairs within the governmental bureaucratic hierarchy; and
- the formal structure of organizations vis-à-vis the effectiveness of their work.
Both problems have enormous political/administrative implications since, among other things, there is a direct relationship between the level of ocean involvement among governmental agencies and the political stature of ocean affairs.
Since in the majority of countries ocean affairs do not represent a central concern but are a matter subsidiary to other activities having higher priority, their political stature is generally low. This is immediately translated, among other things, into the location of the activity being at a low level within the governmental hierarchy, into administrative linkages with more powerful agencies whose authority/functions are not traditionally associated with marine affairs (for example, fisheries under the Ministry of Agriculture), as well as into certain patterns of resource allocation (limited personnel and low levels of funding), situations that mirror the limited political power exercised by agencies having marine-related responsibilities. These types of problems were extensively documented in Colombia (Knecht et al. 1984) as well as in other countries.
The status and position of ocean affairs might move to prominence within the governmental structure when one marine activity acquires unusual relevance, as for example, in the case of Peru in 1970, when the separation of the Ministry of Fisheries from Agriculture was a response to the importance of the fisheries at that time in the national economy. (Marriot 1990)
In terms of the implications of the formal structure of organizations vis-à-vis the effectiveness of their work and their relationship with other agencies, two other issues arise:
- sectoral and functional differentiations; and
- geographic and activity subdivisions.
Sectoral differentiation refers to governmental specialization or divisions generally associated with a variety of ocean and coastal uses (such as, fisheries, tourism, ports and harbours). In this sense, in the majority of countries ocean-related matters may easily fall within 15 to 25 sectoral divisions, thus preparing the ground for fragmentation of governmental responsibility and duplication of efforts.
These hierarchical and sectoral differentiations are further complicated by functional divisions which may also create separate agencies or bureaus, increasing even further the potential for fragmentation. To correct this situation, some administrative systems make use of semi-autonomous organizations, particularly in the fields of fisheries, port administration, and hydrocarbon development.
Finally, the geographic subdivision of sectoral functions further complicates the governing system due to the fact that current institutional arrangements do not span the land-sea interface. This translates not only into a lack of continuity in jurisdiction but also into multiple jurisdictions and laws that apply to various geographic limits. This, added to the division of authority among different governmental levels, creates difficulties in decision-making, thereby widening institutional gaps, encouraging overlaps, and allowing duplication of efforts.
Institutional problems of a functional nature
Institutional problems of a functional nature are associated with the basic functions that should be performed by marine institutions, namely, policy formulation, planning, and implementation. The most salient problem in policy formulation is the absence, in the majority of countries, of an overall ocean policy framework. Policy-making takes place at the sectoral level, is primarily reactive and is, therefore, formulated on a piecemeal basis without interagency consultation. As a result, marine-related policies have conflicting (or at best unrelated) objectives, resulting in environmental damage or simply ineffective implementation. (Vallejo 1991)
As a consequence, decision-making procedures are highly fragmented, suffer from internal duplication and overlap, and reflect competition between agencies. At the resource allocation and budget level, traditional economic sectors with long-standing support compete for funding, resources, and authority while marine-related activities, already dispersed at various levels of the governmental structure, become further diluted, fragmented, and compartmentalized.
Within the national planning process, the marine component is either one of the least developed or simply non-existent. This is due to the absence of clear policy goals, of designated priorities, and to the fact that the majority of countries lack experience in coastal and ocean planning. Coastal/ocean related inputs to national development planning are generally received only from a few and more traditional sectors, they are evaluated on a project-by-project basis, without an examination of cross-sectoral and cross-resources implications, and therefore are not structured within an overall perspective of marine development priorities. (Vallejo 1988) Concomitantly, there are no opportunities for making comparisons among sectors that are crucial for making rational investment choices and for establishing development priorities among various sectors. (Knecht et al. 1984)
At the implementation level, the major problem is the absence of coordination between the planning and the operational levels. From the top down, the absence of clear policy goals and of designated development priorities, coupled with the sometimes limited roles assigned to regional and local governmental agencies in the planning process, intensifies the limitations of the system. Moreover, enforcement mechanisms used in the application of norms and rules that regulate resources and uses are inadequate. All these problems touch upon issues concerning decentralization and autonomy in executing projects and activities, and the delegation of decision-making power to lower levels, coupled with feedback to higher levels than those engaged in the implementation process.
<section>II. National experiences in institution building</section>
Conscious of the limitations of traditional institutional arrangements and of the need to build some kind of organizational structure that would address in a more effective manner the tasks involved in coastal and ocean planning and management, an increasing number of countries have designed alternative institutional arrangements. Three major forces have driven these efforts:
- the need to formulate and implement comprehensive ocean policies;
- the experience acquired through the emergence of coastal area management programmes; and
- the challenge of integrating coastal and ocean planning under a single policy and governance system.
However, before examining the institution building processes that accompany these efforts, it should be clearly stated that conceptually, throughout this chapter, coastal area management (CAM) is considered to be an integral component of a national ocean policy. Thus, when referring to "ocean/coastal governance" it should be understood to include a coastal policy input into the overall national ocean policy-making process.
National efforts have led to a variety of institutional initiatives over the past two decades (see tables 1, 2, and 3). In examining, in depth, some of these cases, particular attention will be given to both the structural and functional aspects of the organizational arrangements as well as to the decision-making processes and the hierarchical relationships between the organizations involved. Criteria used for the selection of specific cases have been:
- information was available and clear;
- the case was representative of the mainstream of current institutional building efforts;
- the case was representative of a variety of institutional arrangements; and
- the institutional arrangements were of a distinctive character.
Table 1 Institution building initiatives for coastal area management (CAM)*
Country
Date of establishment
Institutional arrangement/Lead agency
China
State Oceanic Administration**
Australia
Port Phillip Authority***
United States
Coastal Zone Management Act****
France
Conservatoire de l'Espace Littoral des Rivages Lacustres
Costa Rica
Instituto Costarricense de Turismo
Philippines
Coastal Zone Management Committee
Thailand
Office of Coastal Land Development
China
State Council
Philippines
Coastal Zone Management Task Force
Sri Lanka
Coast Conservation Division
Philippines
Coastal Zone Management Inter-Agency Task Force
China
Working Group to prepare a Draft of a Coastal Zone Management Law
Sri Lanka
Coast Conservation Department
Argentina
Comisión Interdisciplinaria pare el Manejo Costero
Barbados
Coastal Conservation Unit
Colombia
Dirección General Marítima y Portuaria
Oman
Ministry of Commerce and Industry
Philippines
Regional office of the National Economic Development Authority
Grenada
Science and Technology Council
Indonesia
Ministry of Interior and other institutions
Saudi Arabia
Meteorology and Environmental Protection Administration
Singapore
Science Council of Singapore
Brunei Darussalam
Department of Fisheries and other institutions
Malaysia
Department of Fisheries and other institutions
Thailand
Office of National Environment Board and other institutions
Brazil
Secretariat of the Interministerial Commission for Sea Resources (SECIRM)
Ecuador
National Commission on Coastal Resources Management and other institutions
British Virgin Islands
Coast Conservation and Management Advisory Committee to assist the Minister of Natural Resources and Labor
Philippines
Department of Agriculture and other institutions
Antigua and Barbuda
Historical, Conservation and Environmental Commission
Oman
Ministry of the Environment
St. Kitts/Nevis
N.A.
Conservation Commission to advise the Minister who holds the portfolio for development
* The author regrets that some initiatives might have been omitted because the information was not available at the time of publication.
** The provincial Offices of Coastal Management are subordinate to the State Oceanic Ad ministration (SOA). The SOA Institute of Marine Environmental Research (Dalian) also works on coastal zone research.
*** Subsequent initiatives in coastal area management at the state level are not included in this list.
**** Individual initiatives at the state level are not included in this list.
However, a word of caution should also be said with respect to some of the cases under examination. First, with the exception of the Netherlands, Brazil, Hawaii, and Oregon, the institutional experiences examined have emerged as a result of international assistance projects. This particular circumstance should be taken into consideration when assessing the viability of current and sometimes transitional arrangements, within a long-term perspective. Second, it must be understood that most of the institution-building efforts have been under way for too short a time to permit an accurate assessment of their effectiveness.
Institutional arrangements for Ocean Management (OM)
Very few countries have attempted to design institutional arrangements for integrated ocean management, as for example the Netherlands.
Table 2 Institution building initiatives integrated ocean development*
Country
Date of establishment
Institutional arrangement/Lead agency
China
State Oceanic Administration**
Japan
Council for Ocean Development
Republic of Korea
Korea Institute of Science and Technology
Brazil
Interministerial Commission for Sea Resources
Portugal
Ministerio do Mar
Netherlands
Ministry of Transport and other institutions
New Zealand
Auckland Harbour Board and Auckland Regional Authority
Sweden
Swedish Marine Resources Commission
France
Ministry of the Sea
India
Indian Department of Ocean Development
Philippines
Cabinet Committee on the Law of the Sea
Brazil
National Maritime Commission
France
State Secretary of the Sea
New Zealand
Waitemata Harbour Maritime Planning Authority
Pakistan
National Maritime Affairs Coordination Committee
Canada
National Marine Council
Ireland
Department of the Marine
Portugal
Ministerio do Mar
* The author regrets that some initiatives might have been omitted because the information was not available at the time of publication.
** Prior to 1985 it was known as the National Bureau of Oceanography.
Table 3 Institution building initiatives for ocean management (OM)/coastal management (CAM)*
Country
Date of establishment
Institutional arrangement/Lead agency
United States
Ocean Resources Management
(State of Oregon)
Task Force
United States
Ocean and Marine Resources
(State of Hawaii)
Council
* The author regrets that some initiatives might have been omitted because the information was not available at the time of publication.
A variation of this type of arrangement is found in the States of Oregon and Hawaii in the United States which are attempting to integrate coastal area management and ocean planning and management under a common governance system. Despite the specific features that each case may present, there are commonalities among them. In all cases an inter-ministerial or interagency body, having advisory functions, or advisory and executive functions, has been designated at the top policy level. Implementation of the plan is, in general, delegated to line agencies.
In the Netherlands, the national government has the responsibility for the formulation of marine policies and the management of the Dutch part of the continental shelf. The institutional arrangements provide for wide participation and an effective decision-making system linking government, research institutions, and interest groups (see fig. 1). Efforts towards the formulation and implementation of an integrated approach to ocean management started in 1977 when the Minister of Transport and Public Works was appointed Coordinating Minister for North Sea Affairs. At the same time, the Cabinet established a Ministerial Board for North Sea Affairs composed of the ministers who were most involved in the formulation of North Sea policies. This Ministerial Board is advised by the Interdepartmental Commission for North Sea Affairs (ICONA) through the coordinating minister. Representatives of all ministries are members of this Commission, which has an independent chairman. In 1982,
two elements were added to this institutional framework:
- a special commission of Parliament to discuss North Sea policies with the coordinating minister; and
- a non-governmental advisory council, with members from interest groups and from the scientific community, to make recommendations to the coordinating minister.
It was stated explicitly that the decision to establish this framework did not affect the existing powers of the ministries involved. No executive powers have been given to the coordinating minister or to ICONA. As a consequence, decisions on North Sea policies (prepared by ICONA) which affect the powers of the various ministers, can only be reached unanimously. (van Hoorn 1989) In this decision-making system the role of ICONA, the principal advisory body comprised of 13 senior officials appointed by their ministers and headed by an independent chairman, a former prime minister, is a crucial one. Another of the most interesting features of the Dutch approach are the two elements that were added in 1982 which, on the one hand, institutionalize the participation of non-governmental organizations, and, on the other hand, facilitate the policy-making process by maintaining a continuous dialogue with Parliament.
Two elements characterize the development of ocean resources management policy in the United States: the decisive role played in a few states by coastal area management (CAM) agencies and the designation of a high policy level mechanism. In Oregon, the Act that established the Oregon Ocean Resources Management Programme calls for the development and adoption of a comprehensive ocean resources management plan, as a needed improvement to the Oregon CAM programme. In this task, the Department of Land Conservation and Development (DLCP) - the land use planning and coastal zone management agency - is designated as the primary agency for the coordination of the ocean resources programme.
The designation of a high policy level mechanism falls within the Governor's office in the case of Oregon. The Ocean Resources Management Task Force is composed of 21 members and is chaired by the Governor's Assistant for Natural Resources. It is charged with the responsibility of preparing:
- the Oregon Ocean Resources Management Plan - an overall plan for ocean resources and uses within the 200-mile US EEZ, including the Oregon territorial sea - which was completed in June 1990 and submitted for approval, as part of Oregon's coastal management programme; and
- the Territorial Sea Management Plan, a more detailed plan to manage resources in Oregon's territorial sea (3 miles), originally mandated to be completed and adopted by the State and Land Board by July 1991.
It has been stated that Oregon's approach, "a highly structured process to develop an Ocean Resources Plan and a Territorial Sea Plan, has been successful because of the effective use of state officials, local leaders and citizens activists in one forum." (Sorensen and Hershman 1990) The Task Force served:
both as an inter-agency discussion forum ... within a non-threatening decision-making structure that offers new opportunities for agency programme enhancement ... and as a useful sounding board for new ideas with the ocean user representatives, public members, academic representatives, and citizens who regularly attended task force meetings. (Hout 1990)
As a follow-up institutional arrangement, the Task Force recommended the establishment of an Ocean Policy Advisory Council composed of state agencies, ocean users, coastal local governments, and citizen representatives. This council would serve as a permanent mechanism to retain the values of a multidisciplinary, inter-agency, joint public-private approach to ocean planning, policy formulation and coordination.
In Hawaii, the designation of a high policy level mechanism falls within the Hawaii Ocean and Marine Resources Council which is a cabinet-level body created to advise the Governor and the State Legislature. It is charged with formulating the Hawaii Ocean Resources Management Plan which includes a unified set of ocean policies for the State while serving as a forum for multi-level government agency coordination and public participation. (Macdonald, Clark, and Shannon 1991)
A planning team composed of Council staff and consultants was organized to prepare a draft plan to be submitted for public input and comment. The plan recommends the establishment of an Office of Marine and Coastal Affairs in the Governor's Office. This Office would be the central authority to perform such functions as planning and policy development, inter-agency coordination, communication facilitation and conflict resolution. Two major implementation approaches are recommended: a regional approach that would not preclude or supersede existing State and County planning and management processes, but rather would be an extended component of these efforts; and a sector-specific approach with activities which would be evaluated and prioritized with designated lead agencies and coordinated with Federal, State, and County agencies. (Macdonald, Clark and Shannon 1991)
Institutional arrangements for Coastal Area Management (CAM)
The complexity of the process of CAM gives rise to important organizational considerations which are reflected in the institutional arrangements that have been designed for this purpose. This complexity derives from the fact that, contrary to ocean management where decision-making processes are highly centralized as they concern issues of prime national interest, coastal area issues require governance systems whose centre of gravity falls as much at the local level, where the problems are located, as at the national level, where broad policy priority-setting and financial decision-making is undertaken.
Between these two extremes of the administrative machinery, and depending on the nature of coastal issues and/or the relative degree of centralization/decentralization of the national planning system, other organizations such as regional planning bodies, other sectoral authorities and private entities are incorporated into the governance system (see table 4). Also technical organizations from various levels of government, such as national universities, as well as private research institutions, and international assistance groups provide support to the overall programme.
Table 4 Institutional arrangements for coastal area management in selected countries
Brazil
Malaysia
Ecuador
Philippines
Central government
Interministerial/Inter-agency Committees
X
X
X
X
Key organization responsible for plan formulation and/or implementation
X
Central Line Agencies
X
Provincial/State government
Inter-agency Committee
X
X
Key organization responsible for plan formulation and/or implementation
X
X
Provincial Line Agency
X
Regional government
Regional Steering Committee
X
Regional Planning Authority
X
X
Regional Line Agencies
X
Local government
Municipalities
X
X
X
Community participation
X
X
X
NGO's participation
X
X
X
Source: Adapted from White (1989).
A wide array of national experiences documents the above statement. In a number of countries where a CAM programme is in the process of being formulated or implemented, the institutional framework is based on executive agencies at middle or lower levels of the governmental hierarchy supplemented by inter-ministerial or interagency bodies located at a higher level. The functions of these bodies differ according to two distinctive planning approaches, better known as the top-to-bottom and the bottom-to-top approaches to planning, as do their associated decision-making processes through which:
1. broad guidelines for coastal management are formulated at the highest level of government, while responsibility for their implementation rests with authorities at lower levels of government as, for example, in the case of Brazil; or
2. the higher levels of government oversee the formulation of CAM plans which are developed by task-force groups at lower levels of government and later implemented by different organizations, at different levels of the implementation structure, as, for example, in the cases of the Philippines, Ecuador, and Malaysia.
This presupposes an interactive process between the central government and local/provincial/regional authorities. This process is facilitated by an array of intermediate mechanisms that perform a variety of functions.
In Brazil, the National Coastal Zone Management Plan (PNGC) was established in 1988 by the Inter-ministerial Commission for Sea Resources (CIRM) - a governmental agency headed by the Ministry of the Navy which includes representatives of 11 federal ministries. The programme, drawing on the participation of 17 coastal states, is supported by an elaborate institutional structure involving governmental agencies at various levels, scientific institutions, and non-governmental institutions. Recently, the PNGC was transferred to the Brazilian Institute of the Environment (IBAMA), linked to the President's Environmental Office.
The political/administrative structure of the PNGC is organized at three interactive levels. At the highest national level (federal government), CIRM's Secretariat - SECIRM - provides technical and financial support to the States, regional and municipal agencies, encouraging the creation of their own management plans according to a common methodology prepared by a Coordination Group comprised of a number of governmental agencies at the federal level. Consequently, the PNGC has a fundamentally decentralized character. The participation of the local governments and the community is the third level in the entire cycle of the political/administrative process, providing the feedback necessary for the revision of national priorities and guidelines. (d'Almeida Pires-Filho and Cycon 1987; Herz 1989)
Malaysia
's coastal management efforts include most of the State of Johore's coastline and its offshore islands. In order to facilitate maximum participation for decision-making and coordination of plan formulation, two committees were established, both at the national and State levels. The National Steering Committee, composed of representatives of line agencies at the federal level and the Economic Planning Unit of the Johore State Government (EPUJ), oversee the overall planning process while the State Consultative Committee, which includes heads of relevant State and federal departments of the State of Johore, participates in the development of the plan.
A planning team, composed of a full-time resource planner and scientific officer, representatives from federal and State governmental agencies, leaders of task-force groups, and universities, formulate the CAM plan. Integration of all levels of government is ensured by the participation of both, State/district and municipal personnel at planning workshops. The EPUJ plays an active role in plan formulation. Resource/site specific plans are prepared at the executive office of the EPUJ. The Director of the EPUJ and his deputy sit in both the National and State Consultative Committees and also act as Secretary for the Johore Government State Planning Committee. All development plan proposals submitted to the State government are analysed and processed by the EPUJ. The plans will first be endorsed by the State and Federal Committees before being transmitted to the State government for approval. The EPUJ has been identified as the body to coordinate the implementation of the plan.
(Ch'ng Kim Looi 1989)
A variant of this approach is seen in the Coastal Resources Management Programme of Ecuador. The Office of the Environment in the Ministry of Energy and Mines (DIGEMA) and the Coastal Resources Centre of the University of Rhode Island (USA) are responsible for the implementation of the project. The project is centred on six Zonas Especiales de Manejo (Special Management Zones ZEMs) established where there are conflicts that require issue-specific strategies and inter-agency coordination. The objective is the formulation of integrated development and management plans during a period of two years, after which a permanent institutional arrangement will be instituted for the implementation of such plans.
The current administrative structure of the project encompasses all levels of government and all interested parties. At the highest level of government the Comisión Nacional de Manejo de Recursos Costeros (National Commission on Coastal Resources Management) is an inter-ministerial group comprised of those governmental bodies with the greatest interests in coastal resources management, to provide high-level support to the project.
The Secretaria Técnica del PNRC
(Technical Secretariat of the Programme), which administers the various components of the programme, is an entity appointed by the General Secretariat of the Public Administration, within the Presidency of Ecuador. It plays a critical role as a link in the development of the programme, as a facilitator of cooperation among all levels and organizations involved, and as a promoter of new ideas, while at the same time it provides technical support both at the policy level in Quito and to the executive committees of the Special Management Zones in their new coastal management activities.
The third most important institutional element of this project is the Unidades de Conservación y Vigilancia (Ranger Corps) comprised of the enforcement personnel from all the responsible agencies, operating out of the Port Captain Offices which act as coordinators of each team of Rangers.
The institutional structure is completed by:
(i) The Comité Ejecutivo de las ZEMs (Executive Committee of the ZEMs) representing the major national agencies involved in the identified conflicts or resource abuse that lead to the creation of the ZEMs. Technical groups in the areas of artisan fisheries, sanitation/water quality, tourism, geomorphology/coastal processes, and ecology are charged with responsibility for the design of management plans.
(ii) The Comité Asesor de las ZEMs (Advisory Committee of the ZEMS) to work with the Executive Committee of each ZEM, comprised of citizens representing the full range of interests in the area, as well as the appropriate local, provincial, regional, and national agencies with interests in coastal issues but not with sufficient regulatory authority to justify membership on the Executive Committee. (Ecuador 1988; Arriaga 1989)
Two consecutive CAM-oriented plans were undertaken by the Philippines. The first one (1986-1989) focused on the Lingayen Gulf in Northern Luzon. The second (1989-current), on 12 priority bays, although plans will initially be implemented in 3 bays selected as pilot sites. As for the previous plans (Chua Thia-Eng 1989), the key organization responsible for plan formulation was the regional office at the pilot site of the National Economic Development Authority (NEDA; see fig. 2). A Regional Planning Steering Committee was formed, composed of the two provincial governors of the Gulf, representatives of 18 coastal countries, the head of NEDA in this region, technical experts, and other provincial officials. The Committee's main function was to oversee the formulation of CAM plans and to recommend them to the Provincial and Regional Councils for adoption. A regional planning team hierarchically under the Regional Steering Committee, and composed of a consultant (leader) and
other task leaders, developed general policy guidelines and a zoning scheme. The team also received reports and action plans from five task-force groups, each charged with the formulation of specific issue-oriented action plans. Each task-force group was headed by the Director of a provincial line agency or an expert from the region. The group, composed of representatives of line agencies, NGOs (non-governmental organizations) and the community, was supported by technical experts from a research team. Thus any action plan developed had to be channelled through:
- Task-force Group
- Planning Team
- Planning Steering Committee
- Provincial Development Councils
- Regional Development Council.
The adoption of the plans by the Regional Development Council meant that they were integrated into the regional development plans which then received national budgetary allocation for implementation. (Chua Thia-Eng 1989)
<section>III. Institution building for integrated ocean management</section>
Parts I and II provide information from which criteria for institution building can be derived. Both the constraints that affect current organizational arrangements and the success or the limitations demonstrated by new experiments in institution building contain a wealth of experience that should not be overlooked.
The review of institutional problems showed that the core of the matter resides in the need to strengthen the political and planning infrastructure for ocean development while improving the linkages among the various components of the marine governance system. The national experiences reviewed offer a number of approaches to this end. However, before discussing the specifics of institution building, three premises should be taken into consideration.
First, the existing institutional structure must be, as much as possible, the foundation for performing new ocean/coastal related tasks. All countries already have an institutional structure in place that can, with appropriate support, perform many or most of the functions involved in ocean policy formulation and implementation. Consequently, what is needed is the strengthening of the decision-making and communication processes rather than creating new institutions.
Second, strengthening the infrastructure for ocean development involves not only operational and structural adjustments but the provision of the necessary means - capital, technology, human resources, and managerial capabilities - so the institutional structure is capable of performing effectively what is demanded of it. In the majority of countries, these are lacking. Shortcomings are felt particularly in the availability of expertise and technical capacity to address coastal and ocean management issues, marine scientific research, information systems for planning and management, marine technology, and overall funding. (United Nations 1990)
Third, in designing institutional arrangements, provisions should be made for the incorporation of decision-making mechanisms that take account of the environmental and socio-economic linkages between the coastal and ocean areas, and that facilitate the formulation of management strategies which reflect these linkages and integrate coastal (land) and ocean (sea) management efforts.
Institution building strategy
With a structure in place, there is a need to devise an institution building strategy by which, ideally, the following aims are attained:
1. Ocean affairs are elevated within the public policy agenda so marine related policies may be discussed with a view to formulating an integrated national ocean policy.
2. Policy objectives and national priorities set forth in the national ocean policy are effectively integrated within national development planning.
3. All levels of government as well as all interested parties, whether in the private or public arena, are involved in the formulation and execution of an integrated ocean development or EEZ plan.
There are a number of institutional options to address the above challenges. The objectives are, on the one hand, to secure political will and a firm commitment to ocean development at the highest levels of government, and, on the other hand, to build capabilities and awareness within and outside the government and to increase the involvement of governmental and non-governmental organizations as well as of the business and academic communities, in ocean affairs.
National experiences indicate, for example, that the involvement of national and provincial/state planning bodies in the formulation of CAM plans in some South-East Asian countries was a very effective means to ensure government acceptance and to secure budget allocations. (Chua Thia-Eng 1989) That is a valid assessment; however, the objective goes beyond that. In other words, decision-makers should perceive that the marine sector can make an effective contribution towards attaining the interests and objectives of national development. Only in this way is there a chance that ocean affairs can have a prominent role in the overall strategy of a country.
The policy level
Integrated ocean policy requires the highest level of political direction and oversight in order to ensure its success. Although there is no ideal organization to perform the task of formulating an integrated ocean policy and of interagency coordination, national experiences indicate that one of the most effective mechanisms to achieve this objective is the establishment of an inter-ministerial, inter-agency board or council, at the highest political level, presided over by the minister in charge of the lead marine-oriented agency of the country. This body would bring together governmental and non-governmental organizations involved in ocean/coastal affairs. It should provide the necessary leadership and the opportunity and the leverage for policy priority-setting and inter-agency coordination to a degree that previously has not been possible. It may also establish technical committees to conduct studies as required by both policy and planning bodies.
The planning level
Traditionally, a national planning office, or a similar agency, has the responsibility for coordinating the formulation and implementation of national economic policy. Thus its influence extends over the whole of the marine sector. This agency is charged with the formulation and coordination of all general plans for economic and social development and for their presentation for evaluation and approval by higher authorities. In the formulation of their sectoral development plans, all public agencies should follow the planning norms established by the national planning agency. Through their responsibility for making investment recommendations, they have a strong influence in the allocation of budgetary funds among governmental institutions.
Moreover, planning agencies have long-standing experience in short-range and long-range policy analysis and government investment planning. This gives them a unique advantage over other sectoral agencies in terms of their capability to assess the interactions among ocean sectors, and to make comparisons among sectors, in order to establish priorities and to make investment decisions. This task, which is politically sensitive, can only be accomplished by an organization that is located at the highest level in the governmental structure (Knecht et al. 1984). Thus the highest planning body of the country is the ideal choice to give operational effectiveness to ocean policies by becoming the focal point for ocean/coastal planning. The rationale behind this assertion is the following (Vallejo 1991):
- responsibility for strategic ocean/coastal planning and for investment planning should be located at the highest level of the governmental hierarchy. This would include addressing the constraints faced by governments regarding funding of ocean and coastal planning and management efforts as well as allocation of scarce financial resources;
- to perform effectively, the planning body needs the authority to prepare and implement a comprehensive development plan;
- governing, inter alia, the inherent relationships of sustainable resource development and environmental protection; the improvement of the information base for management decisions; the development of human resources; and other needs as required;
- establishing the stages and sequences of development;
- coordinating technical studies in support of policy planning investment decisions, together with universities, technical institutions, and the business community;
- programming in terms of standards, time schedules, technological requirements, and other means to implement the plan effectively;
- to attain the goals of integrated ocean planning, the planning authority should use a number of instruments for strengthening the involvement of all levels of government and other interested parties.
In addition, experience suggests that the technical work of formulating and implementing a plan should be shared at two different levels of planning: while overall direction of the effort at the national level should be located at the national planning agency or other lead agency, the technical work of formulating and implementing the plan should descend through all levels of government and non-governmental entities who should actively participate in the planning and implementation phases. This applies particularly to CAM which requires administrative structures and decision-making systems that descend to the local level.
As illustrated in the cases examined (see tables 1-4), the degree of decentralization depends on various factors, such as the purpose of planning (for example, strategic planning, regional planning, local planning), the geographical locale of planning (such as a multiple resource region, an estuary, a semi-enclosed sea), the thrust of planning (for example, to zone resource locations and use patterns and then to set guidelines for resource use), and the planning approach selected (such as, bottom-to-top approach). Among all these types of situations, planning and management may be carried out by the central planning agency, by various levels of government, by special government agencies in partnership with the industry, and in some cases by local people.
Likewise, there may be several combinations in the degree of authority, dependence, funding, and responsibility of all agents involved in the planning and management process. The decision-making networks will also vary depending on the relative relevance of the issues vis-à-vis the scale and context of the judgements and decisions involved (for example priority development of offshore oil and gas over fisheries would be a decision taken at the highest level of government as it concerns strategic planning objectives).
Finally, integrated ocean planning, encompassing as it does a coastal component, cannot be conducted in isolation. Thus local planning cannot ignore broad national priorities; neither can overall ocean planning ignore the impact of ocean issues and policies on coastal communities. Truly integrated ocean planning should embrace this multiplicity of interdependent activities.
The implementation level
Implementation should fall, as much as possible, within the sphere of existing governmental organizations. However, when the structure does not cover the required decision-making functions and competences, the mandates of existing institutions should be extended, as required by programmes and projects. The arrangements should provide not only for the delegation of authority and responsibility to specialized bodies but also operational links for joint decision-making among the operational bodies, so the unity and consistency intended at the planning stage is maintained throughout the implementation process. (Machado Rego 1984) In this regard, the establishment of technical forums or executive committees to discuss technical issues have been a success in various projects (Organisation of American States 1984). Finally, monitoring of the execution of programmes and projects is an integral part of the continuous cyclic function of policymaking, planning, and implementation.
Follow-up and evaluation of plans and programmes are required in order to be able to translate the implementation experience into new policy criteria, if necessary.
Whatever institutional arrangement is devised, no planning and implementation will be effective without qualified staff, without managerial capabilities, or without funding, and a reasonable scientific and technological basis. As to human resources, high priority should be given to the development of expertise, particularly in the field of interdisciplinary approaches to policy formulation and implementation. A key priority is to build the necessary policy analysis and decision-making competence to deal with the complex problems and issues involved in the development of ocean/coastal areas. Likewise, in order to develop the necessary integrated planning expertise, national planning offices should consider the creation of special staff training programmes for the purpose of preparing their personnel (as well as personnel in other governmental and non-governmental organizations) for the tasks ahead. Some courses of this nature, especially designed for training of national
planners, are available through the assistance of international organizations. (Vallejo 1991)
The establishment of the necessary conditions to enable countries to fulfil their managerial responsibilities involves primarily the provision of information systems as well as enforcement capabilities. There is a need to improve the information available to decision-makers. This includes, inter alia, the establishment of appropriate databases, resource inventories, statistics, geographic information systems, as well as a permanent system for the exchange of managerial and technical information. Likewise, there is a need to develop enforcement capabilities for monitoring, control, and surveillance.
The mobilization of financial resources is a key issue in the process of institution building. Developing countries, in particular, have been hampered by the lack of internal finance, and have therefore depended entirely on external assistance, which often is insufficient to pursue the goals originally stated. Thus countries should not rely on external funds to support an extended commitment to ocean and/or coastal area management. Given the political will, an effort should be made to mobilize domestic resources proportionate to the dimensions of the undertaking. While this approach by no means precludes a continuing effort to obtain external funding, particularly for specific projects, it does suggest the need to devise means to generate domestic funds, for example, by increasing the regular budget of marine-oriented agencies, or the creation of a fund for the purpose of financing a new office at the national planning agency, and for marine development projects, in which
the participating agencies may provide some funding, plus new funds from general government sources. (Vallejo 1991) Investment from the private sector should also be considered.
<section>Conclusions</section>
The problems, experiences and challenges confronted by nations in developing policy and institutions for managing coastal, nearshore and ocean environments illustrate the complexity of this endeavour. The review of national experiences shows that there are no fixed institutional models that can be adopted by any country. Rather, there are alternative institutional options that should be tailored to the particular circumstances, institutional modalities, and traditions of each country.
Moreover, despite the limitations of traditional institutional arrangements, the growing number of institution building initiatives inspire confidence for the future. There is, however, still a long way to go. As governments go about building their ocean development programmes, there is still a need to strengthen existing institutions for the effective implementation of marine policies, for firmly integrating the marine dimension into national development planning, and for harnessing and maximizing the participation of all levels of government and other organizations dealing with ocean planning and management.
The challenge involves not only the development of new governmental capacity to address the complex issues and functions involved in ocean development, but also conducting in-depth research on governance arrangements for integrated ocean planning and management. This is a relatively new field of knowledge that requires our full attention in order to acquire more knowledge, to develop experience, and to provide innovative ideas.
<section>References</section>
Arriaga, L. "Integrated planning and management of Ecuadorian coastal zone." In: Sea-use planning and coastal area management in Latin America and the Caribbean: Report of the Expert Group Meeting. Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC). Santiago, Chile, 28 November - 1 December 1989.
Ch'ng Kim Looi. "Integrated coastal resource management plan: a first for Malaysia." In: Sixth Symposium on Coastal and Ocean Management (Charleston, South Carolina, 1989) Coastal Zone '89. New York: American Society of Civil Engineers, pp. 2177-2191.
Chua, Thia-Eng. "Developing coastal area management plans in the Southeast Asia region." In: Sixth Symposium on Coastal and Ocean Management (Charleston, South Carolina, 1989) Coastal Zone '89. New York: American Society of Civil Engineers, pp. 2192-2201.
d'Almeida Pires-Filho, I., and D.E. Cycon. "Planning and managing Brazil's coastal resources." Coastal Management 15 (1987) 61-74.
Ecuador. "Structure and objectives of a coastal resources management programme for Ecuador and a Manifesto of support for the programme." International Coastal Resources Management Project: Technical Report Series TR-D-2. Published jointly by: Ministerio de Energia y Minas (Ecuador), the University of Rhode Island Coastal Resources Management Center, and the US Agency for International Development. June 1988. p. 32.
Herz, R. "The Brazilian coastal management programme." In: Sea-use planning and coastal area management in Latin America and the Caribbean: Report of the Expert Group Meeting. Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC). Santiago, Chile: 28 November - 1 December 1989.
Hout, E. "Ocean policy development in the State of Oregon." Coastal Management 18 (1990), 255-266.
Knecht, R.W. et al. The management of ocean and coastal resources in Colombia: an assessment. Technical Report WHOI-84-21. Woods Hole, Mass.: Woods Hole Oceanographic Institution, 1984, p. 198.
MacDonald, C.D., A.M. Clark, and S. Shannon. "The Hawaiian ocean resources management programme: policy planning and inter-agency coordination." In: Seventh Symposium on Coastal and Ocean Management (Long Beach, Calif, 1991) Coastal Zone '91. New York: American Society of Civil Engineers, pp. 2633-2644.
Machado, Rego, P. "Institutional arrangements for marine resource development." In: Institutional arrangements for marine resource development. Report of the Expert Group Meeting on Institutional Arrangements for Marine Resource Development, United Nations Headquarters, 10-14 January 1983. Document No. ST/ ESA/144. New York: United Nations Department of International Economic and Social Affairs, 1984, pp. 66-87.
Marriot, A. "Third World Fisheries Departments." Marine Policy 14 (1990) no. 5: 453-454.
Organisation of American States. Integrated regional development planning: guidelines and case studies from OAS experience. Washington, D.C. 1984, p. 230.
Sorensen, D., and M. Hershman. "Ocean policy development in the State of Washington." Coastal Management 18 (1990), 297-310.
United Nations. Law of the Sea. Realisation of benefits under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea: Needs of States in regard to development and management of ocean resources. Report of the Secretary-General. Document No. A/45/712. New York: United Nations, 1990, pp. 16-18.
Vallejo, S.M. "Development and management of coastal and marine areas: An international perspective." Ocean Yearbook, vol. 7 (1988), pp. 205-222.
Vallejo, S.M. "Human resources development: an outline for a training course in ocean management." In: Sea-use planning and coastal area management in Latin America and the Caribbean: Report of the Expert Group Meeting. Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC). Santiago, Chile, 28 November - 1 December 1989.
Vallejo, S.M. "Institutional requirements for ocean development and environmental protection." In: The ocean change: management patterns and the environment. Presented at the Meeting of the International Geographical Union (IOU) Commission on Marine Geography, La Rabida, Spain, 22-25 May 1991.
van Hoorn, H. "Marine policies in the North Sea region: the experience of The Netherlands." In: Sea-use planning and coastal area management in Latin America and the Caribbean: Report of the Expert Group Meeting. Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC). Santiago, Chile, 28 November 1 December 1989.
White, A.T. "Comparison of coastal resources planning and management in the ASEAN countries." In: Sixth Symposium on Coastal and Ocean Management (Charleston, South Carolina, 1989) Coastal Zone '89. New York: American Society of Civil Engineers, pp. 2123-2133.
White, A.T., and N. Lopez. "Coastal resources management planning and implementation for the fishery sector programme of the Philippines." In: Seventh Symposium on Coastal and Ocean management (Long Beach, Calif. 1991) Coastal Zone '91. New York: American Society of Civil Engineers, pp. 762-775.
<section>Environmental accounting and valuation in the marine sector</section>
Ernst Lutz and Mohan Munasinghe
<section>I. Introduction and need for improved environmental valuation</section>
The efficient use of natural resources (both mineral and biological), as well as man-made capital and human resources, are a vital prerequisite for sustainable development. The recent worldwide concerns about the environment have emphasized the importance of incorporating the effects of environmental degradation into conventional decision-making, including those affecting the crucial area of marine resources. One key role of environmental economics is to help value environmental and natural resources more precisely, and internalize the costs and benefits of using such resources into the conventional calculus of economic decision-making. However, the pervasive influence of the environment and the broad range of environmental impacts raise formidable problems of analysis and practical implementation.
At the local or project (micro) level, environmental impact analysis (EIA) provides the means of redesigning development schemes and policies to minimize adverse environmental effects. On the intermediate level, sectoral and regional studies serve the same purpose. At the national level, environmental macroeconomic analysis and environmental accounting help us to develop better economy-wide policies for sound natural resource management. Finally, on the global scale, transnational and planetary models are being developed to deal with issues such as global warming, ozone layer depletion, protection of international waters, and preservation of biodiversity.
To achieve this spectrum of desirable activities, the development of better techniques for economic valuation of environmental impacts and assets is an important prerequisite. In particular, such valuation is the first step towards improving environmental accounting techniques, which in turn will facilitate more effective national and international decision-making to manage aquatic and other environmental resources. The reason is that current national accounting systems do not capture the value of natural resources and environmental degradation adequately, and therefore development strategies that rely on standard income accounting techniques may not result in sustainable development.
There are three specific shortcomings:
a. Natural and environmental resources are not included in balance sheets. Therefore, national accounts represent limited indicators of national wellbeing since they measure inadequately - or even "perversely" - changes in environmental and resource conditions.
b. Conventional national accounts fail to record the depreciation of natural capital, such as a nation's stock of water, soil, air, nonrenewable resources, and wild lands which are essential for human existence.
c. Clean-up costs (such as expenditure incurred to restore environmental assets) are often included in national income, while environmental damages are not considered.
The above shortcomings apply to resources and environmental assets that are national in character. In the case of marine resources that fall outside the 200-mile zones of national boundaries, various additional problems arise as these are considered common property by all countries.
With regard to marine resources some specific shortcomings are:
1. Currently the flow of fisheries output enters the national income accounts in terms of commercial value of the fish catch minus production costs. The stock of fish resources does not enter the system of national accounts (SNA). However, in the future such information could be shown in environmental satellite accounts linked to SNA.
2. If proper accounting of drift-net fishing had been done, it is likely that such accounting would have shown that this is not a profitable activity, since natural capital was being destroyed in significant amounts while only a few commercially valuable species were being used.
3. Oil spills reduce the natural capital, but rather than recording this fact, the present system records only clean-up expenditures which are included in the GDP as true value added (and which therefore cause GDP to increase when a clean-up is undertaken after an oil spill.)
The deficiencies in current national income accounting point to the need for an accounting framework that addresses the preceding concerns and permits the computation of measures such as an environmentally adjusted net domestic product (EDP) and an environmentally adjusted net income (ENI). Such measures would attempt to account better for the depreciation of both man-made and natural capital, exclude relevant categories of defensive environmental expenditures, and estimate damages to the environment as a result of economic activities. Taking into account depreciation of natural capital and calculating an EDP would likely result in a lower level of measured income and perhaps also a lower growth rate.
Improving the quality of decision-making to achieve a more sustainable development path requires:
1. Good understanding of the physical, biological, and social impacts of environmental degradation.
2. Better estimates of the economic value of damage to the environment, to improve the design of policies and projects, and arrive at environmentally sound investment decisions; and
3. Development of policy tools and strengthening of human resources and institutions to implement viable strategies and manage natural resources on a sustainable basis.
With regard to the first step of determining impacts, we have to rely on the skills of multi-disciplinary teams of engineers, ecologists, agronomists, social scientists, and other experts. The second step in considering environmental effects involves valuing the physical impacts and relationships. An environmental impact can result in a measurable change in production and/or change in environmental quality. A number of techniques have been developed to trace the welfare impacts of these changes, as described in the next section. The third step involving policy application, particularly in the marine sector is explored in section III.
<section>II. Classification of economic values and description of valuation techniques</section>
Conceptually, the total economic value of a resource consists of its (i) use, and (ii) non-use values. Use values may be broken down further into the direct use value, the indirect use value, and the potential use value (option value). One needs to be careful not to double-count both the value of indirect supporting functions and the value of the resulting direct use.^1 The categories of non-use values are existence and bequest values. Figure 1 shows the application of these concepts to the valuation of wetlands. There is a link between option and existence values, but they are distinct concepts. Option value is today's willingness-to-pay (WTP) of individuals, who wish to conserve the asset for future use. Existence value, on the other hand, is the perceived value of the environmental asset unrelated either to current or optional use, i.e. simply because it exists.^2
A variety of valuation techniques may be used to quantify the above concepts of value. As shown in table 1, valuation methods can be categorized on the one hand, according to which type of market they make use of and, on the other hand, considering how they make use of actual or potential behaviour.
From a more practical point of view the following organization of the same valuation techniques (according to analytical method) might be useful.
A Direct effects valued on conventional markets
The primary feature of the methods considered in this section is that they are directly based on market prices or productivity. This is possible where a change in environmental quality affects actual production or productive capability.
Table 1 Taxonomy of relevant valuation techniques
Conventional market
Implicit market
Constructed market
Based on actual behaviour
o Change of productivity
o Travel cost
o Artificial market
o Loss of earnings
o Wage differences
o Defensive expenditure
o Property values
Based on potential behaviour
o Replacement cost
o Contingent valuation
o Shadow project
Change in productivity
Development projects can affect production and productivity either positively or negatively. The incremental output can be valued by using standard economic prices. Barbier et al. (1991) have applied the change-in-productivity approach to a flood plain in Nigeria; Hodgson and Dixon (1988) applied it to sedimentation effects on coral diversity and, thus, fish production.
Loss of earnings
Changes in environmental quality can have significant effects on human health. Ideally, the monetary value of health impacts should be determined by the willingness of individuals to pay for improved health. In practice, one may have to resort to "second best" techniques such as using foregone earnings through premature death, sickness, or absenteeism (and increased medical expenditures, which can be considered a type of replacement cost). This approach may be relevant, for example, when considering road and industrial plant safety, and projects that affect air pollution in major cities of developing countries.
The "value-of-health" approach is often questioned on ethical grounds. It is argued that it dehumanizes life, which is considered to have infinite value. In practice, however, society implicitly places finite values on human life and health in policy and projects decisions that affect the environmental quality, workers' safety, or health. If this was not so, we would be justified in spending all of GDP on health improvements.
Actual defensive or preventive expenditures
Individuals, firms, and governments undertake a variety of "defensive expenditures" in order to avoid or reduce unwanted environmental effects. Environmental damages are often difficult to assess, but information on defensive expenditures may be available or can be obtained at lesser cost than direct valuations of the environmental goods in question. Such actual expenditures indicate that individuals, firms, or governments judge the resultant benefits to be greater than the costs. The defensive expenditures can then be interpreted as a minimum valuation of benefits.^3 However, caution is advisable with this approach, especially in cases where defensive expenditures are arbitrarily mandated by governments, having little or no relationship to market forces or free choices by informed economic agents.
B Potential expenditure valued on conventional markets
Replacement cost
Under this approach, the costs that would have to be incurred in order to replace a damaged asset, are estimated. The estimate is not a measure of benefit of avoiding the damage in the first place, since the damage costs may be higher or dower than the replacement cost. However, it is an appropriate technique if there is some compelling reason as to why the damage should be restored, or certainty that this will occur.
The replacement cost approach could be applied in a variety of cases. One example would be to use the cost of an artificial fish nursery to estimate the value of coastal wetlands that might be impaired by a project.
Shadow project
When evaluating projects that have negative environmental impacts, this approach involves the design and costing of one or more "shadow projects" that provide or substitute environmental services to compensate for the loss of environmental assets under the ongoing projects. This approach is essentially the same as the replacement cost approach and is increasingly being mentioned as a possible way of operationalizing the concept of sustainability at the project level. It assumes that there is a constraint to maintain environmental capital intact, and therefore could be most relevant when "critical" environmental assets are at risk.
C Valuation using implicit markets
The methods and techniques described in this section use market information indirectly. The approaches discussed are the travel cost method, the property value approach, the wage differential approach, and uses of marketed goods as surrogates for non-marketed goods. Each technique has its own particular advantages and disadvantages, as well as requirements for data and resources. The task of the analysis is to determine which of the techniques might be applicable to a particular situation.
Travel cost
This approach is most often connected with recreational analysis in industrial countries, where it can serve to measure the benefits produced by recreation sites (ocean resorts, parks, lakes, forests, wilderness). Essentially the same approach can also be used to value "travel time" in projects dealing with fuel, wood, and water collection.^4
The surrounding area of a site is divided into concentric zones of increasing distance. (Visiting the various zones involves different travel costs.) A survey of users, conducted at the site, determines the zone of origin, visitation rates, travel costs, and various socioeconomic characteristics. Users close to the site would be expected to make more use of it, because its implicit price, as measured by travel costs, is lower than for the more distant users. Based on the analysis of the questionnaires, a demand curve can be constructed and the associated consumers' surplus determined. This surplus represents an estimate of the value of the environmental product in question.
Property value
This approach is also referred to as a hedonic price technique, and it is a subset of the more general land value approach. The objective here is to determine the implicit prices of certain characteristics of properties. In the environmental area, the aim of the method is to place a value on the benefits of environmental quality improvements or to estimate the costs of a deterioration.
The property value approach has been used to analyse the effects of air pollution in certain areas. Where pollution is localized, the method compares prices of houses in affected areas with houses of equal size and similar neighbourhood characteristics elsewhere in the same metropolitan area. The approach is based on the assumption of a competitive real estate market, and its demands on information and statistical analysis are significant; therefore, applicability to developing countries is limited.
Wage differential
This approach is based on the theory that in a competitive market the demand for labour equals the value of the marginal product, and that the supply of labour varies with working and living conditions in an area. A higher wage is therefore necessary to attract workers to locate in polluted areas or to undertake more risky occupations. Again, as in the case of the property value approach, the wage differential approach can only be followed if the labour market is very competitive. Also, the approach only reflects private valuation of health risks, not social ones.
Marketed goods as substitutes for non-marketed goods
There are situations where environmental goods have close substitutes which are marketed, and therefore the value of the environmental product in question can be approximated by the observed market price. For example, the value of a non-marketed fish variety can be valued at the price of the most similar fish being sold in local markets.
D Valuation using a constructed market
Contingent valuation
In the absence of people's preferences as revealed in markets, the contingent valuation method tries to obtain information on consumers' preferences by posing direct questions about willingness to pay. Basically it asks people what they are willing to pay for a benefit, and/or what they are willing to accept by way of compensation to tolerate a cost. This process of "asking" may be either through a direct questionnaire/survey, or by experimental techniques in which subjects respond to various stimuli in "laboratory" conditions. What is sought are personal valuations of the respondent for increases or decreases in the quantity of some product, contingent upon a hypothetical market. Willingness to pay is constrained by the income level of the respondent, whereas willingness to accept payment for a loss is not constrained. Estimates of willingness to accept tend to be several times willingness-to-pay estimates.
Pearce and Markandya (1989) compared the contingent valuation method with others, more market-based methods, and found that in seven studies done in industrial countries the overlap of estimates is complete, if accuracy is expressed as plus or minus 60 per cent of the estimates computed. This result provides some reassurance that a rigorously applied contingent valuation method, while not being very precise, nevertheless can produce valuations that are of the right order of magnitude. This may be sufficient to rule out certain alternative projects or favour others, which can be valuable in decision-making.
The contingent valuation method has certain shortcomings, including problems of designing, implementing and interpreting questionnaires.^5 While its applicability may be limited, there is now considerable experience in applying this survey-based approach in developing countries, for example, to evaluate the quality of supply of potable water and electricity services.^6
In certain circumstances, the contingent valuation method may be the only available technique for benefit estimation, which can and has been applied to common property resources, amenity resources with scenic, ecological or other characteristics, or to other situations where market information is not available.
Artificial market
Such markets could be constructed for experimental purposes, to determine consumer willingness-to-pay (WTP) for a product or service. For example, access to a marine park could be offered to different visitors at various price levels, to determine the value placed on the recreation facility. This approach is not used frequently.
<section>III. Practical application of techniques for valuing marine resources</section>
A Existing case-study work
The limited work that has been done in dealing with accounting for and valuing marine resources has tended to be more descriptive and/ or conceptual rather than empirical. Such studies have focused primarily on wetlands, secondly on resources close to the shoreline, and only rarely on ocean resources. Also, most of the work deals with marine resources of industrial countries.
A recent article by Costanza et al. (1989) used both WTP and energy analysis-based methodologies to value wetlands in Louisiana. They indicated a broad range within which the value of the wetlands lost per year was established. Also, Turner (1988, 1990, 1991) has directed a number of efforts on how to value wetlands and how their management can be improved. Barbier et al. (1991) undertook a wetland valuation exercise in a developing country (Nigeria).
Another strand of work has attempted to assess the recreation value of marine resources. Again focusing on wetlands, Bergstrom et al. (1990) assessed the recreational value of Louisiana coastal wetlands within a total economic value framework which divided components into current use, nonuse, and future use values. Their results indicated sizable aggregate economic values (of about $145 million annually) for Louisiana wetlands. Other work includes that of Doeleman (1990) who valued marine wilderness areas, and Van't Hof (1985) who analysed marine parks and protected areas in the Caribbean region. The latter concluded that marine parks have high cost-benefit ratios. Another related piece is that by Hodgson and Dixon (1988) who researched the benefits of fisheries and tourism in Palawan, Philippines.
Pollution damage has been evaluated by Grigalunas et al. (1990) who applied an integrated systems/economics damage assessment model to study the impact of oil and hazardous substance spills in the Yellow Sea off Korea, and Kahn (1987) who estimated the economic damage from herbicide pollution in the Chesapeake Bay (USA). There have been several attempts to estimate the damage from various oil spills on the oceans (e.g., see the Oil and Gas Journal, 1989, concerning the Exxon Valdez incident).
B Challenges for empirical work
At the empirical level, some of the main challenges to improved accounting of marine resources arise because:
a. A large part of the oceans are outside the territorial limits of individual countries and are being exploited like a common property resource (in terms of fishing), and also used as a (costless) sink for wastes.
b. The multi-purpose nature of the resource. The oceans produce not only fish but a large number of other social (recreation, etc.) and climatological services, and they are an important pool of biodiversity. The same argument holds true for coastal resources such as mangroves that produce, among other things, wood (which can be processed into charcoal), while also being important as breeding grounds for shrimp and fish, as bird sanctuaries, etc.
c. Fish, other organisms, and pollutants are not confined to national boundaries, making it more difficult to prepare precise accounts, even for the marine resources within the 200-mile limit of nations.
d. Measuring stocks of fish and other organisms is difficult, and so is the determination of the sustainable level of exploitation.
e. There are significant limitations in knowledge on how pollution physically affects marine output, biodiversity, and the various services.
f. Even in areas where physical information is available, economic valuation in money terms is often difficult or sometimes not possible.
In summary, partly because of the difficulties mentioned above, only limited empirical work has been done to account for and to value marine resources. More attention should be given to this area, in parallel to efforts in international law, as well as to institutional, project, or policy interventions at the national or international level.
<section>IV. Conclusions and recommendations</section>
1. Accounting for marine resources and valuing their contribution to generating sustainable income and providing other services has been neglected in the past but should be given more attention in the future.
2. Better accounting for marine resources both inside and outside of national territorial waters will face conceptual and empirical problems. Nevertheless, work should be pursued in this area, perhaps leading up to an international workshop in a year or two.
3. For oceans outside territorial waters, one should work towards the goal of establishing Ocean Accounts. Various international agencies gather information concerning the oceans, and one of them (such as FAO or the United Nations Statistical Office) could be assigned to take the lead in preparing such accounts. In such accounts, extraction of fish for processing and/or sale in countries would represent an export, and the dumping of wastes would represent an import that reduces the natural capital of the ocean in question. An international agency should be given the responsibility of establishing these accounts in collaboration with other agencies. A paper might be commissioned to review existing databases and suggest which agency should be appointed the lead agency to pursue this initiative.
<section>Notes</section>
1. For a discussion and example of this see Aylward, B., and E. Barbier, "Valuing Environmental Functions in Developing Countries," forthcoming in Biodiversity and Conservation.
2. See for example Randall, A., and J.R. Stoll, "Existence Value in a Total Valuation Framework," in Managing Air Quality and Scenic Resources at National Parks and Wilderness Areas, Westview Press, 1983.
3. Considerable work is going on to identify defensive expenditures. Such expenditures by firms are treated in the current System of National Account (NSA) as intermediate cost and are therefore not part of value added or final output. Defensive expenditures by households and governments, on the other hand, are treated as final expenditures and included in GDP. This practice is being questioned, and proposals are being discussed to change this (see Lutz, E., and M. Munasinghe, "Accounting for the Environment," Finance and Development 28 (1991) no. 1:19-21).
4. For an example, see Hanley, N.D. "Valuing Rural Recreation Benefits: An Empirical Comparison of Two Approaches," Journal of Agricultural Economics 40 (1989), no. 3: 361-374.
5. See, for example, several papers appearing in: The Energy Journal, Special Issue on Electricity Reliability, vol. 9, December 1988.
6. For examples of contingent valuation studies see the case-studies on Haiti and Kenya in this chapter and Munasinghe, M., Electric Power Economics, London: Butterworths, 1990, chapters 2, 7, 8, and 9.
<section>Select bibliography</section>
Aylward, B. The Economic Value of Ecosystems: 3 - Biological Diversity, LEEC Gatekeeper Series No. GK91-03, IIED/UCL London Environmental Economics Centre, June 1991.
Aylward, B., and E. Barbier. "Valuing Environmental Functions in Developing Countries." Biodiversity and Conservation 1(1992), no. 1: 34.
Barbier, E.B. The Economic Value of Ecosystems: 2 - Tropical Wetlands, LECC Gatekeeper Series No. GK89-02, August 1989.
Barbier, E.B. "The Economics of Controlling Degradation: Rehabilitating Gum Arabic Systems in Sudan." LEEC Discussion Paper No. DP90-03, IIED/UCL London Environmental Economics Centre, June 1990.
Barbier, E.B. The Economic Value of Ecosystems: 2 - Tropical Forests, LEEC Gatekeeper Series No. GK91-01, January 1991.
Barbier, E.B., W.M. Adams, and K. Kimmage. "Economic Valuation of Wetland Benefits: The Hadejia-Jama'are Floodplain, Nigeria." LEEC Discussion Paper No. DP91-02, April 1991.
Barde, J.P., and D.W. Pearce (eds) Valuing the Environment: Six Case Studies. London: Earthscan, 1991.
Bergstrom, J.C., J.R. Stoll, J.P. Titre, and V.L. Wright. "Economic Value of Wetlands-based Recreation." Ecological Economics, 2,1990, 129-147.
Costanza, R., S.C. Fraber, and J. Maxwell. "Valuation and Management of Wetland Ecosystems." Ecological Economics, 1,1989, 335-361.
Dixon, J.A., and P.B. Sherman. Economics of Protected Areas. Washington, D.C.: Island Press, 1990.
Doeleman, J.A. "On the Economic Valuation of Marine Wilderness," Research Report or Occasional Paper No. 174. Australia: University of Newcastle, 1990.
Durojaiye, Ramidele O., and Anthony E. Ikpi. "The Monetary Value of Recreational Facilities in a Developing Economy: A Case Study of Three Centers in Nigeria." Natural Resources Journal 28 (1988), no. 2: 315-328.
Finney, C.E., and W. Western. "An Economic Analysis of Environmental Protection and Management: An Example from the Philippines." The Environmentalist 6 (1986), no. 1.
Grigalunas, T.A., J.J. Opaluch, S.C. Chung, D. French, and M. Reed. "Adaptation of an Integrated Ocean Systems/Economics Damage Assessment Model to Korea: Some Preliminary Results." Ocean and Shoreline Management 14 (1990), 51-57.
Hanley, N.D. "Valuing Rural Recreation Benefits: An Empirical Comparison of Two Approaches." Journal of Agricultural Economics 40 (1989), no. 3, 361-374.
Hodgson, G., and J.A. Dixon. Logging versus Fisheries and Tourism in Palawan: An Environmental and Economic Analysis. EAPI Occasional Paper No. 7. Honolulu: East-West Center, 1988.
Kahn, J.R. "Economic Damage from Herbicide Pollution in Chesapeake Bay." Project Appraisal, vol. Z. no. 3, September 1987, pp. 142-152.
Kramer, R.A., E. Mercer, and P. Shyamsundar. "Economic Valuation of the Environmental Impacts of Development Projects: Study Design, Concepts and Progress." Briefing Paper, 24 April 1991.
Lutz, E., and M. Munasinghe. "Accounting for the Environment." Finance and Development 28 (1991), no. 1: 19-21.
Mercer, E. "An International Nature Tourism Travel Cost Model: Estimating the Recreational Use Value of a Proposed National Park in Madagascar." Duke University, April 1991.
Munasinghe, M. Electric Power Economics. London: Butterworths, 1990, chapters 2, 7, 8, and 9.
Munasinghe, M. "Managing Water Resources to Avoid Environmental Degradation: Policy Analysis and Application." Environment Working Paper No.41. Washington, D.C.: World Bank, 1990.
Oil and Gas Journal
, Vol. 87, 10 April 1989.
Pearce, D.W. "An Economic Approach to Saving the Tropical Forest." LEEC Paper 90-06, 1990.
Pearce, D.W., and A. Markandya. Environmental Policy Benefits: Monetary Valuation. Paris: OECD, 1989.
Peters, C.M., A.H. Gentry, and R.O. Mendelsohn. "Valuation of an Amazonian Rainforest." Nature, 339, 29 June 1989, pp. 655-656.
Phelps, C.E. "Death and Taxes: An Opportunity for Substitution." Journal of Health Economics, 7, 1988, pp. 1-24.
Randall, A., and J.R. Stoll, "Existence Value in a Total Valuation Framework." In: Managing Air Quality and Scenic Resources at National Parks and Wilderness Areas. Westview Press, 1983.
Ruitenbeek, H.J. "The rainforest supply price: A tool for evaluating rainforest conservation expenditures." Ecological Economics 6 (1992): 57-78.
The Energy Journal
. Special Issue: "Electricity Reliability," vol. 9, December 1988.
Tobias, Dave, and Robert Mendelsohn. "Valuing Ecotourism in a Tropical Rainforest Reserve." Ambio 20 (1991), no. 2.
Turner, K. "Economics and Wetland Management." Ambio 20 (1991), no. 2: pp. 59-63.
Turner, K. "Market Intervention Failures in the Management of Wetlands." Environment Committee, Group of Economic Experts, OECD, May 1990.
Turner, K. "Wetland Conservation: Economics and Ethics." In: D. Collard, D.W. Pearce and D. Ulph, eds Economics, Growth and Sustainable Developments: Essays in Memory of Richard Lecomber. London: MacMillan, 1988, pp. 121-159.
Whittington, D., J. Briscoe, X. Mu, and W. Barron. "Estimating the Willingness to Pay for Water Services in Developing Countries: A Case Study of the Use of Contingent Valuation Surveys in Southern Haiti." Economic Development and Cultural Change 38 (1990), no. 2.
Willis, K.G., and G.D. Garrod. "An Individual Travel-Cost Method of Evaluating Forest Recreation." Journal of Agricultural Economics 42, no. 1, 1991, pp. 33-42.
World Bank. "Brazil: An Analysis of Environmental Problems in the Amazon." Vol. 2, annex 5, p. 5.
World Bank. Operational Manual Statement No. 4.00, annex A.
Van't Hof, T. "The Economic Benefits of Marine Parks and Protected Areas in the Caribbean Region." In: Proceedings of the Fifth International Coral Reef Congress, Tahiti, 1985, pp. 551-555.
<section>Addendum: A reaction from Max Börlin</section>
<section>1. The need for environmental accounting</section>
"The true value of the marine environment is not understood and the full social costs of using it and the resources it supports are not taken into account. Too often, scientific data are available but are not synthesized in a way to be understood and integrated into coastal management processes."^1 This statement in IUCN/UNEP/WWF's Second World Conservation Strategy Project is shared by a participant from the UN Office for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea at UNCED's PrepCom³ in Geneva: "So many developing countries still don't know what's out there, and are still not in a position to conduct real resource assessments, to really collect all the information and data to be used as a major economic component of their development plans." These shortcomings are rightly stressed by Lutz and Munasinghe.
<section>2. Physical accounting in the marine sector</section>
2.1 Physical accounting a prerequisite of monetary accounts
Lutz and Munasinghe mention the need for relevant data in physical terms. In this regard, UNESCO's Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC), in cooperation with UNEP and WHO, studied for UNCED ways and means of strengthening observation systems for the marine sector, i.e., through the establishment of a Global Ocean Observing System (GOOS),^2 and the Satellite System of Integrated Environmental and Economic Accounting (SEEA),^3 which aim at covering comprehensively the total stock of reserves of natural resources and changes therein, even if they are not (yet) affected by the economic sector.
GOOS is being developed as a comprehensive, integrated system for collecting, analysing and distributing physical, chemical and biological data from the ocean world, including the coastal zones and enclosed and semi-enclosed seas. It consists of five "modules" for living marine resources, coastal zones management and development, health of the ocean, ocean services, and climate prediction.
For UNCED, IOC has drafted a "Declaration on a Global Ocean Observing System (GOOS)" reading: "Recognizing the present evidence of anthropogenic environmental change in the oceans and the key role of the oceans in determining the earth's climate, UNCED should assign a high priority to planning, implementing and maintaining a Global Ocean Observing System and request IOC to continue the development of this system, in cooperation with other international organisations."^4 PIM XIX may wish to subscribe to this Declaration.
2.2 Indicators in physical dimension
"A problem lies in converting the values of certain natural assets to monetary terms so that they can be properly compared with values resulting from market transactions. Until there is further progress in solving this problem, sustainability indicators will need to be used."^5 Given this fact, IUCN/UNEP/WWF^6 request the elaboration of an ecological sustainability indicator covering ecological life-support systems, biodiversity, sustainable use of renewable and minimum depletion of non-renewable resources, and acceptance of the carrying capacity of supporting ecosystems.
Examples of other non-monetary indicators are:^7
a. OECD's Preliminary Set of Environmental Indicators comprising 18 environmental indicators (of which "river quality," "protected areas," and "threatened species" concern the stock of environmental resources, and the other 15 flows such as "fish catches") followed by 7 key indicators reflecting economic and population changes of environmental significance. At the macro level, priority is being given to measures relevant for the development of satellite accounts to the system of national accounts, and for work on natural resource accounts (for example, on forest resources).^8
b. The World Resources Institute's Vulnerability Index measuring vulnerability to anthropogenic change and abundance of tropic coastal ecosystems in some 100 countries.
c. The Index for greenhouse gas net emissions published by World Resources Institute in collaboration with UNEP and UNDP; as the Delhi-based Centre for Science and Environment remarks,^9 such an index requires a value-loaded allocation of the earth's natural ability to cleanse the atmosphere as well as equating "luxury emissions," e.g., of automobiles, with "survival emissions" e.g., from paddy fields or cattle in subsistence farming.
However, disaggregated physical accounts result in an unusable mountain of statistics, and do not enable economic policymakers to integrate resource and environmental considerations into economic, monetary decisions.^10 For that purpose, aggregation through monetarization is required, as discussed by Lutz and Munasinghe.
PIM XIX could support the elaboration of non-monetary indicators for the marine sector prepared in parallel with monetary environment accounts.
<section>3. Valuation techniques</section>
The paper of Lutz and Munasinghe discusses valuation techniques. These methodologies should be evaluated in the light of Giarini's "Theory of Wealth and Welfare" and of the functional value of marine resources.
3.1 The theory of wealth and welfare
In the terminology of the theory of wealth and welfare developed by Giarini in his "Dialogue on Wealth and Welfare,"^11 "Dowry and Patrimony" (D&P), i.e. the source of wealth and welfare, is the total stock of natural (physical), biological, man-made (cultural), and monetarized (capital) D&P, and has, owing to the synergy between the different D&P components, "utilization value." The latter is the utility gained from a stock of products or services for the period of duration of their lifetime whatever their destination, and regardless of the fact that they are paid for or priceless. Thus, utilization value is the measure of real wealth and welfare, and results from the (objective) availability or level of D&P and the (subjective) accessibility to it (both material and cultural).
Factors affecting the estimate of utilization value in the context of, for example, a decision to exploit or abandon an offshore resource include the detection of an offshore resource, resource characteristics, status of current technology, socio-political conditions, economic aspects, and capacity and demand aspects. Similarly, the value of oceans for human nutrition might depend on the existence of indigenous cooperatives for fishing and the existence of man-made infrastructure such as ports. This illustrates the importance of synergy between natural and man-made accumulation of D&P as mentioned earlier.
To measure or indicate welfare requires three steps:
a. First define a new theory of value based on a synthesis of economics and ecology and of priced and non-priced activities based on the new perspectives in terms of the service economy (utilization value).
b. Then devise the most appropriate methods and possibilities of measurement (selection of appropriate monetary and non-monetary indicators).
c. Finish with regular reports comparable to the one done by the World Bank on the basis of GNP, but based on a wider notion of economic development and providing an analogous instrument within a broader economic framework, thus opening the possibility of identifying new operational forms of managing the common heritage of mankind as represented by the oceans.
3.2 Earth's rights
Lutz and Munasinghe mention non-use or intrinsic values of marine resources, currently defined as values that reside "in" something independently of any actual or potential use, but which is captured by people through their preferences in the form of non-use values. ^12
In this context, IUCN/UNEP/WWF's Strategy for Sustainable Living^13 proposes respecting and caring for community life and asserts our responsibility towards the other forms of life with which we share this planet. Similar views had been expressed at WWF's Anniversary Celebration in Assisi 1987, and UNCED is working at the "Earth Charter: The Rio de Janeiro Declaration on Environment and Development" that stresses our common, but differentiated responsibility towards the Earth as a whole.
The concept of "utilization value" in the "Dialogue on Wealth and Welfare"^14 of this new "economics of the common heritage of mankind," covers physical and non-physical uses of natural D&P. It insists on the cultural component of D&P and on the integration of ecology and the economy and hence, also copes with the Earth's rights.
3.3 The functional value of marine resources
Considerable work is going on to identify environmental defensive expenditures^15 and the costs of environmental damages. On the positive side increasing attention is being given to the functional value of marine resources, since they help satisfy physiological and psychological human needs through their:
a. Regulation functions: regulation of certain climatic conditions; storage and recycling of organic matter, nutrients, inorganic human waste; maintenance of biodiversity; providing nursery, feeding, and resting habitats.
b. Carrier functions.
c. Production functions: providing oxygen, mineral resources, tidal, wild plants, and animals.
d. Information functions: providing opportunities for "recreative," spiritual/religious, cultural, educational, and scientific activities.
The theory of wealth and welfare also stresses the importance of the functional value of marine resources and, more generally, of service activities (as opposed to production activities).
3.4 Summarizing
Lutz and Munasinghe recall shortcomings of the available valuation techniques. Their role is not to capture the long-term, global functional value of natural resources. More generally, a systematic evaluation and adjustment in the light of the concept of utilization value, which includes functional values, is needed.
<section>4. Environmental accounting at national level</section>
An accounting framework is needed that permits the computation of measures such as an environmentally adjusted net domestic product (EDP) and an environmentally adjusted national income (ENI), which account for natural capital and its depreciation, relevant categories of defensive environmental expenditures, and damages to the environment as a result of production and consumption activities. Thus, resource depletion and environmental degradation would enter into the traditional macro-economic measures of gross domestic product (GNP) and national income (NI).
This suggestion of Lutz and Munasinghe converges with draft recommendations presented by the UN Statistical Office and UNCED Secretary-General stating that the integration of sustainability concerns in macroeconomic management requires the establishment of better measurement of the crucial role played by the environment as a source of natural capital and as a sink for by-products generated during production and consumption activities . The goal is a Satellite System of Integrated Environmental and Economic Accounting (SEEA) with the following steps:
a. segregation and elaboration of all environment-related flows and stocks appearing in present traditional monetary accounts;
b. linkage of physical resource accounting with monetary environmental accounting (as mentioned in pare 2.1 above);
c. assessment of environmental costs and benefits;
d. accounting for the maintenance of tangible wealth including natural assets;
e. elaboration and measurement of indicators of environmentally adjusted product and income.
<section>5. Environmental accounting beyond the national level</section>
Lutz and Munasinghe recall that a large part of the oceans are outside the territorial limits of individual countries; hence, Global Accounts for the Oceans are needed. This aspect is crucial; in fact, the suggestions for environmental accounting at the national level have a logical addressee, namely the agency producing today the traditional product and income measures. The elaboration of supranational ocean accounts on the other hand is new, the relevant recommendation has no logical addressee and hence, requires supranational arrangements between international organizations in charge of specific contributions. This requirement should be considered in discussing institutional mechanisms for sustainable development of the oceans at regional and global levels.
<section>6. Conclusions and recommendations</section>
One of the 18 chief recommendations of Pacem in Maribus XVI (1988) says: "On the need for new economic/ecological indicators:
We will need to develop and use new indicators of value added: calculations that include, for example, the value deducted from societal benefits by the production process itself."
Pacem in Maribus XIX may wish to come back to this general recommendation elaborating it in ways suggested by our authors and referring it to the UNCED process:
1. Concerning "2.1 and 2.2 Physical accounting," PIM XIX could subscribe to IOC's "Declaration on a Global Ocean Observing System (GOOS)" stressing also the need for non-monetary environmental indicators.
2. Concerning "3. Valuation Techniques," PIM XIX may ask for more systematic integration of the valuation techniques with the principles developed in the theory of wealth and welfare, this new "economics of the common heritage of mankind," with special reference to the long-term global functional value of natural resources.
3. Concerning "4. Environmental accounting at national level," PIM XIX may wish to lend special support for the work of the UN Statistical Office in developing SEEA. A coordination between GOOS and SEEA would be mutually beneficial; the concepts of functional and utilization value of marine resources would be a priority topic.
Also PIM XIX could support the activities of the intergovernmental "Task force on environmental accounting" (of UN Statistical Commission, the Economic Commission for Europe, and Conference of European Statisticians and suggest that the pilot patrimony case-studies include the marine sector.
4. Concerning "5. Environmental accounting beyond the national level," our authors recommend the establishment of Ocean Accounts for marine resources outside territorial waters; PIM XIX may consider this activity of first priority, including the preparation of the suggested review paper. Again, coordination with the GOOS activities would be a prerequisite. Keeping in mind that national bureaux of statistics and national accounts are not responsible for preparing supranational accounts, some other institutional solution is needed; PIM XIX may ask for the lead to be taken by an appropriate international organization along the lines suggested by our authors and in strong cooperation with an appropriate International Environmental Academy; PIM XIX may wish to come back to this issue when dealing with institutional mechanisms at the regional and global levels.
<section>Notes</section>
1. IUCN/UNEP/WWF. "Caring for the Earth - A Strategy for Sustainable Living." Gland, Switzerland, 1991, p. 152. A general overview of environmental accounting is given in chapter 8 of Elkins, P., and M. Max-Neef, eds. Real-life Economics: Understanding Wealth Creation. London: Routledge, 1992.
2. Preparatory Committee for UNCED, Third Session 1991. Global Ocean Observing System (GOOS). A/CONF.151/PC/70, 26 June 1991. Agenda 21, chapter 17, programme area D.
3. Ibid. Now in Agenda 21, chapter 8, programme area D.
4. See also the discussion of indicators in Giarini's "Dialogue on Wealth and Welfare" (8) mentioned in para. 3.1 below.
5. OECD. "Environmental Indicators - A Preliminary Set." Annex to State of the Environment, Paris, 1991, p. 72.
6. Agarwal, A., and S. Narain. Global Warming in an Unequal World - A Case of Environmental Colonialism. New Delhi: Centre for Science and Environment, 1991.
7. Repetto, R. "Balance-Sheet Erosion - How to account for the loss of natural resources." In: International Environmental Affairs 1, no. 2, Spring 1989, pp. 103-137.
8. Giarini, O. Dialogue on Wealth and Welfare: A Report to the Club of Rome. Oxford: Pergamon Press, 1980.
9. Giarini, O., and N. Börlin. "Toward estimating the Contribution of Oceans to Wealth and Welfare." In (14), pp. 229-245.
10. Pearce, D.W. et al. "Blueprint for a Green Economy," London: Earthscan, 1989, p. 105. For a detailed discussion see Markandya, A., "The Value of the Environment: A State of the Art Survey," presented at the International Conference on the Economy and Environment in the 1990s, Neuchatel, Switzerland, August 1991.
11. In Footnote 3 of their paper the authors assert that environmental defensive expenditures by firms are intermediate costs and therefore not part of value added or final demand. Let us assume that an outboard motor boat factory buys from a physical instruments company some noise-isolating devices to be added to the boats it produces. These intermediate noise-defensive expenditures would be excluded from value added and final demand only if the anti-noise devices remain forever in the boat factory and never go with the boats into final use, or inversely if the noise-isolating devices do not stem from the two original production factors of present national accounts, namely, labour and manmade capital, which obviously is not so. See:
Börlin, M., "Industrial environmental defensive expenditures do not inflate GNP? The GNP revision revisited." The Environmentalist 11 (1991), p. 312, UK.
See also Antille, G., and M. Börlin. Intégration des dépenses environnementales dans l'analyse entrées-sorties. Contribution au 23ème Colloque International de l'Association d'Econometrie Appliquée, Econometrie de l'envirounement, Genève, Janvier 1992.
12. With its national research programme on environmental damages, Germany probably placed itself in the forefront of research in damages expressed in monetary terms. Weskamp, A. (Bundesumweltministerium), and W. Schulz (Umweltbundesamt), "Nutzen des Umweltschutzes Kosten der Umweltverschmutzung," Informationen, Bonn, September 1991. In the USA, e.g., impetus is coming from the need for damage assessment under the US Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Act of 1989 (CERCLA), p. 61.
13. de Groot, R.S. Functions of Nature - Evaluation of Nature in Environmental Planning, Management and Decision-making, Netherlands: Groningen, 1992.
14. Vandermeulen, J., and S. Walker. Ocean Technology, Development, Training and Transfer. Proceedings of Pacem in Maribus XVI. Oxford: Pergamon, 1991.
15. Commission statistique et Commission economique pour l'Europe; Commission des statisticiens européens; 39ème réunion plénière (1991):
- Le Secrétariat. Quelques approches de la comptabilité de l'environnement. CES/700 20/3/ 1991.
- Bureau de statistique de l'ONU. Statistiques et comptabilité de l'environnement. CES/ 701 10/4/1991. See UN Statistical Office. Handbook on Environmental Accounting. New York, February 1994.
<section>National case-studies: India and Japan</section>
Krishan Saigal and Tsutomu Fuse
<section>National institutions of governance in marine affairs of India (Krishan Saigal)</section>
India is a parliamentary federal democracy of the Westminster model. Though the Head of State is the President and all work is done in his name the actual executive power at the Centre is vested in the Council of Ministers with the Prime Minister at its head. The division of powers between the Centre and the States is legislated by a written Constitution. The division of work between the different Ministries and Departments is done by the President on the advice of the Prime Minister through the Allocation of Business Rules. In the States there is the Governor and a Council of Ministers with the Chief Minister at its head.
Activities in the ocean have a long history in India. As early as the third century B.C. we have Kautilya, a famous political scientist of the time, writing about the duties of those in charge of ports. Throughout the ages India was also the focal point of seaborne trade whether from Arabia, East Africa, Malaysia, or China. This shipping tradition has continued down to the present day and India is among the top fifteen shipping nations in the world. In fishing also, India has the largest catch of fish among the littoral states of the Indian Ocean while giant strides were made in the exploitation of oil and gas offshore in the 1970s. At the conclusion of the International Indian Ocean Expedition the National Institute of Oceanography (NIO) was established in 1966 to carry out multi-disciplinary research in the areas of physical, chemical, biological, and geological oceanography.
From 1973 onwards when the negotiations in UNCLOS III started, an interministerial committee was established to prepare the brief for the Indian delegation to UNCLOS III. This brief was given final approval by the Cabinet before the departure of the delegation.
In 1979 the need was felt for examining the possibility of establishing a new institutional structure for looking after all matters relating to the sea. There were two reasons for this. In 1976 the Maritime Zones Act had been promulgated whereby a territorial sea of 12 nautical miles, a contiguous zone of 24 nautical miles and exclusive economic zone (EEZ) of 200 nautical miles, from the baseline had been established. It was estimated that by this action nearly 2 million km² (or two-thirds of the land area) was available for exploitation of resources. Also the negotiations in UNCLOS III were drawing to a close and Norway had established a Ministry of the Sea, the United States had the National Oceans and Atmospheric Agency (NOAA) and other nations were also beginning to take a hard look at their institutional organizations relating to the sea.
Examination of the internal organization of India was done in the period 1979-1980. The examination revealed that there were a large number of ministries and departments dealing with ocean affairs.
The more significant ones directly involved with ocean affairs were:
- Ministry of Shipping and Ports (shipping, ports)
- Ministry of Agriculture and Fisheries (fisheries)
- Ministry of Petroleum (offshore oil and gas)
- Ministry of Defence (navy, coastguard)
- Ministry of Mines (minerals exploitation) Ministry of Energy (energy)
- Ministry of External Affairs (external relations, UNCLOS III negotiations).
The following were involved indirectly or in a coordinating role:
- Ministry of Education (universities, technical institutions)
- Ministry of Science and Technology (oceanography)
- Ministry of Space (remote sensing)
- Ministry of Finance (fiscal matters)
- Ministry of Planning (economic planning)
- Ministry of Home Affairs (islands development)
- Department of Cabinet Affairs (overall coordination)
The above departments were only those at the central level. In addition there were 9 maritime States while the other 16 States also had a direct interest in fishing ports and foreign trade. In the context of India's federal structure the States had a very important role to play in the country's ocean agenda, especially the maritime States, in matters concerning the land-sea interface in the form of coastal zone management.
A study of the ground situation in the country ruled out the idea of a "superagency" for the oceans, i.e., an organization that would centralize responsibility for marine affairs. In view of the multiplicity of activities taking place in the oceans it was doubtful if a single administrative unit having such a broad mandate, and concomitant requirements of wide-ranging expertise, could be in a position to harmonize activities, psychological attitudes, and different cultures ranging from the scientific, administrative, and technological, to the diplomatic and legal. Besides it would break the link between land-based activities and ocean activities in some areas (for example communications, food, energy) which could not be neatly labelled as "oceanic" or "land-based. " And of course, there were the well-entrenched bureaucracies which represented dense aggregations of sectorally organized resistance to change.
The problem to be tackled was of bringing about some degree of cohesiveness and coordination in both the vertical and horizontal dimensions vertically among the Centre, the States, and local authorities and horizontally between sectors, activities, and programmes. Rising expectations of the people and the speed of technological advance have created a mismatch between the ability of the government to formulate and implement policy and the demands placed on it by rapidly developing marine technology which was multiplying opportunities of human use of the neritic zones of the world's oceans. The creation of the exclusive economic zone (EEZ), a multi-purpose zone, had significantly enhanced and extended national jurisdiction over all resources and economic activities within it. It required a coordinated, flexible, and sophisticated policy initiative to handle the emerging opportunities.
Large-scale reorganization or the establishment of a superagency being ruled out, the following criteria were considered essential parameters for the design of an appropriate organization:
a. there needed to be effective policy coordination through a more coherent definition of national priorities;
b. efficiency needed to be increased by reducing duplication, conflict, and waste;
c. there was the requirement for increased effectiveness in task performance.
In the context of the above, and keeping in view the crucial position of science and technology in future developments, it was decided in 1981 to create a Department of Ocean Development (DOD) with the following functions and responsibilities:
(i) matters relating to the ocean and not specifically allocated to any ministry or department;
(ii) policies for coordination, regulatory measures and development and relating to the ocean and covering:
- research (including fundamental research) and the development of related uses;
- technology development;
- surveys to map and locate the availability of living and nonliving resources;
- preservation, conservation, and protection of oceans;
- development of appropriate skills and manpower;
- collaboration, including technical collaboration, and related law;
(iii) Ocean Commission;
(iv) the Pan-Indian Science Association;
(v) Ocean Science and Technology Agency or Board; and
(vi) Antarctica.
The main thrust of the new department was elaborated in a document entitled "Ocean Policy Statement" (see annex) presented to Parliament in 1982 by the Prime Minister who was in charge of the new department. It was considered necessary to place the department under the Prime Minister so as to facilitate policy coordination. The main parameters of the new policy were:
- A coordinated, centralized and very sophisticated development response in the context of the vastness, complexity, and uncertainty of the ocean environment.
- The development of an adequate knowledge of Indian sea-space, including mapping of resources.
- The acquisition and development of the appropriate marine technologies for exploiting the marine resources; this implied both the necessity of developing indigenous technologies and the ability to negotiate the acquisition of technology.
- Development of an adequate infrastructure.
- Building of effective systems of management and control.
- Adequate surveillance over the area under national jurisdiction; and
- Conserving and preserving the marine environment.
For underpinning the above policy, DOD was asked to set up a centralized data system with a proper mechanism for the collection, collation, and dissemination of information. Training of manpower was to be accorded high priority while existing agencies had to be adequately strengthened to meet the challenge of ocean development. The Department of Ocean Development was required to function in conjunction with other concerned agencies as a focal point to promote institutional capabilities in areas where significant work is lacking. The complex programme that ocean development entails will require well-designed management and institutional extension of the DOD with sufficient powers vis-à-vis other agencies to help proper and speedy ocean development enabling India to be in the forefront of the international effort. This would also mean close cooperation with both developing and developed countries in a spirit of understanding of the concept that the oceans are a common heritage
of mankind.
Over ten years have elapsed since the DOD was established. It is time to review what has been its impact on ocean development. This is not a task to be lightly undertaken in a country as large, diverse, and complex as India. The impacts of the policy and activities of DOD on more than a dozen agencies at the central level, nine maritime States, two island groups and sixteen other States would require much more time or space than is possible in this chapter. We will confine ourselves, therefore, to a listing of some of the more significant of the outputs of DOD and then critically examine the extent to which it has met the policy parameters delineated in 1982.
The more significant of the outputs of DOD (not necessarily either in order of importance or in time sequence) during the last decade have been:
- The presentation of an ocean policy statement in 1982.
- The sending of an expedition to Antarctica within four months of its establishment; establishment of a permanent station in 1982; signing of Antarctic Treaty and acceptance as a Consultative Party member in 1983; establishment of a second station in 1988.
- Acceleration of the programme of deep-sea exploration for polymetallic nodules in 1981; acceptance as a pioneer investor by the international community in 1982; registration as a pioneer investor by the Preparatory Commission in 1987 (the first country to be so registered).
- Starting of R&D in wave and thermal energy conversion in 1982; establishment of a 150 kW prototype of wave energy in 1990 (the second country in the world after Norway to do so).
- Funding of R&D on a third-generation deep-sea mining system collector (robotics and "smart") in 1990 with the target date of 1997 for trials.
- Coordination of surveying and mapping of the living resources of the EEZ so as to prevent waste and duplication.
- Establishment of an apex group for monitoring and controlling pollution and consisting of all central and state agencies.
- The establishment of an Ocean Science Technology Board to link high technology such as biotechnology, space applications, electronics, new materials, new sources of energy, with development of ocean technology.
- Integrated development of the two island groups of Andamans and Nicobar, and Lakshadweep.
- The establishment of an information networking system linking data and information wherever collected in the nation with a comprehensive prediction and modelling capacity so as to be of use to marine-users, especially:
(i) artisan fishermen operating up to 25 km;
(ii) those involved in construction of ports, lighthouses, and offshore platforms;
(iii) the meteorological forecasters; and
(iv) ocean engineers engaged in designing structures.
Summary
The Department of Ocean Development was set up to coordinate policies and fill up the empty interstices in the ocean governance matrix. Its main thrust was to be in the sphere of marine technology especially that part of it that was state-of-the-art. It was not expected to be a superagency or look after all matters relating to the oceans.
Within the parameters of its mandate the Department has been fairly successful. It has entered an empty space, for example, Antarctica. It has formulated a national ocean policy; accelerated the deep-sea mining programme; funded state-of-the-art technology in the shape of wave energy, ocean thermal energy conversion, an autonomous "collector" for harvesting nodules; set up an integrated national ocean information service linking up both the users and the initiators of information; coordinated the surveying and mapping of resources; established national coordinating bodies, etc.
It is difficult to evaluate the indirect impact of DOD on the policies of other departments in the absence of any relevant data. Marine fish catches have increased, surveillance activities stepped up, mapping activities accelerated, etc. But how much of that can be considered attributable to DOD is not clear. It may be some time before the impact of DOD on ocean governance can be fully assessed. In any case, DOD has to be regarded, at this stage, as an experimental venture in ocean management and it will, no doubt, evolve and adapt with time.
<section>Annex</section>
Ocean Policy Statement
1. The oceans are known to be our last frontiers. Our long coast and the sense of adventure of our forefathers fostered a great maritime tradition. The Indian Ocean which washes our shores provides opportunities which need to be utilized. For success in ocean development, the entire nation should be permeated with the spirit of enterprise and the desire to explore the frontiers of knowledge. Our experience in other fields of scientific endeavour will help our efforts in ocean development. What is necessary is a policy and structure to facilitate a dynamic thrust keeping in view developments in other parts of the world.
2. The adoption by an overwhelming majority of nations of the Convention of the United Nation Conference on the Law of the Sea has established a new international order for the oceans. This extends the economic jurisdiction of coastal States to an area ranging from 200 to 350 nautical miles from the coastline. According to this regime, nearly two million square kilometres of area, or very nearly two-thirds of the land has come under India's national jurisdiction. In this area, the exclusive right to utilize living and non-living resources rests with the nation. Besides, India has been recognized as a "Pioneer Investor" in ocean mining. This gives India the exclusive right to operate in an area up to 150 thousand square kilometres in the high seas for the recovery and processing of polymetallic nodules.
3. For ages, the sea has enabled our people to sail to near and distant lands and has been a source of livelihood to large numbers of people. Even now Indian public and private enterprises do use ocean resources. The country is producing significant quantities of fish and hydrocarbons from the sea and much scientific work has been done in collecting basic knowledge and information about the sea and seabed and in surveying, charting and exploiting it. Progress has been made in construction and development of offshore structures.
4. The vastness, complexity and uncertainty of the ocean environment calls for a coordinated, centralized, and highly sophisticated development response. This should be based on adequate knowledge of marine space (seabed, water and air columns included) as a fundamental prerequisite to the control, management, and utilization of the rich and varied natural resources available from the sea. In addition to basic knowledge to determine the potentialities inherent in the Indian sea space, we have to develop appropriate technologies to harness these resources. A supporting infrastructure has to be built. Effective systems of management and control of the entire set-up are also necessary.
5. We need to map living resources, prepare an inventory of commercially exploitable fauna, and map and assess the availability of minerals from the deep sea. The supporting infrastructure and incentives required are research vessels of different types, manpower, well-laid out programmes of resource exploitation, advanced technology, and everything necessary to promote the growth of ocean technology. In the management sector, the high seas and the Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) up to 320 kilometres have to be looked into for the exploitation of the wealth therein.
6. The main thrust should be on the optima utilization of living resources like fish and sea weeds, exploitation of non-living resources such as hydrocarbons and heavy placer deposits, harnessing of renewable resource of ocean energy from waves, temperature differences in the water column, tidal heights and salinity gradients, and the collection and processing of polymetallic nodules from the deep sea.
7. Marine development is linked with scientific and technological achievements in other areas. Hence, while we develop basic marine science and technology, i.e., technology for marine environment, our technological advances have to be geared to the utilization and preservation of the marine environment. The extension of national frontiers by an area of 2 million square kilometres of ocean space and the consequent access to new sources of energy, minerals and food, requires great strides in ocean engineering, especially in tasks related to structures, materials, instrumentation, submersibles, and systems of propulsion of ships. The exploitation of natural food resources such as fish and seaweeds, and the generation of additional food resources by cultivation, also need scientific methods of aquaculture and marine culture. To survey and predict the ocean environment, the main tasks necessary are sea-floor mapping, charting geodesy, ocean dynamics, currents, waves, cyclones,
marine fauna, chemistry and physics of the oceans, and seabed mineral mapping, delineation, and assessment. Research in all these areas must examine the various processes and their origins so as to have a fundamental understanding, ensuring predictive capabilities. Marine science and technology have also to look beyond the current state-of-the-art to achieve major technological breakthroughs in the future.
8. In addition to research and development in the basic sciences, we should survey the deeper part of the ocean. Similarly in the deep sea, detailed survey and sampling in the regions of EEZ and the adjacent ocean will be necessary to locate and evaluate the rich and economically viable deposits of polymetallic nodules, heavy metals, fossil places and phosphorite deposits. The gathering of data from surveys should be coordinated and a cost-effective system of integrated surveys established.
9. Much more needs to be done for the development of indigenous technology for the exploitation of fish from deeper waters. This also means setting up of infrastructure facilities and services to operate large-sized fishing vessels.
10. An important component of the development programme should be the acquisition of technology. To be self-reliant, such technologies would have to be largely developed, tested, and operated indigenously. Technologies relating to instrumentation, diving systems, position fixing and maintenance, materials development, oceanic data collecting devices, anti-erosion capabilities, submersibles, energy and energy-saving devices are priority items. Several new technologies will have to be commercialized and made cost-effective.
11. Infrastructural support forms an essential prerequisite for ocean development. The variegated infrastructure already available in the country will have to be appropriately augmented, and more particularly in basic supporting facilities like safety and rescue at sea, navigational chains, communication networks, development of appropriate maps and charts, etc. Infrastructural support for providing a complete and reliable information system through a network of data centres on marine resources, processing and marketing systems, advanced technologies and financial assistance would also be necessary. This requires a broadening and strengthening of available infrastructural facilities. Provisions of adequate ports and harbours, shipbuilding and ship repair facilities will be needed in addition to adequate skilled manpower in various sectors of development.
12. Surveillance and conservation of the marine environment and its resources call for an integrated legal framework and its concomitant enforcement. Several laws have already been promulgated regarding maritime zone, fisheries, etc. The Coastguard Organization looks after the enforcement aspects of several of these legislative measures. The coordinating mechanisms of the overall structure of legislation will have to be suitably strengthened under the aegis of the Department of Ocean Development.
13. In light of this, we must have a database to coordinate efforts made by different agencies. This is all the more necessary because of the rapid growth of information in ocean science and technology. A centralized data system will be set up by the Department of Ocean Development with a proper mechanism for collection, collation and dissemination of information acquired both indigenously and from foreign sources.
14. The creation of a self-reliant technological base puts a heavy demand on fully trained personnel. The training of skilled manpower is to be adequately planned. Young scientists, technologists, and engineers will be encouraged to participate in the programme of ocean development and steps will be taken to induce Indian scientists from within the country and abroad to participate in it.
15. Existing agencies will have to be appropriately strengthened to meet the demands of this growing challenge. The Department of Ocean Development will function in conjunction with other concerned agencies as a focal point to promote institutional capability in areas where significant work is lacking. The complex programme that ocean development entails will require well-designed management and institutional extension of the Department of Ocean Development with sufficient powers vis-à-vis other agencies to help proper and speedy ocean development, which would enable India to be in the forefront of the international effort. This would also mean close cooperation with both developing and developed countries in a spirit of understanding of the concept that the oceans are a common heritage of mankind.
<section>References</section>
Government of India, Cabinet Secretariat, Allocation of Business Rules. New Delhi: Rashtrapati Bhawan, 1950.
Ocean Policy Statement
(see annex attached)
<section>Some observations on mechanisms for decision-making and the execution of an integrated ocean policy in Japan (Tsutomu Fuse)</section>
1 Introductory note
Japan is a relatively small island country located off the east coast of Asia. Therefore, the existence of the ocean itself and ocean-oriented human activities are integral parts of Japanese life. Consequently, as the Japanese in general may be called a "fish-eating people," fishing takes a very important place in Japanese industry.
Under such circumstances, the decisive factors influencing Japanese ocean policies are as follows.
A Insularity
Due to her geographical situation, it was inevitable that Japan should develop a close dependence on the surrounding oceans. She may, therefore, be termed a typical insular state. The total tonnage of Japanese commercial shipping, for example, was 25,561,000 gross tons (as of 1989),^1 of which fishing vessels accounted for 2,486,000 tons^2 - almost ten per cent.
B The Japanese - A fish-eating people
The seas surrounding the Japanese archipelago form one of the richest fishing grounds in the world. As a result, fish have always been a major food source for the Japanese people, and the catch is commensurately large. In 1990, the total fish haul was 11,910,000 tons.^3 In addition, 2,290,000 tons more were imported from several countries.^4
C Long history of regional and national ocean policy-making
Until the middle of the Tokugawa shogunate, rules governing the exploitation of the oceans were customarily formulated independently in different parts of the country. The first uniform nation-wide regulations affecting the fishing industry are to be found in "The Regulations of Tokugawa in a Nutshell" (Ritsuryo Yoryaku), published by the Tokugawa government in 1741.^5
The fundamental framework on which modern fishery policies are structured, with respect both to the fishing industry itself and the conservation of fish resources, can be traced to this document. They were confirmed in most particulars in the Fishery Act of 1901, following the Meiji Restoration of 1868 when Japan opened her doors to the world. It can be said, therefore, that modern Japanese ocean policies derive ultimately from customary rules formed in the course of long historical practice.
D Peculiarities of the decision-making system in Japan
It would be fair to say that decisions are usually arrived at in Japan by consensus. Accordingly, the decision-making process in this country, even at the national level, is precisely a matter of achieving consensus among interested parties. The three leading actors at national level whose views, therefore, have to be reconciled are politicians, bureaucrats, and specific interest groups, especially businessmen.^6
These three leading actors are, in principle, independent of each other, but they are in fact closely interrelated. One will find, therefore, in their best mutual interests the grounds for decisions which affect them. We must examine the process by which agreement is reached among them and eventually translated into formal public policy.
2 The decision-making process in Japan and its role in the formulation of ocean policies
A The decision-making process
"Democracy" has become an indispensable and indisputable criterion in the philosophy of decision-making in Japan since the end of the Second World War. Accordingly, as in most western countries, the post-war Japanese Constitution expressly guarantees the democratic process in the making of public policy. In other words, the formal process of decision-making in Japan conforms very closely to that which is found in the western nations. However, it must be observed that certain peculiarities exist in the informal process of reaching consensus among the three above-mentioned leading actors, and that the origin of these peculiarities is to be found in the historically formed culture of Japan.
i) THE FORMAL PROCESS. The formal process of making public policy in Japan takes two forms: normal legislation and budget legislation. Normal legislation may be introduced by the Cabinet or by members of parliament. However, as the executive is an integral part of the parliamentary system of government, over 68 per cent of legislation is drafted, in practice, by the Cabinet.^7
a. A Japanese ministry is made up of bureaus and sections. Once it has been decided that a certain problem cannot be reasonably solved under the existing legal system and that a solution is certain to be requested from various quarters, the relevant section of the ministry involved makes an initial proposal.
b. After careful examination and amendments to the original proposal have been put forward by other interested sections, the director of the bureau in charge is asked to organize an "ad hoc examining committee of experts" within the ministry. To further adjust and fine-tune the conclusions of this committee, inter-ministerial coordination may be called upon to achieve a unified proposal. In some cases, a kind of interministerial contract (aigi sho) is drawn up for the later settlement of possible disputes among ministries.
c. The minister in charge then asks the "Minister's Consultative Council," which is an officially constituted permanent body, to examine and confirm the amended proposal.
d. The minister in charge next presents the approved proposal at a meeting of the Cabinet with a request that it be adopted for draft legislation.
e. The Cabinet submits the draft to Parliament for legislation.
ii) THE INFORMAL PROCESS. The informal process referred to here describes the process of adjustment required in order to reach consensus among the three above-mentioned leading actors: the political, bureaucratic, and business sectors. In the course of the informal process, the drafting section maintains contact with other concerned interest groups, so as to promote consensus through an exchange of views and mutual efforts to bridge any differences which may arise. Much time is spent on this informal process, but it must be emphasized that this part of the procedure is central to the achievement of consensus among the various sectors concerned.
First of all, the informal process within the political sector should be studied carefully. As already mentioned, the Japanese political system based on the principles of parliamentary government, and the drafting of legislation falls mainly on the ruling party. In Japan, the Liberal Democratic Party (LDP) held this position for over forty years. This situation being almost tantamount to one-party government, the methods adopted for reaching consensus and making decisions within the party may be considered the key to successful mechanisms for drafting legislation.^8 Moreover, not only is it a fact that the LDP has been and still remains a union of several factions, but the seriousness of intra-party politics is increasing.
From this point of view, one of the organs of the LDP to which special attention should be paid is the Policy Research Council.^9 The Council has seven departments, more than thirty branches and many other ad hoc committees which undertake research and examine proposals before they are accepted by the Cabinet as formal public policies. According to LDP party rules, such prior examination is mandatory before the Party decides on a final draft.^10 Every LDP member of the Diet has to belong to some department or branch of the Council. In addition, to assist in the search for consensus, LDP politicians make a point of being in touch through their own informal channels with different interest groups, including the business sector. Representing party expertise in a given policy area, a politician, or group of politicians, belonging to the same department or branch is called Zoku Giin (parliamentary member of the tribe).
B Can an integrated ocean policy exist in Japan?
Some scholars hesitate to affirm the existence of a so-called "integrated ocean policy" in Japan. From a legal point of view, there is no independent ministry with the authority to formulate such a policy. Neither is there any unified code of laws in force regulating a national ocean policy. However, if we look at it in another way, it becomes apparent that there exists a system established by custom which does in fact perform this integrating function.
As "ocean policy," broadly speaking, covers matters involving to some degree almost all ministries and agencies of the government, some kind of coordinating system is inevitable. For that reason, the Ocean Science and Technology Council was set up in 1961 to advise the prime minister.^11 On the recommendation of the Council, the "Marine Science and Technology Centre in Japan" and the "Marine Science and Aquaculture Development Centre Japan" were established in 1971. Later, the Council was reformed as the Ocean Development Council, and expanded its brief to include all aspects of ocean development including the conservation of marine resources.
After careful deliberation the newly constituted Council issued several reports, two of which command our particular attention. These are "Fundamental Concepts and Measures for the Promotion of Ocean Development in Japan" (1973), and "Long-term Perspectives on Fundamental Concepts and Measures for Ocean Development" (1990).
In these reports, the following four principles are expressed as prime guidelines of ocean development:^12
i. Ocean development must contribute to the social development of Japan.
ii. Ocean development must contribute to the long-term economic development of Japan.
iii. Ocean development is to be pursued in the national interest in conformity with international interests.
iv. Ocean development must contribute to the interests of the inter national community.
It can be said that these reports established the basic guidelines for future ocean policies.
In order to put these guidelines into operation, a committee of Inter-Ministerial Bodies and Agencies Concerned with Promoting Ocean Development was set up in 1969 under the auspices of the Prime Minister's Office.^13 The aim of the Committee, as its name suggests, is to coordinate ocean policies among concerned ministries and agencies under the guidelines put out by the Council.
In 1970, the group published a "Plan for the Promotion of Ocean Development." Since then, the Plan has been re-examined and amended every year.
3 National policy governing the fishing industry in Japan Its historical background and present directions
A "The Regulations of Tokugawa in a Nutshell"
The first unified code of rules regulating commercial fishing in Japan was published in 1741 under the title Ritsuryo Yoryaku ("The Regulations of Tokugawa in a Nutshell"). This document codified the customary rules which had prevailed in fishing villages all around Japan, and consisted of three fundamental principles, upon which the feudal fisheries systems under the Tokugawa was developed, and important elements of which are still vital to our present system.
i) THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN URAKATA (FISHING VILLAGE) AND JIKATA (FARMING VILLAGE). AS a result of this distinction, only Urakata was allowed the exclusive right to engage in fishing. Distinguishing the farmer from the fisherman, the Tokugawa feudal government could oblige the farmer to devote himself exclusively to agriculture,^14 which was considered the most important industry at that time. The same distinction led to the organization of Nokyo (agricultural cooperatives) in farming villages, and Gyokyo (fishermen' s cooperatives) in fishing villages.
ii) THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN NETSUKE (INSHORE AREAS) AND OFF-SHORE FISHING GROUNDS. The inshore area called Netsuke was open to any member of an Urakata to fish without special permission, while only a limited number of fishermen could afford the privilege of fishing offshore.^15 These areas were delimited by custom in each place. From this practice, a unique Japanese legal concept of fishing rights called Gyo Ken developed.
iii) THE PRINCIPLE OF ACHIEVEMENT. Rights and privileges granted referred expressly to the actual practice of fishing, and therefore, could not, by definition, include mere theoretical rights on paper.^16 Consequently, a life and death struggle for survival centred on actual fishing catches spread throughout almost all fishing villages. Accordingly, the peaceful settlement of disputes among fishermen became a significant mechanism of the principle of achievement, and remains so even under contemporary fishing policies.
This principle is still applied mutatis mutandis even under the terms of the existing Fisheries Act of 1947, according to which the right to fish commercially is awarded subject to specific fishing achievements.
B The Fisheries Act of 1901
The first national legislation regulating Japanese fishing to be enacted following the establishment of the modern system of government was the Fisheries Act of 1901. The essence of this act is said to have been the reconfirmation of the three principles enunciated in the Tokugawa Ritsuryo Yoryaku.^17 It is particularly noteworthy that the establishment of fishermen's cooperatives was made compulsory by law, and that the Act placed upon them responsibility for issuing commercial fishing permits.^18 It followed that without membership in a cooperative no one could engage in commercial fishing. Yet in practice it was still a fact that only small numbers of the richest fishermen could acquire membership.
C The Fisheries Act of 1949
This Act should be recognized as being of no less importance than the Agrarian Reform Act of 1946, which was drafted under the auspices of the Occupation Authority after the end of the Second World War. Since it was the object of the Occupation Authority to "democratize" the Japanese social system, the new Fisheries Act of 1949 set out to democratize the fishing industry and increase the catch through overall utilization of the fishing grounds. ^19
According to this logic, fishing rights and the management of commercial fishing are monopolized under the present system by Gyokyo (fishermen's cooperatives), with the act providing for their democratic management.^20 For this reason, every substantive matter concerning commercial fishing including settlement of disputes comes in principle under the exclusive jurisdiction of the cooperative concerned.
D Conclusion - Problems and perspectives
The characteristics of the Japanese decision-making process may be summarized as follows:
i. The process is characterized by coordination among historically formed interest groups. This has evolved into coordination among ministries and agencies of government representing such groups.
ii. Within the framework of this coordination process, problems can be solved as they arise.
The Japanese decision-making process has worked comparatively well. However, its function has been mostly to facilitate the coordination of different interest groups. It is not, therefore, always adequate to tackle the very difficult problems of conservation or, in some cases, the creation of a sound marine environment in a global perspective.^21
In conclusion, it is necessary to take positive steps to put into practice the new concepts of "eco-development" and "sustainable development."^22 For this, the existing policy-making process in Japan is not appropriate, at the very least, an independent agency should be established to integrate and create a new ocean policy on a global scale.
<section>Notes</section>
1. Bureau of Statistics, Management and Coordination Agency of Japan, The Statistics of Japan 1990 (Nihon no Tokei), p. 132.
2. Ibid. p. 78.
3. This haul ranks first and it is 13 per cent out of the total catch in the world. Association of Agriculture and Forestry Statistics of Japan (Norin Tokei Kyokai), "White Paper of Fishing Industry in Japan 1990" (Gyogyo Hakusho), p. 4.
4. Ibid. p. 5.
5. Hirasawa, Yutaka, "Japanese Fishing Industry - Its History and Possibility" (Nihon no Gyogyo, Sono Rekishi to Kanosei), NHK Books, p. 4.
6. For further consideration, see Abe, Hitoshi, Muneyuki Sindo, and Sadafumi Kawato, "Modern Japanese Politics" (Gendai Nihon no Seiji), Tokyo: Tokyo University Press, 1991, pp. 99-106.
7. Ibid. p. 20.
8. For the details of this process, see Kojima, Kazuo, "Legislative Process of Japan" (Horitsu no Dekiru Made) Tokyo: Gyo Sei Press, 1991
9. "Modern Japanese Politics", op. cit., pp. 29-34.
10. For this Council, see Murakawa, Ichiro, "Decision-making System of the LDP" (Jiminto no Seisaku Kettei Sistemu), pp. 131-163.
11. Article 40, the Rules of the LDP. For further details, see "Legislative Process of Japan," op. cit., pp. 105-108.
12. For this Council and its reports, see Ocean Development Council (Kaiyo Kaihatsu Singikai), "Long-term Perspectives on Fundamental Concepts for Ocean Development 1979" (Chokiteki Tenbo ni tatsu Kaiyo Kaihatsu no Kihonkoso ni tsuite)
13. Ibid. pp. 5-6.
14. For this Committee and the report, see Committee of Inter-Ministerial Bodies and Agencies Concerned with Promoting Ocean Development (Kaiyo Kaihatsu Kankei Schocho Renraku, Kaigi), "Plan for the Promotion of Ocean Development 1987" (Kaiyo Kaihatsu Suisin Keikaku).
15. "Japanese Fishing Industry - Its History and Possibility," op. cit., pp. 136-138.
16. Ibid. pp. 138-146.
17. Ibid. p. 156.
18. Ibid. p. 5.
19. Ibid. pp. 149-154.
20. Article 1, The Fisheries Act of 1949.
21. For Fishermen's Cooperatives, see Imamura, Naraomi, and Yosito Jinnouchi, eds, "Fishery in the New Ocean Era" (Sin Kaiyojidai no Gyogyo), Tokyo: No San Gyoson Bunka Kyokai, 1988, pp. 219-263.
22. From this point of view, it is really "porous." See Pacem in Maribus XIX background paper, annex II of this book.
<section>Part III: Ocean governance: Regional level</section>
<section>The regional seas programme - Integrating environment and development: The next phase</section>
Stjepan Keckes
<section>Introduction</section>
Due to numerous advantages offered by the coastal and near-shore areas, they have been, since antiquity, among the most intensively used and abused parts of the planet. About one-half of today's population lives on the seashores or in their immediate proximity; a variety of industries have developed on a large scale along the coast; the coastal zones are a major recreational area and the basis for expanding tourism; harbours are essential as centres for national and international transport and trade. The near-shore maritime Areas contain the largest part of commercially exploitable marine living and mineral resources. They are also the zones used for marine culture, whose full potential is yet to be developed.
The gradual physical and ecological degradation of the coastal and nearshore areas, and the depletion of their resources, has accelerated during the last few decades at an alarming pace. Although seemingly local in nature, these problems are widespread and are today so evident at sites far away from their origin that only globally applied strategies have a chance to achieve long-term solutions.
The problems of the oceans and coastal Areas are global in nature, but there are significant regional differences in their causes and magnitude. Therefore, the most cost-effective remedies should be sought through action on local and national level, undertaken in the framework and as part of a wider regional and global developmental strategies. The type and intensity of curative and preventive measures and policies, if they are to be effective, are those made in response to the actual situation which varies from place to place, and from region to region, keeping in mind that a solution at one site should not create a nuisance elsewhere. Consequently, regional cooperation seems to be one of the most promising avenues leading to pragmatic solutions to problems specific for a group of countries sharing the same natural environment, such as an enclosed or semi-enclosed sea.
These facts and premises formed the conceptual basis for the development of the Regional Seas Programme of the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP), as a globally coordinated set of regional action plans implemented on national levels according to a global strategy.
<section>The regional seas programme of UNEP</section>
The regional seas action plans
Regional action plans, adopted at high level intergovernmental meetings are the backbone of the Regional Seas Programme. Since the Programme was launched in 1974, nine regional action plans for the protection and development of specific marine and coastal Areas have been adopted for the Mediterranean (1975), Red Sea and Gulf of Aden (1976), Gulf (1978), wider Caribbean (1981), East-Asian Seas (1981), South-East Pacific (1981), West and Central African (1981), South Pacific (1982), and Eastern Africa (1985) regions.
The structure of the action plans follows the framework adopted by the United Nations Conference on Human Development (Stockholm, 1972) for the Action Plan for Human Environment, consisting of three basic components:
- environmental assessment (evaluation and review, research, monitoring, information exchange);
- environmental management (goal setting and planning, inter national consultation and agreements); and
- supporting measures (education and training, public information, technical cooperation, organization, financing).
In spite of the formal similarity of the action plans, in their details they are highly specific in order to respond to the actual problems, priorities, needs, and capabilities of the participating countries.
The explicit overall and ultimate goal of all action plans is the protection and development of the environment and resources in geographic areas covered by the action plans. This goal was to be achieved through a cross-sectoral approach and in a gradual way, taking into account the urgency of the problems as perceived by the relevant governments and the capacity (financial, manpower, institutional) of these governments and their institutions to tackle the problems in a realistic way.
The initial focus of the action plans was on marine pollution control, an obvious subject of high priority requiring a harmonized regional policy and strategy. However, the common experience of all action plans soon confirmed that underdevelopment or improper development are at the roots of most environmental problems, and that meaningful and lasting environmental protection is indeed inseparably linked with social and economic development. Therefore, the focus of the action plans was gradually shifting from a sectoral approach towards pollution control to integrated coastal zone planning and management as the key tool through which solutions are being sought.
Information exchange, training, technical assistance, and projects on various subjects requiring regional cooperation are among the more prominent features of all action plans.
The regional seas conventions
As the legal framework of the action plans, eight regional conventions were adopted for the Mediterranean (Barcelona, 1976), Gulf (Kuwait, 1978), West and Central African (Abidjan, 1981), South-East Pacific (Lima, 1981), Red Sea and Gulf of Aden (Jeddah, 1982), wider Caribbean (Cartagena, 1983), Eastern Africa (Nairobi, 1984) and South Pacific (Noumea, 1986) regions. All but one of the regional seas conventions (Nairobi) are today in force and more than 120 coastal States are potential parties to them. The conventions are of "framework" type committing the contracting parties to protect and enhance the marine environment covered by the convention area, which is in most cases restricted to the 200-mile exclusive economic zones. In a few instances (for example Cartagena and Noumea conventions) high seas which are enclosed from all sides by the 200-mile zone of the contracting parties are also included into the convention area.
Each convention is supplemented with at least two protocols dealing with specific problems, such as cooperation in cases of pollution emergencies, control of pollution from dumping and land-based sources, and protection of endangered species and ecologically sensitive areas. For the purpose of the protocols on the control of pollution from land-based sources and on the protection of endangered species and sensitive areas, the convention Areas have been enlarged to include internal waters, up to the freshwater limit, as well as selected coastal Areas.
In developing the regional seas conventions and their protocols care has been taken to avoid any conflict with the provisions of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, or of any other international agreement on subjects covered by the regional seas conventions.
Institutional and financial arrangements
The action plans operate under the authority of periodic intergovernmental meetings of the States participating in the action plans, or the meetings of the contracting parties in cases where a convention is in force as the legal framework for the action plan.
UNEP provides the overall coordination of the Regional Seas Programme and serves as the secretariat of six action plans and four conventions. In several instances the countries participating in the action plans decided to set up their own secretariats for the conventions and action plans, or designated an existing regional organization to perform the secretariat functions.
The implementation of the action plans is supported by active participation of 14 organizations of the United Nations system, about 30 non-UN international and regional organizations, and more than 1,000 national institutions.
The Environment Fund of UNEP provides the financial resources needed initially to catalyze the development and implementation of the early phases of the action plans. However, the resources of this fund are gradually being replaced by special trust funds set up by the government participating in the action plans, as well as by funds provided by international financial institutions, aid agencies, and generous voluntary contributions from a large number of governments.
Regional specificities
The Regional Seas Programme is frequently identified with the Mediterranean action plan and is considered as its mere extension. Nothing can be further from the truth, the Mediterranean action plan is only one, albeit the oldest and most mature component of the Regional Seas Programme. However, today several other regional action plans can also be considered as mature and highly viable entities of the Programme. In fact, some of them in their complexity, geographic scope, political significance, and real impact on the participating countries, far surpass the Mediterranean action plan. Therefore, when identifying the Regional Seas Programme with the Mediterranean action plan, the use of the Mediterranean action plan as a typical model and yardstick for the evaluation of other regional action plans, and the assignment of special prominence to the Mediterranean action plan, is not correct and is distorting a fair picture of the status of the Regional Seas Programme.
Nevertheless, the Mediterranean action plan, although not typical for all action plans of the Regional Seas Programme, could serve to illustrate the development, achievements, as well as shortcomings and failures of the Programme.
<section>The mediterranean action plan</section>
By the early 1970s it was a widely held view that the environmental problems of the Mediterranean basin required urgent attention and that solutions should be sought through international cooperation of all 18 coastal States. Therefore, in 1973 the Mediterranean was selected as the first region where UNEP decided to test the regional approach to the protection of the oceans.
In spite of considerable differences in the political and socio-economic systems, levels of development of the countries concerned, and even open hostilities between some of the neighbouring States, it was relatively easy to reach quickly an agreement (Barcelona, 1975) of 17 coastal States (all except Albania) about an action plan. The action plan specifically called for:
a. integrated planning of the development and management of the resources of the Mediterranean basin;
b. coordinated programme for research, monitoring and exchange of information; and
c. development of a framework convention and related protocols.
Shortly after the adoption of the action plan the Coordinated Mediterranean Pollution Monitoring and Research Programme (MEDPOL) was launched to provide the assessment of the sources, levels, and effects of pollutants on a continuous basis. The programme was based on networks of national institutions and an agreed common methodology for their work. The number of institutions participating in the network was gradually growing and today the programme has more than 80 participants.
Within a year of the adoption of the action plan, negotiations were completed for a legally binding agreement which would serve as the legal framework of the action plan. The agreement, in a form of convention supplemented with two protocols (control of dumping and cooperation in cases of pollution emergencies), was signed in early 1976 by 11 countries and the European Economic Community (EEC). Less than 2 years after signing, the convention and the two protocols entered into force, and today all 18 Mediterranean countries and the EEC are parties to these agreements.
The assessments carried out after the adoption of the action plan revealed that the land-based sources of pollution are the single most important issue in the protection of the Mediterranean sea. Therefore, the negotiations of an additional protocol on the approaches and measures to curb pollution from these sources was initiated in 1977. The negotiations proved to be lengthy and difficult as they touched on the sensitive subjects of economic development, transfer of technologies, and mutual assistance. While recognizing the need for an urgent action, the developing countries rightly felt that the developed countries, which contribute about 80 per cent to the Mediterranean's pollution load from land-based sources, must not use the protocol in a way which would hurt their development potentials.
The protocol was finally adopted and signed (Athens, 1980) by 12 Mediterranean countries and the EEC. The protocol entered into force in 1983 and today 16 Mediterranean countries (all except Lebanon and Syria) and the EEC are parties to the protocol.
Under the influence of the negotiating parties which were, or were planning at that time, to become parties to the Paris Convention or members of the EEC, the adopted text of the Athens protocol closely follows the pattern of the Paris Convention (designed for oceans with completely different characteristics and by countries on approximately equal levels of economic development) and the strategy of EEC for the control of pollution from land-based sources.
This proved to be a mixed blessing. By such an approach the implementation of the protocol was automatically ensured by the parties to the Paris Convention and members of the EEC (at present all countries bordering the northern shores of the Mediterranean, except Albania, Monaco, Turkey, and former Yugoslavia), that is, by the most developed countries of the Mediterranean. However, for the same reason the joint efforts of the parties to the Paris Convention and the members of the EEC are concentrated on preventing the adoption of any Mediterranean guideline, standard, criteria, or measure (as envisaged by the protocol) which may be contrary to their policies or interests, regardless of whether these measures reflect the priorities of developing countries and their capabilities to implement them.
During the negotiating process the developing countries, with the notable exception of Lebanon and Libya, did not fully realize that the approach taken by developed countries (e.g. insistence on common emission standards; only token promise of assistance to developing countries in acquisition, utilization, and production of appropriate equipment on advantageous terms; lack of any agreement on liability and compensation for damage done by transboundary pollution) may not be in their best interests and may not provide them with adequate international assistance needed for the meaningful implementation of the protocol.
Some believe that the language of the Athens protocol should have been stronger to compel action by the parties. The frequent insertion of words like if necessary, as far as possible, and as appropriate in the text of the protocol, are weakening the protocol and are, for all practical purposes, giving licence to the countries to do whatever they wish. Perhaps more important, however, is the lack of real political commitment to implement the obligations embodied in the protocol. This is evidenced, among other things, by the failure of most parties to adopt national laws and legislation reflecting the provisions of the protocol and its annexes, and by a virtually complete lack of reporting on measures taken, results achieved and difficulties encountered in the application of the protocol, as envisaged by the protocol.
In parallel with the efforts to deal with the problems related to marine pollution, another protocol dealing with specially protected areas was signed (Geneva, 1982); a large-scale prospective study of the Mediterranean's development, the Blue Plan, was undertaken; and a series of projects were initiated as part of the action plan's Priority Action Programme. They dealt with subjects such as soil protection, tourism, rehabilitation of historic settlements, freshwater resource development, solid and liquid waste disposal, renewable sources of energy, aquaculture, environmental impact assessment, coastal zone planning and management.
Realizing that the action plan, at the pace it was progressing, will not solve the burning environmental problems of the Mediterranean basin, the contracting parties to the Barcelona convention adopted in 1985 the Genoa Declaration committing them to the following 10 targets to be achieved as a matter of priority during the second decade (1986-1995) of the Mediterranean action plan:
a. Establishment of reception facilities for dirty ballast waters and other oily residues from tankers and ships in ports of the Mediterranean.
b. Establishment, as a matter of priority, of sewage treatment plants in all cities around the Mediterranean, with more than 100,000 inhabitants and appropriate outfalls and/or treatment plants for all towns with more than 10,000 inhabitants.
c. Applying environmental impact assessment as an important tool to ensure proper development activities.
d. Cooperation to improve the safety of maritime navigation and reduce substantially the risk of transport of dangerous toxic substances likely to affect the coastal areas or induce marine pollution.
e. Protection of the endangered marine species (e.g. monk seal and Mediterranean sea turtle).
f. Concrete measures to achieve substantial reduction in industrial pollution and disposal of solid waste.
g. Identification and protection of at least 100 coastal historic sites of common interests.
h. Identification and protection of at least 50 new marine and coastal sites or reserves of Mediterranean interest.
i. Intensify effective measures to prevent and combat forest fires, soil loss, and desertification.
j. Substantial reduction in air pollution which adversely affects coastal areas and the marine environment with the potential danger of acid rain.
At the same time when adopting the Genoa Declaration, the parties also adopted a long-term (10-year) calendar for the implementation of the Athens protocol. The calendar envisages that a detailed assessment be prepared for each of the pollutant, or groups of pollutants, listed in the annexes of the protocol, accompanied by concrete proposals for measures which may be needed for their control. Among other issues, the calendar also envisages the preparation and adoption of an annex to the protocol which would deal with the control of pollutants from land-based sources transported by the atmosphere into the Mediterranean.
According to this calendar detailed assessments and proposals for control measures have been prepared for 12 pollutants or groups of pollutants listed in the annexes of the protocol. Eight of the proposed measures for microbiological quality of bathing and shellfish growing waters; mercury in seafood and discharges; and discharges of used lubricating oils, cadmium, organotins and organohalogens have already been formally adopted by the parties to the Barcelona convention, and several more are being considered for adoption in the near future. From the information available it seems that until now the adopted measures have been incorporated in national practices of only a few countries. The technical negotiations of the annex on control of air pollution have been completed and the annex may be adopted soon.
In 1987 it became obvious that the action plan lacks a common focus and by spreading its resources and activities in too many directions they do not reinforce each other adequately. This seriously hampered the action plan from concentrating on crucial issues and thus becoming the main instrument of a joint coordinated policy of the Mediterranean countries in matters dealing with the environmental protection of the Mediterranean basin. Therefore, it was decided by the contracting parties to refocus the action plan on its original central goal, i.e., on integrated planning of the development and management of the resources of the Mediterranean basin. The gradual refocusing of the action plan was attempted through a series of integrated coastal zone management pilot projects, taking full advantage of the past achievements of the action plan as well as of ongoing activities and structures adapted to the newly defined central goal.
UNEP coordinates, through a small secretariat in Athens, the implementation of the action plan, according to a precise work plan and budget approved by a biennial meeting of the parties to the Barcelona Convention. For the technical coordination of certain specific activities carried out under the action plan international regional centres were established (e.g. the Regional Marine Pollution Emergency Response Centre in Malta), or national institutions assumed the role of regional activity centres (e.g. for the Blue Plan in Sophia Antipolis, the Priority Actions Programme in Split, and the specially protected areas in Tunis).
Although it is difficult to assess the influence of the action plan, including the Barcelona Convention and its four protocols, on the environmental policies and practices of the Mediterranean countries, there is direct and indirect evidence that a large number of concrete actions were taken by many countries to conform with the requirements and provisions of the action plan and the convention. A few examples for such actions are highlighted in the following paragraphs.
There are no precise statistics on the status of the sewage treatment and disposal systems in all Mediterranean countries. However, the steadily increasing number of beaches monitored in the framework of MEDPOL which meet the required quality standards (78 per cent in 1983, 96 per cent in 1987) is indirect evidence that the treatment and disposal of sewage is improving in many parts of the Mediterranean.
In the Mediterranean coastal zone of France (1700 km of coastline, 5.8 million permanent residents, and 22.2 million tourists annually) in the period 1980-1990 the proportion of treated sewage has increased from 22.5 to 66.5 per cent, and presently 93 per cent of the population is covered by the public sewage system.
Plans have been developed to provide the major coastal settlements and tourist complexes of Cyprus with communal sewage treatment and disposal systems.
Between 1973 and 1988 the amount of pollutants discharged into the sea from the industrial complex of Fos-Berre in France, which is one of the largest industrial complexes (mostly oil refineries and petrochemicals) around the Mediterranean, was reduced by over 90 per cent.
Reception facilities for wastes from ships exist in 50 Mediterranean harbours, although most of them (35) are below the required capacity or standards.
Environmental impact assessment has been introduced in most Mediterranean countries as a standard requirement for all major development projects which may have environmental implications.
UNEP's role as the secretariat of the action plan was essential for the rapid development of the action plan. UNEP as an "untainted newcomer" to the Mediterranean scene was in a unique position to mobilize the countries of the Mediterranean basin around the most complex programme ever undertaken by them jointly. However, it was not the only key to the success, as several unsuccessful attempts to rally the Mediterranean countries around a common cause (including environmental) showed. The active and aggressive leadership provided by UNEP, and the use of UNEP's financial resources to launch the agreed programme, were of crucial importance in the early phases of the action plan.
The action plan is, since 1984, financially self-sufficient. Today practically all expenses are borne by the contributions from the contracting parties to the Mediterranean Trust Fund established in 1979. It was one of the most useful lessons demonstrating that UNEP's funds can be used to catalyze a large-scale programme which continues and bears results long after UNEP's financial support is withdrawn.
The analysis contained in the preceding paragraphs shows that in spite of the numerous shortcomings of the Mediterranean action plan, it is today a viable instrument and mechanism for regional cooperation. However, the future relevance of the action plan to the parties of the Barcelona Convention will critically depend on successful shifting of the focus of the action plan from monitoring, data collection and assessment, to management of coastal areas and near-shore waters, including control of pollution and other activities leading to the degradation of the Mediterranean basin. The primary responsibility to achieve this goal does not only depend on the parties to the convention but also on UNEP, which as the secretariat of the convention and the coordinator of the action plan, should have been stronger in catalyzing the action of the parties.
<section>The next phase</section>
The regional action plans are under the authority of the relevant governments, that is, the contracting parties to the conventions providing the legal frameworks for the action plans. with the "maturing" of the action plans and their increasing financial self-sufficiency, the initial catalytic role of UNEP in shaping their evolution is gradually decreasing. Therefore, it is difficult to foresee the future development of the action plans although, based on the experience accumulated through more than 15 years of the Regional Seas Programme, the following general trends could be foreseen:
a. Shifting of the emphasis from curative to preventive type of action, particularly through the integrated management, on a sustainable basis, of coastal and near-shore areas and their resources.
b. Stronger inter-regional cooperation and establishment of more meaningful links with other regional programmes and arrangements (i.e., Helsinki Commission, Paris/Oslo Commissions) as well as with global programmes and arrangements (such as UNCLOS, Basel Convention, IPCC) relevant to the overall goals of the Regional Seas Programme.
c. Strengthening of the present institutional structures (secretariats) coordinating the existing regional action plans and establishment of the new coordinating structures for the action plans, now directly coordinated by UNEP's Headquarters on an interim basis.
d. Strengthening of the financial basis of the action plans, primarily through the growth of regional trust funds, and additional financial resources mobilized from international financial institutions, private sector, and other non-governmental sources.
e. Expansion of the Regional Seas Programme to geographic areas yet to be covered (e.g., Black Sea, North-East Pacific).
Several important conditions would have to be fulfilled, and developments would have to take place, to ensure that all regional action plans become truly meaningful instruments of regional cooperation.
Initially, the present vague and often noncommittal pledge of the governments to the protection of the marine environment through regional cooperation should be reinforced by binding non-ambiguous political commitments. The involvement of all sectors of the society would be needed to ensure a broad social awareness and support for such commitment. The present prevailing practice of most countries to handle the regional programmes as an activity falling almost exclusively in the sphere of interest of their ministries of foreign affairs deprives the action plans of support from the general public, private and public economic development sectors, and non-governmental environmental pressure groups.
The sectoral approach to a solution of the identified problems should be abandoned in favour of an integrated and holistic approach, which does not see environmental problems as separate from the full complexity of the underlying social and economic issues. The constraints on a more vigorous development experienced by developing countries should be recognized as stemming predominantly from the current relationship between the developed and developing world, dominated by the market forces of developed countries. These forces frequently operate at the expense of the environmental quality and resources of developing countries. Without radical changes in the present pattern of economic development, and without accelerated socio-economic development, most of the developing countries will continue to suffer from further environmental degradation and irrational exploitation of their resources.
The lack of financial resources is a very serious issue, but is not the fundamental reason underlying the inadequate investments in the protection and development of the marine and coastal areas. The major problem is in setting of priorities when allocating available resources for economic development, and in the global economic policies which generally do not favour environmental protection. The root of the problem is in the still widespread notion among political circles that the seemingly drastic and costly changes and measures advocated by natural and technical sciences are economically, politically, and socially impractical or unrealistic, while the constantly growing military expenditures are widely, if quietly, held to be inevitable.
Loans and grants from international financial institutions and bilateral aid from developed countries play a considerable, albeit inadequate, role in assisting developing countries to solve some of their environmental problems through accelerated development. The flow of assistance to developing countries through the Regional Seas Programme, at present far from being commensurate with the problems of developing countries and capabilities of developed countries, should become more meaningful.
In spite of the centrifugal forces which tend to isolate the individual action plans, and the decreasing relative importance of UNEP's financial support to the action plans, UNEP will probably remain the overall coordinator of the Regional Seas Programme. Whether this will continue to happen in the future will depend on UNEP's skill:
- to remain an active partner of the governments participating in the Programmer
- to continue playing a catalytic and non-bureaucratic role for the development of new and innovative approaches and ideas;
- to develop into a mechanism ensuring a globally coordinated approach to the protection and development of the marine and coastal environment through interregional cooperation; and
- to mobilize and coordinate the continuing support of the specialized bodies of the United Nations system to the Regional Seas Programme.
<section>Fisheries efficiency, resources conservation effectiveness, and institutional innovations</section>
Jean-Paul Troadec
<section>Introduction</section>
So far, in fisheries, the change in the ocean regime has had mixed effects.^1 National administrations have acquired new management responsibilities. In regions where long-distance fleets used to operate, shifts in wealth distribution benefited coastal countries. On the other hand, the exploitation of high-seas resources has been little affected and, more important since the quasi-totality of world fishery resources is distributed within the EEZs, the state and performances of a majority of domestic fisheries have not improved significantly. Imbalances between fishing capacities and resource productivity - with their well-known consequences of overinvestment and overcapacity, overfishing, conflicts between fisher groups as well as among users of aquatic ecosystems, and poor enforcement of regulatory measures are pervasive.
Does this means that the objectives of efficiency in fisheries and effectiveness in conservation are unrealistic, or incompatible, or that the new ocean regime alone is insufficient? For answering these questions, the significance for fisheries of the new ocean regime has to be clearly understood. Does this change result primarily from spontaneous initiatives taken by particular individuals or groups, or from forces affecting the sector on an historical scale? If appropriation of international fisheries by coastal States is a long-term development, endogeneous to the sector, is the same process likely to happen again in domestic fisheries?
As in other uses of ecosystems, it is the adjustment of the exploitation regime^2 the natural productivity of the resource, rather than the efficiency of fishing operations or the management of fishing companies, that causes problems in fisheries. Enhanced efficiency in the production function depends primarily on better controls at the level of the fishery, or of the ecosystem, rather than at that of the haul, the trip, or the fishing company. For implementing such controls, new institutional instruments are required. These include property regimes, mechanisms for allocating fishing rights, and structures to put the first two into effect. It is these regimes, mechanisms, and structures that we designate in this paper under the generic term of institutions.
Obviously, an analysis of institutional innovations for fisheries management has to draw on ecology, economics, sociology, and law. Since each discipline casts light only on a part of the issue, inputs from all relevant disciplines have to be integrated. Owing to communication barriers between disciplines, this is not the least difficult point in the analysis.
A second difficulty relates to the diversity of fisheries. As in agriculture (for example, Jollivet 1988), fisheries encompass a broad variety of production systems, differing by their biological, technological, economic, social, institutional, and historical features. All sets, however, are not equally efficient or viable, and the number of options that are open to a given fishery at a given time in its history is limited. There is, therefore, no universal recipe of management or development. If the promotion of fisheries is to be effective, this diversity has to be recognized, analyzed, and accounted for in development and management policies and strategies. This diversity, however, does not prevent general principles to be elaborated. The purpose of this chapter is to present a grid for their analysis.
<section>End of the extensification stage: relation between scarcity, value, and property</section>
During the past three decades, three warnings signalled that large-scale fisheries were undergoing structural changes of historical significance. (Troadec 1989)
First, during the 1960s, production levelled off in the northern Atlantic and the northern Pacific where, traditionally, long-distance fleets concentrated their activities. But, as in the past, they could maintain their growth by extending their operations into southern latitudes. In 1972, however, the growth rate of world fish production dropped suddenly from 6 to about 1 per cent annually. When, that year, the stock of Peruvian anchovy collapsed, for the first time in its history, the large-scale sector had no alternative resource of comparable quality and quantity to sustain its expansion. Unconventional resources (krill, mesopelagic fish, oceanic squids) failed to provide comparable opportunities.
Second, also during the 1960s, the price of fish tended to increase faster than that of other food items in industrialized countries. (Rettig 1989) In Japan, for example, it doubled during the 1960s, and tripled between 1961 and 1976. (FAO 1981)
Third, even though the concept of exclusive economic zone emerged in the early 1950s with the Santiago Declaration on the maritime zone of Chile, the move that led to the acceptance of the 1982 Convention, meant that this concept actually took off after the above-mentioned events. When negotiating fishing agreements, coastal and long-distance fishing countries did not wait until the 1982 Convention principles were officially accepted before using them as a customary legal framework.
Thus, with the exhaustion of extensification opportunities, supply started to lag behind a demand in steady expansion. In many countries - in the North as well as in the South - the price of high-valued species rose relative to other food commodities. Coastal countries with important resources off their shores started to challenge the principle of open access. Unilaterally, they gradually extended the* jurisdictions over resources that long-distance fleets were currently exploiting. The right to fish acquired value. To keep access to fishing grounds, long-distance fishing countries or fleets accepted that they should pay compensation in kind or in cash. Progress in aquaculture and food technology was insufficient to stop and reverse this structural change.
Like manpower and capital at earlier times, the resource was progressively incorporated into the economic process of allocation. With a lag of ten centuries, the history of fisheries repeated that of agriculture. In western Europe, it was indeed during the late Middle Ages that, for allocating land, economic mechanisms (market) gradually took over the discretionary (command) ones of the feudal system, or those based on the social organization of rural communities. (Duby 1962) Today, world fisheries give another illustration of a process that dominated the history of economic thought: the relationship between scarcity, value, and property. (Brown 1987) "Scarce goods, once appropriated, acquire an exchange value." (Walras 1874) For centuries, long-distance fisheries developed under the principles of freedom of navigation, trade, and fishing. Privileges of anteriority of occupation and possession by rural communities were denied, including in developed countries.^3 Management
systems developed by coastal communities earlier affected by resource scarcity were actually damaged by this development, until the property instruments required by the market economy were ultimately accepted by the large-scale sector itself. (Troadec 1989)
Yet, for the world as a whole, the change has affected domestic fisheries only partially. Only certain countries (such as Australia, Canada, Chile, Iceland, New Zealand, several developing countries in the Indo-Pacific region) have addressed the issue explicitly. Their initiatives invite a considerable interest. They provide evidence to check the validity of the theories, and invaluable experience on possible practical solutions. Still, in many countries, the conditions of access for domestic fishermen have not been modified to the same extent as new conditions were imposed on foreign fishermen. The resources being the same, will the same cause have the same effect? i.e., is the scenario outlined above for international fisheries also valid for domestic fisheries?
<section>Regulating the production function</section>
Dynamics of overfishing and inefficient allocation of the resource
For production to be efficient, inputs have to be used in proportion to their relative scarcity. In commercial fisheries, private producers turn to market mechanisms for allocating capital and manpower. This is not the case, however, for the resource as long as access is open and free. Under such conditions, the resource value is not taken into account in allocating production factors. Resources are used as though they were inexhaustible.
As long as resources were considered not constraining, the need for rationing their use was less critical. Crises caused by local over-capacities could be overcome by redeploying boats and people. Since extensification contributed to economic growth and social stability, national administrations supported it through the provision of subsidies, even though guarantees of access would have often been as effective and cheaper.
If access is not regulated, the value taken by a resource that becomes scarce - for instance, as in agriculture, the resource rent - accrues initially to producers. This surplus comes, after salaries and capital costs are covered, over and above the ordinary profit of enterprises. The normal profit corresponds to risk coverage and to gains in productivity derived from managerial skill, assimilation of technological innovations, and adoption of new marketing policies. Producers can only increase or maintain their share of the surplus by increasing their fishing capacities.
Unfortunately, the limited nature of the resource makes the process perverse. Sooner or later, fishing capacities become excessive relatively to resource productivity. First, the rent is dissipated, then the resource is overfished, finally negative interactions and conflicts become pervasive. In the long run, the state and performances of fisheries tend to deteriorate even further since rise in fish price, technological innovations, and improved knowledge on fish distribution all combine in their effect to enhance the rent value.
It is, therefore, not the limited nature of the resources that causes the deterioration of fisheries. Vineyards producing vintage wines are also scarce. This does not prevent them from being well-managed, nor their exploitation from being efficient. In fisheries, it is the institutions that regulate access which are deficient. Their shortcomings were revealed by the emergence of scarcity on a global scale. Because of the interrelationships between the institutional, economic, and biological factors of overfishing, approaches limited to resource conservation - i.e., those which neglect to develop the institutions required for regulating the economic forces and enhancing the economic performances of fisheries - have the best chances of remaining ineffective. Today, progress in fisheries depends essentially on the adoption of institutional innovations for management. Increasing gross output is not the unique way to generate wealth.
Under the property regimes in force in fisheries, the current deficiencies of allocation mechanisms can schematically be outlined as follows: In customary, pre-merchant systems, both resource allocation and wealth distribution were effected through the social structure of the groups. Everywhere, such systems have fallen, or are falling, into disuse as rural groups are penetrated by the exchange economy. With the search for economic growth, a rationality of horizontal integration based on exchange between individuals aiming at maximizing their own profit is gradually substituted to the rationality of vertical integration within self-sufficient, unspecialized groups, whose economy gave priority to reproduction rather than to individual accumulation. As their economy changed, the social organization that structured the groups disintegrates.
Though customary systems can help in understanding the conditions for optimizing extensive uses of ecosystems, with proper adaptations and consolidations - notably the formal recognition of collective use rights - they could provide transitory solutions indispensable for mitigating social distresses, but their compatibility with the market economy is doubtful.
Everything remains outside of the market has only a use value; everything which crosses its narrow threshold acquires an exchange value. Depending on whether he is on one side or another of the elementary market, the individual, the 'agent', is or is not in the exchange, in what I called the economic life to oppose it to the material life. (Braudel 1976)
The exhaustion of extensification opportunities has also affected the capability of administrations to manage fisheries effectively. They no longer have to distribute subsidies, but do have to halt expansion and to cut down fishing capacities. For that task, administrative mechanisms are seriously ineffective. Because they do not integrate the economic forces that generate overfishing, they cannot make the short-term, individual allocation decisions that are needed, even when they succeed, at considerable costs, in preventing biological overfishing. On the basis of biological and economic information collected for that purpose, governments are well capable of elaborating coherent plans for rational resources utilization. But planning does not say how to distribute fixed amounts of exclusive use rights to best performing producers.
To be operative, economic (market) systems also require adequate property regimes. When access is free, the value of the resource, i.e., the resource rent, is not used together with wages and interest, to balance manpower and capital inputs with resource productivity. In the absence of adequate property regimes, the resource rent cannot be assimilated to a mere producer's surplus, nor the resource to a capital. The resource rent is not a monopoly rent, it is not generated by property but by natural scarcity. It exists, at least potentially, and exerts its effects independently of the identity and status - public or private - of the owner. In addition to enabling the use of the resource rent in the economic mechanism of allocation, the property regime determines who gets it. More generally, property enables the reduction in spillovers that affect the costs or benefits of producers or consumers, either individually or jointly. Compared to occupation and possession, property
enables one to dispose of resources, goods, or services as one pleases, that is, at the exclusion of the others - and in a lawful fashion, according to rules that are accepted and enforced by the group.
Under a functional property regime, the resource rent is separated from the ordinary profit of the enterprises. Performances of fishermen become independent of the number and activity of other producers engaged in the same fisheries, or from the natural, productivity of different fish stocks. Producers' rate of profit is equalized, and balancing inputs and resource productivity is made easier, also the resource rent can materialize. Mobility of people and capital, both within and between fisheries, as well as among competing uses of the resources, or with other sectors of the economy, is improved. Since efficient producers can make better offers for acquiring fishing rights, assimilation of technological innovations that lead to effective economic gains is stimulated.
This functional relationship between property and allocation is not specific to market mechanisms. It applies to other allocation schemes as well. Traditional management systems cannot function effectively without the formal recognition of collective exclusive rights over the resources. A system based on command also requires that duties and powers of decision are clearly distributed within the hierarchical structure, as well as between units in charge of promoting development and those responsible for management. The new ocean regime gives an illustration of this point. It was only when the extension of national jurisdictions was accepted that controlling the amount of (foreign) fishing and negotiating fishing agreements became feasible.
This conclusion does not imply, however, that operative property regimes can actually develop in domestic fisheries. This will depend on the applicability, to the sector, of the proper institutions, as well as of the cost and benefit of their adoption. "Property rights develop when gains for internalizing externalities exceeds the costs of internalization." (Demsetz 1967)
Resource jointness and variability
When revising institutions, proper consideration must be given to the constraint imposed by resource jointness. Resource jointness has four origins:
- the mobility of organisms within populations (even sessile species have mobile stages in their life history, and consume organisms that are also mobile);
- the geographic extension of exploited populations, which is such that most are exploited simultaneously by several fishing companies or fisher groups; some extend even across the boundaries of competence of management bodies at provincial, national, or regional level;
- the occurrence of many species in the same area, of which several are, owing to the limited selectivity of gear and fishing operations, simultaneously harvested;
- the trophic relationships among species making up ecosystems.
Because of resource jointness, performances of individual fishermen are directly affected by the number and activity of other fishermen and users of the same resources. To regulate the production function, interventions at scales higher than the fishing company or the fisher group - that is encompassing sets of resources and fleets sufficiently large to control the fishing regime effectively - are therefore needed. For that purpose, boundaries of management units have to match loci of minimal interactions among fisheries. This is usually possible since resources are structured into discrete species and populations, and fleets can be distinguished by their target species, gear, operating range, and fishing strategies. The objective being operational, the delimitation of fisheries or management units has to be pragmatic. It needs to match the structure and economic importance of the fisheries, as well as the administrative and research capacities that are available.
Other processes of higher scales may justify interventions at higher levels e.g., for sharing the production of stocks jointly exploited in two, or more, unit fisheries, or for controlling pollution and other interactions among different uses of ecosystems. The larger the number of uses to be managed simultaneously, the more space remains - the only dimension through which controls can be effected.
Resource jointness has another important consequence. The resource can seldom be allocated directly among fishermen. But quantitative fishing rights can be attributed through controls on harvests (quotas) or means of production (licences). The use of one or the other (or of both) surrogate(s) will depend on the biological and technical features, and the economic and social structure of particular fisheries, as well as on the available administrative and research capacities. Where they can be implemented, catch quotas may facilitate a separate control of capital and manpower inputs, and of resource use, that is, the distinction between resource exploitation and management (see below).
Resource variability
also affects institutions. For highly fluctuating stocks, the future value of the resource rent may be difficult to forecast, and the resulting uncertainty may reduce the effectiveness of economic mechanisms of allocation. Governments are expected to intervene when stocks collapse. The allotment, for undetermined periods of time, of fixed catch quotas may not be feasible, unless part of the overall annual yield is kept in reserve and allocated through other means in years of above-average recruitment.^4 Fine tuning the fishing rate to offset short-term resource fluctuations through the manipulation of a tax on vessels or catches is not operationally feasible, nor politically acceptable as taxes have to be raised in years when fishermen's revenues are dwindling.
Matching resource management and exploitation
The difference of scale between the harvesting and management processes have critical implications on property regimes and allocation mechanisms. Workable arrangements can be classified under two broad categories:
- schemes in which fishing units are regrouped into sets, at the level of which resource management can be effected;
- schemes where resource harvesting and management are administered separately at two different levels by different entities, and then articulated through the allocation mechanism.
Traditional fisher communities, state-owned fishing companies, and cartels are examples falling under the first category. With sets of adequate dimensions, overall fishing inputs can, in theory, be matched to resource productivity. In practice, these solutions present limitations. Usually, coastal communities exploit jointly a variety of stocks. When exploitation has to be rationed, interventions at a higher level become necessary to harmonize the fishing activities of neighbouring groups.
In theory, a single state-owned company could enable input and output to be balanced at the level of a fishery. Still, this solution suffers from another drawback: when not pressed by competition in production and distribution, state fishing companies have, on average, poor records of efficiency. For similar reasons and equity considerations regarding access, cartels are not common in fisheries despite the merits they may have when proper conditions are met. (Gates 1989)^5
Under the second category, the management and exploitation functions are conducted separately. Space and time-scales of resource management are strong technical arguments in favour of a regime of state property of the resources. They are not the only ones. Because of interactions between unit fisheries as well as among ecosystems uses, and because several fishery resources can be exploited by groups which cannot always compete, immediately at least, under the same regime (small-scale and large-scale fishermen, domestic and foreign fleets), administrations frequently have to make allocation decisions between major fishery units and fisher groups.^6 Also, the classic economic argument put forward in agriculture, which states that public ownership of land can facilitate the investment of the resource rent in activities contributing directly to the development of national economies - rather than its immediate consumption or hoarding - and stimulate technological innovations and
efficiency in harvesting activities, is also valid in fisheries, especially in developing countries with large resources at their disposal. Since their economies are less diversified, resource rents, which can be considerable,^7 are the major source of investment they use to develop their infrastructures, human resources and new industries.
A regime of private property by the State recognizes that harvesting is generally a private - even if collective - activity whose economic performances depends on the capacity to ration, i.e. on exclusion. Such a regime distinguishes fisheries from pure public property resources, goods or services (e.g., justice, or defence) where exclusion of nationals is not acceptable, or from resources where rationing is not necessary, for example, urban lighting.
Resource ownership entails five major duties:
1. resource conservation;
2. determining exploitation regimes for discrete fisheries;
3. making resource allocation decisions among interrelated fisheries or user groups;
4. negotiating harvesting contracts with fishermen; and
5. monitoring that harvesting is conducted according to contracts.
This distinction between resource management and harvesting implies that rights attributed to fishing companies or fisher groups are only temporary rights of use (tenancy), and not property rights. Governments can allocate such rights through economic (market) mechanisms. To determine their price, they can rely on the market (public auction), or use criteria of their own to fix the level of royalties. In the latter case, however, they will encounter serious difficulties in adjusting the amount of rights to the optimum level. If the price is low, they will have to use discretionary decisions whose political limitations have already been underlined. However, when extracting a substantial part of the rent, royalty schemes (on catches or fishing capacities) can reduce overinvestment significantly and, thus, improve the state of resources and the economic performances of fisheries, while providing funds to cover management costs.
Thus, a private property regime of the resources by the State is compatible with an economic mechanism (market) for allocating use rights to private producers. Under such a regime, access remains open but not free, while with an administrative rationing of entry, access is free but not open. Governments can allocate collective concessions to fisher groups, notably those handicapped by history (lower geographic and professional mobility), or enjoying anteriority privileges over certain resources. Usually, large-scale and small-scale fisheries will require different institutional setups to reflect differences in their economic and social organization.
Effects on wealth distribution
It is especially when changes in property regime are envisaged, that a demonstration of their general interest will seldom suffice to make institutional reforms acceptable. Certain groups, losing in the change or fearing to do so, will strongly oppose changes. Fishermen are likely to show little enthusiasm for a clarification of the property regime, even though a distinction between a state property of the resources and private tenancy rights would not depart significantly from regimes encountered in pre-merchant rural communities.
... the household ... is usually not the exclusive owner of its resources: farmlands, pastures, hunting or fishing territories. But across the ownership of greater groups or higher authorities, even by means of such ownership, the household retains the primary relation to productive resources. When these resources are undivided, the domestic group has unimpeded access: where the land is allotted, it has claim to an appropriate share.... The family enjoys the usufruct, the use right...." (Marshall Sahlins 1974)
Under current institutions, fisheries administrations and industry have strong incentives to maintain the status quo.
However, compensations can make institutional changes more acceptable, accepting that anteriority in the participation to fisheries entails certain privileges. Most countries that started to regulate access in their domestic fisheries allotted initial fishing rights on the basis of fishermen's past historical performances. Effects of new institutions on wealth distribution have to be anticipated. Special dispositions may have to be taken for underprivileged groups. But the fact that risk of inequity is always latent is no justification for no action. Jurisdictions in force are not necessarily equitable. If law is not justice, there is no justice without law.
Under a regime of private property by the State and a market mechanism for allocation, fishermen's major gain will consist in a reduction of uncertainty.^8 As overfishing lowers, resource variability, risk of stock collapse, and conflicts will go down. By abating competition for the resource, guarantee of access matched to amortization time of investments and manpower mobility would enable fishermen and the industry to plan their activities more efficiently. They would be in a better position to defend their rights against other uses of marine resources. But their average revenues will remain determined by their opportunity costs - that is, by the state of other sectors of national economy - and the normal profit of enterprises. The resource rent would accrue to the State which could use it, first to cover the management costs, then for the development of national economy. The net gainers, that is tax payers, should consider fisheries management more positively. The task of
the fishery administration will be facilitated as resource allocation will be easier, the rate of fishing lower, and conflicts the exception rather than the rule. Enforcement will be easier and cheaper, and environmentalists' assessment of fisheries may improve, also research could devote its scarce resources to more innovative kinds of investigations. The demand for it will be enhanced since the normal profit of fishing companies can be temporarily increased by better information on the resources and technological innovations.
<section>Implications for management structures</section>
The mandate, membership, and rules and regulations of management structures depend on the property regime and allocation mechanism that are adopted. Since the latter change with the fisheries, no standard model can be proposed, however, general principles can be put forward.
National level
1. The progress of fisheries depends essentially on interventions on resource management at the level of fishery units. Typologies of fisheries are needed to delineate management units.
2. Since world fishery resources are heavily concentrated within the areas of national jurisdiction and management units are, on average, smaller than the EEZs, coastal countries and, within them national administrations, have a direct and major responsibility for the revision of management institutions.
3. Depending on the extent to which the management and harvesting functions can be separated, the mandate, membership, and internal rules of management bodies are likely to vary around three basic models:
a. Clear distinction: public management by an administrative structure responsible for assessing and monitoring the state of fisheries, and relying on market mechanisms to determine rental rates and allocating temporary, quantitative fishing rights to private producers. Such a scheme is more likely to be adopted, initially, in large-scale, capitalistic fisheries.
b. Partial distinction: concerted (or co-) management by structures in which fisheries administrations and elected representatives of fishermen would collaborate. Such structures are likely to encounter difficulties, and to show inefficiencies, similar to those experienced in agricultural cooperatives when the social and economic principles on which they are run are not properly clarified. Such a scheme may represent a transitory, but unavoidable, stage in the development of management institutions.
c. Low distinction: collective (private) management by groups of fishermen, or companies, to whom exclusive collective rights of use are granted over a given resource, for a fixed but renewable period of time (traditional groups, cartels).
4. By dissociating wealth distribution aspects from participation in harvesting, economic mechanisms - with adequate property regimes promote efficiency in exploitation and effectiveness in management. They further technological innovations that lead to efficiency, and could provide substantial rents for the development of South economies. They would reduce the political burden of administrations.
5. With the reduction of international dimensions of fisheries management that came with the extension of national jurisdictions, a partial transfer of management duties to lower administrative levels (e.g., province) can be envisaged. At lower levels, the importance of fisheries relative to other economic sectors is better appreciated, and communication among parties concerned by management facilitated.^9 More generally, all fisheries units need not be administered at the same level (local, provincial, national, or regional). The essential requirement is that the level matches the geographic extension of unit fisheries. Different levels are compatible.
Regional level
1. Where stocks are entirely distributed within areas of national jurisdiction, there is no need to maintain or create international structures for their management. Where two, or more, coastal States share the same stocks, where stocks extend over EEZs and the high seas, and for highly migratory species (United Nations 1991), the need for regional cooperation in management remains largely unchanged.
2. Participation in the management of shared, straddling, and high-seas stocks depends on the property regime of the resources. For shared stocks totally circumscribed within a set of EEZs, resource property and management responsibility coincide; participation in management is closed and determined by ownership (exclusion). This is not the case for straddling and high-seas stocks; property is common; exclusion in harvesting is not acceptable, only reduction of catches; responsibility for management falls primarily on fishing nations and coastal countries in the area of jurisdiction of which such stocks occur.
3. For all such stocks, economic mechanisms of allocation may also facilitate management by distinguishing between property, management responsibility, and distribution of wealth on the one hand, and participation in harvesting on the other hand. Then, rationing and exclusion in harvesting will be possible. The condition is that owners agree on the long-term sharing of output (resource rent), but not necessarily on input (vessels or jobs). Agreements of that kind is very difficult to reach where the number of parties is high. The adoption of economic mechanisms of allocation will be easier in fisheries where a small number of coowners share common traditions and belong to the same regional economic (and political) organization. In that perspective, the experience gained from the management of the Pribiloff/North Pacific fur seal fishery may deserve fresh attention. It is practically the only international stock which has been managed with some efficiency, under a scheme
where resource ownership and harvesting were separated.^10
4. Progress in the management of straddling stocks extending marginally in the high seas depends also on the clarification of their property regime, or on a distinction between ownership and harvesting. The property issue is essentially a political one. Its technical aspects do not differ significantly from those on which the principles of the UN 1982 Convention were developed.
5. In the absence of exclusion in the harvesting of high-seas stocks, changes in the mandate, and improvement in the performances of regional management bodies are unlikely. The need for rationing harvesting is less urgent for stocks, e.g., several stocks of oceanic tunas, whose exploitation is still constrained by demand rather than by supply.
6. Progress in resource conservation is possible through political processes that lead to the banning of a particular fishing activity (e.g., moratorium on whaling, or of pelagic netting). Such an approach can be justified as a temporary measure until the conditions and tools for rational exploitation are developed. However, by itself it cannot provide long-term solutions and should not, therefore, be generalized. Man cannot stop using natural resources, but needs to develop institutions and practices for their wise and efficient utilization.
7. As uses of aquatic ecosystems intensify and diversify, the development of methods and the conduct of analyses integrating the effects of fishing, sea-ranching programmes, harvesting of juveniles from wild populations for aquaculture purposes, pollution of various origins, and climatic variability, on the structure, abundance, and productivity of exploited or altered ecosystems, become urgent. The ability to manage effectively exploited fish populations and to conserve aquatic ecosystems depends on the capacity to discriminate and quantify the different causes of variation - including the natural ones. Regional bodies with competence over the various uses of aquatic ecosystems - but separately for analysis and action - are needed, especially for closed or semi-closed seas surrounded by densely populated and highly industrialized areas such as the Mediterranean.
<section>Conclusion</section>
The origin of the poor performances of fisheries - including the in efficiency of resource conservation - has been located in the deficiencies of the conventional institutions regulating access. It is not economics that has to be reconciled with ecology, but institutions that need to be adjusted to the new conditions of resource scarcity. There is no objective reason to oppose exploitation and conservation. Since the latter conditions the former, objectives of economic efficiency and resource preservation are compatible. Man needs to use and preserve the biosphere equally.
The new ocean regime represents an important step towards the adjustment of institutions to the new conditions. If it has had little effect so far, on the management of high-seas fisheries, the clarification of the international property regime of neritic resources has created new opportunities for the management of domestic fisheries. But, this step alone is insufficient, it has to be completed by new national property regimes, allocation mechanisms, and management structures. Wherever applicable, economic mechanisms of allocation can improve considerably performances of resource harvesting and management.
The space and time scales of processes that can be regulated have a great significance for the design of the new institutions. They are critical for determining the levels of intervention and, for that reason, have direct implications on the functional sharing of duties between the private and the public sectors. They are equally critical for determining the nature and contents of the property regimes, the kinds of allocation mechanisms, and the mandate, membership, and rules and regulations of management bodies. A large number of combinations of property regimes, allocation mechanisms, management structures, supports for fishing rights, and economic organization of fisheries can be envisaged. But the choice for particular fisheries is low. Furthermore, the development of institutions has to go step by step, following sequences that can be assimilated by, and are acceptable in, specific fisheries.
From a technical viewpoint, the mandate, membership, and internal rules of fisheries management bodies should optimally be determined after considering:
i. the structure and dynamics of the production function;
ii. the smallest sets of resources and fleets that can effectively be managed separately;
iii. the specific features of unit fisheries; and
iv. the management institutions that match their specific features.
Of the various levels of intervention in the production function today, the fishery unit is the most critical. Progress in economic performances and effective conservation depends primarily on the regulation of unit fisheries or their equivalent. Because the scales of resource management and harvesting differ, they will have to be regulated separately in a majority of fisheries. Property regimes and allocation mechanisms can articulate these two functions in an effective and efficient manner.
For several reasons, the responsibility of adjusting management institutions to the new conditions rests primarily with national administrations:
1. the largest part of the world fishery potential is located within areas of national jurisdiction;
2. the spatial scale of unit fisheries is on average smaller than that of EEZs;
3. the spatial, time, social, and political dimensions of resource management require interventions at higher levels than the fishing company, or even the unit fishery;
4. the task of revising legislations regulating an economic activity falls under the responsibility of national governments.
One should not infer, however, from the emphasis put on national and public levels that potentially useful interventions are restricted to such levels. On the one hand, private producers are generally in a better position to optimize harvesting in commercial fisheries. On the other hand, there would be benefit in managing certain fisheries at provincial or even lower levels, whereas others, extending beyond national boundaries, have to be regulated at regional level.
The emphasis put on institutions for economic and social development is not fisheries-specific. Today, the most serious issues that puzzle our society, e.g., the conservation of the biosphere, the state of traditional groups in rural areas, the underdevelopment of countries in the South, coincide with sectors of activity and groups in their first contacts with technologically and economically advanced sectors of activity. Traditional societies and sectors are actually damaged by such contacts as long as they have not themselves developed the institutions which they need in order to benefit from the market economy. As communication and exchange intensify, such societies and sectors have less and less time to adjust to a faster and faster changing environment.
The fishery system can provide a useful model for analysing the broader issue of environmental conservation or protection. Even though ecosystems and the regulation of their uses are markedly more complex, and interventions at higher scales justified by the space and time extension of certain processes (e.g., acid rains, global warming), the natural and institutional constraints affecting environmental conservation and fisheries management are similar: resource scarcity, jointness, variability and geographic extension; interference of man-made effects and natural variability; deficiencies of institutions for regulating access whence natural capacities are saturated. Because the fisheries production function is simpler and better known, and because commercial fisheries are a source of quantitative information with hardly any parallel in other uses of ecosystems, the potential value of the fishery model goes beyond the conservation of fish stocks and the economic optimization
of their harvesting. It can contribute to the development of general principles and strategies of broader applicability for the wiser and more efficient use of the biosphere.
<section>Notes</section>
1. This paper has been written by the author in his personal capacity. Therefore, the ideas it contains are not necessarily those of FAO, UNDP, or the Moroccan Ministry of Fisheries, and cannot commit those administrations.
2. i.e., the fishing rate - and the fishing capacities which generate it - and its distribution relative to that of the species and sizes making up the stock.
3. With the notable exception of Japan, which may be related to the later development of long-distance fisheries in this country.
4. Which is a palliative, and not a solution.
5. Periodic tenders can be used to maintain competition and open access.
6. Administrations are regularly making short-term allocation decisions among individuals within fishing groups. They encounter considerable difficulties in this task. At the same time, governments do not always give proper attention to long-term allocation decisions among groups, although such decisions require public interventions.
7. e.g., US$ 250 millions (1986) for the Moroccan cephalopod fishery alone (Bertignac et al. 1989).
8. The fishermen's opportunistic behaviour is largely related to the universe of uncertainty in which they operate.
9. It is not without reasons that several island states are among countries where substantial progress in management has been accomplished.
10. However, there are other differences: e.g., the stock is exploited ashore, which facilitates control.
<section>References</section>
Bertignac, M., S. Cunningham, and M. Zouiri. "La pêcherie céphalopodière marocaine. Modélisation bio-économique et propositions d'aménagement." Projet PNUD/FAO MOR 86/019. 1989.
Braudel, F. La dynamique du capitalisme. Edit. Artaud, Paris: 1976.
Brown, V. "Value and property in the history of economic thought: an analysis of the emergence of scarcity." Econ. et Soc., 71987: 85-112.
Demsetz, H. "Towards a theory of property rights." Amer. Econ. Rev., 57 (1967) 347-359.
Duby, G. L'économie rurale et la vie des champagnes dans l'Occident médiéval. Aubier, Edit. Montaigne, Paris: 1962.
FAO. "The State of Food and Agriculture 1980. World Review: Marine Fisheries in the New Era of National Jurisdiction." Rome: FAO, Table A-1 (e): 82. 1981.
Gates, J.M. "La régulation du taux d'exploitation dans les pêcheries commerciales." In Troadec, J.-P., op. cit., 1989, 497-524.
Jollivet, M. (sous la dir.), "Pour une agriculture diverifiée. Arguments, questions recherches." Collect. Alternatives Rurales. Edit. L'Harmattan, Paris: 1988.
Rettig, R.B. "Is Fishery Management at a Turning Point? Reflections on the Evolution of Rights Based Fishing." In Neher, P., R. Arnason, and N. Mollett, Rights Based Fishing. NATO ASI Series, Ser. E: Applied Sciences, vol. 169, 1989, 47-64.
Sahlins, Marshall. Stone Age Economics. Chicago: Aldine, 1974.
Troadec, J.-P. (ed.). "L'homme et les ressources halieutiques. Essai sur l'usage d'une ressource renouvelable commune." Paris: IFREMER, 1989.
United Nations. "The Law of the Sea: The Regime for High Seas Fisheries Status and Prospects." Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea, 1992.
Walras, L. Eléments d'économie politique pure. Lausanne: Imprimerie L. Corbaz &c C., 1874.
<section>Regional cooperation in nonliving resources: Joint management zones</section>
Francisco Orrego Vicuña
Various legal arrangements brought into force in the past three decades have sought the development and management of non-living resources by means of the establishment of the joint zones between the States involved. (Brownlie 1979) The rules of international law applicable to this new form of cooperation have steadily developed from these regimes and have given place to an extended contemporary practice. Most of such arrangements have been bilateral in nature, although proposals for the participation of more States have been occasionally put forward. Only two multilateral regimes have relied to some extent on this approach - the 1920 Spitzbergen Treaty (Spitzbergen Treaty 1920) and the recent Convention on the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resource Activities (CRAMRA, 1988), while part XI of the Law of the Sea Convention has only partially reflected this trend. (LOSC, 1982)
<section>Concept of joint development and management of zones</section>
An interesting report prepared by Professor Rainer Lagoni for the International Committee on the Exclusive Economic Zone of the International Law Association explains that the concept of "Joint Development" has been used in relation to "the cooperation between States with regard to the exploration for and exploitation of certain deposits, fields or accumulations of non-living resources, which either extend across a boundary or lie in an area of overlapping claims." (Lagoni 1988) These arrangements can include or not a mechanism for the joint management of such resources, but they will always involve some degree of cooperation among the States concerned. Eventually the joint management can also be undertaken by private operators in the context of "unitization" of deposits or other contractual arrangements.
The practice being so varied in terms of the specific mechanisms devised for undertaking such a cooperation, it is preferable to have a concept that will encompass these various modalities at large. Therefore, the essential element is to seek cooperation from the States, and eventually operators, in relation to such areas and deposits. (Miyoshi 1988)
A good number of these arrangements have been made in connection with existing boundaries, while a few others are devised in the context of a delimitation process, and still others originate in situations where delimitation is pending. (Lagoni 1988) In turn, the jurisdictional models to be followed can also be numerous, ranging from a territorial model to forms of condominium and eventually to an "open-use" model. More often, however, jurisdictional models of a functional type will be used, either by means of ensuring shared or joint jurisdiction, consortium models, or models relying on the operation of institutional mechanisms. (Orrego Vicuña 1988) The practice which will be examined next reveals a combination of jurisdictional criteria organized on a rather pragmatic basis.
<section>Legal regime of joint development and management zones</section>
Geographical scope
The geographical scope of joint development and management zones is also very varied. A 1960 Agreement between Austria and Czechoslovakia, dealing with common land deposits of natural gas and oil, does not refer to a particular geographical area but to a certain deposit the extent of which would be determined by the States Parties, being a mixed Technical Commission empowered to calculate the resources in situ. (Austria-Czechoslovakia 1960; Lagoni 1988)
In most cases, however, precise geographical areas are defined in connection with resources. The Norwegian-United Kingdom Agreement of 1976 on the Frigg Field gas reservoir defines the area by both geographical and geological factors, eventually extending to other gas-bearing strata from which the resource can flow into the area. (Norway-United Kingdom 1976; Manin 1978; Lagoni 1988) Geographical coordinates are also utilized in the Abu Dhabi-Qatar 1979 Agreement (Abu Dhabi-Qatar 1969), the Bay of Biscay 1974 Convention between France and Spain (France-Spain 1974), the 1981 Iceland-Norwegian Agreement relating to Jan Mayen (Iceland-Norway 1981), and the Malaysia-Thailand 1979 Memorandum of Understanding (Malaysia-Thailand 1979).
Some other agreements use different geographical approaches. The Ems-Dollard 1960 Treaty between the Federal Republic of Germany and The Netherlands (Federal Republic of Germany-The Netherlands 1962) has established a joint development zone in the Ems Estuary, divided by a provisional line into two subzones, one for each country. Nine subzones are identified in the Japan-Korea 1974 Agreement on the joint development of areas of the continental shelf (Japan-Korea 1974). The Bahrain-Saudi Arabia 1958 Agreement establishes a joint development area which lies entirely in the Saudi Arabian continental shelf (Bahrain-Saudi Arabia 1958). In spite of the partition of the Neutral Zone between Kuwait and Saudi Arabia in 1965, the coordinated exploitation of the whole area was kept, thus, extending the continental shelf six miles offshore (Kuwait-Saudi Arabia 1965; Lagoni 1988). Iran and Sharjah have established a joint regime for the disputed island of Abu Musa (Iran-Sharjah, 1971).
Saudi Arabia and Sudan established a "Common Zone" in areas of the seabed and subsoil beyond the 1000-metre depth lines in the Red Sea (Saudi Arabia-Sudan, 1974).
While not strictly a joint development regime, Australia and Papua New Guinea agreed on a complex delimitation scheme which, among other features, sets up a protected zone where mining is prohibited and makes other arrangements in different areas (Australia-Papua New Guinea 1978). A highly complex "Zone of cooperation", defined by geographical coordinates and divided into three areas, has been established by Australia and Indonesia in the East Timor continental shelf area (Australia-Indonesia 1989). Indonesia and Viet Nam have discussed eventual arrangements for the Natuna Sea area. (Valencia 1986)
It should also be kept in mind that such cooperative arrangements can cover broad geographical areas. The 1920 Spitzbergen Treaty, for example, relates to the archipelago in terms of land areas and the territorial sea, a matter of controversy being its extension to the continental shelf areas. The 1988 CRAMRA Convention encompasses the whole of the Antarctic continent and surrounding continental shelf areas. This means that the geographical scope of any such arrangement need not be restricted to a given deposit or specific area but can extend to broad regions of land and marine spaces.
Exploration and exploitation arrangements
The arrangements relating to the exploration and exploitation of natural resources in joint development areas range from rather simple schemes of cooperation to highly complex and structured systems of jurisdiction and revenue sharing.
The Austria-Czechoslovakia Agreement is based on the very simple principle that each party exploits its share of resources in proportion to the size of the deposit on its side of the boundary, under the conditions laid down by the Technical Commission. The Bahrain-Saudi Arabia Agreement stipulates that exploitation shall be carried in the manner decided by the latter government, but it shall grant one-half of the net revenues to Bahrain, an approach which is, of course, related to the fact that the whole area lies on the Saudi continental shelf; accordingly, sovereignty and administration of the area are not affected by the agreement. (Lagoni 1988) Between Abu Dhabi and Qatar there is also the principle of equal sharing of royalties, profits and fees, but the exploitation is undertaken under the terms of a concession granted by Abu Dhabi. In the Ems Estuary area both Germany and The Netherlands exercise jurisdiction and apply their laws and regulations in the respective
subzones, but they may grant concessions under their domestic law for the whole joint development zone; the concessionaires, whose rights and obligations are spelled out in detail, are entitled to an equal share of the oil and gas recovered from the whole area, the expenses being allocated in proportion to the share. (Barberis 1975) In the Iran-Sharjah understanding a single concessionaire exploits the oil resources of Abu Musa, who shall pay one-half of the stipulated amounts directly to each government.
A different and more complex approach is that which provides for the "unitization" of the deposit which is to be exploited as a single unit. (Woodliffe 1977) In this regard, the Frigg Field Agreement provides that each government will require its licensees to enter into an agreement with the licensees of the other party in order to appoint a "Unit Operator." The agreement also regulates the free movement of persons and material, safety, inspections, taxation, transfer of rights and other matters, but does not affect the rights and jurisdiction of each party. Kuwait and Saudi Arabia have retained their joint and undivided equal rights over the resources of the partitioned neutral zone, what has been appropriately described as a "functionally limited condominium." (Lagoni 1988) Joint exploitation is undertaken in this context while prior oil concessions remain in force; freedom of access and movement, safety, and taxation are also governed by the Agreement. Bolivia and Chile
agreed last century on a short-lived condominium for the exploitation of resources extending to large areas on both sides of the agreed land boundary.
Other situations do not involve unitization but rely on a joint-venture approach. In the case of France and Spain each government retains its sovereignty and jurisdiction over the respective area of the joint zone, providing for joint ventures between the companies operating in each sector and the export of the resources recovered from the sector of one State to the other State. Also in the Jan Mayen case there is a provision for "joint venture contracts," with the possibility of a State Party participating in the activities which take place in the sector of the other Party with a share of 25 per cent in conjunction with governmental or non-governmental companies or else directly between the States concerned; some activities of exploration are to be undertaken by the Norwegian Petroleum Directorate at its own expense. The Japan-Korea Agreement provides for concessionaires of both parties, who shall enter into an "operating agreement" and shall have equal share of the
resources; the laws and regulations that apply are those of the Party whose concessionaire is designated "operator" in a given subzone.
Another quite different approach is that which entrusts an international organization or Commission with the basic decisions relating to exploration and exploitation. Saudi Arabia and Sudan have established one such Commission for the exploitation of metalliferous deposits in the Indian Ocean, which grants licences and concessions, supervises exploitation and determines the applicable law. Also Malaysia and Thailand have established a Joint Authority which assumes all rights and responsibilities on behalf of the parties in relation to exploitation of the area, including the terms applicable to these activities; the Understanding contains a number of rules on criminal jurisdiction and related issues. (Valencia 1986; Valencia and Miyoshi 1986)
The most elaborate scheme yet undertaken is that between Australia and Indonesia relating to the Timor Gap. The Zone of Cooperation is divided into Areas A, B. and C. In the first of such areas the rights and responsibilities of the two States regarding exploration and exploitation of petroleum shall be exercised by the Ministerial Council and the Joint Authority, the operations being carried out by means of production-sharing contracts. In Areas B and C, each State has the primary responsibility respectively, with the obligation to notify the other party of the production agreements entered into and to pay the other party 10 per cent of the income tax collected. The Ministerial Council is the body in charge of policy orientation, while the Joint Authority is the entity in charge of management of exploration and exploitation with all necessary powers to this effect. Detailed clauses govern surveillance, security, search and rescue, air traffic, surveys, research, marine
environment and other matters. Unitization is also provided for deposits extending across the boundaries of Area A. The criminal law of each party applies to its nationals or residents, but the law applicable to production-sharing contracts is specified in each contract. A petroleum-mining code, a model production-sharing contract, and a taxation code are annexed to the Treaty, providing with great detail for the organization of contracts and operations. (Prescott 1989; Willheim 1989)
It has been reported that Argentina and Chile have recently discussed the establishment of a large ecological joint zone in the disputed areas of the Patagonian boundary line, including ice-fields, which would be managed by a Joint Authority. Such an eventual solution has not met, however, with general support. Among the multilateral schemes, the Spitzbergen Treaty provides for a simple solution based on the recognition of Norwegian sovereignty and the granting of mining rights to all the parties to the Treaty on an equal basis. In this arrangement there is no unitization nor joint-venture cooperation, but individual operations. To a limited extent Norwegian law applies. (Ostreng 1977) The CRAMRA Convention, on the other hand, is extremely elaborate, both in terms of the procedures for opening areas for exploration and exploitation and in relation to the content of the Management Schemes, which shall embody the rights and obligations of the operators. Joint ventures are also
encouraged and a highly complex institutional machinery is set up to manage the system as a whole. The interests of claimants, non-claimants, and the international community are accommodated within this Convention. The applicable international law to mining operations has been substantially developed in this framework, having transformed Antarctica into the biggest joint development and management zone ever devised. (Orrego Vicuña 1988)
Institutional machinery
A good number of joint development zones include some form of institutional machinery and provisions for the settlement of disputes. Most are rather simple schemes. The Austria-Czechoslovakia Agreement provides for a mixed Technical Commission, the decisions of which are considered to be accepted by the parties unless there is an objection within a month; disputes which are not settled in the Commission or by diplomatic means can be submitted to arbitration. A Consultative Commission has also been established for the Frigg Field, but the most important decisions are taken by the governments; the settlement of disputes also follows the pattern of Commission intervention, negotiation, or submission to an Arbitral Tribunal. (Utton 1968) The Kuwait-Saudi Arabia Agreement has a joint permanent Committee, with settlement of disputes referred to friendly means, the Arab League, and the International Court of Justice. The France-Spain joint zone relies only on consultations between
the parties and the settlement of disputes by means of negotiation or arbitration. The Iceland-Norway Agreement provides for a Conciliation Commission for the settlement of disputes. In the Germany-Netherlands case there is provision for arbitration, while the question of delimitation can be submitted to the International Court of Justice.
As mentioned above, a few agreements contain highly elaborate institutional arrangements. The Saudi Arabia-Sudan Red Sea Agreement provides for a powerful Joint Commission, which can determine the boundaries of the zone, grant licences and concessions, supervise the exploitation, and determine the applicable law; disputes can eventually be submitted to the International Court of Justice. The Japan-Korea agreement also establishes a Joint Commission entrusted with important powers, including recommendations for the settlement of disputes between concessionaires, and the negotiation or referral to arbitration of interstate disputes.
The Malaysia-Thailand Agreement, like the Australia-Indonesia Treaty, establishes a very powerful Joint Authority which assumes the rights and responsibilities of the parties in the described zone of cooperation. This Authority is an international organization with legal personality, which manages the aggregate of activities in the area, including the terms of contracts. The settlement of disputes is to be undertaken only by means of consultation and negotiation; the latter Treaty, however, provides for binding commercial arbitration for production-sharing contracts.
CRAMRA has also provided for a very elaborate and complex institutional arrangement, which proved necessary not so much in relation to the management of exploration and exploitation as to the need to accommodate different national interests, with particular reference to the role of claimants and non-claimants of sovereignty. A Meeting of States Parties, the Commission, Regulatory Committees, and Advisory Committee, and a Secretariat are called to intervene in the management of this regime. Decision-making is also very elaborate as is the distribution of powers between the institutions and between the latter and the participating States Parties. A binding procedure for the settlement of disputes leads to arbitration or the International Court of Justice.
<section>Ocean boundaries and joint development zones</section>
Most of the existing joint development zones have been devised in order to deal one way or the other with the question of boundaries or competing claims of sovereignty and jurisdiction. In the case of existing boundaries such arrangements prevent the infringement of rights of either party which could otherwise be the result of exploitation from the opposite side. (Lagoni 1988) In other cases such arrangements will facilitate the actual delimitation of a boundary by separating from it the issue of underlying resources, which will be bought under a joint regime. (Lagoni 1988) Still a few such zones are established while delimitation is pending in order to facilitate the activities of exploration and exploitation and overcome jurisdictional difficulties. (Lagoni 1988)
The fact that many deposits of natural resources extend across national boundaries has led to important developments in the law applicable to such situations in terms of the organization of the exploitation under cooperative or unitized arrangements. (Lagoni 1979; Onorato 1968) Article 4 of the 1965 agreement between Norway and the United Kingdom has provided a model clause for resource deposits of this kind, requiring the parties to seek agreement on the most effective manner to undertake exploitation and the manner in which the proceeds should be apportioned. Such a clause is contained today in numerous agreements and it has also, in part, inspired Article 142 of the Law of the Sea Convention, requiring due regard to the interests of coastal States when activities in the seabed area relate to deposits lying across the limits of national jurisdiction, eventually entailing liability. (Lagoni 1988)
The issue of resource deposits has often been raised in the litigation of ocean boundaries before international courts and tribunals, but so far it has not carried particular weight in the adjudication of such disputes.
<section>The expanding role of joint zones: a conclusion</section>
Joint development and management zones have thus far accomplished a useful role in relation to the exploration and exploitation of deposits connected with boundaries between States, with the process of agreeing on a delimitation, and with situations where delimitation is pending. There is a trend here which is likely to continue in view of the fact that such arrangements provide a management tool in situations which otherwise would lead to disputes and confrontations.
Although such zones have been mainly devised in relation to nonliving resources, there is no reason to prevent their utilization with respect to other uses of the sea. In point of fact, some of the most recent agreements have included clauses on cooperation regarding living resources, the environment, scientific research, search and rescue, and other issues. This may well be an area of expansion for such zones in the near future.
The most promising development, however, lies in the expanding geographical scope of joint development zones. First, the Spitsbergen Treaty, to a limited extent, and second, CRAMRA in a very broad dimension, have proven that such a concept can well apply to large geographical regions, whether it be an archipelago, a whole continent, or the immense area of the oceans composing the Southern Ocean. Both land and maritime areas are brought under such concept in these instances. Regional seas as a whole and other situations could well benefit from these precedents in the future. The geographical expansion is also related to the establishment of comprehensive regimes under international law for the management of such large areas. Again, CRAMRA provides a most illustrative example of both substantive and procedural rules to this effect. The ensuing accommodation of interests not only takes into account those that are at the heart of given disputes, but to an increasing extent those
of the broader international community as well. Coastal and non-coastal States participate on equal footing in this regime, including its maritime dimension. This innovative approach is certainly a major development of international law.
Both the law and the practice discussed in this chapter reveal that there is ample ground for cooperation and understanding in the context of agreed joint regimes, even in situations of disputed claims. The decisive issue is that participating states may derive comparable benefits from such arrangements.
<section>References</section>
Abu Dhabi-Qatar. "Agreement on settlement of maritime boundary lines and sovereign rights over islands, signed on 30 March 1969." United Nations Document ST/LEG/SER.B/16, 403.
Australia-Indonesia. "Treaty on the zone of cooperation in an area between the Indonesian province of East Timor and Northern Australia, done over the Zone of cooperation on 11 December 1989." International Legal Materials, vol. 29, 1990, 469.
Australia-Papua New Guinea. "Treaty on sovereignty and maritime boundaries in the area between the countries, done at Sydney on 18 December 1978." International Legal Materials, vol. 18, 1979, 291.
Austria-Czechoslovakia. "Agreement concerning the working of common deposits of natural gas and petroleum, signed at Prague on 23 January 1960." United Nations Treaty Series, vol. 495, 1964, 126.
Bahrain-Saudi Arabia. "Agreement concerning the delimitation of the Continental Shelf in the Persian Gulf, done at Riyadh on 22 February 1958." United Nations Document ST/LEG/SER.B/Add. 2, 185.
Barberis, Julio A. "Los recursos minerales compartidos entre Estados y el derecho internacional." Derecho de la Integracion, vol. VIII, nos. 18-19, 1975, 45-58.
Brownlie, fan. "Legal status of natural resources in International Law. Some aspects." Recueil des Cours de l'Academie de Droit International, vol. 162, 1979, 1, 272.
Convention on the Regulation of Antarctic Mineral Resource Activities (CRAMRA), done at Wellington, 2 June 1988. International Legal Materials, vol. 27, 1988, 859.
Federal Republic of Germany-Netherlands. "Supplementary Agreement to the Treaty concerning arrangements for cooperation in the Ems Estaury (Ems-Dollard Treaty) signed at Bennekom on 14 May 1962." United Nations Document ST/LEG/SER.B/15, 755.
France-Spain. "Convention sur la delimitation des plateaux continentaux des deux Etats dans le Golfe de Gascogne (Golfe de Biscaye), signee a Paris le 29 Janvier 1974," United Nations Document ST/LEG./SER.B/19, 445.
Iceland-Norway. "Agreement on the Continental Shelf between Iceland and Jan Mayen, done at Oslo on 22 October 1981," International Legal Materials, vol. 21, 1982, 1222.
Iran-Sharjah. "Memorandum of Understanding, signed in November 1971," Middle East Economic Survey, vol. XV, no. 28, 5 May 1972, Supplement.
Japan-Korea. "Agreement concerning joint development of the southern part of the continental shelf adjacent to the two countries, done at Seoul on 5 February 1974." In: Robin Churchill and Myron Nordquist, New directions in the Law of the Sea, Dobbs Ferry, NY: Oceana Publications, 1975, vol. IV, 117.
Kuwait-Saudi Arabia. "Agreement relating to partition of the Neutral Zone, signed on 7 July 1965." United Nations document ST/LEG.SER.B/15, 760.
Lagoni, Rainer. "Oil and gas deposits across national frontiers." American Journal of international Law 73 (1979): 215.
Lagoni, Rainer. "Interim measures pending maritime delimitation agreements." American Journal of International Law 78 (1984): 345.
Lagoni, Rainer. "Joint development of non-living resources in the Exclusive Economic Zone." Report of the International Committee on the Exclusive Economic Zone, International Law Association, Report of the Sixty-third Conference, 1988, 509-558.
Malaysia-Thailand. "Memorandum of Understanding on the establishment of the resources of the sea-bed in a defined area of the continental shelf of the two countries in the Gulf of Thailand, done at Chiang Mai on 21 February 1979." Energy 6 (1981): 1356.
Manin, Philippe. "Le Traite de Frigg." Annuaire Francais de Droit International, 1978, 792.
Miyoshi, Masahiro. "The basic concept of joint development of hydrocarbon resources on the continental shelf." International Journal of Estuarine and Coastal Law vol. 3, 1988: 1.
Norway-United Kingdom. "Agreement relating to the exploitation of the Frigg Field Reservoir and the transmission of gas therefrom to the United Kingdom, done at London on 10 May 1976," Treaty Series N. 113, 1977; Cmnd. 7043.
Onorato, William T. "Apportionment of an international common petroleum deposit." International and Comparative Law Quarterly 17 (1968): 85.
Orrego Vicuña, Francisco. Antarctic Mineral Exploitation. The Energing Legal Framework, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 1988, Chapter 7.
Ostreng, Willy. Politics in High Latitudes: The Svalbard Archipelago, London: Hurst & Co, 1977.
Prescott, Victor. "Maritime Boundary Agreements: Australia-Indonesia and Australia-Solomon Islands." Marine Policy Reports, vol. 1, 1989, 37-45.
Saudi Arabia-Sudan. "Agreement relating to the Joint Exploitation of the Natural Resources of the sea-bed and sub-soil of the Red Sea in the common Zone, done at Khartoum on 16 May 1974." United Nations Document ST/LEG/SER.B/18, 452.
Spitsbergen. "Treaty concerning the archipelago of Spitsbergen, signed at Paris, 9 February 1920." American Journal of International Law, Supplement, vol. 18, 1924, Official Documents, 199-208.
United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, done at Montego Bay, 10 December 1982, International Legal Materials, vol. 21, 1982, 1261.
Utton, Albert E. "Institutional arrangements for developing North Sea oil and gas." Virginia Journal of International Law, vol. 9,1968, 66.
Valencia, Mark. J. "Taming troubled waters: joint development of oil and mineral resources in overlapping claim areas." San Diego Law Review, vol. 23, 1986, 661684.
Valencia, Mark J., and Masahiro Miyoshi. "South East Asian Seas: Joint Development of hydrocarbons in overlapping claim areas?" Ocean Development and International Law Journal 16 (1986): 211.
Willheim, Ernst. "Australia-Indonesia sea-bed boundary negotiations: proposals for a joint development zone in the 'Timor Gap'." Natural Resources Journal (1989): 821-842.
Woodliffe, J.C. "International unitization of an offshore gas field." International and Comparative Law Quarterly 26 (1977): 338.
<section>Regional centres for marine science and technology</section>
Krishan Saigal
<section>Introduction</section>
The world is undergoing a process of transformation. Analysis of the long-term trend of forces leads to the change being characterized as approaching the emergence of an "information society"^1; of a "new wave" overlying the earlier agrarian and industrial "waves"^2; of a "turning point" in modern-day civilization with the inculcation of non-materialist values^3; of the emergence of the post-industrial society, the third industrial revolution, etc.^4 The common factor underlying all prognostications is the recognition of technology being a significant driving force underlying the changing world scene.
Ecological considerations and the awareness that the resources of the globe were being depleted at a fast rate and likely to have grave implications for the coming generations not only led to the concept of "sustainable development", but also to a growing awareness of the serious ecological consequences of the growing technological "gap" between the developing and the industrialized countries.
The Brundtland Report and UNCED called for cooperative action between the industrializing and industrialized countries, taking note of the growing technological gap between the developing and the developed nations, especially in the area of technological developments, and called for an organized effort to develop and diffuse such technologies Besides being innovative and socially acceptable, such technologies needed to be in harmony with environmental factors.
Attention was also drawn to the systemic nature of the changes taking place. The challenges arising from these changes are intertwined so that separate policies and institutions could no longer cope with the interlinked problems. The need, therefore, was not only for integrated policies but also for a major re-orientation and restructuring of institutions at the national, regional, and global levels.^5
Simultaneously, the United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO) and the European Economic Community (EEC) identified six and nine technologies respectively, as the leading edge of the industrial wave of the future. Both the EEC and UNIDO included marine technology as the high technology of the twenty-first century. A United Nations document linked marine with all the high technologies that characterize the leading edge of the new (or third) industrial revolution.^6
UNIDO had been assessing the impact of the new technologies on the developing countries and saw in these developments, and in the changes taking place, both a danger and an opportunity - the danger of being marginalized in the world order, and the opportunity of developing an alternative path of technological growth. It envisaged the setting up of centres in the frontier technologies of micro-electronics, new materials, marine industrial technology, and energy as being of critical significance.^7
The EEC in the light of emerging developments established the EUREKA and EUROMAR systems for promoting high technology. In these systems, industries from two or more countries could identity research and development projects from the specified areas and submit them to the respective national coordinators. If found suitable, they would be submitted to the Conference of Ministers for a final decision. On approval, half the cost of the projects was to be borne by the participating enterprises and the other half by the respective governments and the EEC (where the EEC is a participant). The final product is the property of the enterprises and is available to the concerned countries and the EEC on normal terms. The EUROMAR system seeks to promote synergy through private sector-public sector cooperation.^8
The 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNLOSC) addressed the question of upgrading science and technology skills in developing countries. Besides stressing the need for establishing national S&T centres (art. 275) it devoted two articles to the establishment and functions of regional centres for S&T (arts 276 and 277). It stressed that the regional centres should disseminate, inter alia, marine science and technology data and information, conduct training and educational programmes, do management studies, organize regional conferences, seminars and symposia, study programmes related to the protection and preservation of the environment, make a comparative study of transfer of technology policies, and technically cooperate with other states of the region.
Mediterranean Centre for Marine Science and Technology
In 1988, the International Ocean Institute undertook a feasibility study on the modalities of establishing a Regional Centre for Marine S&T (Meditech) in the Mediterranean.^9 The study was based on the need:
- to implement arts 276 and 277 of UNLOSC;
- to build on the UNEP Regional Seas Programmer
- to adopt the EUREKA/EUROMAR system of EEC for Meditech;
- to enable developing countries to acquire high technology;
- to have technology co-development instead of transfer; and
- to have South-South and North-South cooperation.
The above parameters were considered essential if the technology gap was to be bridged, sustainable development attained for the region as a whole, and unnecessary multiplication of institutions and duplication of effort avoided.
As the study progressed it became clear that the Mediterranean Centre posed some interesting design challenges. The countries of the Mediterranean varied from the most developed to those with very little developed marine technology. The countries could be roughly grouped into three categories based on their marine scientific and technological capabilities. There was one group of States (for example, France, Italy, Spain) with well-developed industrial capabilities, a large and variegated research establishment, and a capability to go through the entire process of development from the laboratory to the shop floor. Even these countries, however, considered themselves to be somewhat inadequate in the high-technology areas and so had joined the EUROMAR system.
There was another group of States whose industrial structure (and technological absorptive capacity) was somewhat lower than the first group but who had adequate manpower to undertake scientific and technological research in variegated fields. Yugoslavia, Greece, Turkey, Israel, and Egypt fall within this category.
The rest of the Mediterranean countries had capabilities for oceanographic research but their manpower resources being limited, the work was spread rather thinly on the ground. These countries needed to augment their manpower and S&T infrastructure, pay more attention to market forces and concentrate on clearly defined technology missions.
The new emerging technologies place heavy demands on skilled manpower. These skills relate not only to the science and technology fields but also to risk management, financial management in a complex, high-risk and uncertain field, and management of systems related to inter-organizational interfacing and networking. Validated modules for such appraisal systems not being available, skills in the above fields cannot be acquired in a theoretical framework, but require on-the-job experience which can best be provided in the environment prevailing in the developed North. At the same time, the experience of dealing with high-tech in the countries of the South would be more relevant to developing countries. Meditech thus had to establish its human resources development strategy in close cooperation and harmony with both the North and the South. It would also have to learn how to interface with the variegated cultural, scientific, and technological demands placed on it because of
the need to interface simultaneously with developed and developing countries. Most of the developing countries of the Mediterranean did not possess a well-developed industrial structure. The EUROMAR system could not, therefore, be transferred to Meditech mutatis mutandis since in that system the prime movers were industries.
We have already noted the asymmetrical position prevailing among the Mediterranean States, all of which had different perceptions of, and needs from, the proposed Centre. If one were to try and work out what was of common interest to all the States the result would be a set of activities which almost certainly leave out of consideration all areas and activities related to high-tech fields. On the other hand' if activities were to be those at the very frontiers of knowledge, the linkages would be more with Northern Europe, and non-Mediterranean, States than within the Mediterranean region.
The answer, therefore, had to be a role somewhere between the above highly polarized situations. A number of such roles, in an interfacing modular organizational concept could be visualized Some of them could be to:
a. collect and disseminate information relating to marine science and technology as well as the associated high technology fields;
b. provide consultancy and advisory services to the developing countries;
c. further technology development in the identified areas by:
- acting as a catalyst
- networking different research institutes
- acting as a coordinator and synthesizer
- promoting integrated technology transfer
- developing the technology itself;
d. promote development of scientific and technological skills through training programmes, symposia, seminars, and conferences;
e. promote the establishment of efficient, innovative and effective management systems in the field of research and development, environmental control, and marine resource exploitation.
Meditech could take up all the above activities in one large, integrated organization having capabilities relating to:
1. information collection, collation, and dissemination;
2. provision of advisory and consultancy services;
3. development of technology as a catalyst, through networking, coordination, etc.; and
4. promotion and development of scientific and technological skills and the establishment of appropriate management systems.
Since technology development would require defining technologies or sets of technologies likely to exhibit efficiencies over the next 25 years or so, capabilities in future forecasting would have to be an integral part of its processing system. Modern advanced technology is very much dependent on a select and skilled labour force which is capable of generating new ideas and methods capable of being proven by analysis and testing, besides having the skills necessary to integrate large systems. Successful R&D is also dependent on synthesis of scientific knowledge, technical abilities, market prospects and outlets, information about financing possibilities, and delineation of appropriate strategies if research and discovery ® development ® commercialization ® industrialization is to take place smoothly. This would mean Meditech having to deploy a great amount of manpower of diverse skills and high quality, which besides being difficult to locate would also be very costly to
maintain. This could raise expenses beyond acceptable limits.
Besides, the dynamic nature of high-tech dictated an organizational development paradigm where both structural change and management development processes are in operation. This could best be achieved, perhaps, by a modular approach where new functions and, where necessary, staff are grafted into or detached from compatible organizational structures. The nucleus organizational module of Meditech would be based on its acting as collector, collator, and disseminator of information. The information flow would be as in figure 1.
The "nucleus" Meditech would establish links with national agencies, R&D centres, universities, selected industries, associated high-tech institutions, the EEC, UN agencies, World Bank, etc., so that information about their activities, aid programmes, loan policies, marketing possibilities, and so on, could be collected, collated, and distributed. The benefits of such information flows could be considerable, for example, in the form of reducing, if not eliminating, duplication of efforts, of leading to more efficient international distribution of labour through the development of appropriate joint activities, and through the generation of new ideas and methods.
The next function Meditech could take up would relate to the holding of symposia and conferences for facilitating exchange of information and the development of group thinking. The same organization as for the nucleus could perform this task with the additional conference cost. Functions that could be grafted on later would relate to training and the provision of advisory services. Both need not be on the regular budget of Meditech but would be met by grants on a case-by-case basis from such organizations as UNDP, World Bank, EEC, and national aid agencies. The job of Meditech would be to draw up proposals and training programmes, etc., thereby helping the developing countries to channel their request to the right quarters. Meditech would also help in establishing laboratory-to-laboratory contacts so that scientists/technologists from developing countries could get on-the-job training from the institutions of the developed countries.
The training programmes would have the objectives of:
a. sensitizing national decision makers to the implications of, and possibilities inherent in, marine technology;
b. inculcating group thinking and through that, developing technological assessment and forecasting methodologies relevant to the Mediterranean;
c. inducing group forecasts of likely future developments in marine technology and their implications for the Mediterranean countries;
d. establishing multi-disciplinary and multi-institutional operating systems;
e. inducing knowledge sharing by training in methodologies being currently used in research including developments in software, techniques, and instrumentation;
f. developing methods of cost-effective surveys and management skills and procedures relevant to high technology and the Mediterranean.
Functions relating to technology development would be added on at the appropriate time. Separate ad hoc project organizational teams for identified technology missions, as when approved by the concerned governments, would be established and funded out of the concerned project costs, and so would not be on the regular budget of Meditech. The operational modes available to the Regional Centres would be of catalyzer, promoter, coordinator, and developer. In all the cases the processing system would be as in figure 2.
Advantages of the processing system delineated in figure 2 are:
1. the system is in a dynamic equilibrium with advancing technology while at the same time taking note of national goals and policies, and the possibilities of marketing/commercializing selected technology;
2. the selected technology is socially relevant both to the developing and developed countries thereby saving on adaptive research;
3. critical elements useful to all countries are identified thereby lowering development costs;
4. the system leads to technological literacy in developing countries and sociological literacy in the developed ones, by having information flow of high-tech to developing countries and socio-cultural implications of high-tech to developed countries;
5. there is disaggregation of marine technologies into "basic packages" capable of interfacing with a number of types of finished technologies ranging from high technology to commercial technology to appropriate technology;
6. changes in work allocation (between existing institutions and Meditech) by the Council of Ministers, depending on availability of funds, could lead to various developmental hybrids.
In the above system, if the work is distributed entirely by the Council of Ministers to existing national institutes, Meditech would act as a catalyst and arrange for the networking of various institutes through appropriate work allocation. It would act as a promoter if the proposal submitted by it to the Council of Ministers, after appropriate interactions with the national institutions was based on its understanding of which future technologies were necessary in the Mediterranean context. Its role would be that of coordinator if the Council of Ministers were to entrust to it the job of coordinating/over-seeing the work being done in different laboratories/institutions. In its entire work, Meditech would be acting as developer of the technology.
As can be gleaned from above, Meditech is a network consisting of four elements:
- The National Coordinators. These are appointed in each participating country. It is their task to solicit and preselect eligible projects for the system.
- The Meeting of National Coordinators. It is the task of this meeting to consider all preselected projects and identify the best and, where desirable, identify additional partners and funding sources.
- The Council of Ministers makes policy decisions, determines priorities and is responsible for the final selection of projects.
- A Coordinating Centre which services the other elements of the network and may assume a number of additional functions and tasks.
The structure and staffing of Meditech follows the expressed desire of the Mediterranean States for a lean and cost-effective Centre. Meditech is an organization that acts as a small hub of a network with operations as decentralized as possible. The objective of Meditech is not only to have joint development of technology through cooperation between the northern and southern States but also to generate investments.
The synergism generated by this system, integrating science, industry and government, private and public sectors, on a regional basis, is enormous. EUREKA, including EUROMAR, has adopted, in just over the first five years of its existence, more than 500 projects representing a total investment of over 80 billion French francs (about US$12 billion).^10 The prospects of Meditech generating investments are thus good.
<section>Summary</section>
The model for regional governance developed during the course of the Conference Pacem in Maribus XIX has the following parameters:
political
to have universal participation including hinterland States;
systemic
to have a holistic, intersectoral and integrated approach;
institutional
to avoid duplication and waste of resources;
informational
to develop networking including the South;
training
to develop skills in the South to augment participatory capacity and underpin technological and economic development; and
technological
to have joint development of marine technology.
Meditech meets most of the requirements of regional governance as developed during the Conference. It could, therefore, serve as a model for adaptation in other ocean regions. In one respect, however, Meditech, along with the Regional Seas Programme of UNEP, differs from the Conference Model regarding participation by hinterland (landlocked) States. This is not in line with sustainable development and the integration of land and sea-based activities. Other regional models, as has been done by IOMAC, could perhaps remedy this lacuna.
<section>Notes</section>
1. Naisbaitt, John. Megatrend. New York: Warner, 1984.
2. Toffler, Alvin. The Third Wave. New York: Bantam, 1982.
3. Capra, Fritjof The Turning Point. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1982.
4. Baber, Walter F. Organising the Future. University of Alabama Press, 1983, pp. 1-13.
5. WCED. Our Common Future. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1987.
6. Ibid., pp. 60-61, 87-88, 310.
7. United Nations Law of the Sea, 1988, "Current Status of Deep Sea-Bed Exploration and Mining Technology." Kingston, Jamaica.
8. UNIDO. "Special Report of the Executive Director to the Fourth General Conference of UNIDO." Doc. No ID/319, August 1984, Vienna, pp. 14-16, 25
9. For information on EUROMAR system and prospects contact EUROMAR Secretariat, c/o Alfred-Wagener Institute for Polar and Marine Research, Columbusstrasse, P.O. Box 120161, D-3850 Bremerhaven, Germany.
10. See Le Monde, 19 June 1991, "Economic", p. 21.
<section>Regional cooperation in marine sciences</section>
Gunnar Kullenberg and Agustin Ayala-Castañares
Regional cooperation in marine research and systematic observations is long standing. An example is the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea (ICES), initiated at the end of the 1800s and the intergovernmental agreement formally concluded in 1902, only about 25 years after the meteorologists started their global cooperation in the International Meteorological Organization (IMO) (now World Meteorological Organization). At a later date, a milestone in the development of ocean affairs was laid down in the Santiago Declaration of 1952, announcing the 200-nautical mile extended economical zone limit for the Comisión Permanente del Pacifico Sur (CPPS), created at the same time. This has gradually led to an extensive cooperation of marine research and observations in that region. This was founded on a clearly identified need related to renewable marine resources of overwhelming richness.
Cooperation in research in the North Atlantic led to regional cooperation in fisheries management through a series of regional fisheries management commissions. This structure included an active participation of advice from the scientific community. In the CPPS region it worked towards the same end, but the other way round.
These examples, and many more, point to the necessity of the regional concept in the spectrum of scales as being important in fostering cooperation, including that of marine research.
The International Oceanographic Commission (IOC) has realized this from early on. The Commission started fostering regional cooperation from its beginning by supporting and organizing at the intergovernmental level the Indian Ocean Expedition in 1960-1965. However, this was a regional endeavour carried out with global perspective and support; and has, to some extent, been a guideline to the regional cooperation ever since.
The regional subsidiary bodies of the IOC have been developed since the middle 1970s, and in particular during the 1980s. The basic ideas are that regional cooperation, including that of marine science, is a must, for the following reasons: because of the dynamics of the ocean and the marine environment (as well as its resources); a regional perspective helps define priorities and priority needs; the pooling of efforts; results are much more visible and convincing when seen in a regional perspective; it fosters regional and national development and supports a multilateral economy; and the need to address many marine problems on a regional rather than a national or global basis. Regional cooperation in marine matters is also easier than regional cooperation on land. Hence, the regional window is natural as far as marine sciences are concerned.
The debates during the UN Law of the Sea Convention formulation and the Convention itself help develop these ideas considerably, mainly through regimes inherent or specific to the Convention. This has also, as evidenced in the Arctic Sea and many other places, gradually generated a regional debate and discussion.
The lessons learnt for the future include: the "identification" and "identity" complex; and partnership (similar to twin-cities in a terrestrial comparison); the critical mass complex; the need for a long term (decadal) policy and plan, which includes a common interest and common priorities; the need for governmental commitments and involvement; the associated need for regional, not external, governance of the region; the stimulation to be obtained from regional cooperation as a driving factor; the creation of IOC regional sub-commissions on the basis of the start made through regional committees; the cooperation and complementarily of IOC and UNEP regional actions and the gradually increasing interaction of these regional bodies.
The future lies in the ability to convince support systems and individual government institutions of the benefit of multilateral cooperation supplementing the bilateral aid or donor activities. There is also a need for an increased coordination and cooperation between donor institutions. Without a change in attitude and development of a global solidarity, the aid for development will not suffice.
<section>1. Background</section>
The adoption of the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea has stimulated coastal States to increase their understanding of maritime areas adjacent to their coasts through the application of marine science and technology. The Convention provides a definition of the extent of a coastal State's jurisdiction. It established the Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) of up to 200 nautical miles within which the coastal state may exercise sovereign rights with regard to the utilization and management of natural resources, living and nonliving, in the water, seabed and subsoil, The Convention makes provision for scientific research within the marine areas under national jurisdiction and the EEZs of coastal States. In general, the coastal seas are now a "national resource" and the new UN Law of the Sea calls for regional cooperation in formulating and implementing management and conservation strategies.
<section>2. Need for marine research</section>
Long-term systematic research and observation programmes should be organized according to a globally coordinated strategy to monitor the changes in the state of the marine and coastal environment and of ocean processes, and their interaction with atmospheric and terrestrial processes. The results of the research and observations should be critically evaluated and widely disseminated through easily accessible databases. For the future it is important that the gap between developed and developing countries is bridged and further steps taken, as far as possible, to fully re-establish the confidence and partnership between governments and scientists. Steps should be taken to ensure a rational application of the provisions of the consent regime, which would, at the same time, benefit the development of the scientific capability, especially of the developing countries and the international scientific cooperation. In this respect, some of the major question marks, for example, with
regard to the role of the oceans in global climate change, need to be addressed.
The increasing world population places an ever-growing pressure on land-based resources. The demand for marine products and ocean services will increase in parallel and increase the need for marine research and services. The living resources of the oceans have been exploited over very long periods of time through traditional fisheries operations, but the new era of cultivating the marine living resources, exploitation of the mineral resources and ocean properties, through the application of modern science and technology, has scarcely begun.
The solution to global problems must be sought through international and intergovernmental cooperation. Decisions are needed now to enable the world community, by a collective scientific effort at national, regional, and global levels, to understand global change of which the ocean is a major element. Through improved knowledge of the ocean and its resources, on local, regional, and global scales, Member States can strengthen their capabilities for socio-economic progress while contributing to the well-being and sustainable development of humankind as a whole.
In spite of great technological developments, many challenges remain to be met. The cost, scale, and complexity of global ocean studies demand clear goals, international cooperation, and the coordination of common services. However, studies of the ocean and plans for exploitation are often poorly integrated. National policy for marine affairs is usually fragmented among government departments, for example, with separate responsibilities for energy, mineral resources, pollution control, fishing, shipping, and defence.
The key to progress must be cooperation by governments. They must make the long-term commitment to fund the necessary research and associated interpretation of results for management use, the long-term observing systems, and data evaluation. Global studies are beyond the resources of any single national authority. There must be a willingness on the part of governments and scientists to work together over a long period of time. Cooperation will include shared operation of technical facilities such as ships, satellites and new automated devices, and the facilitation of access to EEZs for routine ocean monitoring purposes.
Observations from satellites will revolutionize marine measurements over the next 20 years. These should be available to all scientists working on global and regional studies. Existing international framework for ocean data analysis and exchange have established a system which works, and which is often cited as an example for other environmental services. The existing mechanisms for coordination and cooperation, in particular IOC, have played a major role in this development. However, exchange mechanisms are under-funded and in some countries they no longer operate. Valuable data, needed for studies of climate and pollution trends, have already been lost.
What kinds of marine research are needed for sustained development? What are the needs of third world countries in this regard? How can industrialized nations, the scientific community, and funding agencies cope with these needs? Where should the money come from and where should it go? Major restructuring of approaches to partnership and cooperation in the fields of marine science and services is needed if the problems facing the world community are to be adequately addressed.
The following major directions should meet the challenges and opportunities. Many are now being addressed through ongoing programmes, but achieving them fully will require concerted action and commitments by governments and international coordination to the end of the century and beyond:
a. Global climate research programmes and the associated large-scale oceanographic experiments to observe and understand air-sea interaction, the impact of the ocean on climate, and the impact of changing climate on the ocean.
b. Research and monitoring of marine pollution to measure and assess the effects of human activity, notably those resulting in degradation and contamination, especially in the coastal interface zones.
c. Study of the marine environment as a whole - both coastal and open-ocean - its physical and biological parameters and processes, with emphasis upon its role as a residence for living resources, its geological and geophysical properties, including non-living resources in shallow and deep-ocean areas, and the interfaces between the ocean, its floor, and the atmosphere.
d. Accelerated development of ocean services, including observing and monitoring data exchange and product producing systems leading to a Global Ocean Observing System in support of marine research and ocean use, as a common service to Member States and their marine user communities.
It should be noted that different countries have differing needs and opportunities in the fields of marine science and that the state of marine science development in a particular country may not reflect its overall stage of development. In some instances, developing countries have well-established marine science capabilities. In most cases, spending is very limited and funding for research is largely directed to the investigation of immediate, resource-related problems. Little is invested, either nationally or internationally, in strengthening the capabilities of these countries in addressing more broadly based research problems. The limited national investment in science education in many countries frequently results in general shortages in skilled scientific and technical manpower in science-related fields which, in turn, results in competition for such scarce resources between marine science and related professions. Regional cooperation is a mechanism to help solve some
of these problems, and to assist in the establishment of partnerships.
An important aspect of future directions in marine science must encompass the integration of open-ocean research programmes with those on shelf seas and in the coastal zones. Consideration of open-ocean processes in isolation or separately from the processes occurring in coastal zones will be counterproductive in the face of global climatic changes and sealevel rise. This needs to be taken into account in the regional cooperative programmes.
The challenge for marine science is therefore not only to address its current role but to redefine its objectives such that new goals and targets can be met expeditiously and economically. The UN Convention on the Law of the Sea provides an initial framework within which marine science and marine scientists in different countries may engage in partnership to achieve these new goals. This requires the establishment of linkages and support structures throughout the global scientific community; the provision of training opportunities and/ or the necessary equipment to establish an indigenous capability in various aspects of marine science; the provision of ocean services such as hazard warning systems, observation and monitoring networks, baseline modelling and data systems with inbuilt data quality assurance and exchange mechanisms; and through such mechanisms contributing to the overall sustainable development goals and strategies of poorer nations.
The introduction and the international endorsement of the EEZs have implied the addition of a new territory or region to the coastal States. This new territory has created new opportunities and obligations for the coastal countries. In order for those opportunities to be used it is, as on land, necessary to occupy the territory, and this is now gradually happening. The next century will see a growing occupation of the ocean space, and the traditional uses will be adjusted and expanded. Tourism for health, recreation, sport, combined with the leisure of the local population will be one area: but tourism adjusted to sustained development, or so-called "green-tourism." An associated expansion of the use of the ocean as a transportation means of goods and human beings is clearly to be expected. This will also occur in light of fossil fuel limitations. The renewable energy from the wind can best, and perhaps only, be used for transportation at sea and along the coasts.
Ocean-going research vessels driven through sail technology are already in use; likewise for tourism and recreation, and these uses will expand. The thrill of sailing in a large vessel is exceptional for young people and for their physical and psychological training.
The Charter of Economic Rights and Duties helped to shape the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea which aims at a more just and equitable order that may meet the needs and interests of developing countries. The Convention encourages the cooperation of states, either directly or through international organizations concerned with marine scientific research, and the transfer of knowledge and technology. The Convention has now been signed by 159 States and ratified by 60 (December 1993) to enter into force on 16 November 1994.
Countries from north and south, against the background of the huge and complicated marine issues, have gradually realized the need for cooperation and the mutual benefits that can be derived. Pooling of resources, sharing of information, education and training are all essential elements to create a foundation for the global approach necessary if the major outstanding uncertainties are to be narrowed down and a better basis for making informed about the future shaped, so as to avoid additional immense problems for the future due to the present actions.
<section>3. International cooperation</section>
Although all coastal States have local problems which require marine scientific research for their solution, they also have problems which can only be resolved by investigations on a wider geographical scale. Over the years, a pattern of international cooperative programmes has emerged and procedures for planning and implementing these have been worked out by groups of States. In parallel with this regional development, global cooperative programmes in the field of ocean science and ocean services have been launched. As the number of developing States involved in regional programmes especially has increased, so have these regional programmes increasingly been directed toward solving problems addressing transnational oceanic phenomena of particular interest to those states. All developing coastal States, if they are engaged in marine science at all, are involved in various forms of international cooperation. Because of the nature of the marine environment, and the history of
its use, some advanced countries are also participating in most of these programmes, even in regions where they are not coastal. Inevitably, the more advanced countries obviously have contributed a large share of the effort to acquire relevant knowledge; many of the developing countries, on the other hand, have obvious difficulty in substantially contributing to these enterprises. Moreover, cooperative programmes are mutually beneficial, especially to the developing countries in so far as they provide an excellent opportunity for interaction and for strengthening of national infrastructures in various disciplines of marine sciences both in coastal and offshore waters.
Most international cooperative programmes require action at the regional level through provision of coordinating secretariats, regional data centres, and some common research facilities. Most of the effort is, however, undertaken by the participating States. Usually, each State takes a specific share, geographically, in the investigations. In addition, selected national units will commonly perform international functions for the duration of the programme and sometimes after it. This often calls for international funding to strengthen them. Financial help can make a substantial contribution to such programmes when provided through regional/subregional aid projects for the particular purpose of strengthening the participation from the developing States in such a way that their national capabilities in marine science are permanently enhanced.
The Law of the Sea specifically requires States to cooperate on a global and, as appropriate, on a regional basis in the protection and preservation of the marine environment, taking into account characteristic regional features (article 197). This also implies cooperation in, and promotion of, marine scientific research and systematic observations for common use. It is also specifically stated that States and competent international organizations shall promote international cooperation in marine scientific research for peaceful purposes (article 242). This cooperation can occur through inclusion of bilateral and multilateral agreements, so as to create favourable conditions for the conduct of marine research and integrate efforts of scientists studying the essence of phenomena and processes occurring in the marine environment and the interrelationships between them (article 243).
The Convention likewise stimulates international cooperation for the development and transfer of marine technology, through existing bilateral, regional, and multilateral programmes and through expanded and new programmes, in order to facilitate marine research and appropriate international funding for ocean research and development (article 270). In this context the establishment of national marine scientific and technological research centres and the strengthening of existing national centres is promoted (article 275). Adequate support is encouraged to facilitate the establishment and strengthening of such national centres and to provide advanced training facilities and necessary equipment, skills and know-how, as well as technical experts to States which may need and request such assistance (article 273).
The promotion of the establishment of regional marine scientific and technological research centres, particularly in developing States, is also encouraged, in order to stimulate and advance the conduct of marine scientific research by developing States and foster the transfer of technology (article 276). Examples of the functions of such regional centres are also explicitly given (article 277).
These mechanisms should be used. Several endeavours are underway including in the Mediterranean and the wider Caribbean. Regional networks are being established through regional research and observation programmes, addressing identified priorities. This mechanism is very viable but requires increased financial support on an interregional basis. The multilateral funding mechanism needs strengthening, to adequately supplement the bilateral ones.
<section>4. Major phases of the development of regional cooperation</section>
Through the establishment of the IOC in 1960 a mechanism was created to foster intergovernmental cooperation in marine sciences. The IOC, from the start, emphasized regional actions, through concerted action, with the participation of the States, both from inside and outside the region in question. Examples are the International Indian Ocean Expedition, 19601965; the Cooperative Study of Kuroshio and Adjacent Regions, 1962-1977; the Cooperative Investigations in the western African region; and in the Caribbean (see for example, Roll H.U., 1979, IOC Technical Series No. 20; M. Haq, 1989 Document IOC/INF-773).
These activities gradually led to the realization that regional cooperation gave great benefit to the participating nations and to the establishment of regional coordinating Committees. The negotiations during the UN Conference on the Law of the Sea stimulated an upgrading of these bodies to Regional Committees as IOC regional subsidiary bodies. The existing IOC regional subsidiary bodies are given in table 1, together with some information about them.
Table 1 Existing IOC intergovernmental regional subsidiary bodies
IOC Sub-Commission for the Caribbean and Adjacent Regions (IOCARIBE)
Created: 1982
First Session: 1984
Last Session: 1992
(Fourth)
IOC Regional Committee for the Central Eastern Atlantic (IOCEA)
Created: 1984
First Session: 1987
Last Session: 1993
(Third)
IOC Regional Committee for the Cooperation Investigations in the North and Central Western Indian Ocean (IOCINCWIO)
Created: 1979
First Session: 1982
Last Session: 1992
(Third)
IOC Regional Committee for the Central Indian Ocean (IOCINDIO)
Created: 1982
First Session: 1988
Last Session: -
IOC Regional Committee for the Southern Ocean (SOC)
Created: 1967
First Session: 1970
Last Session: 1987
(Fifth)
IOC Sub-Commission for the Western Pacific (WESTPAC)
Created: 1989
First Session: 1990
Last Session: 1993
(Second)
It is noted that two of those Regional Committees have been upgraded to IOC Regional Subcommissions for WESTPAC and for the Caribbean and Adjacent Regions (IOCARIBE). These Subcommissions have wider functions and roles than the regional committees, and they suggest a certain maturity towards marine research and observations, and related cooperation in the regions. The IOCARIBE Subcommission was created in 1984 and the WESTPAC Subcommission in 1989/90. It is to be noted that these are parts of the IOC and not independent bodies. The idea is that the regional programmes and their implementation shall benefit from the global programme developments in the IOC framework, but that they, at the same time, are addressing regional priorities. The establishment of the Subcommissions was only done after careful and in-depth evaluations of the developments of the marine programmes in the regions (see for example, M. Haq, 1989).
The possibility of merging the IOCINDIO and IOCINCWIO Regional Committees into one IOC Subcommission for the Indian Ocean and adjacent regions has been discussed. The analysis suggests that this is premature in view of the large differences in the state of development of marine science in the countries surrounding the Indian Ocean. However, there is no doubt that the creation of an IOC Subcommission for the Indian Ocean is one goal for the 1990s.
The increasing interest in the Southern Ocean in relation to its role in the climate system, the potential further exploitation of marine resources in the Southern Ocean, and its possible contamination by long-range transfer of pollutants - as well as through actions in the region and in Antarctica - has led to a strong realization of the lack of data from this region. Efforts are therefore underway in IOC and its Regional Committee for the Southern Ocean to increase ocean observations there, and WOCE has a large hydrographic programme in the area. There also appears to be a need for increased cooperation in marine research in the Southern Ocean, in view of its possibly vital role in the climate system. Also in the Arctic and northern North Atlantic regional cooperation is increasing in the context of the climate system research, likewise in view of the possibly critical role of these areas in the climate system. Considerations are underway for the creation of a regional
centre for logistics and operational support in Iceland, and the IOC has expressed interest in cooperating with such endeavour.
One basic task of the IOC is to facilitate international cooperation in marine science, among Member States and among organizations. Hence the IOC subsidiary bodies are endeavouring to cooperate with other regional bodies, inside and outside the UN system. In this way, cooperation and dialogue is established between the marine science community and the management communities who are supposed to use the results of the marine research and systematic ocean observations. Clearly such a dialogue is a must - but nevertheless, it is difficult to establish. There is some interaction with the regional FAO Fisheries Council and Commissions - but not very much. As an example, the efforts and potential of the IOC regional mechanisms are hardly referred to in the recent study by the World Bank, FAO and others on the development of fisheries, including related ocean research.
Very close cooperation has been established with the UNEP Regional Seas Programme in most of the regions. The UNEP Programme addresses the questions related to the management and control of marine pollution mainly from land-based activities, and focusing on a regional scale. This programme is thus interested in using scientific results and adequate, reliable observations. In many cases IOC and UNEP regional definitions overlap, and cooperation and coordination between the programmes and activities would, therefore, seem natural. It has, however, taken a long time and strong efforts to achieve this goal. Presently the cooperation is strong in several regions and include joint programmes in the Caribbean, Southeast Pacific, East and West Africa, but not in the South or Western Pacific, or in the East-Asian or South-Asian Seas. This is related to the different definitions and to the level of development of the programmes, and that the IOC has not really been present in the
South Pacific.
The IOC has also promoted a policy of cooperation and coordination with regional bodies, including ICES, ICSEM, CPPS, IOMAC. This has led to joint programmes and activities with these bodies.
In many cases the IOC has entered into formal agreements or memoranda of understanding with partners, well reflecting the complementarity of the activities, as well as the need for dialogue and cross-sectoral interactions between different parts of society.
<section>5 Some experiences</section>
The experience obtained in implementing the priority programmes in marine research and services adopted by the IOC regional subsidiary bodies has identified several difficulties. These can be seen to be accentuated by the success stories. In the Caribbean the regional marine pollution programme of IOCARIBE, CARIPOL, developed very successfully through a careful step by step procedure, which included: identification of the problem; focusing on something realistic and doable; developing the appropriate methods and manuals; instituting the required training; formulation of the regional programme, including an agreed data submission procedure; data analysis and evaluation; bringing together all participants at suitable intervals so as to ensure an active feeling of a network and exchange of experiences, together with the stimulation of seeing and using data obtained from partners in the network. The only gap was the application of the information to formulation and
implementation of marine pollution control and abatement measures. This was lacking since there was no real dialogue with, for example the UNEP Caribbean Action Plan, or the IMO. This situation is now remedied - but in the process the close feeling of a network among the CARIPOL participants has been lost. There are several other success stories - but of course also failures.
What then are the major problems which have been encountered? These include: lack of communication; lack of governmental commitment or priority listing, so as to make it difficult to obtain, for example, UNDP funding; lack of commitment on behalf of the national institutions, so as to make it difficult to have active participation of scientists and technicians, since there is no benefit in it for them; lack of funds and partners in the developed regions; and lack of trained personnel and equipment. These problems are interlinked. A basic aim has been, and is, to train personnel but if the institutions are not committed then personnel is not available for training. The lack of governmental support is, of course, related to the fact that marine matters usually are not in focus - man is, after all, a terrestrial animal. The remedies include a dynamic search and pressure in the region. These programmes cannot be operated from far away - there is a definite need to have committed
and very competent staff present in the region and actively visiting the participating institutions. The mechanism of regional centres comes to mind. Another remedy is that functioning national liaison mechanisms be established which are linked to all relevant ministries and governmental departments. These bodies must be active on the national scene and fulfil the coordination role.
Finally, another remedy is improved coordination among donors and various supporting agencies. The bilateral and multilateral aid mechanisms must be seen as complementary and not conflicting. Use should be made of a regional mechanism to stir support, on a bilateral or multilateral basis, towards the same goal or programme over a whole region from several donors. This is what we are attempting to achieve through the IOC regional subsidiary bodies, in the establishment of an increasing dialogue with national donor agencies, so as to obtain support to an agreed regional programme.
<section>6. Looking ahead</section>
UNCED emphasized the regional scale in context of the Agenda 21 for the Oceans. It has been considered viable to enhance regional cooperation and coordination for the development, protection, and sustainable use of the marine environment and its resources. At the same time the legal and management framework provided by UNCLOS has been emphasized. The mechanisms provided through the IOC regional subsidiary bodies can, in close cooperation with other parts of the UN system and in particular UNEP, provide the basis for the implementation of studies and systematic observations required for proper assessment of available resources, including their distribution, for marine environmental audits, for impact assessments of climatic and other changes, for formulation of control measures and for help towards their enforcement. A proper information basis and fact-finding process must be part of any sustainable development. With proper coordination and dialogue this can be achieved
through existing mechanisms, provided the coordination and dialogue at regional levels are matched by similar efforts at national levels. It should be pointed out that the coordination and cooperation between the existing mechanisms and bodies dealing with the marine environment is reasonably good. It includes frequent interagency consultations, the GESAMP and ICSPRO agreements and the regional bodies.
In this context, the mechanism of regional centres for marine science and technology foreseen in UNCLOS should be considered. Such centres may provide the obvious coordination and dialogue mechanism, provided the structure permits them to work closely with all relevant partners both in and outside the UN system. Isolated centres will not serve the coordination function. The implementation of the IOC/UNESCO Comprehensive Plan for a Major Assistance Programme to Enhance Marine Science Capabilities of Developing Countries could conceivably be tied to the development of such centres, which would inevitably contribute to, and establish, partnerships among participating Member States, both from the region and outside. Such centres may provide a basis for an optimal use of available resources including a scientific community which is often below the critical mass of the national levels, but on a regional integrative basis becomes above critical mass.
<section>Regional case-studies: The Baltic Sea, and Indian Ocean</section>
Nikolaus Gelpke and Hiran W. Jayarwardene
<section>Regional cooperation in science: the Helsinki convention for the Baltic (Nikolaus Gelpke)</section>
1 Introduction
On 22 March 1974 the seven States of the Baltic region - Denmark, Sweden, Finland, USSR, Poland, German Democratic Republic, and the Federal Republic of Germany - signed the Convention on the Protection of the Marine Environment (HELCOM) at its Secretariat in Helsinki, Finland. In the preamble of HELCOM, the parties recognize their responsibility "to protect and enhance the values of the marine environment of the Baltic Sea area for the benefit of their peoples," and that this "cannot effectively be accomplished by national efforts only but that close regional cooperation and other appropriate international measures aiming to fulfill these tasks are urgently needed."
The Helsinki Convention was the first regional treaty to cover land-based pollution sources and, in particular, to combat marine pollution from oil in the entire drainage basin, which is 4.3 times as large as the area of the Baltic Sea itself. Certainly the inspiration to initiate conventions for similar-sized semi-closed marine areas like the Red Sea, the Persian Gulf, the Mediterranean, and others, was drawn from the success of the intergovernmental action in protecting the Baltic Sea. This success was partly due to the well-developed organizational structure of Baltic marine science.
This chapter provides an overview of the reasons leading to this successful cooperation in the Baltic region. For a better understanding of the development of scientific and political cooperation in the region, a brief historical description, followed by the environmental aspects of the Baltic Sea, will be given. As an example of multilateral cooperation in the Baltic region, the Baltic Marine Environment Protection Commission will be described in more detail.
A comparison between the "Blue Plan" for the Mediterranean Sea and HELCOM may lead to new concepts in the Baltic region with regard to the existing new political and socio-economic situation in the eastern parts of the Baltic.
2 The Baltic region in its historical context
The Baltic has first to be seen in its historical perspective to understand the background of regional cooperation in science. This brief survey describes its social, political, and legal dimensions.
The history of human settlements in the Baltic basin dates back to the neolithic era - the Bronze and Iron Ages, when successive cultures were established on its shores and contacts with south European states existed. (O'Dell 1957)
The western and southern coastal Baltic areas have remained relatively stable since the tenth century. Slavic tribes had occupied most of the coastal area between the Elbe and the Vistula Rivers, while German Saxons on the southern coast had only a narrow foothold near Denmark. In the north, the western shores of the Baltic basin were inhabited by two Scandinavian tribes, the Swedes and Goths, while the Danes occupied their present area plus parts of the western and southern coastal Baltic areas. (Boczek 1989) The relatively stable political situation in this part of the Baltic region led to a strong economy, which has persisted to the present.
The southeastern and eastern parts of the Baltic region have a more complex human and political history. As an exception to the region, the Gulf of Finland was settled by Finno-Ugrics who migrated to the Baltic region from a region between the Ural and middle Volga Rivers. The southeastern part was settled by Baltic tribes belonging to the Indo-European family; the Livs, Lithuanians and Prussians. (Boczek 1989)
While the southern and western countries established their own states and had been converted to Christianity by the tenth century, the eastern parts of the region were occupied and subjugated by different states such as the German Order, and the Baltic tribes had been converted to Christianity by force. (Boczek 1989) Already in those times a cultural division was established between the Roman Catholic West and the Russian Byzantine East.
The quite stable situation of the western and southwestern parts of the region led, after a Viking period of three centuries, to the Hanseatic League in the fourteenth century, mainly controlled by the Germans. The Hanseatic League was a trading group in northern Europe, controlling the East-West trade of the time. This old tradition of East-West cooperation is very important for the understanding of scientific cooperation today, encompassing such different cultural and political systems.
The Hanseatic League was later controlled by Denmark and this country remained, after the decline of the "Hansa" in the fifteenth and seventeenth centuries, the dominant power in the Baltic region. Until World War II different states such as Poland, Sweden or USSR had the leading role in the control of the Baltic region through trade or military power. After both World Wars I and II, the region underwent political transformations. The most important political development was the rise of the USSR as the strongest Baltic state and the creation of the two German states, as well as the extension of the Polish coastline to more than 500 kilometres in 1945.
Today, the Baltic region is very highly populated and industrialized, economically intensively used, endangered by pollution and political insecurity. In the drainage basin of the 6 coastal States Finland, USSR, Poland, the Federal Republic of Germany, Denmark and Sweden - live approximately 71 million people, 51 per cent of whom are Polish, 16 million reside directly along the Baltic coast. (Jenisch 1991) These figures combined with the fact that the share of the Baltic region in worldwide industrial production has reached perhaps 15 per cent - testify to the stresses to which the marine Baltic environment has been exposed in its recent history. (Boczek 1989)
However, the lesson of Baltic history is, that even in a region where there are such different political and religious States, a stable political situation and old traditions in trade can lead to amicable cooperation among all of the littoral States. Only in times of war, when they try to achieve hegemony in the Baltic was cooperation never conclusive.
3 Environmental aspects of the Baltic region
The necessity to develop certain (scientific) multilateral agreements highly relevant to environmental concerns in the Baltic region, has to be explained by the specific marine environment of this region.
The Baltic Sea (417,000 km^2) is one of the largest brackish-water areas in the world. Extremely shallow (mean depth 55 m, maximum 459 m) and geologically very young (formed 12,000 years ago), this semi-enclosed body of water (22,000 km^3) provides an ideal experimental test bed for the proper understanding of marine environmental changes under the tremendous influence of man. It has not been recognized for about two decades that the Baltic Sea is seriously polluted, and various appraisals have become available. (Zmudzinski 1989) It is not only the influence of human activities, however, but also the specific environmental conditions in the Baltic Sea that have led to this situation.
The input of fresh waters into the Baltic Sea results in the stratification of the water column into two main layers, a surface layer (less saline) and a heavier bottom layer (more saline). The natural mixing of the water column by wind and currents influences only the upper layer. The Kattegat is divided through very shallow rises (18 m), where only specific climatic conditions allow the input of heavier salt water from the North Sea to enter the Baltic Sea. So the slow replacement time for 50 per cent of the water is about 8 years; and that for 90 per cent, about 25 years. The water exchange with the Baltic Sea is made more difficult by the fact that the Baltic Sea consists of several relatively deep basins, interrupted by shallow rises. The bottom layer remains less well mixed, and becomes progressively poorer in oxygen over a period of years due to biological activity. This natural phenomenon has been well known in the past, but increasing eutrophication of the Baltic
Sea has resulted in a faster consumption of oxygen in the lower stratum of the bottom layer. The prevailing anaerobic conditions favour the growth of sulphate-reducing bacteria producing hydrogen sulphide, which is influencing the environment as a cell-poison and reductant which leads to the inhospitality of the stratum to its earlier inhabitants. (Babenerd and Meyerhöfer 1988) The last important salt-water input from the North Sea was in 1975-1976. As a result one could measure an increase of salinity and oxygen in the bottom layer, and as a consequence some animals could settle, but only temporarily.
Another consequence of the brackish character of the Baltic Sea is a minimal species diversity comparing with fresh water or ocean water. The increasing anoxia in the bottom layer enhances this fact even more.
The highly industrialized nations in the drainage basin of this small semi-enclosed sea cause not only eutrophication but also serious heavy-metal pollution. The increase of heavy metals in the bottom sediments where municipal and industrial wastes are being discharged (Kremling 1987) result in highly elevated copper concentrations of red and green algae and crustaceans; lead in red algae; and cadmium in the brown algae. Near the coast, mercury concentrations are, therefore, substantially high in the tissues of the commercially important herring. Levels of dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT), polychlorinated hydrocarbons (PCBs) and oil (petroleum hydrocarbons) have been declining in recent years. However, higher values can still be found in coastal areas and near municipal centres.
In summary, eutrophication and the continued high input of toxic substances, particularly near industrialized centres, are of concern especially with regard to the relatively long period of renewal of the Baltic Sea water with water of the open ocean.
4 Multilateral cooperation in the Baltic region
The term "dominium maris baltici" is well known in history, science, and international law as the futile attempt of Danes, Germans, Poles, Russians and Swedes to achieve hegemony. There have been many attempts, but the political condition was never there. Since the early Middle Ages the law of free market and old trading traditions were stronger than any other power.
At the 6th International Geographical Congress held in London in 1895 Professor Otto Petterson of Sweden put forward a plan for international marine science cooperation for the Baltic, with special emphasis on the commercial aspect of fisheries. (Voigt 1986) These first endeavours to put forward a scheme for international marine science cooperation originated in the attempt to organize and optimize commercial cooperation. The congress recognized the scientific and economic importance of the results of recent research in the Baltic, especially with regard to fishing interests, and its opinion was that the survey of the area should be continued and extended to include the cooperation of the different nationalities. First in the field of scientific cooperation was the International Council for the Exploration of the Sea (ICES), founded in 1902.
Although issues of pollution have been recognized for a long time, it took half a century to create political circumstances allowing scientific cooperation in the region. At the start, multilateral cooperation among the seven Baltic littoral States was only possible after the official recognition of the German Democratic Republic by the Federal Republic of Germany in 1973 in the "Grundlagenvertrag." This treaty formed the prerequisite for the first multilateral convention the Baltic Fishing Convention of 1973.
The Convention on Fishing and Conservation of Living Resources in the Baltic Sea and the Belts was signed in Gdansk in September 1973. Under this condition, the International Baltic Sea Fishery Commission was established in Warsaw. In its preamble the parties to the Convention recognize the need for cooperation to preserve and increase the living resources of the Baltic Sea and the Belts. The Convention is an important legal instrument to provide a permanent system for resource monitoring, but a weakness of the Convention is that the Commission is powerless with regard to nonparties. It merely can "draw the attention" of nonparties to acts they may have committed that might have an adverse effect on the Baltic fishery resources. (Broms 1989)
Shortly after this first treaty the Convention on the Protection of the Marine Environment of the Baltic Sea followed in 1974. The Baltic Marine Environment Protection Commission (HELCOM) was established under the Convention in Helsinki. A detailed description and discussion of HELCOM is given in subsequent paragraphs.
Various other Conventions followed the first two:
- The Nordic Environmental Protection Convention of 1974
- The Final Act of 1975 on Security and Cooperation in Europe
- The Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution of 1979
- The Convention Relating to the Non-Fortification and Neutralization of the Aaland Islands in 1921.
Besides intergovernmental agencies created by these Conventions there are two other organizational bodies - the Baltic Marine Biologists (BMB) established in 1968 and the Conference of Baltic Oceanographers of 1957 both independent non-governmental organizations (NGOs). The Baltic Marine Biologists was established by marine scientists of the Baltic region, mainly to elaborate and standardize methods for marine biological investigations and encourage close cooperation between the different scientific institutes along the Baltic coast. The early establishment of the NGOs in the Baltic region in 1957 and 1968 offered the chance for international cooperation long before intergovernmental agreements were possible. Therefore, independent non-governmental organizations are obviously a promising tool for peaceful scientific cooperation in a region where political security is still not yet established.
The existing multilateral agreements are an important contribution to political cooperation among the seven Baltic States. It is interesting to observe that the first environmental agreements were established, followed by political Conventions, both responsible for the benefit of the environment and security of the Baltic region. The development of environmental contracts appears to have influenced the trust among the various littoral States - not least among States belonging to the North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO) and the Warsaw Pact. (Broms 1989) In other words, regional cooperation in environmental problems appears to enhance regional cooperation in the political area of the region. In a way, the environmental responsibility took over the stabilizing role of trade and commerce in earlier days.
5 Baltic Marine Environment Protection Commission
The basic foundation of cooperation among the Baltic coastal States is the "Convention on the Protection of the Marine Environment of the Baltic Sea Area" or the "Helsinki Convention." This Convention, adopted in 1974 and enforced since 1980, is the first international instrument to deal with different sources of pollution in respect to a given regime. (Ehlers 1988) The Convention led to the establishment of the Marine Environment Protection Commission (HELCOM), which serves as the executive body for the Convention.
Article III.1 of the Convention establishes a fundamental principle: "The contracting Parties shall individually or jointly take all appropriate legislative, administrative or other relevant measures in order to prevent and abate pollution and protect and enhance the marine environment of the Baltic Sea."
The basic provision governing scientific-technological cooperation is provided for in Article XVI: "The contracting Parties undertake directly, or when appropriate through competent regional and other international organizations, to cooperate in the fields of science, technology and other research, and exchange data as well as scientific information for the purposes of the present Convention."
A description and evaluation of activities under the Convention are given below.
A Survey and research
Since 1979 the seven littoral States of the Baltic region are carrying out a "Baltic Monitoring Programme" under the guidelines of HELCOM. Measurements of the environmental quality are carried out regularly at stipulated stations in the Baltic Sea. A weakness of the monitoring programme is the limitation of survey to the central Baltic Sea, with no monitoring stations close to estuaries or dumping areas.
B Heavy metals
Trace element data in fish and shellfish, gained from a baseline study, from different investigations and national monitoring programmes provide some insight into geographical differences in the levels of the contaminants involved. (Baltic Marine Environment Protection Commission 1990) HELCOM concludes in its "Second Assessment" that it is still very difficult to compare data from different laboratories, owing to methodological uncertainties. Without such basic scientific studies it is not possible to assess the fate of pollution by trace metals entering and leaving Baltic waters, from their accumulation in recent sediments. (Voigt 1986) There is an urgent need for intercomparison and standardization. However, the decrease of copper, cadmium, zinc, and lead in fish since 1978 to levels comparable with the North Sea are showing the success of intergovernmental cooperation within HELCOM.
C Organic pollutants
The prohibition of dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane (DDT) use in all littoral States through the Convention resulted in a decrease of DDT concentration in seabird eggs and herrings. Consequently, the stock of fish-eating seabirds increased since 1970. Other harmful organic pollutants of great concern like PCB, PCT, HCH, etc. are more complicated to measure. New measuring methods prevent a direct comparison with older ascertained concentrations. Expensive high-tech methods and the need of very experienced analysts are still limiting success. This is a particular problem for regional cooperation in science, because new methods are difficult to introduce and standardize among the different countries in the Baltic region with such different socio-ecosystems. Another problem is the great variety of sources: riverain input, direct discharges, and airborne transport which need simultaneous international product-control regulations and national efforts to control emissions from all
responsible sectors.
D Plant nutrients
Seventy thousand tons of phosphorus and one million tons of nitrogen (as nitrate, ammonia and organic compounds) are discharged annually into the Baltic Sea. This fertilizing should have an impact on the algal growth. In fact, in the period between 1980-1985 in many parts of the Baltic Sea the nutrient concentrations increased, but at the same time, saline water from the bottom layer surged to the surface. Therefore, it is not easy to distinguish the origin of increased nutrient concentrations. However, strengthened investigation of the deep-water layers and measuring of nutrient input by river discharge must be strengthened.
E Eutrophication
Increasing concentrations of phosphorus and nitrogen in the winter water often precludes an intensive phytoplankton springbloom. The later biodegradation of this biomass consumes oxygen, which is the reason for the increasing oxygen depletion in the bottom layer of the Baltic Sea. Scientific proof of this phenomenon has been given. (Babenerd and Meyerhöfer 1988) For the summertime the cooperating monitoring programme of HELCOM could measure an increase of primary production comparing the time-scales 1975-1978 and 1980-1983. The second Periodic Assessment of the State of the Marine Environment of the Baltic Sea describes a further increase of nutrient concentrations during 19841988, but in recent years the Commission could observe a stagnation in several areas of the Baltic Sea. However, the release of phosphorus from the sediment under anoxic conditions is still increasing. Another new phenomenon in the Baltic Sea is the appearance of toxic algal blooms like Gyrodinium
aureolum and Prorocentrum minimum.
HELCOM: Organization and policy
Many articles have been written about the organization and policy of the "Helsinki Convention." Nobody denies that HELCOM is, in comparison with other intergovernmental agreements, very successful and a model in cooperation and efficiency. But insights into the reality of the Convention allow perhaps a better assessment of their problems and successes.
Obviously one of the secrets of a successful intergovernmental cooperation in science is a functioning communication system between the different States, their governments, and the scientists. In Germany, it is the Federal Minister of Transport who has the primary responsibility in the Cabinet for matters related to the Convention on the Protection of the Marine Environment of the Baltic Sea Area, including the "Helsinki Convention." The Deutsches Hydrographisches Institut (DHI), a Federal agency, has responsibility for monitoring the Baltic Sea, and to forward the information, for example, monitoring data. HELCOM contacts the Federal Ministry for Research and Technology or the DHI directly. These organs then forward the information to the responsible scientists (e.g., marine biologists at the "Institut für Meereskunde" in Kiel). A weakness in this information pathway is that the responsible scientists sometimes do not get the information in time in the complete form. A
closer information network should be established between HELCOM and the scientists. The successful direct cooperation among scientists from different countries confirm this suggestion.
The recognition of the two German states was the political prerequisite for the "Helsinki Convention." But there are still political and socio-economic differences between the "western" and "eastern" world. The Convention had the delicate role of establishing scientific and technological cooperation within all seven littoral States of the Baltic Sea. Therefore, since the Convention has been in force in 1980, more than ten years of a remarkable cooperation must be appreciated. Difficulties in cooperation, however, have obviously existed in the past and remain to be solved. The official communication and basic data exchange between HELCOM and the USSR was sometimes very difficult. This situation was aggravated by the fact that many scientists of the USSR or Poland were unable to obtain travel permits. The communication between "western" and "eastern" scientists is based mostly on private efforts, and so such a lack of information resulted in great difficulties for the
cooperation between the states and HELCOM.
The new and existing political development in all of the eastern countries has led to a completely new situation. But the opening of the "east" is also problematic. Poland, for instance, has financial problems for the running of scientific programmes, especially with regard to such expensive equipment as is used for the chemical part of the monitoring programme.
6 Comparison between HELCOM and regional seas institutional framework
The United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) was established in 1972; it designated the oceans as one of its first priorities, and endorsed a regional approach to maritime environmental problems. As a result, the UNEP Regional Seas Programme was established in 1974 with an initial focus on the Mediterranean Sea. HELCOM served as a model for its establishment. For a comparison of HELCOM and the Regional Seas Programme, it is instructive to compare HELCOM and the "Mediterranean Action Plan," the first of the six programmes now in formal operation.
In a way, the history of both agreements has many parallels. Like the ICES for the Baltic region, the International Commission for Scientific Exploration of the Mediterranean Sea (Monaco) of 1910 was the basis for scientists to collect and exchange data on the causes and effects of marine pollution. (Boxer 1982)
Since the early 1970s several UN organizations have been acting on the basis of a growing awareness of problems of the Mediterranean Sea (FAO, IOC, UNESCO, IMO). In 1974 UNEP set up a comprehensive Action Plan for the Mediterranean Sea. The Plan was adopted in 1976 by 16 of the littoral States.
The four principles of the Mediterranean Action Plan are:
a. a legal framework for cooperation, in the form of an umbrella convention and a series of technical protocols;
b. a plan for coordinated scientific research, monitoring, and information exchange as a basis for determining priorities and policy;
c. provisions for institutional and financial arrangements; and
d. an integrated planning and development component, including socio-economic considerations. (Gebremedhin 1989)
Obviously, there are organizational and administrative differences between the Action Plan and HELCOM, but the research and monitoring component of the two agreements is comparable. However, the Mediterranean Action Plan goes a decisive step further. Within the framework of the Mediterranean Action Plan the "Blue Plan" was formulated and adopted in 1975 in Barcelona under the auspices of the United Nations Environment Programme. The Blue Plan recognizes the need for economic growth in the region, but with the constraint that such development must be environmentally sound. (Gebremedhin 1989)
The recognition of the importance of socio-economic development for a region where scientific cooperation should be established could be a model for the new political situation in the Baltic region. The dramatic changes in the former USSR and Poland and the reunification of the two German States intensify the need for a "Baltic Blue Plan."
The lesson from HELCOM for the regional seas institutional framework is on the organizational and administrative level. HELCOM as the executive component of the "Helsinki Convention" has the advantage of a relatively small and independent administrative organization. Although this administration is well defined there are still the above-mentioned problems of communication between HELCOM and the people from the participating countries who are involved. For a more effective coordination, communication and scientific cooperation must be conducted in a most direct way.
However, the Baltic region differs from the Mediterranean area in several important aspects which makes direct comparison very difficult. In the Baltic, tourism does not play as dominant a role as in the Mediterranean area. Tourism is, on one hand, a serious pollution problem, and on the other hand, a prospective financing source, if new financial concepts could be realized. Another difference is the rapidly growing population in the Mediterranean area whereas the population in the Baltic region is relatively stable.
Both Conventions provide a framework for cooperation where each can serve as a model for the other in some special way.
7 Further prospects
The Second Periodic Assessment of the State of the Marine Environment of the Baltic Sea, 1984-1988, gives in its general conclusions detailed information about requisite measures for the future. Conclusively there is still a need for greater knowledge about:
- the water exchange between the North Sea and the Baltic Sea,
- the reasons for the increased pH,
- the biological degradation of organic pollutants,
- the early stages of development of fishes, and
- the total volume input of organic pollutants.
These are just some points of the mentioned scientific needs.
Furthermore, the Second Periodic Assessment requires the continuation, and an extension of the Baltic Monitoring Programme (BMP). The efficiency of the BMP could be enhanced if the planning of surveillance cruises were better coordinated in a central point. This would improve data supply and use. At present, uncertainties in data handling is due above all to insufficient accessibility and lack of quality control by users.
The completely new situation and the continuous rapid political and socioeconomic development of the eastern countries of the Baltic region make it difficult to make projections for the future. What is certain, however, is that the need for scientific and technological support will increase. The exchange of data and experience between HELCOM and the eastern countries and between scientists and the various States may, in fact, become easier. As an important result of this development, the possibility to combat land-based pollution in the entire drainage basin of the Baltic Sea is increased.
The reunification of the two German States opens new possibilities for a reorganization of the Baltic research programme and a new division of labour in the new Germany. The Institut für Meereskunde in Warnemünde, in the former German Democratic Republic, for example, will be the prospective institute for Baltic oceanography. The Institut für Meereskunde in Kiel, on the other hand, could assume the full responsibility for global oceanographic research.
Summing up, recent political development raises hopes for improved intergovernmental cooperation in the Baltic region, including a development programme, with HELCOM providing financial and logistic support for the eastern countries of the region. The "Mediterranean Blue Plan" could serve as a model to support this.
This brief and fragmentary overview of international cooperation in the Baltic region shows that many problems still await solution. However, there is the hope that efforts will continue in the best tradition of international marine science cooperation, and the political and socio-economic development in the eastern part of the Baltic region will open new horizons of cooperation in science and technology, so that once more the Baltic region will play a leading role for the benefit of the ocean and the peoples living on its shores.
<section>References</section>
Babenerd, B., and T. Meyerhöfer. "Studie zum Fischsterben in der Kieler Förde im Oktober 1988." Forschungsvorhaben Wasser 102 (1988), no. 4: 234.
Baltic Marine Environment Protection Commission - Helsinki Commission. "Second Periodic Assessment of the State of the Marine Environment of the Baltic Sea, 1984-1988; General Conclusions." Baltic Sea Environment Proceedings, No. 35 A, 1990.
Boczek, B.A. "The Baltic region in its historical context." In: Westing, A.H., ed. Comprehensive security for the Baltic. PRIO, UNEP, SAGE publications: 1989, 23-34.
Boxer, B. (1982) "Mediterranean pollution: problem and response." Ocean Development & International Law 10 (1982): 315-356.
Broms, B. "Multilateral agreements in the Baltic region." In: Westing, A.H., ed. Comprehensive security for the Baltic. PRIO, UNEP, SAGE publications: 1989, 62-71.
Ehlers, P. Marine scientific cooperation in the framework of the Helsinki Commission. Kieler Meeresforschungen, Institut für Meereskunde an der Universität Kiel. Sonderheft No. 6; The Baltic Sea Environment, 1988.
Gebremedhin, N. "Lessons from the UNEP Regional Seas Programme." In: Westing, A.H., ed. Comprehensive security for the Baltic. PRIO, UNEP, SAGE publications: 1989, 90-98.
Jenisch, U. "Die Ostsee als Wirtschafts und Lebensraum. Wirtschaft, Umweltschutz, Seerecht." German Yearbook of International Law, vol 33, 1991, 349-382.
Kremling, K. "Dissolved trace metals in waters." In: First Periodic Assessment of the State of the Marine Environment of the Baltic Sea area, 1980-1985. Baltic Sea Environment Proceedings, 17B, 1987, 209-219.
O'Dell, A. Scandinavian World. London: Longmans, Green, 1957.
Voigt, K. "The Baltic Sea - pollution problems and natural environmental changes." In: Richardson, J.G., ed. Managing the Ocean: Resources, Research, Law. Mt Airy (USA): Lomond Publications, 1986, 159-167.
Zmudzinski, L. "Environmental quality in the Baltic region." In: Westing, A.H., ed. Comprehensive security for the Baltic. PRIO, UNEP, SAGE publications: 1989, 46-53.
<section>The Indian Ocean Marine Affairs Cooperation (IOMAC) (Hiran W. Jayewardene)</section>
Introduction
Wherever the intensity of human activity has increased, the emergence of management arrangements has been a prerequisite for rational utilization of such areas and their resources. So, in the international field, whether it be outer space, the polar regions or the deep ocean regions, international cooperative arrangements have evolved to circumscribe the limits of individual action and provide for cooperative use and joint management. Also, in the area of ocean space - the oceans - it may be seen as inevitable that intergovernmental arrangements would eventually develop as a basis for rational management.
In such a context, the process of Indian Ocean Marine Affairs Cooperation (IOMAC) may be seen as a pioneering ocean management movement initiated by countries of the region, joined by extra-regional user states. For reasons of comprehensiveness and effectiveness, IOMAC was founded on the concept of integrating relevant management disciplines in mandated fields, as well as integrating relevant national, regional, and global institutional elements in the regional management framework.
In furtherance of the primary commitment for the realization of the promised benefits to governments from the new ocean regime, IOMAC has consistently emphasized training as an essential tool in advancing national capabilities in the requisite fields of marine affairs. This would be essential for bringing about a true integration of the ocean sector in national development strategies.
Inspired by recognition of the finite character of the adjacent ocean and its resources, African and Asian states united in the context of a characterization of the Indian Ocean as the "village pond" in the largely underdeveloped African-Asian region of the world. In IOMAC the Indian Ocean was then seen as a unifying rather than a dividing medium as it had appeared before. In addition to promoting cooperation between Indian Ocean States and entities outside the region, including technologically-advanced States and international organizations, IOMAC since its inception, has opened new vistas on regional cooperation and facilitated the broadening of intra-regional contacts which promote closer cooperation between African and Asian countries on a regular basis. In the future, such contacts could provide the platform on which closer integration of the rim community could be forged.
Already, a number of far-reaching management measures for the ocean, such as its Declaration as a Sanctuary for Whales for All Time, Banning of Large-scale Drift Nets, Declaration of a New Era of Indian Ocean Exploration, Initiation of Process Leading to the Establishment of an Indian Ocean Tuna Management framework, or establishment of a regional network of focal points for marine affairs, represent significant progress by IOMAC in bringing about collective ocean management in the region.
Background
1 Institutions for ocean management
Intergovernmental institutional arrangements for managing various aspects of ocean activities have evolved from time to time. Fisheries institutions such as WECAFC, IATTC, CECAF, ICCAT, FFA, and IOFC have developed mandates for specific regions and/or species. Conventional regimes have evolved in respect of environmental management of specific sea areas, as in the case of the Baltic Sea Convention or the Convention for the Protection of the Mediterranean. Under UNEP a number of "Regional Seas" environmental programmes have been established. In the field of marine scientific research, the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC) has a number of regional affiliates such as IOCINDIO, IOCARIBE, and WESTPAC.
The deliberations in the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea and the resultant 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, provided for a number of institutional arrangements ranging from the International Seabed Authority (part XI) through the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea (part XV) to the Regional and National Marine Scientific and Technological Centres (arts 275-277). While the provisions of the first two have attracted considerable international attention since the conclusion of the Convention (as in the deliberations in the Preparatory Commission), the last has remained in relative obscurity.
In the more traditional areas of marine activity such as the delineation of regimes, jurisdiction, marine research, and resource utilization - areas of immediate practical relevance to developing countries - there has been only limited activity in terms of efforts to realize the benefits of the 1982 Convention and to advance requisite national skills. Consequently, there have been no major institutional developments in this area. As noted above, the only directly relevant institutional arrangements envisaged under the Convention - although limited in scope to scientific and technological aspects - have not been utilized in the preparatory and post-Conference processes preceding entry into force.
IOMAC is perhaps the only regional initiative of its kind to have originated in the UNCLOS process. The very title of IOMAC-I: the First Conference which established the framework of IOMAC in 1985, was cast "in the context of the New Ocean Regime" - obviously referring to the regime ushered in by UNCLOS III.
The frequent references in the text of the 1982 Convention, especially in the context of regional cooperation, has drawn the interpretation that "an undertaking to cooperate is also an undertaking to act". (Pinto 1988) More recently, the ongoing international deliberations on the regime of the high seas has manifested a trend towards res communis and further development of the thesis on the obligatory character of international cooperation in its use and management.
2 Marine/ocean affairs: The new management discipline
One of the remarkable, but often overlooked, aspects of UNCLOS III was the marshalling of multi-disciplinary expertise through national delegations for confronting a myriad of assorted problems and issues in areas such as fisheries, oceanography, geology, geography, marine technology, finance, and economics - apart from the central legal discipline. Nevertheless, the process of negotiations - perhaps somewhat clouded by immediate issues of jurisdiction and the politically challenging task of completing part XI - possibly detracted from the Conference reflecting that experience in full. Hence, we have in articles 275-277, an acknowledgment of the role of marine science and technology. Even at the end of the Conference, "science and technology" was still seen as the essential discipline as emphasized in the Group of 77-inspired "Resolution on the Development of Marine Scientific and Technological Capabilities" - one of the resolutions appended to the Final Act of the
Conference as annex VI. While some grappled with nomenclature such as "oceanology," it was left to developments in the aftermath of the Conference to give recognition to the broader concept of "marine affairs" as the general discipline on which ocean management of the future was to be founded. The International Ocean Institute (IOI) Training Programmes in marine affairs for developing countries and IOMAC, were perhaps the forerunners of this new approach to the oceans. The subsequent designation of the Office/Division of Ocean Affairs and Law of the Sea under the Secretary-General of the United Nations not only gave high-level status to the Law of the Sea and related matters, it also gave the formal endorsement of the United Nations to the new management concept for the oceans.
"Marine affairs" encompasses the range of ocean-related disciplines in an interdisciplinary framework. However, there is no precise content of general acceptability, the scope being determined by a particular mandate. In the case of IOMAC, six main areas of activity have been identified, namely, marine science technology and ocean services; living resources; non-living resources; ocean law policy and management; marine transport and communications, and the marine environment. By design, the IOMAC mandate was limited to the peaceful uses of the ocean.
3 IOMAC - The Indian Ocean Management Initiative
IOMAC developed from informal consultations in the closing stages of the Third Law of the Sea Conference regarding developing country perspectives on the follow-up to the Conference and realization of its aims for their benefit. Many countries were slow to recognize that mere assertion of rights in respect of vast sea areas and offshore resource potential would not endow them with those benefits. The principal challenge then, as it is now, was the effective integration of the marine dimension in national development strategies. In the Indian Ocean there was, initially, a need to assess the state of activities and identify national priorities and requisite measures for advancement in the marine sector. Above all, there was a necessity to determine a suitable forum for such deliberations. Several rounds of initial discussions in the Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee (AALCC) which provided the only appropriate general forum spanning the Indian Ocean - soon revealed the
need for a dedicated forum within which Indian Ocean marine affairs could be properly addressed. With encouragement from a core-group of countries pledging their support for an Indian Ocean Conference, the Government of Sri Lanka which had initiated the discussions and studies on the Indian Ocean in AALCC in 1981, announced the convening of the First Conference on Economic Scientific and Technical Cooperation in the Indian Ocean in Marine Affairs in the context of the New Ocean Regime (IOMAC-I) in Colombo in July 1985. The Conference was preceded by an inter-agency consultation convened in May 1985 by the Special Representative of the Secretary-General of the United Nations for the Law of the Sea for coordinating UN agency support to the Conference, and an Intergovernmental Preparatory Meeting in Colombo in June 1985.
4 Background, history and basic aims
IOMAC was founded on the following three basic objectives which guided the First Conference:
a. Create an awareness regarding the Indian Ocean, its resources and potential for the development of the states of the region, and furthering cooperation among them, as well as with other states active in the region, bearing in mind the new ocean regime embodied in the 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
b. Provide a forum where Indian Ocean states and other interested nations could review the state of the economic uses of the Indian Ocean and its resources and related activities, including those undertaken within the framework of intergovernmental organizations, and identifying fields in which they would benefit from enhanced international cooperation, coordination, and concerted actions.
c. Adopt a strategy for enhancing the national development of the Indian Ocean states through the integration of ocean-related activities in their respective development process, and a policy of integrated ocean management through a regular and continuing dialogue and cooperative international/regional action with particular emphasis on technical cooperation among developing countries.
The First Conference commenced in July 1985 with a Consultative Phase (15-20 July 1985) and concluded with a Final Phase of Meetings of Experts and Officials followed by the Ministerial-level Meeting (26-28 January 1987), both Phases of the Conference being held in Colombo, Sri Lanka. The first meeting of the IOMAC Standing Committee was held in Colombo on 28 January 1987 upon conclusion of the Conference. Since then the Standing Committee has had six other Meetings, with the Seventh Meeting of the Committee being held in July 1991. With the exception of the Sixth Meeting of the Committee which was held in Arusha, Tanzania, in conjunction with the Second Conference (IOMAC II) all Meetings of the Committee have been held in Colombo as the seat of the Secretariat. The Second Conference took place in Arusha, Tanzania, 3-7 September 1990.
Over 35 States from the Indian Ocean region and outside have participated in IOMAC activities together with 38 international organizations, offices and entities of the United Nations system, and other governmental and non-governmental organizations and entities.
As an exercise in the development of international organizations, IOMAC is characterized by a functional approach which preceded the process of formalization culminating in the adoption of the Arusha Agreement on the Organization for Indian Ocean Marine Affairs Cooperation of 1990. In an era of international endeavour based on a new approach to integrated marine affairs management, this practical approach has helped governments and organizations to participate, experience, and understand the nature and scope of such a framework for cooperation. This process of programme development and institutional consolidation was principally supported by the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP).
At present the Arusha Agreement has been signed by nine countries (Indonesia, Iran, Kenya, Mauritius, Mozambique, Nepal, Pakistan, Sri Lanka, and Tanzania) and ratified by five (Indonesia, Mauritius, Mozambique, Pakistan, and Sri Lanka). Eight ratifications would be needed for entry-into-force. In the meantime, the IOMAC Technical Cooperation Group has begun to be activated following the Arusha Resolution, and a number of IOMAC activities, including the IOMAC-IOI Training Programme, are being implemented.
The organizational framework for Indian Ocean marine affairs cooperation
1 Principles of cooperation
The main task of the First Conference at its Consultative Meeting in July 1985, as preceded by the Preparatory Meeting in June of that year, was to give form and content to the basic concept of cooperation underlying the objectives of association of IOMAC. The IOMAC Declaration adopted by the Ministerial-level Final Phase of the First Conference in January 1987 set out the Framework of Cooperation in the form of an elaboration of the principles of IOMAC. These principles deal inter alia with integration of the marine sector into national development strategies; rights and needs of the land-locked and geographically disadvantaged States; acquisition and dissemination of information; harmonization and strengthening of management arrangements; designation of national focal points; development of maritime transport services; cooperation within international organizations; cooperation at international conferences; operational arrangements; and action to implement. The Second
Conference in Arusha in 1990, reviewed the 1987 principles, and assigned the matter to the Standing Committee for further consideration.
2 Membership and participation
Participation in IOMAC since the First Conference has been guided by objective criteria based on the practice of the General Assembly of the United Nations in the Ad Hoc Committee on the Declaration of the Indian Ocean as a Zone of Peace. This provides for the following categories: 1 Indian Ocean States - a littoral States, and b hinterland States; and 2 major maritime users.
Considerable debate and discussion has taken place with regard to the inclusion of the latter category of Major Maritime Users (MMUs). Since the area coming within the purview of the organization includes and extends beyond the limits of national jurisdiction to encompass the high seas, it is arguable that an effort to move to coastal state management of the ocean as a whole, while excluding other users with legitimate rights therein, would tend to go in the direction of creeping jurisdiction and a revival of mare clausum. At the same time, there is no doubt of some concern that developing country interests would be subjugated in a framework also accommodating developed countries making up the category of MMUs. Sometimes the issue is also cast as a political bogey in the context of intra-regional strategic perceptions. On the other hand, some MMUs have argued that the MMU claim of interests may not only be equal to, but could even surpass that of coastal States in terms of
areal extent and intensity of user activities. The concern regarding MMUs would appear to be greatly diminished in the light of the reality of day-to-day intercourse with developed countries, and the growing realization of the need for shedding post-colonial antipathy, interdependence, reduction of international tension, and building mutual confidence through cooperation. IOMAC has gone some way towards building such confidence through the mechanism of the Technical Cooperation Group (TCG). At present Australia, Bangladesh, China, Egypt, France, Germany, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Kenya, Malawi, Malaysia, Mauritius, Myanmar, The Netherlands, Nepal, Norway, Pakistan, Romania, Saudi Arabia, Seychelles, Sri Lanka, Tanzania, Thailand, United Kingdom, United States, and the Commonwealth of Independent States (CIS) are participating in the TCG.
In fact, precedents of developed country participation in other regional organizations, and even the Indian Ocean Fishery Commission (IOFC), and present discussions on an Indian Ocean Tuna Commission (IOTC), would tend to recognize the value of accommodating all principal actors in management. An ancillary issue is the claim of some MMUs for recognition as littoral States on account of territorial possession in the Indian Ocean.
In Arusha, the IOMAC II Resolution adopting the constituent Agreement for the Organization "considered that at this stage membership in the Organization should be open only to coastal and hinterland States of the Indian Ocean" and further considered it "desirable that States other than coastal nor hinterland States of the Indian Ocean and particularly such states as are active in the Indian Ocean, should also participate in the activities of the Organization for purposes of ensuring the widest possible international cooperation." The Conference requested the Standing Committee through the Secretary-General to undertake consultations with States that are not coastal or hinterland states of the Indian Ocean with respect to their participation in or cooperation with IOMAC.
The following States from the Indian Ocean region have participated in IOMAC: Arab Republic, Australia, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Burundi, Comoros Islands, Djibouti, Egypt, Ethiopia, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Kenya, Kuwait, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mauritius, Mozambique, Myanmar, Nepal, Oman, Pakistan, Seychelles, Singapore, Somalia, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Thailand, Tanzania, Uganda, Yemen, People's Democratic Republic of Yemen, Zambia, and Zimbabwe.
3 Institutional framework
The institutional framework of IOMAC is comprised of the following elements: the Conference which functions as the plenary, the Standing Committee which is the executive body, the Technical Cooperation Group (TCG) providing for cooperative exchanges with developed countries from outside the region, and the Secretariat which performs the regular functions of such a body. In addition, IOMAC has put into place a Network of IOMAC Focal Points in governments within the region and outside, as well as in participating international organizations.
4 IOMAC Conference and Chairmanship
At the Final Session of the First Conference (IOMAC I) in January 1987, the Conference requested the Committee to make arrangements to convene the next meeting of the Conference preferably within two years but not later than January 1990. The Second Conference (IOMAC II) was held in Arusha, Tanzania in September 1990. The venue and date for the Third Conference (IOMAC III) to be held in 1995 is to be decided by the Standing Committee.
The Chairmanship of the Conference passed from Sri Lanka which had hosted the First Conference, to Tanzania - the host country for IOMAC II thus setting a precedent for rotation of the Chairmanship in accordance with the practice of certain other organizations such as the Non-aligned Movement (NAM).
5 The Standing Committee
The Standing Committee was established in 1987 by the First Conference. It was originally envisaged that the Committee would initially consist of 10 members nominated by the Conference to represent the major geographical areas and principal ocean-related interests (that is, landlocked, geographically disadvantaged, mainland coastal, and archipelagic States). They would hold office inter-sessionally up to the next IOMAC Conference. The Conference provided that the Committee shall be open-ended and shall meet as often as necessary for the performance of its functions and shall determine procedures, the agenda, and venue of its meeting. The Conference established the Standing Committee with primary responsibility for taking action as may be necessary for policy level guidance on the implementation of the Programme and Plan of Action and furthering cooperation through the framework of IOMAC.
Participation in the Standing Committee very soon surpassed the numbers envisaged by the First Conference with 17 participants at the initial meeting in January 1987 (regarded as the original Members of the Committee), which has progressively increased in participation through 15 (in 1987), 21 (in 1988), 22 (in 1989), 25 (in 1990), and 28 (in July 1991). The Committee meetings in 1992 and 1993 were equally very well attended.
Article 8 of the Arusha Agreement governs the Standing Committee as follows:
COMPOSITION
1. The Conference shall determine the size and elect members of the Committee, from amongst the Members of the Organization, and shall endeavour to ensure that the major geographical areas and the principal ocean-related interests (namely, landlocked, geographically disadvantaged, mainland, coastal and archipelagic) shall be represented in the Committee.
FUNCTIONS
2. The Committee which shall be the executive body of the Organization shall:
a. Provide the necessary policy guidance for the implementation of the Programme of Cooperation and Plan of Action of the Organization, and for the furtherance of cooperation through the framework of the Organization.
b. Consider the implementation of decisions taken by the Conference.
c. Supervise the administration and finances of the Organization.
d. Submit to the Conference, for its approval, the budget estimates and accounts of the Organization, together with comments and recommendations.
e. Submit to the Conference, for its approval, proposals for programmes and activities of the Organization.
f. Authorize the Secretary-General to take whatever steps the Committee considers necessary for achieving the objectives of the Organization.
g. Establish its rules of procedure except as otherwise provided in this Agreement.
h. Exercise such other functions as may be referred to it by the Conference.
MEETINGS AND PROCEDURE
a. The Committee shall meet in regular session once a year.
b. The Committee shall meet in special session whenever a majority of the members of the Committee request the convening of a special session.
c. A quorum for meetings of the Committee shall be two-thirds of the members of the Committee.
d. The Committee shall elect a Chairman and a Vice-Chairman.
e. Members of the Organization not elected to the Committee may participate at its meetings without a vote.
f. The Committee shall endeavour to reach its decisions by consensus. Where consensus is not possible, decisions of the Committee shall, unless otherwise provided in this Agreement, be made by a majority of its members present and voting.
g. Representatives of governments not members of the Organization, representatives of the United Nations and the appropriate agencies and bodies of the United Nations, representatives of such other international and national governmental and non governmental organizations as the Committee may deem appropriate, and experts in fields of interest to the Committee may be invited to attend meetings of the Committee as observers. If one-third of the members of the Organization objects to the invitation of an observer to the Committee that observer shall not be invited thereafter.
In practice, the meetings of the Committee held on an annual basis, has created a regional forum which brings a growing number of delegates and experts from Asian, Arab and African States together regularly, and has helped create new professional and personal ties within the region. The Committee's deliberations provide participating states and other entities an opportunity to review and maintain an overview of activities in the respective sectors of marine affairs in the region, and to plan, implement, and monitor various cooperative activities. The concurrent meetings of the Technical Cooperation Group (TCG), which is becoming more active, has also served to focus greater attention on the meetings and work of the Committee.
6 The Secretariat
Since the Preparatory Phase of the First Conference the Government of Sri Lanka has provided host facilities for the Secretariat. At the Second Standing Committee Meeting in 1987 the Committee approved the provision of an independent and permanent location for the Secretariat in Colombo. For the purpose of formalizing these arrangements and securing the appropriate host facilities, in addition to facilities pledged to the Committee, a host facilities agreement between the Secretariat and the Government of Sri Lanka will give effect to these decisions.
Article 9 of the Arusha Agreement provides for the Secretariat composed of the Secretary-General, who shall be the chief administrative officer of the Organization, and such staff as the Organization may require.
The Secretary-General shall, as chief administrative officer, be responsible, under the guidance of the Committee, for the administration of the Organization and its programmes. The provisions detail the functions of the Secretary-General and provide, inter alia, that he shall ensure that the Organization shall be an effective and dynamic channel of cooperation in marine affairs in the Indian Ocean.
7 The Technical Cooperation Group (TCG)
At the Second Standing Committee Meeting it was decided, inter alia, to establish a Technical Cooperation Group which would provide for the participation of States with advanced capabilities in marine affairs and also prospective donor States. Accordingly, the Secretariat identified and invited such countries to be associated with the Standing Committee at its future meetings with a view to jointly identifying areas of possible cooperation and procedures for interaction. The creation of this Group in 1988 has provided a forum for a regular dialogue between Indian Ocean States and participating technologically advanced States interested in the Indian Ocean. Initial participation of these countries essentially as observers, has gradually progressed to a more active level of contact.
8 Network of focal points
It is required that participating States of IOMAC should designate and notify other participating States the national entity primarily responsible for coordination of its marine activities and the maintenance of marine affairs cooperation on the regional and global levels through a network of such entities. This process of establishing an international network of focal points within the Indian Ocean and globally has been underway since the completion of the First Conference in 1987. Both States and international organizations have responded to the formal communication from the Secretariat requesting the early designation of focal points. The Secretariat maintains regular contact with governments through their respective national focal points. Communications relating to the announcements of IOMAC meetings, workshops, training programmes and other activities, are regular items of such contact.
9 Cooperation with international organization
Since the inter-agency consultations in Geneva in May 1985 which preceded even the First Conference, the IOMAC process has evolved in very close cooperation with international organizations concerned with marine activities, in particular, the United Nations and other interested organizations.
The following 38 entities have so far been associated with IOMAC activities:
Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee (AALCC)
Commonwealth Secretariat
Division of Global and Interregional Projects, UNDP
Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP)
Economic Commission for Africa (ECA)
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nation (FAO)
Gulf Cooperation Council (GCC)
Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC)
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)
International Centre for Ocean Development (ICOD)
International Hydrographic Bureau (IHB)
International Maritime Organization (IMO)
International Ocean Institute (IOI)
International Telecommunications Union (ITU)
International Union for Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources (IUCN)
International Whaling Commission (IWC)
Issue-based Indian Ocean Network (IBION)
Law of the Sea Institute (LSI)
Netherlands Institute for the Law of the Sea (NILOS)
Office of the Special Representative
Organization of African Unity (OAU)
Project Jonah (Australia)
Regional Bureau for Africa, UNDP
Regional Bureau for Asia and the Pacific, UNDP
UN Ad hoc Committee of the Indian Ocean Peace Zone
UN Department of Political and Security Council Affairs
United Nations Development Programme (UNDP)
UN Division for Outer Space Affairs
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO)
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)
United Nations Fund for Population Activities (UNFPA)
United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO)
UN International Economic and Social Affairs Department
UN Legal Counsel
UN Division of Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea
UN Revolving Fund for Natural Resources Exploration
United Nations University
World Meteorological Organization (WMO)
Programmes and activities
The IOMAC programme of cooperation was developed on the basis of the identification of national priorities at the Preparatory Meeting in June 1985, and deliberations thereon at the Consultative and Final Phases of the Conference in July 1985 and January 1987. In view of the considerable range of varying national requirements and wide scope of activities envisaged, it was found necessary to draw from the programme salient items of common interest which were brought together in a more focused plan of action. For purposes of practical implementation the Secretariat prepares and implements a work programme under the guidance of the Standing Committee.
1 The programme of cooperation
The programme of cooperation is based on the deliberations of the Consultative Phase of the First Conference and provides an identification of areas for cooperation in respect of each of the principal sectors of IOMAC activity. The Second Conference reviewed the programme of cooperation and provided an appraisal and supplementary guidelines for future activities.
2 Plan of action
In the plan of action, specific areas of cooperation are identified for implementation on an immediate, medium- or long-term basis. The First Conference noted that certain items for immediate implementation could of necessity also have a medium- and/or long-term character. It was further provided that elements of the programme of cooperation would be drawn on from time to time in the context of implementation of the plan of action for purposes of further elaboration and augmentation thereof under the aegis of the Standing Committee and in the context of the framework for cooperation.
3 Work programme
Rapid implementation of a wide-ranging work programme has been a major achievement of IOMAC. Initiation of a number of new activities in areas not fully addressed by earlier and existing programmes as well as organizational mandates has served to demonstrate the usefulness and effectiveness of a collective regional undertaking committed to serving national needs. IOMAC has moved to organize comprehensive programmes of activity in each of the principle sectors through expert meetings followed by practical measures.
One of the earliest undertakings of IOMAC in the technical sphere was with regard to introducing space technology applications to marine resources. Undertaken in collaboration with the Outer Space Affairs Division of the United Nations, and later the Space and Upper Atmosphere Research Commission (SUPARCO) of Pakistan, a series of preparatory technical meetings paved the way for the region. It is interesting that IOMAC's first venture in building national capabilities was in what is regarded as a high-technology area, rather than in a basic discipline such as marine science. In a way, to borrow a phrase, it is perhaps to "leap-frog into the future" and may inspire some confidence for many developing States in the region that are late starters in marine affairs.
One of the motivating factors for IOMAC was an unsuccessful effort to build a CCOP (Committee for Coordination of Offshore Prospecting for Mineral Resources) in the Indian Ocean, as in the case of the very successful organizations of this sort presently operating in East Asia and the South Pacific. Although IOMAC emerged with wider aims, the improved climate for cooperation in the marine sector was brought about by greater awareness of the Ocean's resource potential and paved the way for an unprecedented mandate for initiating cooperative activities in respect of nonliving resources, at the IOMAC Technical Group on Offshore Prospecting for Mineral Resources in the Indian Ocean held in Karachi, in July 1988.
The following are the salient aspects of IOMAC activities in each of the principal sectors in terms of organizing for work and implementing activities:
MARINE SCIENCE, TECHNOLOGY, AND OCEAN SERVICES. "A New Era of Indian Ocean Exploration": On a proposal made by Tanzania, the Conference adopted the Resolution on a New Era of Indian Ocean Exploration which called for a systematic, coordinated long-term collective international effort to explore the Indian Ocean along the lines of the International Indian Ocean Expedition (1962-1965). However, this new effort was required to concentrate on near-shore areas and to give emphasis to the needs of developing States, as well as to secure their participation.
Taken in the light of the seaward extension of national jurisdiction and the new framework for the conduct of marine scientific research under the Law of the Sea Convention of 1982, the IOMAC Declaration of a New Era of Indian Ocean Exploration may go some way in providing reassurance to major nations conducting marine scientific research, as much as it seeks to strengthen developing Indian Ocean states capabilities in this field.
As a sequel to the Arusha Declaration of a New Era of Marine Science, a major IOMAC international marine science symposium was held in 1992. This provided an opportunity to review existing programmes, national priorities and new avenues for cooperative activities in the region.
Space Technology Applications
: In addition to the important IOMAC-UN Technical Workshops held in Colombo (1986) and in Karachi (1989), IOMAC has prepared a manual on Remote Sensing Applications for the Indian Ocean region, and is initiating a number of pilot projects, as well as a training workshop held in the region in 1992.
LIVING RESOURCES. Tuna resources: The IOMAC I Preparatory Meeting as well as the First Conference at its Consultative Phase in 1985, and the Final Phase in 1987, for the first time took cognizance at intergovernmental level of the rapid development of a major industrial-scale distant water tuna fishery in the Indian Ocean in the early 1980s, and called for the early establishment of an appropriate regulatory body for management of Indian Ocean tuna.
Subsequent IOMAC meetings, especially at the Standing Committee, have kept relevant developments under review, and have acted as a catalyst for deliberations on the establishment of such a body now likely to emerge under the auspices of FAO in the form of the proposed Indian Ocean Tuna Commission (IOTC). In January 1989 a group of IOMAC fisheries and legal experts met in Jakarta to prepare common positions for intergovernmental deliberations on the subject. In this context, IOMAC has consistently maintained the importance to be attached to the participation of distant water fishing nations in a future management regime that would ensure its effectiveness, as well as emphasized the importance of providing for the increased participation of developing Indian Ocean States in harnessing the resource.
IOMAC Declaration banning the use of large-scale drift nets: The Seventh Meeting of the IOMAC Standing Committee adopted a Declaration banning the use of large-scale drift nets in the Indian Ocean.
NON-LIVING RESOURCES. Offshore prospecting for mineral resources: In July 1988 the IOMAC Meeting on Offshore Prospecting for Mineral Resources in the Indian Ocean hosted by the Government of Pakistan in Karachi, generated a strong intergovernmental mandate for initiating a programme of cooperation in this field, with the collaboration and assistance of states with technologically advanced capabilities in this field.
INDIAN OCEAN LAW, POLICY, AND MANAGEMENT. Marine Affairs Management Training: IOMAC regularly conducts marine affairs management training in collaboration with the International Ocean Institute (IOI). The annual IOMAC-IOI Marine Affairs Training Programmes have been held in Arusha, Kuala Lumpur, Cairo, and Mauritius. Each 10-week course accommodates 25 participants from developing Indian Ocean States and provides training in integrated management to mid-level career officers responsible for managing marine activities in their countries.
MARITIME TRANSPORT AND COMMUNICATIONS. Formation of an Association of Shipping and Port Authorities in the Indian Ocean: The Second Conference endorsed a number of proposals made by the IOMAC Meeting of Experts in Shipping and Port Development hosted by the Government of Kenya and held in Mombasa in August 1990. A number of important recommendations made by the meeting for promoting cooperation in shipping and port development were endorsed by the Second Conference. In July 1991, the Seventh Meeting of the Standing Committee adopted and recommended for governmental approval, terms of reference for the IOMAC Association of Shipping and Port Authorities. It is envisaged that some of the cooperative measures identified would be taken up for implementation by the Association.
MARINE ENVIRONMENT. Dumping of hazardous waste and toxic materials; pollution of the sea by oil; and potential adverse impact on the marine environment of proposed deep seabed mining are the relevant issues. In 1988, the third meeting of the IOMAC Standing Committee reviewed these specific aspects of concern to Indian Ocean countries and recommended that the Secretary-General identify an effective mechanism to monitor and develop regional capabilities of coastal States for prevention of such environmental hazards with assistance from the competent international agencies.
Establishment of a regional network for marine pollution monitoring
: Following consultations between IMO and the IOMAC Secretariat, the Seventh Meeting of the Standing Committee requested the Secretariat to take necessary steps in consultation with IMO, UNEP and other interested entities for the early establishment of an Indian Ocean network.
Indian Ocean Environment Conference
: Presently preparatory work is under way for the convening of the IOMAC Indian Ocean Environment Conference. The Conference will review the health of the Indian Ocean, identify environmental problems, and determine a common programme for cooperation in this field.
INTERESTS AND NEEDS OF LAND-LOCKED STATES. Accommodation of the interests of land-locked nations in the context of marine affairs was recognized very early by IOMAC as a logical corollary to the rights of land-locked countries in respect of access to living resources, and access to and from the sea. Although a technical meeting on the subject was planned under the joint coordination of Uganda and Nepal, this has been deferred in favour of an expert study on key issues and current trends.
TRAINING, INFORMATION, AND OTHER FIELDS RELEVANT TO COOPERATION IN MARINE AFFAIRS. Indian Ocean Marine Affairs and Aquatic Resources Information System (IO-MAARIS): Work on the establishment of IO-MAARIS commenced in 1987, at the Second Meeting of the Standing Committee. The Committee reviewed and endorsed the IOMAC/UNCTAD/UNDP sponsored Mission Report which detailed three major components of the proposed system - i.e., the institutional element involving the creation of three nodes in the region as a first step; a training and educational element; and outputs element. The IOMAC Information Workshop held in Jakarta in February 1990 reviewed and identified a number of practical measures for putting into operation the proposed information system. At present the Secretariat publishes an Indian Ocean Newsletter which provides an update on IOMAC activities and other related developments.
Annex
IOMAC Work Programme 1986-1995
Date
Activity
Venue
Status/comments
15-19 September
United Nations Regional Meeting of Experts on Space Technology Applications in the Indian Ocean Region.
Colombo, Sri Lanka
Concluded Report No. IOMAC-1/ A/25
26-28 January
First Conference on Economic, Scientific and Technical Cooperation in Marine Affairs in the Indian Ocean in the Context of the New Ocean Regime(IOMAC-1 )
Colombo, Sri Lanka
Concluded Report No. IOMAC-1/ A/27
2 February-10 April
IOI Training Programme in Management and Conservation of Marine Resources - Class C Regional Cooperation and Development in the Indian Ocean.
Arusha, Tanzania
Concluded
11-14 July
First Meeting IOMAC Technical Group on Offshore Prospecting for Mineral Resources in the Indian Ocean.
Karachi, Pakistan
Concluded IOMAC/ TM-1/A/1 (Report) IOMAC/ TM-1/A/2 (Documents)
10 October-16 December
IOMAC-IOI Marine Affairs Training Programme
Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
Concluded
22-24 November
IOMAC Standing Committee 3rd Meeting
Colombo, Sri Lanka
Concluded Report No. IOMAC-1/ SC-3/9
20-24 January
IOMAC Meeting of Legal and Fisheries Experts and Second Meeting on IOMAC Statutes
Jakarta Indonesia
Concluded Report No. IOMAC/ TM-2/A/1
2-6 July
UN/IOMAC Workshop on Oceanographic/Marine Space Information Systems
Karachi, Pakistan
Concluded Report No. IOMAC/ TM-3/A/1
17-21 July
IOMAC Standing Committee 4th Meeting
Colombo, Sri Lanka
Concluded Report No. IOMAC-1/ SC-4/7
10 October-15 December
Second IOMAC-IOI Training Programme in Marine Affairs
Cairo, Egypt
Concluded
5-9 February
IOMAC Information Workshop
Jakarta, Indonesia
Concluded Report No. IOMAC-1/ TM/4/5/Rev. 1
2-5 May
5th IOMAC Standing Committee Meeting
Colombo, Sri Lanka
Concluded Report No. IOMAC-1/ SC-5/6/Rev. 1
27-31 August
Regional Workshop on the Development of Cooperative Arrangements among IOMAC Countries in the area of Shipping Ports, and Multi-modal Transport
Mombasa, Kenya
Concluded Report No. IOMAC-1/ TM-5/10
3-7 September
Second Conference on Economic, Scientific and Technical Cooperation in the Indian Ocean in the Context of the New Ocean Regime(IOMAC-II) and 6^th Meeting of the IOMAC Standing Committee
Arusha, Tanzania
Concluded Report No. IOMAC-II A/10
15-19 July
Seventh Meeting of the IOMAC Standing Committee
Colombo, Sri Lanka
Concluded Report No. IOMAC-II/ SC/12/Rev. 1
7 October-13 December
Fifth IOMAC-IOI Training Programme in Marine Affairs
Mauritius
In progress
19-23 October
International Scientific Workshop on Marine Scientific Cooperation on the Indian Ocean
Colombo, Sri Lanka
Concluded Report No. IOMAC-II TM-6/1
26-30 October
Eighth Meeting of the IOMAC Standing Committee
Colombo, Sri Lanka
Concluded Report No. IOMAC-II/ SC-8/14/Rev. 1
12-19 November
Ninth Meeting of the IOMAC Standing Committee, Technical Cooperation Group (TCG) and the In augural Meeting of IOMAC Association of Shipping and Ports Authority
Colombo, Sri Lanka
Concluded Report No. IOMAC-II/ SC-9/13/Rev. 1
Tenth Meeting of the IOMAC Standing Committee and the Second Meeting of IOMAC Shipping and Ports Authority
Colombo, Sri Lanka
Dates to be confirmed
Third Conference on Economic, Scientific and Technical Cooperation in Marine Affairs in the Indian Ocean in the Context of the New Ocean Regime (IOMAC-III)
Dates and venue to be confirmed
Indian Ocean Environment Conference
Dates and venue to be confirmed
IOMAC-IOI Marine Affairs Training Programme
Indonesia
Dates to be confirmed
<section>References</section>
Kwiatkowska, B. "the Role of Regional Organisations in Development Cooperation in Marine Affairs" In Soons, A., ed. Implementation of the Law of the Sea Convention through International Institutions, Honolulu: Law of the Sea Institute (1990).
Pinto, M.C.W. Economic, Scientific and Technical Cooperation in the Indian Ocean. FAO (1988).
IOMAC Documentation:
Record of the First Conference (IOMAC-I/A/27) 26-28 January 1987
Record of the Second Conference (IOMAC-II/A/10) 3-7 September 1990
Agreement on the Organization for Indian Ocean Marine Affairs Cooperation,
Arusha, Tanzania (GA Doc. A/45/831) 7 December 1990
Consolidated Records of the Standing Committee (IOMAC-II/A/2) September 1990
Record of the Seventh Meeting of the Standing Committee (IOMAC-II/SC-7/12/Rev. 1) July 1991
<section>Part IV: Ocean governance: Global level</section>
<section>Ocean governance and the global picture</section>
Jan van Ettinger, Alexander King, and Peter Payoyo
<section>I. Ocean problems are global problems</section>
In the Preamble to the United Convention on the Law of the Sea, signed at Montego Bay in December 1982, recognition is made that "the problems of ocean space are closely interrelated and need to be considered as a whole." The acknowledgement of this fundamental unity of concerns within the marine sphere has been a first significant step that necessarily leads to further recognition that ocean space problems are inseparable from the problems associated with land and with the air. The fact, for instance, that 90 per cent of ocean pollution results, through river run-offs and via the atmosphere, from land-based human activities encourages a rethinking of the meaning of ocean problems. Ocean problems can no longer be viewed in isolation from those on land and in the atmosphere. There are two main reasons for this: one is economic and the other, environmental.
As a result of technological as well as world population growth, the variety and intensity of uses of the oceans have been rapidly increasing. A meaningful view of the totality of these uses, and the problems of the oceans that they imply, is given in the 1982 Convention on the Law of the Sea. Activities on land and in air (and outer) space have, likewise, become inextricably related to human activities in the oceans. Consequently the environmental and economic impact of these activities are part of the ocean problems that have, therefore, become global in magnitude. Some examples of the vital economic relationship between human activities in the oceans and on land or in air (and outer) space are following:
- harvesting living resources, fisheries and aquaculture, is part of the global food supply;
- mining the ocean's minerals is becoming integrated into the world's raw materials system;
- shipping and navigation form a vital part of the world trade and communication network;
- exploiting submarine oil and gas deposits are an increasingly important element of the world's energy sources, making up more than 20 per cent of world supplies;
- tapping the endless movement of tides and waves and the ocean's thermal gradient have a large potential for future energy supply;
- developing marine technologies is increasingly carried out in symbiosis with other advanced technologies; and
- the global armaments race already embraces lands and oceans, as well as (outer) space.
These human activities generate waste, which increases in quantity, variety, and perniciousness. The resulting ocean-based pollution, interacting with the much more considerable land-sourced pollution of the oceans, conveyed through the atmosphere and river run-offs, exacerbates the already critical pollution of the entire planet. Thus, most of today's technology spews out effluents of radioactive materials and non-biodegradable toxic chemicals which persist and diffuse throughout the ecosystem. This bring us to a second, environmental, reason why the marine sphere cannot be seen in isolation from the land and air spheres: pollution consolidates land, air, and oceans into a truly single physical space.
Inasmuch as the activities in the oceans cannot, therefore, be viewed in isolation from those on land or in air (and outer) space these activities being qualitatively the same with respect to both economic aims and environmental consequence - the problems of the oceans must not be seen in isolation from the problems of land and air (and outer) space. Ocean problems are part and parcel of the totality of global problems.
Economic and environmental considerations in the appreciation of ocean problems cast a notion of ocean management which relies on the key importance of the biosphere - the ecological whole consisting of the oceans, land, and air. It is amazing to realize that a basic scientific truism which states the fundamental ecological unity of oceans, land, and air has only been established recently as a politically significant premise in understanding worldwide problems and in formulating approaches to their management and resolution.
The marine sphere forms not only an inseparable element of the biosphere. The oceans also play a central role in the regulation of the climate of the planet. Global climate change in the direction of warming has become a concern inevitably connected with the processes and changes taking place in the oceans. Should global warming materialize, sealevel rise will change the face of the planet. Climate change boosts a perspective on the oceans that unifies its peculiar problems with universal problems.
Ocean governance in the 1982 Convention on the Law of the Sea is viewed as a balanced matrix of ocean activities or uses, on the one hand, and protection and preservation of the marine environment, on the other hand. The guiding inspiration in evolving a comprehensive regime for this purpose was the concept of the Common Heritage of Mankind. This concept forms the core precept, the heart, of ocean governance in the new law of the sea. However, though its application is limited to the international seabed, its significance as a foundational concept in the tackling of ocean problems is not precluded.
Keeping in mind the relationships between ocean and global problems, the following questions can be raised: How far should the concept of the Common Heritage of Mankind and its institutional implications be extended to the management of other areas of global concern? How far can ocean governance in the 1982 Convention on the Law of the Sea - with its guiding concept of the Common Heritage of Mankind - stand as a model for the management of other areas of global concern?
<section>II. The common heritage of mankind</section>
It was Ambassador Arvid Pardo of Malta who on 1 November 1967 first proposed that the new law of the sea must be based no longer on the notion of "freedom of the seas" but on a new concept, the Common Heritage of Mankind (CHM). He presented this concept as a novel legal principle worthy to be introduced in international law. With this concept began the "marine revolution." Professor Elisabeth Mann Borgese (1980) commented:
The basic principle, the motor force of the 'marine revolution,' is the concept of the Common Heritage of Mankind. It cannot be stressed enough that the adoption of this principle by the XXV General Assembly as a norm of international law marked the beginning of a revolution in international relations....
It is surprising, therefore, that the Law of the Sea Conference itself has done so little about elaborating the concept of the Common Heritage and giving it a clear definition in legal and economic terms. For the outsider or newcomer to the law of the sea, it is difficult to conceptualize the precise meaning of this concept which remains somewhat rhetorical and etherial. Yet the components of a definition are all in the present version of the Draft Convention, that is the Informal Composite Negotiating Text, and one might use the components drawn from four different Articles (136,137,140, and 145) to formulate a definition in two basic articles:
First Article
The Area and its resources are the Common Heritage of Mankind.
Second Article
For the purpose of this Convention 'Common Heritage of Mankind' means that:
1. No State shall claim or exercise sovereignty or sovereign rights over any part of the Area or its resources, nor shall any State or person, natural or judicial, appropriate any part thereof. No such claim or exercise of sovereignty of sovereign rights, nor such appropriation shall be recognized.
2. The Area and its resources shall be managed for the benefit of mankind as a whole, irrespective of the geographical location of the States, whether coastal or land-locked, and taking into particular consideration the interest and needs of the developing countries as specifically provided for in this Part of the Convention.
3. The Area shall be open to use exclusively for peaceful purposes by all States, whether coastal or land-locked without discrimination and without prejudice to the other provisions of this Part of the present Convention.
4. Necessary measures shall be taken in order to ensure effective protection of the marine environment from harmful effects which may arise from activities in the Area, in accordance with Part XII of the present Convention."
In 1970, the UN General Assembly adopted Resolution 2749 declaring the CHM as the primal principle governing the exploitation of the international seabed. The CHM concept was thereafter given legal status in the 1982 Law of the Sea Convention (entered into force November 1994) as well as in the earlier 1972 UNESCO Convention for the Protection of the World Cultural and Natural Heritage and in the 1979 Moon Treaty (both already in force).
The CHM concept underpins the whole process of sustainable development in the marine sphere and constitutes the basis for ocean governance in the new law of the sea. What cannot be overemphasized is that the CHM concept - with its developmental, environmental, and peace-enhancing approaches to the resolution of ocean problems - embodies the most comprehensive formula and rationale for the management of marine resources or the ocean environment. Thus, the concept has significant implications for the governance of world resources, in general, and of the biosphere as a whole.
It is said that in searching for a regime to govern the exploration and exploitation of nodules in the deep seabed, the international community found instead, through the CHM concept, the most advanced system for international cooperation in technology development and transfer, crucial in the bridging of the development gap, creating in the process the beginning of a new form of ocean governance, and world governance in the twenty-first century. (Borgese 1990) The growing impact of the concept, in the context of the process of its definition, is an outstanding development in international relations. (Postyshev 1990)
Acceptance of the CHM concept, although at present limited to areas like the international seabed area, could be an immensely important innovation in geopolitical thinking, introducing new ingredients of equity and social justice to political decision-making. In addition, the CHM concept introduces a totally new economic theory, transcending both the market theory and the central planning theory. (Borgese 1991 ) An emerging economics of the CHM, founded on a new economic philosophy, holds a potential to transform our present world!
Certain guiding principles of the CHM concept lend themselves for application to other areas of global concern. The five principles may stated (see Borgese 1980): first, the principle of non-appropriation which determines that no single State can claim exclusive title to the CHM; second, the principle of shared management which entails a new form of social relations based on an international regime of cooperation; third, the principle of "common benefit for mankind as a whole," implying an equitable scheme of distribution and redistribution of wealth; fourth, the principle of "use for exclusively peaceful purposes," which injects the notion of disarmament in the process of implementing the CHM concept; and fifth, the principle of conservation for future generations which reiterates the principle of sustainable development in the oceans.
Underlying these five principles is a system of peaceful settlement of disputes without which the CHM philosophy cannot be logically pursued. This makes the CHM a complete framework for the comprehensive process of global governance. Moreover, from an appreciation of the principles or attributes of the CHM, it becomes apparent that the CHM concept is in agreement with the fundamental principles and purposes of the United Nations.
From an institutional standpoint, the challenge posed by the CHM concept may be conceived as a problem of integration. The institutional mechanisms required to implement the CHM concept need to be unified in a new system of global governance. The model for this integration spans horizontal and vertical levels of governance.
At the horizontal level, integration takes place in two ways: first, among sectoral/disciplinary institutions (for example environment, defence) which have hitherto been operating independently from one another, and second, between the public and private sectors whose interactions point to the direction of more intense cooperation. At the vertical level, integration of national, regional, and global institutions concerned with similar issues is called for. Relevant to this is, for example, the proposal to establish an Ocean Assembly in the United Nations to fulfill the role of a global mechanism which addresses the domain of ocean problems: from policy setting, to operational activities, to dispute settlement. The institutional implications of the CHM concept constitute its strategic value in shaping the world of the twenty-first century.
<section>III. The common heritage of mankind and four other problem areas</section>
As a result of the greatly increased public and governmental awareness of environmental dangers, the spotlight is now on the need for sustainable development. The major challenge posed for today's planners is unambiguous. New modes of thinking are demanded and new approaches to the management and use of world resources of all kinds must be made. Furthermore, people especially in the industrialized countries will have to reassess, with generational consequences, their life styles and to appreciate the need to change the* aspirations from quantity towards quality. This suggests that a thorough examination is required as to how and to what extent the CHM concept with its operational principles and its institutional implications should be extended to the efficient, equitable and sustainable management of other areas of global concern which span not only the oceans but also the terrestrial environment and even the atmosphere.
Extension of the CHM principles to some terrestrial areas such as Antarctica seems obvious and its flavour is already noticeable in the Antarctica negotiations. The purpose of this chapter is, however, to present a preliminary exploration of the possibility of extending the CHM concept and its institutional implications to areas where the problems are distributed in a geographically or functionally more expansive manner. We have selected four examples, namely energy, food, the atmosphere, and outer space. These particular problem areas are chosen for their respective characteristic importance to the survival and progress of mankind as a whole.
By energy is meant the product and processes, natural and human, associated with the generation, maintenance, and development of mankind's capabilities. Food is understood as the system of provisions for human nutriment. The planetary atmosphere consists of those layers of gaseous mass or air surrounding the earth. Outer space covers the environment beyond the earth's atmosphere including the moon and other celestial bodies. Energy and food are sectoral concerns which predominantly belong the terrestrial sphere of activity and where the concept of basic human needs raises questions of human equity. These are heterogeneous problem areas in contrast to the atmosphere and outer space which are interlinked and more homogeneous in a spatial sense.
In the Law of the Sea, "environment" and "resource" are identical and there can be no conflict between "conservation" and "development." (Borgese 1991) But the distinction between "resource" and "environment" is now progressively obliterated in all other fields by the sustainability thesis, making the CHM concept amenable to more and more potential applications or extensions. Energy, food, atmosphere and outer spaces are problem areas representative of the merging of the environment and resources and are sufficiently varied to test the value of the CHM concept as an overall proposition for the global governance of the world's resources and/or the environment.
1 Energy and the CHM
Energy is the basic ingredient in the evolution of the planetary system and the laws of thermodynamics provide the fundamental constraints to its use and development. Until the onset of the Industrial Revolution, societies operated exclusively on renewable energy from the sun, mainly through photosynthesis in the green leaf. Heat was obtained from the burning of wood, and indeed this is still the main energy source today for multitudes of people in the developing world. Energy to till the fields, to grind grains, and to do physical work was provided by the feeble muscular work of men and animals and, at times, by the use of simple waterwheels and windmills - secondary forms of solar energy.
With the development of the steam engine and the exploitation of coal, this equilibrium situation came rapidly to an end. Using the fossil fuels coal, oil, and natural gas, often converted to electricity for convenience, the present industrialized societies arose, generating great wealth, stimulating international trade on a scale previously unheard of, and creating transportation and communications networks which are painfully consolidating life and activity on our planet into a single, extremely complex system. Even within the present century human activity has multiplied some fortyfold, demanding vastly increased quantities of energy and materials and with population growth and industrialization, these increases continue.
Given this backdrop of a growing need for energy, there is a strong case for creating a mechanism to oversee the planetary energy situation. The balance of supply, conservation, and improved efficiency in energy use constitute an important element of overall global energy management. But it is insufficient to consider world energy policy solely in terms of assuring adequate supplies to meet growing needs. Recently recognized environmental constraints indicate that increased consumption of fossil fuels, or even consumption at present levels, could lead to environmental disaster. In the past, it has been assumed that the waste products of human and industrial activity would be absorbed and transformed by a benevolent Nature. Today we can no longer rely on this; for the first time human activity is having a substantial and possibly an irreversible impact on the biosphere.
The energy question has indeed reached a stage where it must inevitably be dealt with as a global problem requiring global solutions. Dispersed, self-aggrandizing and uncoordinated, and "unsustainable" decision-making by independent actors on energy matters has brought about a dismal world situation wherein remedy can only be found through cooperation and solidarity. Recent tendencies in international law and organization, briefly described below already point to the direction of global management of the energy problem.
Certain closely interwoven themes of the total energy issue clarify the nature of the management tasks involved, thereby suggesting the corresponding institutional underpinnings for a meaningful response to the energy challenge. These may be listed as follows:
i. energy security,
ii. environmental impact,
iii. energy technology, and
iv. development.
Energy security
The issue of energy security, which directly impinges on the energy "mix" debate, has become a major issue of environmental security. Energy security is not so much a question of continued adequacy of limited energy supplies. In fact, proven reserves of oil have been increasing in the past 20 years. (Odell 1991) Energy security means using those types and amounts of energy which the environment can sustain. Three main measures identified to implement this notion of energy security through the next century are proposed to be adopted: sustained efforts at increasing energy saving and efficiency; switch to natural gas as a bridge between the fossil and non-fossil era; and accelerated development of alternative, non-fossil energy sources. (van Ettinger 1991)
Environmental impact
Environmental impact of energy generation and use is a focal consideration in any policy initiative on energy. Whether the concern be for the destruction of forests and natural ecosystems - due to agricultural expansion and the depletion of wood for fuel and building purposes - or for the large emissions into the atmosphere from the burning of fossil fuels - resulting in smog on a local scale, acid rain on a regional scale, and in an enhanced greenhouse effect on a global scale - energy production and utilization impart the need for environmental assessment. Clearly, the principles of shared management of energy for the common benefit of mankind as a whole offer a promising approach in addressing the environmental consequences of global energy disposition.
Energy technology
The sustainability of energy use, in terms of resource depletion as well as environment pollution, is constantly linked to the dynamic of advanced technology in the energy sector. Energy technology impacts on issues such as conservation, pollution control, clean fuels, and greenhouse gas stabilization. The emerging view on energy technology introduces the ingredient of universal access to beneficial technology so that sustainability is assured. This means that applying the principle of non-appropriation to technology which enhances a sound biosphere would be of vital importance. This non-property attribute of energy technology is, in fact, already evident in technology co-development - a creative form of North-South cooperation based on the CHM concept. Development of alternative energy sources for future generations is also significant.
Development
The development dimension focuses on the equitable consumption of energy in the pursuit of progress by all nations in general, and in the South, in particular. But the environmental consideration in development gives rise to a dilemma: from an environmental point of view the early cooperation of the South in reducing global greenhouse gas or CO[2] emissions is essential; from a development point of view, however, the South will have to continue to increase its per capita energy use. (van Ettinger 1991) Assistance to the Developing Countries (DCs) in harnessing and developing their energy resources and capabilities in a sustainable manner is in effect an indirect strategy for stabilizing the atmospheric concentration of greenhouse gases. Co-development with or within the South of Renewable Energy Technologies (RETs) and Energy Efficient Technologies (EETs) are effective means to pursue global energy security. This is realized at the regional level, for example, through the
Latin American Energy Cooperation Programme. (UNCTAD 1990)
Energy as a global issue
International organizations are now progressively approaching energy as a global issue. Thus, the IEA promotes the diversification of energy sources and the dissemination of proper energy technologies to achieve energy security and promote environmental objectives. (OECD 1989a) The International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA) is doing important global regulatory and management work in the limited field of nuclear energy. The World Bank acknowledges through ESMAP that aid to the developing countries is integral to the response to the energy challenge. Congruent and increasingly coordinated initiatives in the direction of sustainable energy development are also undertaken by international organizations involved in energy questions: EEC, UNCTAD, UNDP, UNIDO.
International organizations Involved with energy questions
Main organizations
IAEA
International Atomic Energy Agency
ESMAP
Energy Sector Management Assistance Programme of the World Bank
IEA
International Energy Agency of the OECD
Some other organizations
EEC
- European Economic Community; European Energy Charter
ECE
- UN Economic Commission for Europe, Committee on Gas
OLADE
- Latin American Energy Organization
OPEC
- Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries
UNDP
- United Nations Development Programme
UNIDO
- United Nations Industrial Development Organization
IGU
- International Gas Union
IPEC
- Independent Petroleum Exporting Countries
Two evolving initiatives may be cited which potentially embody a CHM-oriented response to the energy problem: UNIDO's Centres of Excellence, and the European Energy Charter. The UNIDO concept of a Centre of Excellence adopts the model of the Regional Marine Scientific and Technological Research Centre envisioned in the Law of the Sea Convention, the model of which has especially been advocated by Professor Elisabeth Mann Borgese. These centres are concerned, among others, with the important process of co-development of marine energy technology. Cooperative endeavours in this direction for marine industrial technology are being carried out in the Mediterranean and Carribean. (UNIDO 1991)
The draft European Energy Charter provides a regional approach by creating an energy market which also responds to environmental concerns. When implemented, the Charter will impinge on fields such as access to, and exploitation of resources, trade and investment, security, and research technological development, and innovation. This regional model reiterates the notion that energy can be subject to shared management for the common benefit of nations, can be conserved for future generations, and can be exclusively used for peaceful purposes. Opening up the possibilities of the Charter to the South - for example, through a "Window to the South," as is advocated by van Ettinger - would add to the promise of this approach to confront the energy problem in a comprehensive manner.
The world economy is increasingly dominated by the forces of the market, a system which has proved more efficient than any alternative. However, these forces which may contribute to the generation of environmentally friendly technologies by themselves will not be able to ensure the right conditions for the world as a whole. The market responds to essentially short-term signals and ignores long-term problems. Hence, if necessary trade-offs are to be made within the energy, environment, development nexus to ensure the sustainability of energy, complementary mechanisms such as the above regional arrangements have to be created.
The institutional implications are apparent. An institutional framework, transcending "horizontal" boundaries as well as "vertical" levels of governance appears to be required for the governance of energy no less than for ocean governance, and at least some of the building blocks can already be discerned. But given the present profile of the private sector in the energy field, (i.e., the role of the Seven Sisters) the nature of public/private cooperation allows for limited operational capability of the public sector in the management of energy.
2 Food and the CHM
The food system is essentially a subsystem of energy, in that it is the intermediate for the conversion of solar radiation into the muscular energy of men and animals. The expansion of world agriculture since the end of World War II has been phenomenal and has enabled the food supply, more or less, to increase as rapidly as the world population in the period. However, this expansion has been made possible less by the opening up of new lands than by the intensive use of chemical fertilizers. During the period 1950-1986 the average annual consumption of fertilizer per inhabitant of the earth rose from 5 kg to 26 kg. To produce a ton of nitrogenous fertilizer takes about one ton of oil. Oil is also necessary for the manufacture of weed-killers and pesticides which are used intensively in modern agriculture as well as for tillage and the operation of irrigation pumps. All this means that the increase in the world's food production represents the conversion of oil into edible
cereals via the photosynthetic process.
The problem of food security, therefore, necessarily links to the problem of sustainability in the energy field. At the basic level, food must be considered a modality of energy (or the agricultural aspect of energy) and its management as a world concern depends on the resolution of the energy problem, specifically with reference to the developmental theme mentioned above. Food security is a sustainable development issue whose resolution hinges on the abolition of world poverty. The fundamental issue of global redistribution is overriding and emphasizes the global character of the food problem. (King 1989) But a comprehensive food security policy would include, in addition to global wealth redistribution, a strategy to equitably distribute agricultural inputs (e.g., fertilizer, insecticides, seeds) and provision for adequate food reserves to take care of lean years and emergencies.
A scrutiny of the issues involved will confirm the necessity of a global regime for food entailing immediate international target setting, joint action, and cooperation to avert a chronic world food crisis, the characteristic feature of which is the tragic coexistence of food overproduction with widespread persistence of hunger. Statistics corroborate the conclusion that the problem of world food security is not solved by the production of sufficient food, or the physical transfer of food to countries with food scarcity problems, but by a conscious international political programme to redistribute income or wealth of which food policy is but an element. The total amount of food produced in most years is sufficient for planetary needs, and the accumulated reserves allow for lean years. Indeed, it was estimated that in 1987, world food production was sufficient to provide some 19 per cent more calories than was necessary to provide a reasonable diet for every inhabitant of the
earth. It is clear that the existence of plenty of food in the world has little relevance to the persistence of hunger.
The geographical distribution of food adequacy capabilities varies significantly. The United States and Canada account for some 70 per cent of exported grain, which gives the region a strong strategic role in the world food economy, and the European Community is emerging as a major and rapidly increasing exporter of cereals. The majority of developing countries (DCs) depend on imports for their food requirements, but the regional picture is changing. It is estimated that, at the beginning of the next century, Asia will have an annual grain surplus of about 50 million tons, while Latin America will have a small deficit of about 10 million tons. The main deficit areas will be Africa and the Middle East where a shortfall of 60 million tons and 50 million tons, respectively, is expected. The* food problem is exacerbated by rapid population growth, agricultural land degradation, a high proportion of arid lands, local wars, indebtedness, and wrong priorities by politicians. (King
The internationally destabilizing imbalances do not enter a process of meaningful resolution simply because existing political and market systems, responding to short-term gains discourage a global approach to the food problem. Access to food, and therefore the basic individual right to food adequacy, has often been denied to importing countries, through food trade restrictions, for political motives. One has only to cite the embargo of exports of American grain to the Soviet Union at one time and of the denying of food aid to DCs whose actions were deemed incompatible with the interest of the United States.
Technological breakthrough in food production, for instance through genetic engineering and biotechnology, have addressed the question of food quantity produced but have not led to food adequacy. The structures which would assist this type of technologies to be disseminated are dismally inadequate. However, it is obvious that the concentration of these technologies in a few nations would lead to an intensified dependence on food imports on the part of many countries. The result would in fact be a veritable food-based colonialism. (King 1989) A case for universal access to food technology, supportive of general food self-sufficiency at all levels on the basis of the non-appropriation principle, does exist.
Treating food as CHM is not a novel idea. Fish, the utilization of which is, by and large, subject to national sovereignty, has been proposed to be declared as CHM by, among others, the Vatican. Support for this advocacy is also found under the EEZ Regime of the New Law of the Sea. Even though fisheries are under the sovereignty of a coastal State, it has already many features of the CHM: it must be used sustainably in accordance with the best scientific information and if there is a surplus, it must be shared. It could then be asked: if such conditions could be attached to the "ownership" of fish, why not to that of food in general?
Equally the environmental dimensions of the food problem press for its international management. Long-term uncertainty in food security throughout the world lies in the impact of the food problem on the biosphere. As has already been mentioned, the development of new sustainable energy sources is crucial for long-run food security. In the industrialized countries (ICs) as well as in some DCs, where agriculture is highly energy intensive, one must question whether they may be able to maintain their production levels as energy demands and costs rise together with environmental protection levies. Food adequacy in the long-run will, therefore, have to reckon with alternative systems for food-energy production. Application of the common benefit and conservation for future generations principles in the area of food security, grounded on energy security, shows new ways in tackling the food problem.
A second environmental dimension of the food problem relates to the destruction of forests, to open up land for agriculture or urban development, through the use of wood for fuel or construction purposes, and due to acid rain. Widespread degradation and erosion of good soil is presently estimated to take place in some 35 per cent of the world's croplands. Intensive agricultural practices such as those of the Green Revolution demand much more water than do traditional methods; as a result, water levels are falling in many areas, causing concern as to sustainability.
As regards the demographic parameter of a food security policy, there is still much to be desired in the formulation of development plans, nationally and internationally, which take into account the relationship between population and resource potential, including food, and the environment. Population stabilization programmes have to be linked more firmly with a food security regime at the national, regional, and global levels.
A last environmental aspect of the food problem pertains to the greenhouse gas emissions contribution of the agricultural sector. This concerns ties up with the development of energy technologies in agricultural production which are environmentally sound. It may be added that agricultural processes, such as wet-rice farming and cow flatulence, also contribute to the emission of greenhouse gases, in particular of methane. First and foremost is the promising possibility of shifting food production intensity from agriculture to fisheries, mariculture or aquaculture and, in the future, even space culture. Setting up the social, economic, and technological infrastructure for this shift should be an internationally managed effort to achieve best results. This process complements all other initiatives which implement the principles of common benefit and shared management in regard to food.
International involved with the food question
Main organizations
FAO
- UN Food and Agriculture Organization
IFAD
- International Fund for Agriculture
WFP
- World Food Programme
Some other organizations
WHO
- World Health Organization
ICGEB
- International Center for Genetic Engineering and Biotechnology
CGIAR
- Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research
What institutional vehicles may be exploited to create a CHM regime for food? The FAO, UNDP, WFP, IFAD, UNCTAD, and CGIAR are some international institutions involved in addressing world production of or trade in food. UNIDO has a programme on freshwater development and biotechnology. FAO is, however, the main institution mandated to coordinate a world programme on food security. This role would be very much enhanced by incorporating in its present programmes CHM-inspired strategies.
The private sector's role in the food sector, unlike in the energy sector, is more varied. Government can undertake operational, joint venture, or simply licensing roles. There is wide flexibility in public/ private cooperation in order to achieve food security. Thus, the production and distribution of agricultural inputs (fertilizers, insecticides, seeds) may be subjected to a global programme while the management of foodstuffs may be more decentralized.
Thus it would appear that no new international institutions need to be created for the management of food as a CHM. In fact, since all food institutions deal with fish, which has the characteristic attributes of CHM, all other food resources can potentially be CHM! Existing international institutions, by reformulating programmes, to fit into a CHM framework of global governance in the food sector, are sufficiently capable to carry out the needed reform. Yet still, the FAO's undertaking should always form part of the overall scheme of cooperation to redistribute the planet's wealth in favour of the DCs.
3 Atmosphere and the CHM
The atmosphere, the oceans, and the land surface constitute the biosphere through complex interactions that are as yet poorly understood by scientists. These physical interactions have just recently been given political attention at the international level because of a phenomenon called "global warming." In the past, the atmosphere has simply been regarded, comparable to the oceans, as a changeless feature of the biosphere, and accessible to all subject only to the restrictions imposed by national sovereignty. The problems of air pollution compel a recognition of the atmosphere as an object of global management.
The need for an atmosphere regime goes beyond the search for a more precise definition of sovereignty over airspace. Like the law of the sea, a Law of Atmosphere is more than an affair of delimitations. But akin to the "internal waters, territorial sea, exclusive economic zone, high seas" delimitation in the law of the sea, defining the upward reach of national competence is indispensable for governance of the atmosphere based on allocation of national/international competencies. That the atmosphere is a resource to be managed at the global level is a realization which is becoming increasingly pervasive. This is due to the pivotal importance of the atmosphere in three areas of growing concern: ozone depletion, transboundary air pollution, and climate and climate change.
Ozone depletion is a problem that has been progressively addressed since the adoption of the 1985 Vienna Convention on the Protection of the Ozone Layer. The framework for dealing with atmosphere-conveyed pollution is laid down in the 1982 Law of the Sea Convention. This framework is applied and developed in international agreements such as the 1979 Convention of Long-range Transboundary Air Pollution and its Protocols. Considering the emergent legal regime as regards atmosphere and climate, there will likely be increased attention in this new field. (The Framework Convention on Climate Change adopted by the UNCED entered into force in 1994). The rest of this section will explore the basis of and institutional developments related to atmosphere and climate.
Notwithstanding prevailing limitations and uncertainties on the scientific understanding of climate and climate change, there is consensus that the accumulation of "greenhouse gases" in the atmosphere, which accelerates global warming, will most probably lead to global climate change. (IPCC 1990) Its predicted environmental consequences, like sealevel rise or modification of terrestrial and marine ecosystems, have caused alarm and provoked a spate of initiatives by the international community. These initiatives converge in their policy conclusions: the atmosphere must be subjected to a comprehensive management regime as soon as possible.
An important ingredient of the emergent global programme on climate change is the stabilization of greenhouse gas concentrations, particularly CO^2, in the atmosphere. Inescapably, the objective can only be achieved by direct intervention in the energy sector, energy use being the predominant man-made cause, accounting for as much as one-half (IPCC 1990), of the greenhouse gas emissions. Specific measures toward stabilizing the build-up of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere assume either a scenario to reduce the greenhouse gas emissions via "source oriented" measures or a scenario to mitigate impacts of future climate change via "effect-oriented measures." Reduction strategies include familiar paths like development of energy conserving technologies, switch to natural gas, and use of alternative energy sources. (Van Ettinger et al. 1989)
Climate change related R&D is providing a strong impetus for international, inter-organizational and inter-disciplinary cooperation to consolidate the scientific base for a meaningful global, regional, and national response to global warming. It is essential to build national capacities, especially in the DCs, to monitor the effects of climate change.
Substantial participation of the DCs, which are most vulnerable to climate change, in an evolving global programme on climate change is absolutely necessary given the global character of the climate problem. Two notions on the nature of this participation have surfaced: first, that global climate-change ameliorative or anticipatory initiatives should not prejudice the economic development of the South; and second, the principle of common but differentiated responsibilites of all nations in addressing climate change. (see 2nd World Climate Conference, 1990) The advocacy for assistance to the DCs, in the technology field, or the proposal to create a Climate Fund, is an offshoot of these new notions on development. (Van Ettinger et al. 1989)
The problem of climate change fully demonstrates the desirability of applying the CHM principle of shared management of the earth's atmosphere for the benefit of mankind. From the present understanding of man-induced climate change, it is really unavoidable to resort to a global management of the atmosphere based on cooperation from all sides.
UNGA Resolution 43/53 proclaims that climate change is a "Common Concern of Mankind." This logically supports the need to promote a systematic international effort in overcoming global warming. A prolific number of vehicles, at the organizational and programme levels, already exists to tackle the climate problem. Furthermore, a global network of coordinated undertakings, such as the global climate observing system of the WMO, IOC, and other international agencies, is in the process of consolidation.
Atmosphere governance is integral to ocean governance simply because their implications for sustaining the entire biosphere are identical. A framework treaty on climate, as a consequence, must be related both substantively and institutionally to the 1982 Convention on the Law of the Sea. The entry into force of the 1982 Convention is, therefore, a necessary element in any strategy to tackle the climate problem.
Organizations involved with the climate and climate change question
INC
- International Negotiating Committee
IPCC
- Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change
WCC
- World Climate Conference
WMO
- World Meteorological Organization
IOC
- International Oceanographic Commission of UNESCO
UNEP
- United Nations Environmental Programme
ICSU
- International Council of Scientific Unions
IUCN
- International Union for the Conservation of Nature and Natural Resources
Outer space and the CHM
Outer space has been described as a "resource" the management of which depends on the creation of a hitherto non-existent international institution. (WCED 1987) Outer space, to the extent that it can be subject to governance, does present a challenge of establishing a management regime which puts this space in the long-term service of mankind. Sustainable development in outer space can only proceed along this route.
At the UN, the initial inspiration behind the proposal to create a World Space Organization in 1985 was a campaign against the militarization of outer space. This inspiration remains valid today and forms the basis of any concept of international cooperation in managing outer space as a global resource. It also provides, so to speak, the favourable soil in which the seed of the CHM concept can be nurtured and further developed. In fact the 1967 Treaty on Principles Governing the Activities of States in the Exploration and Use of Outer Space already foreshadowed a CHM regime for outer space. It defines outer space as "Common Province of Mankind" and astronauts as "the envoys of mankind" to outer space. The essential concepts for a meaningful management regime for outer space - namely, disarmament and development overlaid by the CHM philosophy and the concept of "comprehensive security" - are already in place and the concrete proposal for the creation of a World Space
Organization (WSO) has already been tabled at the UN General Assembly. The remaining concern involves the political will, together with the conditions for its galvanization, to push for the realization of the WSO.
Professor Elisabeth Mann Borgese has explored in detail the significance of the Law of the Sea Convention to the creation of a WSO. The most viable scenario for this process of institutional creation and development follows the procedure or negotiation path travelled by the Convention. But the credibility of establishing and operating a WSO effectively is, of course, very much a function of the entry into force of the 1982 Convention on the Law of the Sea. (See table on page 267.)
In addition to the adoption, with appropriate modifications, of the UNCLOS III agenda and plan of action, Professor Mann Borgese also considered how the experience and success of institutions like INMARSAT or EUREKA can be assimilated in the structure, programmes, and operations of the proposed WSO. The WSO will thus be an opportunity to break new ground and apply the most advanced concepts of international cooperation and global resource management. For instance, initial acceptance of the CHM principles of non-appropriation, common benefit, and peaceful purposes with respect to outer space can justify the sole use of space technology and its products (e.g., information from remote sensing) to achieve developmental and environmental objectives. The WSO will truly be a most meaningful enterprise to consolidate and carry forward the gains of and values under the CHM concept, bringing out its universal significance in planetary governance.
Table 1 Comparison of action required for the management of oceans and space
OCEANS
SPACE
1. Placing item on GA Agenda
1. Placing item on GA Agenda
2. Introduction of Item in Address to GA
2. Introduction of Item in Address to GA
3. Creation of Ad Hoc Committee
3. Reference to Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
4. Adoption of Declaration of Principles
4. Adoption of Declaration of Principles (re-examination and further development of the Outer Space Treaty and Moon Treaty, in consideration of new scientific and strategic developments)
5. Preparation of agenda for UNCLOS III
5. Preparation of agenda for UN Conference on World Space Organization
6. UNCLOS III
6. UNCWSO
7. Adoption of Convention; establishing of Prep. Com. To Set up Authority
The European Space Agency, which recently launched a satellite to engage in sensing for an array of environmental objectives proves that a regional effort for sustainable development in outer space can be consolidated. The ESA's activities in outer space are mandated to be exclusively for peaceful purposes. A global effort in this direction is not far off with the creation of a WSO.
Organizations involved with outer space questions
UNCOPUOS
- United Nations Committee on Peaceful Uses of Outer Space
ESA
- European Space Agency
EUTELSAT
- European Telecommunication Satellite Organization
INMARSAT
- International Maritime Satellite Organization
INTELSAT
- International Telecommunications Satellite Organization
INTERCOSMOS
- Programme on Cooperation in the Exploration of Outer Space for Peaceful Purposes
INTERSPUTNIK
- International System and Organization of Space Communications
ARABSAT
- Arab Satellite Communications Organization
ITU
- International Telecommunication Union
COSPAR
- Committee on Space Research
NASA
- US National Aeronautics and Space Agency
<section>IV. Global governance and the four problem areas</section>
1 To what extend do the selected problem areas compare?
Characterizing energy, food, atmosphere, and outer space as global problem areas yields the finding that a new orientation to international resource/environment management is necessary. The various elements of these problems lend themselves to meaningful appreciation and resolution in light of the CHM concept, highlighting the profound extent to which CHM principles can be put in the service of global governance.
Common threads run through the gamut of numerous, interwoven and complex issues in these four areas of concern. These connections would paint the backdrop for each step forward taken towards reforming or building institutions for global governance. First technology development is a crucial dimension in each of these global management fields. Creation of new technology and its application to peaceful uses are important bases for ameliorative or progressive action, whether one considers energy use and energy-use consequences, food security, or space exploration and exploitation. The result is the vision that because the misuse of technology has caused these global problems, technology must now be employed to resolve these same problems.
International management of the resources involved relies on the conviction that science and technology must be made more accessible to more and more people and must be consciously built into any process of political decision-making. This connects with a second point of convergence in the resolution of the above areas of concern: securing long-term interests of all people concerned is an inevitable parameter in policy formulation and decision-making. Choices that have to be made regarding any of the four problem areas are concerned with the issue of sustainability, and the forthright question that arises in any policy situation is whether a particular decision or action contradicts the requirements of ecological balance, or Mother Nature herself. Only sustainable development in the energy or food sectors, or in the atmosphere and outer space environment can secure long-run common interests and can in fact prove durable in a strategic sense.
A last feature that is common among the four areas of concern analysed is the inexorable movement towards new forms of cooperation. Whether this cooperation is seen in terms of inter-organizational effort, or cooperation between North and South, or cooperation among national, regional, and global agencies and institutions, or cooperation between public and private sectors, based on cooperation among all disciplines of knowledge, more cooperation is imperative. This underpins the application of the CHM principle of shared management in all the problem areas analysed.
There is much promise in the emerging international relations of cooperation, and increasingly, the old international politics of peaceful coexistence is falling apart. The recent European Energy Charter is a case in point. This is also clearly seen in the direction taken by Research and Development initiatives in all spheres and the expanding role of technology co-development schemes in the overall development process of the South. The consensus is that these activities can no longer be carried out on the assumption of competition and conflict among international actors.
A word is needed on the dynamic nature of public/private sector cooperation now needed to advance the philosophy of sustainable development. With the environmental consideration as a conceptual basis for programmatic action, the issue of "free enterprise versus command economy" has become passe. Participation by the public sector in economic activities is increasingly identified as its participation in environmental activities. The interests of the public sector can, therefore, never run into conflict with that of the private sector because there can be no conflict between "conservation" and "development." (Borgese 1991)
A pragmatic arrangement is dictated by what may be termed as "sustainable cooperation" between public and private sectors. In carefully considering the extent of public sector participation in actual resource management - whether this be in the form of operational activities, joint ventures, or simple licensing - the role of public enterprises is to promote sustainable development at the national, regional, and global levels of governance. Education campaigns on the inevitability of global governance based on sustainability, and indeed the CHM concept, is an initial task for the public sector.
Technology development, environment-based concerns and interests of mankind as a whole, and cooperation for a sustainable world: Is it desirable to join these common threads into a single structure of world governance such that energy, food, atmosphere and outer space are simultaneously addressed as a unified global problem under a new global order?
2 To what extent can the four problem areas be integrated into a single scheme of global governance?
The process of institutional joinder of concerns by international organizations, especially within the UN system, is already rapidly taking place. National, regional, and global integration of programme priorities and pursuits is also becoming evident, and the refocussing of WMO's role in regard to climate concern illustrates this trend. WMO coordinates and consults with an array of UN agencies and international institutions such as IMO, UNEP, INMARSAT, ICSU and carries out programmes at the national, regional, and global levels in cooperation with many more institutions.
In the UN itself, the emergence of more coordinating mechanisms (such as the ECOSOC's Committee on Programme Coordination, or Administrative Committee on Coordination, or the Office for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea, or the Consultative Committee on Substantive Questions) underscores the importance of multi-disciplinary, inter-sectoral, and multi-organizational projects. The confusing maze of coordinating bodies in the UN, given the background of intensifying inter-disciplinary programmes of various UN Agencies and bodies, would indicate that the UN system is due for an overhaul. The symptoms for reform in the UN for a more effective global governance are beginning to show.
The inadequacies of existing global institutions to respond to global problems have warranted the regionalization of solutions for these global problems. In the field of energy for instance, the trend is towards the regionalization of energy markets. This is, of course, part of the broader process of regional economic and political integration. The institutional implications for global governance of this development are only barely understood. The regional approach to global problems surely holds bright prospects for global resource management. But one should never lose sight of the necessity for global mechanisms in the management of energy, lest regionalization becomes a formula for protectionism and parochialism defeating the very essence of cooperation in a new global order.
From a purely environmental perspective, the interrelated issues of energy, food, and the atmosphere have substantial and direct impact on the comprehensive problem of global energy management. It was seen that the food security problem figures prominently as an energy security problem and the concern for climate and climate change is, by and large, a function of energy exploitation, use, and development. Global management of the energy sector could, therefore, conceivably simultaneously comprehend governance of the food sector and the atmosphere. At the global level, any institutional response to the energy problem will of necessity impact on the food and atmosphere problems. Energy, food, and the atmosphere, as global concerns, can hence be tied together into a single scheme of global governance.
A profound institutional innovation in the energy sector could perhaps be imagined with the creation, within the UN system, of a Biosphere Security Council devoted to consideration of the problems of global environment and energy use, to include examination of the consequences of present trends and possible changes, including their impact on development of the DCs. The guiding principle of this Biosphere Security Council would enshrine a notion of "comprehensive" or "common" security essentially projecting the CHM concept, rather than military "collective security" as embodied in the present UN Charter which is vouchsafed in the Security Council.
In addition to representatives of the existing Security Council members, additional members (by rotation) should be appointed from countries in Africa, Asia, Latin America and the Middle East. The Biosphere Security Council would take its decisions on the basis of a qualified majority vote. Because of the complex technical nature of the matters to be discussed, a few eminent persons from science and economics should be present. They should be full members but without vote. This would enable their views to carry weight, without challenging the prerogatives of the governments.
The challenge posed by the problems of outer space span environmental, developmental, and disarmament issues as well. But outer space is an expansive resource which can thus be managed with relative independence from biosphere concerns such as food, energy, and atmosphere. As the 1981 Congress of the International Astronomical Federation put it, outer space is "mankind's fourth environment." The proposal to create a World Space Organization would definitely be most relevant in this regard. The environmental and developmental objectives of the WSO can be linked to the activities of, or coordinated by, the Biosphere Security Council.
Whatever the institutions to be developed which may address the four problem areas discussed here, whether jointly or separately, what cannot be doubted is the importance of the CHM concept as a guiding principle for governance. Confirmed in an ultimate sense is the fact that the planet, the entire biosphere, is the common heritage of mankind.
<section>V. Conclusions</section>
Is it really possible to design institutional programmes for global governance on the basis of a substantive (CHM) concept whose status remains uncertain as long as the instrument in which it is embedded has not been secured? To what extent can the inexorable process of institution building contribute to a wider appreciation of the concept and its significance for environmental/resource management? Can institutional reform in the present and next century proceed on any other normative basis? In institutional terms, can the principles of the concept be captured into the mandate of any agency which deals with resources? Does the CHM really promise the key to global governance in the coming century?
It cannot be doubted that the CHM concept, the founding concept of the 1982 Law of the Sea Convention, has a direct impact on the broad issue of global resource management. At the conceptual level, the extension of CHM principles to problem areas such a energy, food, atmosphere, and outer space is desirable and points to promising approaches in intergrating humanity's concern for disarmament, development, and the environment. The international community is definitely assured of a hitherto unrealized "comprehensive security" with the functional expansion of the CHM concept to more areas of global concern.
In this study on four selected problem areas, global governance ramifies into two interdependent schemes of resource management. On the one hand, managing energy, food, and the atmosphere supplies the overall direction in managing a unified energy environment in a multi-dimensional way. Protection or preservation of the planet's delicate biosphere is the pivotal assumption in any envolved institutional programme to address this concern. On the other hand, the objective of outer space governance is to create an effective regime so that this non-material resource can be put to the long-term service of mankind. From the viewpoint of a global governance scheme, outer space is considered to be a discrete resource distinct from energy, food, or the atmosphere.
Ocean governance provides a third identifiable dimension to planetary governance and with it an adequate or complete picture of global governance is discerned. Ocean governance becomes reality with the entry into force of the 1982 Convention on the Law of the Sea. It must be pointed out that the conceptual underpinnings of ocean management in the new Law of the Sea consist of environment, development, and disarmament pillars - a truly expansive framework for managing the ocean as an environment/resource.
Overall, global governance inspired by the CHM concept branches out into three focal areas of resource management: oceans, energy, and outer space. Applying the CHM concept to outer space significantly accelerates development and disarmament processes; applying it to the complex of energy-related concerns is the best assurance for ecological harmony and also development; and pursuing the CHM in the oceans leads to development, disarmament, and ecological security.
The institutional mechanisms to carry out the task of global governance for energy and outer space have already been pointed out. It was suggested that a UN Biosphere Security Council and the World Space Organization are appropriate and urgently needed fore for tackling the energy and outer space problems, respectively. The magnitude and scope of institutional power necessary to overcome the problems of energy or outer space governance, implied in the creation of the UN Biosphere Security Council or the WSO, would suggest the development of a corresponding institution for the ocean sphere. Herein lies the institutional significance of energy or outer space governance to ocean governance.
Although the CHM concept underpins the whole Law of the Sea, the institutional expression of the concept has been simply confined to the international seabed and its resources through the International Seabed Authority. What seems to be needed is to evolve more institutions - national, regional, and global - within the already defined substantive framework of the 1982 Law of the Sea Convention in such a manner that the CHM concept would truly pervade the totality of ocean concerns. This process of institutional creation should lead to an increasing unification of ocean management initiatives within an umbrella mechanism for ocean governance.
The development of Regional Centres is proof that the CHM concept is being expanded institutionally under the Law of the Sea. At the national level, the incorporation of integrated ocean policy into national development plans is gradually taking place, altering traditional approaches to social and economic development. At the global level, the establishment of a UN Ocean Assembly, which would bind previously sectoralized marine concerns (for instance, fisheries, shipping, ocean mining, science, and technology) would perhaps be the adequate institutional vehicle for ocean governance in the twenty-first century. This Assembly would coordinate with the WSO, both being possibly under the direct guidance of the UN Biosphere Security Council, in a project of global governance built upon the CHM concept.
The logical conclusion is that ocean governance is really part of global governance, but ocean governance provides the key concepts in appreciating the extent and nature of global governance. In turn, global governance points out the need for institutional expansion and consolidation in the marine sphere for a more meaningful ocean governance.
The conclusion that institutional innovation is more than ever imperative in the marine sphere is validated by the increasing intensity and expansion of activities in, and uses of, the oceans. The evidence that governance of ocean space increasingly intrudes into terrestrial and atmosphere concerns clear: offshore oil and gas now account for more than 20 per cent of world production; the protein requirements of more and more people are produced from ocean resources; the role of the oceans as a sink for greenhouse gases is conclusive; knowledge of the oceans derived from satellite sensing of earth phenomena and activities is crucial; and regional seas give rise to an unprecedented consciousness to cooperate.
These and other factual relationships between ocean concerns and planetary concerns point to the capital importance of assimilating ocean governance in an overall scheme of global governance. The institutional consequences are but a logical outcome of this process of building a more reassuring foundation for ocean security. Then it can be said that ocean-centred, environmentally focussed, boundary transcending security is very likely the element of ocean governance that holds the whole system of comprehensive security together and makes it globally stable. (Borgese 1991)
<section>Select bibliography</section>
Borgese, E.M. "Expanding the Common Heritage of Mankind." In: Dolman, A., ed. Global Planning and Resource Management. Oxford: Pergamon, 1980.
Borgese, E.M. Some Preliminary Thoughts on the Establishment of a World Space Organization. Ottawa: Canadian Centre for International Peace and Security, 1988.
Borgese, E.M. Ocean Mining and the Future of World Order. Berlin: Dahlem Conference Proceedings, 1990.
Borgese, E.M. "Perestroika and the Law of the Sea: A Case Study." Ocean Yearbook, Vol. 9, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1991, p. 1.
Davis, G. Global Warming: The Role of Energy Efficient Technologies. London: Shell Co. Selected Papers, 1990.
Dolman, A. Resources, Regimes, World Order. Oxford: Pergamon, 1981.
Dupuy, R-J., ed. La Gestion des Ressources pour L'Humanité: Le Droit de La Mer. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1982.
Dupuy, R-J., ed. The Settlement of Disputes on the New Natural Resources. The Hague: Martinus Nijhoff, 1983.
Elliot, P., and R. Booth. Sustainable Biomass Energy. London: Shell Co. Selected Papers, 1990.
Ettinger, J. van. Energy and Environment in a Global Perspective 1972-1987-2002. Unpublished Monograph: van Ettinger and Associates, 1989.
Ettinger, J. van. Climate and Climate Change with Special Reference to the Oceans in General, the Mediterranean Sea Area in Particular. Unpublished Monograph: van Ettinger and Associates, 1989.
Ettinger, J. van. A Window to the South in an Energy Conscious European Home. Unpublished Monograph: van Ettinger and Associates, 1991.
Ettinger, J. van. "Oceans, Climate Change, and Energy" Ocean Yearbook, Vol. 10, Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1993, p. 132.
Ettinger, J. van, T.H. Janse, and C.J. Jepma, "Climate, Environment and Development." Development and Change No. 27, 1989.
European Commission. Proposal for an Energy Charter to be Adopted by all European Countries, including the USSR. Draft Document, 15 February 1991.
FAO Committee on Fisheries. Environment and Sustainability in Fisheries. FAO Doc. COFI/91/3, February 1991.
"Inter-governmental Panel on Climate Change." IPCC First Assessment Report, Vol. 1, August 1990.
Kahane, A. Global Scenarios for the Energy Industry: Challenge and Response. London: Shell Co. Selected Papers, 1990.
Kimball, L. "International Law and Institutions: The Oceans and Beyond." 20 Ocean Development and International Law 147, (1989).
Kimball, L. International Institutions and Legal Issues: The Oceans. Unpublished paper dated 7 March 1991.
King, A. "The World Food Situation: Glut and Starvation." International Journal on the Unity of the Sciences. Vol. II, 1989.
King, A., and B. Schneider. The First Global Revolution: A Report to the Council of the Club of Rome. London: Simon & Shuster, 1991.
Matte, N.M. "The Law of the Sea and Outer Space: A Comparative Survey of Specific Issues." Ocean Yearbook, Vol. 3, 1982, pp. 13-37.
Odell, P.R. Global and Regional Energy Supplies: Recent Fictions and Fallacies Revisited. Unpublished Monograph: Erasmus University, 1991.
OECD. Consolidation of Energy Gains and New Challenges for the 1990s. OECD Doc. IEA/GB(89)30, 1989a.
OECD. World Energy Outlook. OECD Doc. IEA/GB(89)31, 1989b.
Postyshev, V. The Concept of the Common Heritage of Mankind. Moscow: Progress, 1990.
Second World Climate Conference. Conference Statement and Ministerial Declaration. 29 October-7 November, 1990.
UNCTAD Secretariat. Technology Policy in the Energy Sector: Issues, Scope and Options for Developing Countries. UN Doc. UNCTAD/TT/90.
UNIDO. UNIDO Program on Marine Industrial Technology. Contribution of the UNIDO to PIM XIX. 30 May 1991.
UNIDIR. Disarmament Problems Relating to Outer Space. New York: United Nations, 1987.
United Nations Doc. A/Res/44/228 on the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development. 1990.
United Nations Doc. A/CONF.151/PC/42/Add.1 and Doc. A/CONF.151/PC/60, on the Protection of the Atmosphere. July 1991.
Williams, R., and K. Holmes. Energy - The End of Crisis? Prospects for Natural Gas. London: Shell Co. Selected Papers, 1990.
WMO. Ocean Governance: National, Regional, and Global Levels. Unpublished contribution of the World Meteorological Organization to PIM XIX. 15 April 1991.
World Commission on Environment and Development. Our Common Future. Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1987.
<section>Note</section>
A revised and expanded version of this chapter served as the Background Paper for Pacem in Maribus XX, held in Malta on 1-5 November 1992.
<section>The competent international organizations: Internal and external changes</section>
Thomas A. Mensah
The 1982 United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea was conceived and elaborated as a treaty to "establish a comprehensive framework for the regulation of all ocean space."" This means that the principles of the Convention would apply throughout the entire area of the seas and oceans and cover all activities within the area, or that are likely to have impacts thereon. Nevertheless, it was also recognized that the Convention itself could not deal in detail with all the measures and arrangements which need to be taken or established to apply and implement the principles in specific areas or to particular activities and operations. For this reason, the Convention envisages, and indeed requires, States to cooperate in developing mechanisms, procedures, standards, and measures necessary for particular areas, sectors, or spheres of activity within the maritime context. This cooperation is mainly to be undertaken within or under the auspices of "competent international
organizations," that is to say, intergovernmental bodies or institutions with the relevant expertise and mandate to deal with specific areas of the seas or particular maritime activities.
For the practical implementation of most of its general provisions, the Law of the Sea Convention assigns important roles to existing international organizations which are deemed competent for the relevant measures. In some cases the Convention does no more than recognize and underscore functions which are already being performed but which are considered essential for the realization of the objectives of some provisions of the Convention. But whether it assigns new functions or whether it merely recognizes existing roles of the organizations concerned, the Convention proceeds on the clear premise that the "competent international organizations" have important, and in many cases indispensable, roles to play in the effective implementation of its provisions in many crucial areas.
For reasons which are no longer important, the Conference (the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea) which adopted the Convention decided against referring to the competent international organizations by name, except in a few cases. However, the language chosen and the subject matter of the relevant provisions generally give clear indications about the identity of the organizations which are expected to discharge the responsibilities specified in the particular provisions of the Convention. The Convention also makes it clear that the competent international organizations may be subregional, regional, or global (article 61) and the organizations could be both within as well as outside of the United Nations system (as for example the International Hydrographic Organization (IHO)) to which specific reference is made in annex II, article 3(2).
The roles assigned to, or expected of, competent international organizations range from the development of international regulations and standards, the promotion of cooperation for the exchange of information, expertise and assistance to facilitate arrangements and procedures for the peaceful settlement of disputes arising in connection with maritime activities. As indicated earlier, the Convention does not, as a rule, refer to organizations by name. However, there is now a general consensus in the international community on the identity of most, if not all, of the organizations which are described as "competent" in the various articles of the Convention. For example, it is agreed that, in the area of navigation and the prevention of maritime pollution from vessels by dumping, "the competent international organization" is the International Maritime Organization (IMO), as in articles 22, 41 and 53 relating to sea lanes and traffic separation schemes, article 60 on the removal
of disused artificial installations and structures, and articles 211, 217, 220, 221, etc. concerning the development and implementation of regulations and procedures for the prevention and control of marine pollution from vessels. With regard to the management and conservation of living marine resources (as in articles 61 and 119 on measures to prevent resources being endangered by overexploitation) there is little doubt that the competent organization, at the global level, is the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) of the United Nations. Similarly one of the major competent organizations in the field of marine scientific research is without doubt the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC) of UNESCO, although the International Hydrographic Organization (IHO) has important functions in this area. Also worth mentioning is the role of the United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) in the implementation of the Convention's provisions regarding the protection and
preservation of the marine environment, in particular in respect of the prevention of marine pollution from land-based resources and from the atmosphere (articles 207, 208, 212, 213, and articles 194 and 196 on general measures).
In the very important field of dispute settlement, the Law of the Sea Convention once again recognized the role of competent international organizations, and it provides for their involvement in the innovative arrangements and procedures which it has elaborated to promote and encourage greater acceptance and resort to peaceful means of dispute settlement. In particular the Convention assigns significant roles for a number of organizations in the operation of the Special Arbitral Procedure provided for in annex VIII. The establishment and maintenance of the lists of experts for the special arbitral tribunals is assigned in various areas to the FAO (fisheries), UNEP (the protection and preservation of the marine environment), IOC (marine scientific research), and IMO (navigation and prevention of pollution from vessels and by dumping).
The Law of the Sea Convention assigns such important roles to existing organizations because the governments which negotiated and adopted the Convention recognized three major conditions which are crucial for the effective implementation of the Convention's provision and the achievement of the goals and objectives of the Convention in all its various aspects. The conditions are:
1. The greatest possible emphasis on an international perspective in dealing with ocean affairs and, in particular, the need to discourage unilateral State action based on narrow national or regional interests.
2. The advisability of utilizing existing machineries which had developed special mechanisms and expertise in specific fields. Apart from the wisdom of making use of experience already acquired, reliance on existing bodies would avoid the establishment of new and expensive mechanisms.
3. The imperative necessity to avoid duplication and overlaps, at the national and international levels, in an area of increasing relevance to the development needs of all States, but with particular significance to the developing countries. In view of the scarce resources (human and financial) available, duplication of efforts or institutional structures would result in unnecessary waste and also reduce the benefits which the Convention was intended to bring to all States and their peoples.
But the governments would not have been willing to leave so many vital issues for action in these organizations unless they were satisfied that certain assumptions and understandings were equally accepted by the organizations and their memberships. These assumptions were:
a. That the organizations were indeed willing and able to accept the roles assigned to them, and that they had the means to discharge the responsibilities entrusted to them within the framework of the Convention on the Law of the Sea and pursuant to the principles of the relevant provisions.
b. That the international community (i.e., governments, intergovernmental bodies as well as non-governmental organizations and, as appropriate, individuals) will take all the measures needed to enable the organizations to accept and discharge the functions and obligations entrusted to them. In particular, States Members of the respective organizations will provide the resources and facilities needed by the organizations in taking the measures required; and also that all States and persons concerned will not only recognize the roles and competence of the organizations but will also extend to them appropriate support, cooperation and assistance, when and as necessary.
In other words, the effective discharge of the roles assigned to, or expected of, the organizations entail changes both within and without the organizations.
<section>Internal changes</section>
The changes that need to be made within the competent international organizations relate mainly to their institutional machineries, their procedures, and the procurement, allocation, and rational utilization of resources.
Institutional changes
Where the Convention on the Law of the Sea assigns new functions to an organization - or where an existing function has been given recognition in the Convention and has thus acquired legal significance for States Parties - the organization concerned may find it useful, and indeed necessary, to examine its current institutional machinery in order to determine whether the existing arrangements are suitable and adequate for the discharge of the new functions, or for the performance of the old responsibilities in the new circumstances created by the Convention's provisions. Thus, for example, where the Convention assigns functions involving the development and adoption of international regulations or standards, it may be necessary for the organization concerned to decide whether those functions can be exercised by its existing bodies and organs, or whether new specialized subsidiary bodies may be needed. This may be the case particularly where development or adoption of the
regulation or standard in question involves cooperation with other organizations or governments which would normally not be participating in the routine work of the organization in question. In any case the organization will need to take decisions on the appropriate body or organ to deal with the assigned functions. For example, article 2 of annex VIII, when it assigns responsibility for the drawing up of lists of experts to serve on the special arbitral tribunals, states that the lists shall be drawn up and maintained by the organizations named "or in each case by the appropriate subsidiary body concerned to which such organization, programme or commission has delegated this function."
Thus, an essential step in the effective discharge of any new assignments under the Convention appears to be the taking of the necessary decisions concerning the establishment of new institutional bodies, or the adjustments in existing mechanisms, in order to permit or facilitate the performance of the new functions or the discharge of existing responsibilities in the ways made necessary by the new dispensations under the Convention.
Procedural changes
In addition to the institutional changes, organizations may (and in most cases will) need to make changes in their procedures to enable them to discharge functions and undertake measures assigned by or expected under the Law of the Sea Convention. This will be so whether the functions concerned are newly assigned or whether they are existing functions which have been given increased importance by the Convention. For, even in the case of existing functions it is unlikely that procedures and arrangements which were suitable and adequate when the results of action were mainly addressed to the members of the particular organizations will be equally appropriate when the outcomes are intended to be relevant (and applicable) to States, organizations, and individuals who would normally not be involved in the work of the organization in question. For example, the procedures of IMO with regard to traffic separation schemes were largely "internal" to the Member States of that Agency
and to those non-Member States which accepted the international treaties which were adopted under the auspices of IMO. However, under the Law of the Sea Convention IMO's competence in this sphere has been significantly enlarged to include the function of considering and approving (or at least endorsing) proposals by States in respect of schemes for implementation in exclusive economic zones, in straits used for international navigation, and in archipelagic waters. Even in the territorial seas, coastal States have to take IMO's recommendations into account. In view of these new dimensions, IMO cannot expect to perform its functions adequately without changes to its existing procedures. For example, new procedures are needed to enable States which wish to establish traffic separation schemes to put their proposals to IMO. This is particularly the case where the State concerned is not a member of IMO. In addition IMO will need to develop new procedures both to receive inputs
from States and bodies which need to be aware of such results. For example, the recommendations of IMO should be publicized appropriately to all States (including non-Member States) which are required by the Convention on the Law of the Sea to take these recommendations into account when adopting their domestic measures.
Similar considerations apply to FAO in connection with its functions concerning the management and conservation of marine-living resources, especially where it is required to establish standards and procedures, taking into account "the best scientific evidence available" or where it has to cooperate with States and other organizations "whether subregional, regional, or global." In undertaking measures pursuant to these provisions, FAO may find it necessary to make adjustments to its normal procedures, for example, in order to permit or facilitate liaison with, and acceptance of inputs from bodies, institutions, and persons who might not otherwise be involved in the work of the organization.
In addition to procedures relating to participation, competent international organizations may find it advisable (and indeed necessary) to make changes or adjustments in their work plans in order to assign higher priorities to items of work which would otherwise rank lower in their work schedules. Thus, for example, IMO felt obliged to upgrade work on the regulations for the removal of disused artificial installations and structures at sea in response to the provisions of article 60 of the Convention on the Law of the Sea. And it is possible that the provisions of the Convention on the prevention and control of marine pollution from land-based sources have, at least in part, contributed to the intensification of the work on this subject within UNEP and its Regional Seas Programme.
Resource allocation
Even where organizations and their Member States are ready and willing to effect the institutional performance of their functions under the Law of the Sea Convention, they will still not be able to meet the challenges in full unless they are able to make available (or otherwise procure) the resources required to take the measures and to make the necessary changes. Where the new functions require the creation of new institutions and new mechanisms, the need for additional resources may be obvious. But even where what is involved is a change or modification in existing arrangements and procedures, the need for additional resources may be no less real, for instance, where an organization has to open its processes to more participants (States and/or organizations) it will need more resources in order to provide the extra facilities required. Where the results of work have to be brought to the attention of a larger audience, the costs in production and distribution will increase
and in many cases the personnel requirements will also escalate.
Cooperation with other organizations
Finally the competent international organizations will need to adopt significant changes which will enable them to forge effective cooperative relationships with States and other organizations which have responsibilities in respect of the related aspects of the Convention. For, as the Secretary-General of the United Nations said in his statement to the final session of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea in December 1982, "the effectiveness of the Convention's principles, which constitute a balanced and harmonious whole, will be enhanced if States can coordinate their action, compare their experience and make the new legal regime an incentive for new forms of international cooperation. This requires equally coordinated action by the United Nations and the specialized agencies ...." The Secretary-General might have added that this cooperation also requires coordination of action with many organizations and bodies outside the United Nations system.
The need for cooperation among States and with international organizations, is recognized throughout the Convention but particular emphasis is given to cooperation in the crucial provisions of the Convention concerning the development and transfer of marine technology (part XIV). Under this part, and especially in article 266, States and competent international organizations are required to cooperate in promoting the development of marine scientific and technological capabilities of all States; this is to ensure that they are able to participate in the global efforts envisaged in the Convention for the equitable exploitation of marine resources, the protection and preservation of the marine environment, and other activities, "with a view to accelerating the social and economic development" of States. But the Convention recognizes that the basic objectives it proclaims (article 268) and the measures for achieving these goals (as specified in article 269) can only be achieved
with maximum degree of cooperation between States and the international organizations, sharing and exchanging their individual and collective information, experience, and expertise. For this reason, the Convention imposes clear and specific responsibilities on States and also on the competent international organizations. In article 272, the Convention requires States to endeavour "to ensure that competent international organizations coordinate their activities, including any regional or global programmes." Article 278 of the Convention requires the competent international organizations "to ensure, either directly or in close cooperation among themselves, the effective discharge of their responsibilities ...."
These provisions of the Convention make it abundantly clear that competent international organizations cannot hope to perform their functions under the Convention or discharge the trust imposed in them by the international community until and unless they are ready, able and willing to organize themselves and make such changes as may be necessary, not only to pool their ideas and experiences together and thus rationalize the use of the diminishing resources available to all of them, but also to maximize the impact of their activities and programmes on States, corporate bodies, and individuals who engage in separate but interrelated operations in various sectors of ocean space.
<section>External changes</section>
Internal changes in the competent international organizations may be necessary but they are not, and cannot be, sufficient to ensure the effective discharge of their functions under the Convention of the Law of the Sea. For this, certain changes will be necessary outside the organizations. This is because, although these organizations (or at least some of them) are endowed with a measure of legal independence and the means and resources for independent operation, the fact still remains that measures which they develop require State approval (or at least acquiescence) before they become operative. What is more, the rules, standards, and procedures which emanate from these organizations can only be implemented and enforced by appropriate State action. In addition, many of the initiatives which emanate from these organizations require the acceptance, support, and involvement of non-State bodies and entities industry, non-governmental organizations - although internal
developments within respective organizations can promote, or alternatively hamper, their emergence or growth. Of the many external changes that are essential for the successful discharge of the functions of internal organizations, cooperation from other organizations deserve special mention.
In addition to the participation and commitment of States in the competent organizations, the organization's effectiveness will be greatly enhanced by the willingness of other organizations, and their Member States, to enter into constructive cooperative relationship, as foreseen and required by the Convention on the Law of the Sea. As stated earlier, the Convention recognized, and sets great store by cooperation among States, between States and the competent international organizations and among the competent organizations themselves. Such cooperation is necessary, firstly, to enable organizations and their Member States to benefit from the special knowledge, experience, expertise of other bodies and, secondly, in order to increase the rational use of scarce resources, avoid duplication of effort and wasteful jurisdictional conflicts. In many cases, organizations spend valuable time and resources challenging the competence of other organizations to undertake particular
projects and programmes or, sometimes, even in attempting to deal with the same problems simultaneously. And in most cases these disputes arise or are maintained because delegations (and ministries or departments in governments) adopt different positions in different organizations. The competent international organizations will not be able to give of their best unless there is the necessary change in governments which will enable the organizations to organize their work in such a way that problems and issues are dealt with in the most suitable of several possible fore, but with the willing and constructive support and cooperation from all other organizations which may have something of merit to contribute to the final outcome. Such a change requires that most governments have a measure of interministerial and interdepartmental coordination which ensures that the policy of the government on any matters which come up in the organizations will be well considered; that it is
established with the full awareness of all possible implications; that it is known to, and accepted by, all ministries and agencies concerned, and finally that it is the policy which will be advocated by all representatives of the state in all organizations and in all fora.
<section>Methods of promoting and encouraging the needed changes: (internal and external)</section>
To promote and encourage the various internal and external changes, the following methods and approaches may be considered:
a. Development and encouragement in international organizations of institutional arrangements and procedures which stress the essential interrelationship between the various programmes and activities within ocean space.
b. Increased assistance and advice to governments, particularly governments of developing countries, in organizing institutional and administrative structures which facilitate and require effective coordination of national policy-making and policy implementation on maritime matters.
c. Greater support for programmes of human resource development (training, etc.) which stress the vital importance of an integrated and coordinated approach to the management of the seas and the oceans.
<section>Note</section>
1. The views expressed in this paper are solely those of the author; they may not be attributed in any way to any organization or institution with which he is now, or has in the past, been associated.
<section>Information and communication on the oceans</section>
Jacques G. Richardson
In comparison with existing and forthcoming laws on the seas and oceans, international treaties such as those on the Antarctic and Nuclear Non-Proliferation have perhaps proven more compelling on the public mind. Such comparisons refer, however, to well-defined achievement, that is to say, popular and decision-making attention is more interested in the ocean's fauna (but not its flora, their commercial value notwithstanding); or the possibilities it offers for travel and adventure, sports and other leisure, as well as defence and security. The menace of a rise in sealevel as a result of global warming tends to be presented by the media as a scenario of cataclysm, a distortion of the probable reality of the future. (Ausubel 1991)
Media material dealing with the ocean made available for consumption primarily by scientists and technologists is of high quality, authoritative, plentiful and ever growing as we learn more about the sea, its processes and interactions with terrestrial masses, the atmosphere, and human activity. However, technical transfer of specialized knowledge among oceanologists is not likely to affect public reactions, whereas decision-makers may be more significantly influenced by (challengingly presented) scientific and technical papers or audiovisual messages.
Information and communication targets
Taking the example of the International Ocean Institute (IOI), its vocation is to promote education, training, and research to enhance the peaceful uses of ocean space and its resources, their management and regulation, as well as the protection and conservation of marine environment.
By extension, IOI seeks to make better known the institutional requirements during the next century for sustainable development of marine space and, in terms of governance, to apply them to the sea and coastline. To ocean specialists, to those concerned with governance, and to professional communicators, it follows that audiences showing interest in maritime matters are of three types:
A. the public (to whom the ocean belongs, now and in the future);
B. policy formulators and decision-makers (who seek to regulate and prolong use of the sea); and
C. specialists professionally involved with the sea and its exploitation (those who use it directly or try to understand it better), here called oceanologists.
These three target groups are the audiences that concern us in the present chapter. The challenge of approaching these groups intelligently, and with effective results, via various non-scholastic means can be represented by the following typology.
Increasing impact and raising awareness
In increasing impact, we may benefit from the experience of science journalists in treating science and technology policy, where experience has shown that such policy (together with chemistry, incidentally) is the most unrewarding aspect of science and technology to popularize - or even to semi-popularize, as in the case of the specialists, audience (C). Many readers, listeners or spectators (the would be learners) are not interested in the aspects of research concerned with science policy - they are, in a word, apathetic to the subject, and there is ultimately very little message conveyed.
While preparing this chapter, I spent a day at the new Nausicaâ Oceanographic Museum and the nearby Ifremer Research Centre at Boulogne-sur-Mer (France). Boulogne has been an active port since before the Roman occupation of Gaul and Britain; as a community, it literally lives by the sea, and is not very far from the French terminus of the new Channel Tunnel.
Table 1
Communication level
Message complexity
Public
Usually unidisciplinary
Simple to not too complex
Policy formulators and decision makers
Multidisciplinary
Relatively complex, with elements of economic scale
Oceanologists
Transdisciplinary
Complex, detailed, perhaps difficult, with elements of intergovernmental science and technology policy.
Discussions with the Ifremer Centre's 50 scientists and technical personnel were replete with references to collaborative projects within the 8 countries bordering the Channel and the North Sea, but at no time was intimation made by these professionals of a Law of the Sea and its implications. Nor was governance a concern of the ingenious and most attractive exhibits at Nausicaâ. This situation repeats itself (one must add) throughout the world's oceanic research centres and exhibits related to the sea, fisheries and affiliated topics.
Governance appears to fit the category of science policy, mentioned above. The subject of governance needs treatment, then, with all the resources and astuteness of which marine specialists and communicators are capable. Only in this way will there be conveyed meaningfully and usably to the public and the decision-makers, although not to oceanologists, the significance of pending international legislation concerning the world ocean. ("Usably" includes increasingly purposes of sports, entertainment, and other forms of leisure.)
The public and decision-makers, audiences (A) and (B), the media available during the foreseeable future with the highest impact are - it is agreed among professional communicators - audio-visual: television clips and longer productions; cinema films; exhibit- and museum-type slide montages with sound. This appraisal has almost worldwide application. (Cornell 1991)
The next highest impact comes from good newspaper and magazine articles. These, together with books, were the first mass popularizers of science and technology during the nineteenth century to reach significant audiences, and remained so well into the present century. This evaluation applies chiefly to industrialized societies having a good rate of literacy.
The effect of radio programmes is probably highest in the oral-aural cultures, such as those of Africa, but now of comparatively little consequence elsewhere. Exceptions to this "little consequence" are found in countries maintaining broadcast channels of wide and dense information content: BBC's Radio 4 in the United Kingdom, France Culture, Public Service Radio in the United States, Canadian Broadcasting Corporation Radio Canada, some of the NHK broadcasts in Japan, the Soviet and Chinese radio networks, and similar services in other nations. All of these media combine to serve the public and decision-makers, audiences (A) and (B) not so much as channels for better public understanding of the sea and its use but as venues for informal education about the world ocean and its protection. (Tressel 1990)
In those cultures where books are available and read, it is inevitably the highly popularized or profusely illustrated volumes or collections that have impact. For oceanologists, audience (C), the highest effect lies, as one would expect, in scholarly and technical journals. When this audience is transdisciplinary, review-type journals and audio-visual productions seem to have the most to offer.
When time permits, books convey to this specialized "market" the most complete data and interpretation available. Books will sometimes hold the attention of decision-makers, although this category of audience is inevitably short of the time necessary for a thorough consumption of book contents. The type of venture begun in August 1991 by UNESCO, Environment Brief - a serial bulletin designed and edited specifically for decision-making audiences - can help supplant the unread book.
Ocean museums and outdoor parks are in a special category, because the high-impact centres of this type are found almost exclusively in the industrialized countries, and then usually only along the littoral. Among these, it is the most recent, interactive displays that communicate best. Developing countries usually do not have the financial resources needed to support such museums, so their populations inevitably do without.
<section>Functional segments related to ocean governance</section>
The operating spectrum concerning data and its interpretation which needs to be communicated at the global level includes:
General themes
- The communality of the oceans (hence the prospective Law of the Sea Treaty).
- Complexity of the resource: ocean-land, ocean-atmosphere, land-atmosphere effects; mankind's interaction.
Nature
- Awareness of the history of mankind's adaptation to the total oceanic environment.
- The coveted seashore (and island ecology).
- The threat to terrestrial expanses.
- The shielding forest.
- Freshwater constraints
- Shifting industry.
pollution and toxicity
- Urban growth and decay.
pollution and toxicity
- Offshore technologies.
pollution and toxicity
- The agriculture/food outlook (fishery, aquaculture)
Economy
- Transport.
- Security and defence.
- Outlook for energy (renewable included).
- Leisure tourism.
- Cultural impacts.
Outlook
- Plans, finance, and legislation.
- Implementation and regulation.
- Evaluation and control.
- Future of humanity-ocean relationship.
The functional spectrum suggested above sometimes offers little occasion for the reporting of events. But, in almost all the categories of the spectrum, it is process that dominates. By "process" is meant consideration of the dissemination of knowledge or information over time. Catching and maintaining the interest of non-professional audiences becomes, therefore, the main challenge for communicators.
Process also dominates another category of subjects related to the sea. These might be termed the mechanical aspects related to ocean exploitation; they include regulatory and juridical considerations.
<section>Vehicles of communication</section>
Good examples of continuing informational sources conveying information (in most of the categories specified) to the various target groups are absorbed, analysed, assessed, and interpreted by them in direct relation to the segments of human activity. These sources may be classified as follows:
1. Scholarly and technical journals (primary): this is universally, printed material.
2. Interdisciplinary media for professionals: these can be printed, or audio-visual materials.
3. Interdisciplinary media for decision makers: printed or audio visual materials;
4. Interdisciplinary media for the public: these are, increasingly, of audio-visual nature.
5. Unidisciplinary or single-sector media relating to the specific topics listed above: these can be either printed or audio-visual, or a combination of both.
Unidisciplinary or single-sector media abound, in many languages, the world over. The major petroleum spills occurring along coastlines during the 15-year period between 1977 and 1991 have been the source of much intensive treatment of the pollution of beaches, estuaries and ports, and local fauna and flora. The sea has figured prominently in legend and myth and, after the advent of literacy, through fictional writing.
In the second half of the twentieth century, Jacques-Yves Cousteau and Rachel Carson have made enormous contributions to the public's understanding of sea as a force of nature and as the source of both exotic biota and the 100 million tonnes or so of edibles harvested from the ocean annually.
Interdisciplinary materials for decision makers are most often commissioned directly by governmental and non-governmental bodies such as the International Ocean Institute. These are, for the most part, painstakingly detailed in their research and compilation, and statistically sound when databases are available and well stocked. Consumers of such material - those who formulate policy, adopt it, then translate policy into decisions and operational programmes need to be aware of a pitfall in this category. In a few cases, militancy on the part of one interest group or another can "make the reports say" what such advocates desire that they convey. The Roman precaution of "buyer beware" is the obvious prudence to be exercised by users of such material. Otherwise, the materials available are highly reliable.
<section>An imperative about communication</section>
The University of Hawaii's Roger Fujioka, a hydrologist with profound concern for the total environment, suggests a dozen insights that should serve usefully all those concerned with rationalizing mankind's approach to the use - and minimal abuse - of a global common, such as fresh water or the oceans.
Dr. Fujioka has already graciously absolved me of transferring his concern from the hydrological environment to that of the sea and coasts. The following are his `'disciplining dozen":
Opinion and mankind's exploitation of the oceans
Rule 1. Recognize the fact that opinion is powerful.
Rule 2. Recognize the difficulty in arguing against opinion from a technical point of view, for opinion is not based solely on the technical merits of practices under consideration.
Rule 3. Recognize that opinion is strongly formed by public media, especially newspapers and television. Look at newspaper headlines, for example, then imagine the impression they make on citizens. Many readers do not take the time to read further: they form opinions from the headlines.
Rule 4. Recognize that there are never enough data to respond to everyone's concerns in selecting the best technological approach to the solution of problems.
Rule 5. Recognize that any technical approach chosen will result in the creation of (new) potential problems.
Rule 6. Recognize that some people distrust or reject new technology, or the recommendations made by government, industry, or university scientists.
Rule 7. Recognize that a few persistent citizens can impede or delay projects. Recognize further that such people are often perceived as champions of just causes - such as protecting the environment or human lives, issues having essentially sentimental appeal.
Rule 8. Recognize that the public must be educated on technical issues before these reach the state of open hearings. The public is willing to listen and absorb technical merits into the decision-making process, but not when the public seeks to "make a point" during the final stages of public hearings.
Rule 9. Recognize, however, that scientists and engineers are not trained (nor have they the time) to educate the public.
Rule 10. Recognize the need for professional specialists in information transfer - those trained in science or technology as well as in communication with government regulators, the media, and the public.
Rule 11. Recognize that there is a need for responsible information represents no vested interests other than providing a forum for the discussion of environmental resources.
Rule 12. Use the 11 rules above to implement action. (Adapted, with permission, from International Hydrological Bulletin, January-March 1991, p. 2)
<section>Ideas for better communication</section>
The following are given as initiatives to help facilitate the tasks of improving information and communication regarding the sea and its coastal environments, and the discharge of moral and technical obligations to assure the sustainable development of these resources for generations to come:
1. Invite the mass and specialized media to observe or participate in most ocean-related events such as Pacem in Maribus conferences.
2. Encourage influential, mass-circulation magazines and periodicals specifically oriented towards the oceans or the environment in general to preview a maritime world governed by UNCLOS.
3. Encourage two or three "world class" communicators to prepare personalized picture essays on an oceanic world affected by UNCLOS provisions.
4. Promote a television series along the same lines. There are numerous qualified scientific or environmental journalists who might be persuaded to develop such a broadcast. Financing could come from environmentally dependent industrial enterprises: petroleum, pulp-and-paper, and chemical firms.
5. Encourage a major publishing house to undertake production of an "Atlas of a Treaty-regulated World Ocean," capable of being converted into other major languages.
<section>References</section>
Ausubel, Jesse H. "A Second Look at the Impacts of Climate Change." American Scientist, 79 May-June (1991), pp. 210-221.
Cornell, James. As editor, Cornell treats the subject especially well in Ground-Level Views of Global Problems: International Environmental Reporting. Cambridge, Mass.: International Science Writers Association, 1991.
Tressel, George. "Science on the Air: NSF's Role." Physics Today, 43 November, (1990), p. 24.
<section>Collective security and the changing role of navies</section>
Joseph R. Morgan
<section>Introduction</section>
Navies have been in the world since antiquity, serving the maritime security needs of coastal States, both large and small. However, the role of naval forces in maintaining national security and global stability at sea has changed periodically, depending on advances in technology and changing political geography. During an era of intense rivalry among countries for control of colonies and trade routes, a primary role of naval forces was to insure free and unimpeded use of the seas for commercial purposes. When rival states and pirates regularly interfered with peaceful shipping, navies were needed to provide protection to merchant ships or to deter attacks upon them by the threat of overbearing force. According to Mahan (1890), "The necessity of a navy, in the restricted sense of the word, springs, therefore, from the existence of a peaceful shipping, and disappears, with it, except in the case of a nation which has aggressive tendencies, and keeps a navy merely as a branch
of the military establishment." Mahan, however, based his analysis of the role of navies on events during the period 1660-1783, the heart of the sailing ship era and a time when colonialism and mercantilism were considered not only acceptable but highly desirable paradigms for maintaining a stable world order. (Allen 1988) For the most part, colonies no longer exist, and the functions of navies, therefore, have changed, adapting to new conditions, among which the proliferation of independent States is overwhelmingly the most important.
Protecting the sea lanes of commerce (SLOCs) is still widely stated as a principal mission of naval forces, but it is logical to argue that many countries with large merchant marines, Norway for example, get along quite well with small navies, and some countries such as the United States have large, powerful navies but small merchant fleets. (Martin 1967) Therefore, there must be other, more important, missions for naval forces. Indeed, there are. During modern wars, most of which are not fought over SLOCs or the maintenance of colonies, an important function of a navy is to project power from the sea against the land territory of an enemy. This can be done by shore bombardment using guns or missiles, bomber planes launched from aircraft-carriers, and by amphibious landings, in which specially designed ships carry troops that are put ashore on an adversary's coast. General support of land forces is another role for wartime navies. Air power and shore bombardment are
frequently used in direct support of troops and armoured units.
Virtually all countries list defence of their coasts against attack by an aggressor state as a principal reason to maintain a navy. The coastal defence mission is decreasing in importance, however, as more advanced technology has resulted in the ability to project power from sea to land over much greater distances than ever before, as through the use of long-range missiles.
Perhaps more important in the changing world order, navies also have a useful role in peacetime. The capability of navies to project great power frequently acts as a deterrent to the aggressive tendencies of potential enemies. The threat of an exchange of nuclear missiles served to deter both the United States and the former Union of Soviet Socialist Republics from permitting their Cold War rivalry to escalate into actual combat. Navies frequently practice "gunboat diplomacy," a show of force by surface ships, to provide a not so subtle warning to countries that the initiation of hostilities by them is likely to result in the use of force by a more militarily powerful country. Finally, there are some basically non-military functions of navies, such as scientific research at sea, hydrographic surveys, maintenance of navigational aids, assistance to countries in the event of disasters, and various humanitarian activities such as search and rescue.
<section>Navies of the developing world</section>
Virtually all coastal States, and some landlocked countries as well, maintain navies. The most recent edition of Jane's Fighting Ships gives statistical data for 164 navies, most of which are fleets of developing or third world countries. (Sharpe 1991) Morris (1987) analysed the characteristics of those navies he classified as "Third World" and arrived at the six ranks described below. These can be considered as a hierarchy of naval missions and the associated ship characteristics needed to carry out the assigned functions.
Rank 1 (token) navies
These have a formal organizational structure, assigned officer and enlisted personnel of appropriate ranks, and a small number of coastal vessels with little or no combat capability. A few of these navies have one or two fast attack craft (FAC), but this alone does not justify reclassifying them into rank 2. Token navies are maintained for prestige purposes only, but it is difficult to see how a small, ineffective navy can lend much eminence to the country. It might be reasonable simply to ignore the presence of the large number of rank 1 navies, since their potential to either maintain or upset security at sea is negligible; however, there is a distinct tendency for countries to upgrade their token navies into rank 2 fleets.
Rank 2 (constabulary) navies
These navies are equipped with coastal patrol craft (PC) and fast attack craft (FAC) in varying numbers and configurations. The FACs can perform various police or constabulary functions, and the PCs are able to provide some degree of surveillance capability. Although the small size of the vessels and their generally light armament make them unsuitable for offshore combat, in limited sea areas, such as narrow straits through which more powerful warships and many merchant vessels must pass, FACs can be potent weapons platforms. (Alexander and Morgan 1988, p. 347) Modern technology, particularly guided missiles, has given some quite small ships a comparatively large combat capability. An example of a rank 2 navy with impressive combat potential is Singapore, the strategic location of which on the Malacca-Singapore Straits sea lane accounts for much of its successful maritime economy and seapower. The addition of FACs to the PCs that characterize rank 1 navies adds greatly to
combat capability at relatively little additional cost. Over the last decade, the increase in numbers of FACs in navies of both developing and developed countries has been impressive.
Rank 3 (inshore territorial defence) navies
The addition of corvettes to the PC and FAC-dominated fleets normally signals the rise in rank from 2 to 3. Corvettes are somewhat larger than FACs, have more endurance, better seakeeping characteristics, and hence can operate farther from shore. Moreover, their relatively low cost and considerable endurance makes them ideal for patrolling exclusive economic zones (EEZs). Although most of the rank 3 navies consist of FACs and corvettes as the principal ship types, almost all have one or two larger vessels, usually frigates and small destroyers. The latter two ship types are much more combat capable but are also much more expensive to build and maintain. In addition, their crew requirements are much greater. Hence, the addition of frigates and destroyers to the fleet often indicates the intention to move up from rank 3 to a naval force with a greater geographic reach and regional interests.
Rank 4 (offshore territorial defence) navies
Destroyers, frigates, and submarines characterize these navies. The more diversified characteristics of these ships permit greater combat capabilities and defensive coverage of a larger sea area. Many rank 4 navies developed their fleets by accepting obsolescent ships contributed or sold by larger naval powers. In the past two decades, however, there has been a great increase in missile technology, which has resulted in upgrades in the capability of these older vessels. More recently, new destroyer, frigate, and submarine designs have been incorporated into rank 4 fleets. In many cases, the ships can be locally built.
"Submarines offer particular advantages for Third World navies. They combine considerable combat potential in coastal waters with relatively low cost and modest manpower requirements. A small navy with submarines can help face and deter incursions by larger and more powerful surface forces in offshore areas." (Morris 1987, p. 43) The conventional (diesel-powered) submarines operated by rank 4 navies are in contrast to the nuclear submarines which are much larger, more expensive, harder to detect, and more capable. Only a small number of countries operate nuclear submarines, which are weapon platforms with considerable offensive capability. "Operated by 43 navies, it (the submarine) is the most numerous of the major warships." (Barnaby 1991, p. 326)
Rank 5 (adjacent force projection) navies
There is an important difference between rank 5 navies and the lower rank fleets. The rank 5 naval missions are offensive in nature, and the ships are designed to project force against an adversary, rather than to act defensively to protect their coastal waters. Consequently, rank 5 navies have major warships, including in some cases cruisers and submarines with deep-water potential. North and South Korea are good examples of countries with rank 5 navies; they clearly have established their fleets with a view toward force projection against each other, albeit in a limited geographic area - the Yellow Sea and Sea of Japan. Force projection usually implies at least some air power, and a characteristic of rank 5 navies is naval aviation, either shore-based or by means of helicopters carried aboard naval vessels.
Rank 6 (regional force projection) navies
Countries operating these navies aspire to project force and influence over a larger region than encompassed by their nearby enemies. India, for instance, seems to be developing a navy that will exercise command of the entire Indian Ocean, and Argentina and Brazil have naval forces designed to operate in large areas of the South Atlantic.
<section>The law of the sea and changing naval missions</section>
Paradoxically, the Convention on the Law of the Sea (CLS), which decrees that large areas of the oceans should be used for peaceful purposes only (UN 1983, articles 88,141,155(2)), has led to the proliferation of navies and a worldwide increase in the numbers of naval ships. Many weak coastal States that were either unable to afford them or thought them unnecessary now have navies. However, many of the new navies and the generally small ships that characterize them are only quasi military in nature. The wide acceptance of the concept of the EEZ and its codification in the CLS (UN 1983, articles 55-75) has resulted in the need for small ships to patrol large areas of the coastal oceans in order to prevent poaching and other illegal activities in EEZs.
As expressed by a well-known naval analyst, "It is rare during the preparation of this book to find one salient change occurring worldwide. This year, however,... the adoption of a 200-mile Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) by many countries is illustrated by the dramatic increase in the number of ships clearly intended to patrol an area suddenly expanded by 98.5 percent." (Moore 1978, p. 127)
These ships need not be heavily armed, since "the enemy" is more likely to be an unarmed fishing boat than a hostile naval craft. (Morgan 1986, p. 365) Many of the least economically developed countries, such as the new Pacific island States, have acquired the largest ocean areas over which they have some degree of sovereignty, either in the form of archipelagic waters or EEZs. These are countries that can least afford navies but now need them. The size of the navy designed for EEZ surveillance and enforcement functions obviously should be based on the marine territory to be covered as well as the importance to the country of its fishery and mineral resources.
<section>Medium power and superpower navies</section>
Hill (1986) argues that there is a category of countries which from the standpoint of military capability should be classified as medium powers, that is with greater power than the third world countries described above and less than the superpowers. He includes among the medium powers Britain, France, India, Brazil, and Japan. Since India and Brazil have been discussed above as third world countries with rank 6 navies, it is clear that there is overlap between classifications according to Morris and Hill. Nevertheless, both authors present valid, useful arguments in their categorizations of naval power. The distinctions and the lines separating the various categories in the naval hierarchy are blurred in any case. In the specific case of China "There will be some situations in which it is appropriate to regard China as a superpower; there will be others ... in which she should be regarded as less than that. It will never be appropriate to consider her a medium power. As it
has so often been through the centuries, China is sui generic." (Hill 1986, p. 19)
Medium powers may aspire to exercise seapower worldwide but are limited by resources. They must make choices, based on what they consider their vital interests and what they can afford. The United Kingdom managed to fight a war against Argentina in the Falkland Islands, thousands of miles from Britain, but it had to muster virtually all its maritime resources to do so. In contrast, the United States, a superpower, seemingly effortlessly deployed six large aircraft-carriers, a battleship, nuclear submarines, cruisers, and destroyers in the Persian Gulf to assist in the reconquest of Kuwait after its occupation by Iraq.
Both France and Britain operate small aircraft-carriers and nuclear submarines, including some designed to fire long-range nuclear-armed missiles; but neither country compares with the United States and Russia in overall naval power.
China's navy is unique in the very large number of FACs available for coastal defence. At the same time, it has destroyers and nuclear submarines. In one respect (the emphasis on FACs and other small vessels) it resembles a rank 2 navy; its ballistic missile submarines, on the other hand, might qualify it as a quasi superpower.
<section>Changing naval functions</section>
The Cold War between the United States and Russia involved the maintenance of nuclear deterrent forces by both countries, with each nuclear arsenal capable of destroying the other. Thus, a mutually assured destruction (MAD) capability was employed to insure peace, albeit at immense cost. Nuclear-armed missiles fired from submarines and intercontinental ballistic missiles launched from fixed or mobile land-based sites was the cornerstone of the MAD strategy of both countries.
Where small wars were involved, in almost all cases the United States and Russia supported opposing sides. This was particularly the case in the Middle East, with the former Soviet Union generally backing Arab countries and the United States assisting Israel.
The Cold War spawned important military alliances: NATO and the Warsaw Pact. The two sides were "face to face" along the Central Front, which formerly divided East and West Germany. In East Asia, a similar confrontation existed along the demilitarized zone between North and South Korea.
Dramatic changes in Eastern Europe have made the Warsaw Pact obsolete, as one after another former Soviet satellites have overturned their Communist governments and, in effect, declared their "freedom" from the former Soviet Union. Although NATO remains intact as a military alliance, there is apparently far less need for it to counter the threat from Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union. Moreover, the demise of the former Soviet Union itself and the "birth" of independent or quasi-independent republics changed the entire military and ideological picture vis-à-vis the United States and former Soviet Union. The end of the Cold War was signified by events such as those in the Middle East when for the first time in recent history the Security Council of the United Nations was able to arrive at a unified position countering the aggression of Iraq against Kuwait. A number of previous Middle East crises had demonstrated the inability of the United Nations to serve a useful
role, as superpower rivalry precluded the necessary unanimous support by the five permanent members of the Security Council.
From the standpoint of naval forces, a considerable reduction in numbers of fleet ballistic missile submarines now seems appropriate. Likewise, one would expect that navies need a smaller number of large ships designed for force projection, since much of the justification for aircraft-carriers, large cruisers, and battleships is based on the strength and missions of the opposing superpower fleet. The role of nuclear attack submarines is to destroy the fleet ballistic missile submarines and large surface combatant ships of the enemy; hence, a reduction in numbers of deterrent and force projection vessels leads logically to a proportional reduction in submarines designed to counter them.
In the superpower navies, destroyers, frigates, and small cruisers are generally designed to operate in support of aircraft-carriers and battleships as part of battle groups. Therefore, reducing the numbers of carriers and battleships can logically lead to a comparable reduction in numbers of smaller-size combatant ships. Moreover, the superpower navies have large numbers of ships which operate in support of battle groups to provide for underway replenishment of stores, ammunition, and fuel. These support vessels can be reduced in numbers as the numbers of combatant ships are diminished. Overall, the end of superpower rivalry can lead to sizeable reductions in the navies of the United States and former Soviet Union as naval missions and functions change. Deleting the force projection and nuclear deterrence role of navies could result in a large reduction in numbers of some of the most powerful, expensive ships.
According to Sharpe (1991, p. 49) 1992 was scheduled to see the reduction of United States naval forces by 1 aircraft-carrier, more than 70 surface warships, and 22 nuclear submarines. Undoubtedly, financial and resource limitations played a role in the planned reductions, but the plans were also "backed up by a global consensus that truly the Soviet disunion is facing a decline in both military and any other terms you care to mention. There is also the hope that cutbacks in US naval forces may strengthen the arm of the more enlightened political elements in Moscow and lead to a reciprocal decline in, say, the Soviet submarine building effort." Thus far, however, "there are no changes that justify, in terms of matching capabilities, the partial unilateral naval disarmament which is affecting the West. In 1990 ... the Soviets launched ten new submarines, six of them nuclear powered, with formidable modern weapons and sensors .... Clearly, the West is still seen as an active
potential adversary, at least by those who manage the allocation of defence funds." (Sharpe 1991, p. 51).
While it is clear that the end of the Cold War should reduce the sizes of superpower navies, this is not necessarily the case for the very numerous small navies, which have other missions. The tendency for these navies to move up in rank has been mentioned previously. The end of superpower ideological rivalry will not automatically put an end to the numerous rivalries and conflicts that exist among nations. Many of these countries have disputes with their neighbours over religion, boundaries, resources, and historic enmities. Iraq's invasion of Kuwait and the resultant war in the Gulf, as a coalition of Arab and non-Arab nations countered the aggression, was not related in any way to traditional Cold War ideological differences. In several past Arab-Israeli wars - 1956, 1967, 1973 for instance - truces were imposed on the contestants by either the United States or the former Soviet Union. Were this not the case, the wars would undoubtedly have lasted longer, with more loss
of life. It is also quite possible that longstanding rivals will choose to arm themselves more effectively if they cannot count on help from a superpower. This might certainly be so in the case of North and South Korea. (Morgan 1991) Without naval support from one or other of the superpowers, both Koreas will probably "beef up" their navies.
Without the action of superpowers to put a quick end to small wars they may tend to both increase in numbers and ferocity. The India-Pakistan wars in the past were primarily over religion (Stoessinger 1982, pp. 115139), and a dangerous state of affairs continues. The Cold War's ending will have little effect on the state of relationships between these two bitter rivals, and the lack of superpowers to keep their clients in check makes the situation even more hazardous.
<section>An optimistic future</section>
Although threats of war between small powers may not become less numerous than they are at present, there may be increasing opportunities for navies of superpowers and medium powers such as the United Kingdom, France, Italy, etc. to utilize their navies in noncombatant roles. Although there is no reasonable way that large combat ships and submarines can be employed in humanitarian and other peaceful uses, the large navies have a host of ships designed for amphibious operations and logistic support of the combat ships which might very well serve in roles such as disaster relief, ocean scientific surveys, maintenance of navigational aids, and production of better nautical charts.
Although several navies might use their ships in these functions, an analysis based on US Navy fleet types seems appropriate, since the American navy is now the largest and most effective force in the world. All ship types listed below are found in reasonably large numbers in the US Navy.
US Navy ships suitable for non-combatant roles
Amphibious ships
Amphibious command ships
Amphibious assault ships (general purpose)
Amphibious assault ships (multi-purpose)
Amphibious cargo ships
Amphibious transport docks
Amphibious assault ships (helicopter)
Dock landing ships
Tank landing ships
Mine warfare ships
Mine countermeasures ships
Coastal mine hunters
Auxiliary ships
Ammunition ships
Combat stores ships
Oilers
Fast combat support ships
Replenishment oilers
Fleet tugs
Hospital ships
All the amphibious ships have characteristics useful for disaster relief operations. They all are designed to load and offload cargo under conditions where ports, harbours, and pier facilities are not available. The ships in the US Navy use helicopters or amphibious boats (those that can run ashore on beaches) in some combination. The amphibious assault ships (multi-purpose) carry as many as 42 helicopters, 6-8 vertical takeoff and landing aircraft, and a number of amphibious air cushion vehicles. The amphibious assault ships (general purpose) carry fewer helicopters, 19, but they have extensive medical facilities on board, including operating rooms, X-ray rooms, a hospital ward, an isolation ward, laboratories, and a pharmacy. The amphibious assault ships (helicopter) are similarly equipped. They carry 20 helicopters and also have well-equipped medical facilities.
The mine warfare ships are of modest size and speed: 1312 tonnes full-load displacement and 13.5 knots for the mine countermeasures ships and 895 tonnes full-load displacement and 12 knots for the coastal mine hunters. Their value for non-combatant operations lies in their relatively economical operating costs and the fact that they can be readily converted for various types of oceanographic surveys, since they are built to stream and recover minesweeping gear and have winches, booms, etc. suitable for handling large oceanographic sampling devices.
Five of the auxiliary ships are designed to carry various types of cargos in direct support of combat vessels. They can load and offload cargo rapidly and transfer it at sea. These characteristics make them useful for disaster relief operations, where there is a need to bring in essential food and fuel supplies rapidly. The fleet tugs can serve equally well in a civilian or military role
The US Navy has two large, splendidly equipped hospital ships. They have a full load displacement of 69,360 tonnes, an overall length of 894 feet, and a speed of 16.5 knots. They are equipped with 1,000 patient beds; 12 operating theatres; laboratories; pharmacies; dental, radiation, and optometry departments; and burn care, radiological, and physical therapy departments. They are manned by a crew of 68 and have 820 on the hospital staff. They were deployed in the Persian Gulf region to support US combat forces in the 1991 war against Iraq, but since troop casualties were very light, the hospital facilities were scarcely needed. It is easy to envision, however, the valuable humanitarian role the ships could play in natural disasters, epidemics, and other events requiring medical help.
Of equal importance to the peaceful operations of navies is the skill and training of crews. The US and other large navies have officer and enlisted personnel well qualified to carry out the complex functions of operating a large vessel. They are trained in a great number of specific job skills, which would be as important in peacetime as in war. Of particular note is the capability of the ships and their crews in precision navigation, handling of boats and aircraft, medical technologies, logistics, and maintenance.
Contrary to much common belief, there is a long tradition of using navies in peacetime roles. For example, exploration was long a prime function of naval forces when wars were not going on. One only has to note that Captain Cook of the British Navy and Lieutenant Wilkes of the United States Navy were explorers who contributed tremendously to our knowledge of the Pacific and Southern Oceans. Much of what is known about the Polar seas was due to the efforts of Russian naval personnel. With the age of exploration long since over, the peaceful role of navies must change in character. But, there is still a good deal of work for them to do for the betterment of mankind.
Navies can also be used in direct support of peace, as well as in simply non-warlike activities. Superpowers, medium powers, and countries with small navies can contribute ships to maritime peacekeeping forces. A group of relatively small but well-equipped ships of several nations can operate together under UN command to deter offensive actions by potentially hostile countries. UN seagoing forces could have forestalled conflict at sea in the Spratly Islands region, for instance, and they could likewise prevent all too frequent fishery disputes that sometimes result in violence.
<section>Conclusion</section>
Navies inevitably will respond to changing conditions, but few nations will be inclined to dismantle completely their seagoing combat forces. However, reduction in numbers of both ships and missiles whose function is nuclear deterrence has been continuing for some time, and almost certainly this will be accompanied by a comparable reduction in ships with missions to support large aircraft-carriers and battleships. Still, the world will almost certainly remain an uneasy environment for the conduct of international relations. Security at sea will continue to require navies, but one can hope that in a more peaceful, less ideologically competitive world seagoing forces will be used more for defensive and humanitarian roles than for missions of mass destruction.
<section>References</section>
Alexander, L.A., and J.R. Morgan. "Choke Points of the World Ocean: A Geographic and Military Assessment." Ocean Yearbook 7, 1988: 340-355.
Allen, S. "The Elements of Sea Power: Mahan Revisited." Ocean Yearbook 7, 1988: 317-339.
Barnaby, F. "The Role of the Submarine." Ocean Yearbook 9,1991: 326-338.
Hill, J.R. Maritime Strategy for Medium Powers. Annapolis: Naval Institute Press, 1986.
Mahan, A.T. The Influence of Sea Power Upon History 1660-1783. Boston: Little, Brown, 1890.
Martin, L.W. The Sea in Modern Strategy. London: Chatto and Windus, 1967.
Moore, J.E. (ed.) Jane's Fighting Ships. London: Jane's Publishers, 1978.
Morgan, J.R. "Small Navies." Ocean Yearbook 6, 1986: 362-389.
Morgan, J.R. "Naval Operations in Korean Waters." Ocean Yearbook 9, 1991: 294-306.
Morris, M.A. Expansion of Third World Navies. New York: St. Martin's Press, 1987.
Sharpe, R. (ed.) Jane's Fighting Ships 1991-92. Alexandria: Jane's Information Group, 1991.
Stoessinger, J.G. Why Nations Go to War. New York: St. Martin's Press, 1982.
United Nations. The Law of the Sea. New York: United Nations Press, 1983.
<section>Ocean governance and development: The question of financing</section>
Ruben P. Mendez
<section>Introduction</section>
The pattern of life on earth has changed radically and irreversibly in this century, and our institutions have not kept pace. Like the oceans themselves, the challenges we now face transcend national boundaries, and yet our laws and funding mechanisms, for the most part, operate at the national level.
A shift, however, seems to be taking place. The Law of the Sea Convention is just one example of a growing recognition of the need for new reforms of international cooperation. But implementing the Convention's programmes and dealing with other critical environmental and developmental issues will require a substantial increase in available funding.
The present pattern of international assistance and other public financial flows, which relies almost completely on unpredictable voluntary contributions, has become obsolete and is woefully inadequate. The urgent challenges before us call for a new approach to questions of international public finance. This chanter,^1 discusses a system of taxes, user fees and other mechanisms that could generate substantial revenues on an automatic rather than a discretionary basis, comprehensively rather through the present patchwork. These could be used to fund general and ocean-related development programmes and also the regulation and conservation of ocean resources.
Although these ideas are still new and controversial, there are many reasons to believe that they provide a viable approach, and because the marine environment affects us all so pervasively, the oceans provide an ideal starting point for a system of international public finance. The Law of the Sea Convention, by designating international property rights to the deep ocean bed, has, in fact, already set this process in motion.
Because of the huge volumes of economic activity involving the use of the oceans, international taxes or user fees could mobilize substantial revenues. For instance, a tax of just 0.1 per cent on international trade - 95 per cent of which is through ocean freight - could yield almost $4 billion, based on the level of imports in 1993.
In addition to mobilizing revenues, a variety of "Pigovian," or corrective, taxes and user fees are desirable for the management and optimum development of ocean resources. Charging users for the cost (to other potential users) of using the global commons can prevent the overuse of what is wrongly perceived to be a free and inexhaustible resource. Specifically designed long-term or even quasi-perpetual leases on fisheries, for example, could provide an incentive for leaseholders to maintain, rather than deplete, the resource. And "permits to pollute" could be sold at a price that would discourage polluters and at least equal the cost to society of the pollution. Charging polluters for the damage they cause is more efficient than trying to enforce across-the-board regulations.
Financial measures such as those cited could be implemented within the existing international political framework by means of conventions, or multinational treaties. The automatic, compulsory nature of the charges would eliminate the "free-rider" problem that tends to undermine voluntary funding schemes.
The potential sources of revenue that can be derived from the oceans are varied and extensive. While some may be placed in a general fund for international programmes, a substantial portion should be allocated specifically for ocean governance and development. A proposed multisectoral oceans organization or institutional arrangement could help mobilize these funds and manage their expenditure.
<section>The present situation</section>
Inadequacies and needs
The scale of funds raised for official development assistance (ODA), $60.4 billion in 19922, pales in comparison to what is spent annually on arms, about $900 billion (based on estimated expenditures in 1989)3, and to the magnitude of the problems that need to be addressed. The present pattern of resource mobilization for assistance programmes, based almost completely on discretionary contributions, has been sorely inadequate, unreliable, and unpredictable. For the past two decades, voluntary contributions have amounted to an average of only 0.35 per cent of the GNP of the developed countries. This is half the 0.7 per cent target established by the United Nations General Assembly and OECD's Development Assistance Committee. Figure 1 shows that in real terms, official development finance stagnated during the last decade, and total net resource flows to developing countries dropped precipitously by 33 per cent.
Even the assessed obligations of Member States to the regular budgets of the organizations of the United Nations system have not always been honoured by the large contributors, for various political reasons. The effectiveness of these organizations has thus been critically hampered and in some instances their very viability threatened. Political considerations could easily jeopardize funding for programmes concerned with the oceans, in view of the refusal thus far of certain industrialized countries to ratify or accede to the Law of the Sea Convention. As for funds raised by the World Bank and regional development banks through members' subscriptions and in international capital markets, these are lent to the highly credit-worthy middle- and high-income countries, to maintain the banks' credit ratings.
The inadequacy, unreliability, and unpredictability of present funding sources point to the need for a new system akin to that practiced by nation-states, comprising financing mechanisms that are "automatic" rather than discretionary, as described above.
New funding mechanisms are especially appropriate for ocean governance and development, since the oceans constitute 75 per cent of the world's total surface, contain extensive living and non-living resources fisheries, minerals, and the principal means of transport and are part of the global commons. The oceans, moreover, are the main influence on global climate, absorb most of the atmospheric carbon dioxide and substantial wastes and are the object of extensive expenditures. Substantial funding will be required for:
- the eventual implementation of the rules and programmes of the Law of the Sea Convention;
- the ecologically sound development of marine fisheries including those of the Southern Ocean;
- the exploitation of the resources of the deep ocean bed, e.g., by the Enterprise, for the benefit of all mankind (and, depending on further exploration, the possible need to manage the ecosystem of the deep ocean bed, where various forms of life have been discovered);
- the prevention of marine pollution;
- further research and possible action on the influence of the oceans on the global climate and on regional weather patterns, and other activities such as their development for energy and fresh water.
Averting the tragedy of the global commons
Even the most abundant resources have their limits, and the unrestrained use of the commons leads to their degradation, as illustrated by Garret Hardin in "The Tragedy of the Commons."^4 Charging users for the cost of using the commons can prevent overuse of what are wrongly perceived to be free resources. Fees would drive home the economist's principle of "TANSTAAFL" - the acronym for the colloquial aphorism "There ain't no such thing as a free lunch"^5 - the counterpart of the environmentalist's "polluter pays principle."
An important requirement for levying such charges and fees is the designation of the oceans as common property, a resource belonging to all mankind, or res communist This is in contradistinction to the notion of res nullius, a thing that belongs to no one, and is therefore "up for grabs." It is in the latter situation that the tragedy is bound to occur.
Designating the oceans as res communis has ample precedents in traditional international law, dating from the time of Grotius, and a basis in the principles of equity. It could underpin a system of charges for exploiting the ocean bed, marine fisheries, navigation and over-flight, and developing the resources of the Southern Ocean. These charges could, at the same time, lead to more protection and better management of marine resources. The level of fees or charges would vary according to the different kinds of uses or purposes. In some cases, demand could help establish appropriate costs. In other cases, fees may be set in line with economic rents or the level of revenues needed.
The changing political tides
The UNCLOS precedent described above is but one example of the increasingly "porous" boundaries between sectors. In many other areas we also see a breaking down of barriers to traditional ways of generating funds for interregional projects. This development seems to be part of a growing recognition of the integrated and interdependent nature of the challenges and issues before us and the need for parallel institutional changes. It follows a long-term trend of essentially progressive attitudes toward financial matters.
This historical trend is evident in the economic philosophies that have prevailed since the advent of a sense of international community. Laissez faire replaced mercantilism as a more effective means of promoting international trade. After World War II a variety of development assistance programmes sprouted in response to widespread agreement on the need for a more equitable distribution in the wealth of nations and for international development assistance and economic cooperation.
The establishment of a broad system of international taxation to fund these efforts seems basically a question of time - elements of it are already in place. Although nations are jealous of their sovereignty, and do not readily submit to international authority, compulsory payments to the regular budgets of public international organizations have already been agreed to universally, in principle if not always in practice. In the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund the financial obligations of membership are punctiliously observed. Many political leaders and students of political economy raised the need for a more equitable distribution in the wealth of nations - for a narrowing of the gap between the rich and poor nations - and for international development assistance and economic cooperation. These led to the sprouting of a variety of international assistance programmes after the end of World War II. The beginning of Special Drawing Rights in 1969, although in
rudimentary form, was a breakthrough that had been dismissed as fanciful only a decade earlier. And at the Toronto Conference on the Changing Environment in 1989 the participants, including the developed countries, called for international taxation to protect the global environment.
Perhaps the strongest precedent can be found in the European Community, where a true system of international taxation is already in full practice. Under this system, members of the EC pay 1 per cent of their value added tax (VAT) income to the European Commission, with the percentage increasing gradually over the years as Europe-wide legislation supersedes national legislation. This system could serve as a model for financing worldwide institutions such as the United Nations and its affiliated agencies. It illustrates the quickening pace and possibilities of institutional change in the fields of international political and economic relations.
<section>Specific proposals</section>
Revenue taxes: Economic potential and technical features
Ninety-five per cent of international trade in goods uses the global commons through ocean freight, and because of the sheer volume involved, a tax on goods and services crossing national boundaries could yield enormous revenues without posing undue hardship. There would, of course, be exceptions, such as Singapore, but special provisions could be made for such cases.
International trade reached almost $4,000 billion in 1989, as measured by the volume of imports. This means that an ad valorem tax levied at only 0.01 per cent could yield almost $4 billion annually in revenue. A tax of 1 per cent could yield almost $40 billion, and a tax of 2 per cent, almost $80 billion, which alone exceeds the total volume of ODA that year. Projected annual export growth rates of at least 6 per cent annually (at constant prices) in the 1990S6 indicate steady growth in revenues. National customs offices would provide a ready-made administrative infrastructure for tax collection.
A general trade tax need not, unlike tariffs, depress the total volume of trade, because of the enormity of the tax base, the rate could be set at a much lower level than tariffs, which are designed deliberately to serve as disincentives to imports. Computer modelling could determine rates that would raise substantial revenues without depressing the volume of trade. The trade tax could be collected either at the point of importation or the point of exportation, preferably at the former, since taxation of imports is much more common and the necessary infrastructure of experienced customs officials and facilities is already in place. If a particular country refused to tax its imports, its trading partners could levy taxes on their exports to it. Determining the commodities subject to a general trade tax should be fairly straightforward.
One technical problem concerns re-exports. It is arguably unfair to tax imported materials again when they have been processed and shipped to another country in the form of finished goods. It should be possible, however, to resolve this problem by giving the exporter a credit or rebate. Other questions concern the treatment of capital goods used in development, and the treatment of certain countries, such as Singapore, that are particularly dependent on international transactions. Here, a system of exemptions or deductibles, and graduated rates could be applied.
As far as invisible items are concerned, it would be practical to include insurance and freight charges in taxes imposed at the point of importation. Import taxes are often charged on the c.i.f. value of imported goods, that is, on "cost, insurance and freight." Other invisible items such as the expenditures of tourists, diplomats and military personnel, would be exceedingly difficult to tax and should therefore be exempted.
How are national boundaries to be defined for the purposes of trade movements? One possibility would be to use membership in the United Nations or any of its specialized agencies as the criterion. This would include practically all countries, including Switzerland and Tonga, but there would still be the political problem cases of Taiwan and Western Sahara. A practical solution would be generally to treat all trade that passes through customs as international. Like a sales or value added tax, a general trade tax would not in itself be progressive, but its effect could be made so by using its proceeds for programmes benefiting poorer countries and the international activities cited at the beginning of this chapter.
There are the principal technical questions that might arise in the administration of a tax system. There would undoubtedly be others, but as in the case of national taxation - where the most complex systems exist they could be dealt with in various ways. It is clear that a system of international taxation would be technically feasible, even in the face of intricate administrative problems.
The immediately preceding discussion focused on issues relating to a general trade tax, but much of it could also apply to taxing other traded goods. For example, international taxes could be levied on specific traded commodities, such as internationally traded oil, other exhaustible hydrocarbons such as coal and natural gas, mineral raw materials, such as aluminum, copper, iron, lead, nickel, manganese, tin, and zinc and on international passenger and freight transport.
Pigovian measures
In addition to mobilizing revenues, a carefully designed system of international public finance can help regulate and protect the environment. A corrective, "Pigovian", system of incentives and added costs can provide public funds, regulate activities with negative external effects on society and the environment, and promote activities with positive external effects. These are all desirable social outcomes, ones that mechanisms based on market forces and voluntary contributions alone cannot produce or can produce only at inadequate levels. Many problems of the international economy are in fact due to its almost complete reliance on market forces and the goodwill of the rich.
Taxing oil
Oil consumption is the chief cause of increased carbon dioxide and much pollution in the atmosphere, and a tax on oil imports and consumption could play a significant Pigovian, or corrective, role. To be effective, it should increase the cost of oil substantially enough to discourage consumption, encourage energy-saving measures and alternative sources of energy and - to the extent that it does not - to raise funds for corrective and compensatory purposes. Of all the components of world trade, oil holds the most promise for additional tax revenue. Despite its decline, oil accounts for the largest single portion of international trade, after manufactured goods (excluding iron and steel and non-ferrous metals). It thus has the advantage of a large base, but a tax on both domestic and internationally traded oil would have the advantage of a much larger base and a wider distribution of the burden. While the more developed countries would contribute more, there may still be a
need for differential rates to ease the burden on developing countries for which the import bill is already onerously high.
Among the many alternative sources of energy that become economically viable are those from the oceans. Some estimates place the worldwide potential of tidal power at the equivalent of more than one billion barrels of oil a year, or 5 per cent of global oil consumption, and the potential of wave and ocean thermal energy at much higher levels. Investment in the development of alternative sources of energy and the promotion of energy efficiency is inhibited by the low price of oil. A tax on oil could change its relative advantage, with beneficial effects from an environmental viewpoint and, in the long run, also in financial terms. Wave-energy devices arranged in line offshore and acting as a barrier could provide other benefits such as harbour protection and aquaculture. Ocean thermal energy conversion (OTEC), utilizing the temperature differences between warm surface and cold deep waters, could be combined with desalinization and other economic activities. Proceeds from oil
taxes could be used for further research on alternatives such as these and their development in the twenty-first century to reduce the greenhouse effect of gases and replace dwindling oil reserves.
Taxing polluters of the marine environment: A case-study
Some of the most visible pollutants of the marine environment are oil and petroleum products. Taxes on the amount of oil discharged into the ocean would induce offenders to reduce polluting emissions and, to the extent that total elimination was uneconomic, produce revenues for clean-up operations.
In this situation, taxes would take account of external environmental costs in a way that the market mechanism does not. In a free market, an oil company will pollute the marine environment as long as the environmental costs are not reflected in its income-and-expenditure accounts. Pigovian taxes - in this case a form of fine calculated on the basis of the amount of damage it inflicts on the marine environment (and society) will "internalize" these costs, so that the company will have an incentive to use safeguards. Should the incentives fail, funds will nevertheless be generated to clean up the ocean waters.
A differential tax could also be imposed so that polluters installing anti-pollution devices would be taxed at a lower rate than those who do not. This kind of tax could reduce chronic emissions from routine tanker operations, the single most important cause of discharges from shipping, accounting for one-third of the hydrocarbons entering the ocean from all sources.' The problem arises because of the fact that after oil tankers unload oil in port, they are too light to sail. So, typically they fill some of their tanks with sea water to add weight (or ballast) to the vessel. When the tanks are emptied and cleaned to take in the new cargo, a significant amount of oil (which had been clinging to the walls of the tanks) is released with the ballast water.
Tankers with segregated ballast tanks do not, on average, discharge as much oil into the oceans, and a differential tax on these two types of ballasts would motivate owners to replace old ballast tanks with segregated ones. Within the first year, assuming that all tankers would, by then, have segregated ballast tanks, revenues would fall by about 50 per cent according to a UNEP study^8 and Steinberg and Yager. They estimate an annual revenue over a 20-year period of more than $20 million, assuming a tax of $10 per ton of spillage from tanks without segregated ballasts. At lower prices, oil consumption, shipments and spillage subject to tax would rise and higher rates, say, of $35 to $40 a ton, might be needed to induce tanker owners to install segregated ballasts. Under these conditions, the tax could yield a total revenue exceeding $100 million annually and over a 20-year period induce tanker operators to spend between $4 and $5 billion on pollution-abatement technology.
The taxes just cited are only examples of many possible Pigovian measures that could be designed to help reduce pollution of the oceans. Such measures could be extended to other parts of the global environment. Similar taxes could be imposed on users of carbon fuels to internalize the environmental costs of "the greenhouse effect," on loggers to internalize the socio-economic costs of deforestation, on producers of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) to internalize the adverse effects on the ozone layer, and on other generators of negative externalities.
Leases, permits, and auctions
Another way of internalizing external costs to society and the environment is through the granting of leases to private parties to exploit certain areas. Such leases, however, should be granted only on a long-term, even a quasi-perpetual, basis so that there would be an incentive to maintain the resources of the areas under lease rather than to overexploit them. For example, fishing nations could be assigned specific areas of the oceans in which only fish of a particular species, e.g. tuna, might be caught. As payment for the benefits derived available to some nations but not to others - user charges in the form of leases would be imposed.
The cost of administering such schemes may leave nothing significant for general development purposes, but would be a means of financing ocean governance. The discipline imposed could lead to economic efficiency and sustainability. Both the designation of specific fishing areas for specific species and the fees for the right to fish in these areas, would lead to a heightened awareness that a hitherto free resource is limited. The fishing nations would be compelled in their own self-interest to conserve their marine fisheries.
Another means of internalizing external costs would be to sell permits to pollute. The cost of the permits would equal the marginal cost (to society and the environment) of the pollution. This method is used in nation-states and smaller political entities such as States and cities of the United States of America. The advantage of permits to pollute is that the polluters would pay according to the amount of damage they inflict on the environment, which would not be true of across-the-board regulation. National experience has shown this an effective way of dealing with pollution, providing financial means for "cleaning up" the environment and an incentive to decrease pollution. A market for trading in such permits exists in the United States. A global market is also a possibility.
Legal and administrative arrangements
Legal and administrative procedures for international taxes, such as those described here, could be put into effect within the existing international political system. Essentially what is required is a convention, or multinational treaty. At a minimum, it should deal with:
a. defining the tax base;
b. setting the tax rate;
c. the method of collecting the tax;
d. the initial disposition of proceeds;
e. conditions for the treaty to enter into force;
f. sanctions against treaty violators; and
g. the procedures for withdrawal.
Provision might also be made for review of the treaty after a specific period, or for its automatic termination at a fixed date, unless the parties reaffirmed their ratification.
The treaty could include a ceiling on tax rates, so that the tax liability on citizens of each country would not be open-ended, and a certain flexibility to vary rates. Differential tax rates could be used for distributing the tax burden more equitably.
The treaty need not deal with all of these subjects in a definitive way. It could sketch the broad outlines of the proposed tax and leave the filling in of details to a standing body representing the parties to the treaty. This body could, for example, be given the authority to handle specified procedural and administrative problems and even adjust tax rates within stated guidelines.
<section>The global commons: disputed and encroached areas</section>
Antarctica and the Southern Ocean
The Southern Ocean may be defined as the body of water lying south of the Antarctic convergence (roughly 55 degrees South and varying with the seasons), where the swirling frigid waters of the southern polar region meet the warmer waters of the southern Atlantic, Indian and Pacific Oceans. Like Antarctica, it contains vast, unexploited resources that could provide an important source of international revenue. The region is also a delicate ecosystem, and its development should be viewed circumspectly. Antarctica's political status hangs in a delicate balance, with seven nations claiming sovereignty over parts of the continent, and various - mainly developed - countries having formed an Antarctic club. How these questions are resolved will be a key to developing, protecting, and managing the unique southern polar region.
With the conclusion of UNCLOS III in 1982, during which an informal moratorium on discussion of the subject had been observed, governments, especially of developing countries, have become more actively interested in the internationalization of Antarctica. In 1983, the Seventh Conference of the Heads of State or Government of the Nonaligned Countries stated that exploration of the area and exploitation of its natural resources should be carried out for the benefit of all mankind, and referred to "widening international cooperation in the area."^9
The question of Antarctica has since been debated annually by the United Nations General Assembly. As expected, the countries with territorial claims on, or interests in, the continent have called for a continuation of the Antarctic Treaty. The developed countries have proposed modalities for the possible development of its mineral resources (e.g., the United States and New Zealand) and environmental protection through the declaration of Antarctica as a "World Park" (e.g., France and Australia). And most less-developed countries have pressed for declaring Antarctica part of the common heritage of mankind. This is the official position, for instance, of the Organisation of African Unity. The Group of 77 is not united on this issue, since several of them have staked claims on the continent or are parties to the Antarctic Treaty. The upshot of these discussions is important, in view of the region's vast resources, including fisheries and offshore oil and minerals.
Fisheries: Krill and whaling
A major resource of the Southern Ocean is krill, a shrimp-like crustacean rich in protein, and suitable for both human consumption and animal feed. About 5 centimetres (2 inches) long when mature, with antennae adding another 2.5 centimetres (1 inch), krill contains about 15 per cent protein by net weight - roughly equivalent to beef, shrimp and lobster. Krill are found in great numbers south of the Antarctic convergence (Map 1) where phytoplankton flourish in the circular flow of ocean currents and the upwelling of nutrients during the Antarctic summer.
Estimates of the annual sustainable yield of krill have ranged as high as 1,000 million tons. More recent estimates are 110 to 150 million tons, which is double the total 1977 fish catch of 70 million tons. Conservative estimates by US scientists are 1 to 2.5 million tons, and by Soviet scientists 15 million tons. These are based on an ecosystems approach, taking into account the possible effects of catch levels at all points in the food chain, krill being a major food source for other fish, whales, birds, and seals.^10 Even these lower estimates portent the Southern Ocean as one of the world's largest fisheries. Partly as a result of the decrease in the whale population, the krill population has grown considerably, and the consensus is that there is no present danger of overexploitation. Much of the whale population feeds in the Southern Ocean, and charging for whaling and krill fishing in this area could serve the purposes of producing substantial revenues and keeping
development at sustainable levels.
With conflicting claims on Antarctica, there are especially strong grounds for declaring the Southern Ocean res communis - part of the common heritage of mankind. It is questionable whether claimants can declare EEZs in the Southern Ocean since some of their territorial claims overlap and the major powers, including the United States and the Russian Federation, do not recognize these claims.^11 Fishing in the Southern Ocean could then be the subject of international taxation, user charges, leases, or the sale of permits to fish.
Offshore oil and others
There is geological evidence of mineral resources, including gas and oil, offshore the coast of Antarctica. The probable locations are the Ross Sea, the Weddell Sea Basin, the Amundsen Sea continental margin, and the Bellinghausen Sea continental margin. (See Map 2) There are environmental considerations to be borne in mind, and formidable physical obstacles, especially the distance and harsh climate of the region. A parallel may be drawn with the northern polar region, where technology has been developed for the North Sea, the Beaufort Sea and coastal Labrador's "Iceberg Alley." If the industrialized countries engage in offshore oil development off the Antarctic coast, a system of taxes, user charges, fines, permits, and leases could be used to help ensure environmentally sound development and a source of revenues for mankind.
Encroachment of the global commons: The EEZs
From Grotius' time until the early twentieth century, virtually the entire ocean area was considered a global common in the sense that the high seas were open to navigation and fishing by citizens of all nations. The use of the oceans for transport threatened no one since, except in rare situations of congestion of a few shipping lanes and fisheries, nothing of value was scarce. Only the territorial seas which were limited to 3 nautical miles from coastal baselines - and internal and archipelagic waters were excluded. With the advance of technology and sophisticated warfare, territorial seas were extended to 12 nautical miles. This was the situation before UNCLOS III.
With the blessings of the Law of the Sea Convention, coastal States have appropriated "exclusive economic zones" (EEZs) extending 200 nautical miles (230 statute miles) from coastal baselines from which the breadth of the territorial sea is measured. In the EEZs, the coastal States have exclusive rights a) for the purpose of exploring and exploiting, conserving, and managing the natural resources, whether living or nonliving, of the waters superadjacent to the seabed and of the seabed and its subsoil; and b) for managing other activities for the economic exploitation and exploration of the zone, such as the production of energy from the water, currents, and winds.^12 This was a reversal of the long-accepted doctrine of Mare Liberum.
Under the principles of equity and traditional pre-UNCLOS III international law, the resources of the oceans, up to and excluding the territorial seas, should be shared by all mankind. The reason is clear: they are part of the res communis or, according to modern concepts of intergenerational equity, part of the common heritage of mankind. The Convention of the Law of the Sea tries to take account of these principles by giving land-locked States certain rights to explore and exploit the resources of the EEZs, after negotiation with the coastal States. In practice, however, this does not seem a promising procedure for the land-locked States. To date, no cases of revenue sharing have been reached. For this reason, the Convention of the Law of the Sea was a step backwards in the development of the principles of international equity.
The EEZs, which contain the shallower waters and the bulk of the continental shelves of coastal States, contain most of the currently valuable natural resources, both living and non-living. The non-living resources, which include hydrocarbons, are extensive because the continental shelves are much older geologically than the deep ocean bed. The EEZs also contain the world's most productive fisheries. This is partly due to the upwelling of deeper waters along continental shelves, bringing nutrients toward the surface waters, and, from the viewpoint of the economics of transport, to their proximity to the coast.
The appropriation by coastal States of the EEZs has substantially reduced the available global commons, in a manner similar to the reduction of the commons by the enclosure movement in Europe. About one-third of the world's oceans are now encompassed by these zones. These, as well as the continental shelves, are shown in Map 3. The declaration of EEZs is in contravention of the principle of res communis, which forbids nation-states as well as individuals from appropriating any part of common property as private property.
Although the Convention on the Law of the Sea has given its blessings to EEZs,^13 present and future jurists will perhaps still recall the words of Vásaquez: "Things which are imprescriptible by the disposition of the law, may not become objects of prescription even after the lapse of a thousand years . .." and Grotius: "Every one perceives that no usurpation no matter how long continued is competent to intercept the use of a res communis."^14
<section>p326.jpg Map 3 Exclusive economic zones (EEZs) and continental "rains in the oceans</section>
There is a distinction, furthermore, between the EEZs and the territorial waters. The coastal States exercise sovereignty over the latter but not over the EEZs, which Cooper and UNEP, among others, have called a "privilege conferred by the international community."^15 It is reasonable, therefore, for the world community to ask the coastal States to provide a portion of the income they derive from the EEZs to a global authority for international uses, including assistance to land-locked developing countries. Such an arrangement, it may be recalled, was proposed by Nepal in the form of the creation of a "Common Heritage" Fund. A "gentleman's agreement" for the sharing of revenues from the EEZs could still be forged and would not contravene any of the sovereign rights of the coastal States.
<section>Institutional arrangements for financing</section>
The Law of the Sea Convention has established an institutional framework for the mobilization of resources from the exploitation of the deep ocean bed in the form of the International Seabed Authority, which will be responsible for licensing and collecting fees for the mining of the deep ocean bed by private firms, and the Enterprise, which may itself mine it under a parallel system of seabed mining. It is evident from this discussion, however, that the sources of revenues that can be derived from the oceans are much more varied and extensive: they can be from the deep ocean bed, from fishing on the high seas, from taxes on trade through freight and over-flight and on passenger traffic, from a system of taxes, user charges, fines and permits for commercial activities in the Southern Ocean and others. These resources can be placed in a general fund for general international use. A significant part, however, should be allocated specifically for ocean governance and
development. Activities for these purposes are also myriad: there is a need for regulation, enforcement of the provisions of the Law of the Sea when it enters into force, for research on ocean resources and the way it influences climate and might in the twenty-first century even be used to forecast or modify climate and regional weather patterns.
The establishment of an Oceans Assembly is described in chapter 19. It could be a forum for policy making and the initiation of new activities. To be effective, it should be tied to a new specialized agency or institutional mechanism linking the existing bodies concerned of the United Nations system (also proposed elsewhere in this book), which would deal with policy implementation and the conduct of day-to-day operations on ocean affairs.
Such an agency or coordinating mechanism could be made responsible for the operations necessary for the mobilization of the ocean resources noted previously, with the exception of those general resources derived from trade taxes, which in view of their general nature would require a special body within the United Nations itself. The Oceans Assembly could provide general guidance to the oceans' organization and also be responsible for the allocation of those ocean revenues specifically earmarked for ocean governance and development. It could also make recommendations to the United Nations on the use of any surplus ocean revenues that can be allocated for general purposes.
<section>Notes</section>
1. Mendez, P. International Public Finance: A New Perspective on Global Relations. New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press, 1992.
2. OECD. Development Cooperation 1992 Report, Table 3.1.
3. Sivard, R.L. World Military and Social Expenditures, Table I. Leesburg, Va.: World Priorities, 1989.
4. Hardin, Garret. "The Tragedy of the Commons." Science, vol. 162, December, 1968, p. 1243.
5. Dolan, E.G. TANSTAAFL (There ain't no such thing as a free lunch): The Economic Strategy for Environmental Crisis. New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1971.
6. For instance, see Overall Socio-economic Perspective of the World Economy to the Year 2000. United Nations, New York, 1990, pp. 50-51.
7. This is an estimate by the United States Academy of Sciences, cited in Steinberg, E., and A. Yager, New Means of Financing International Needs. Washington, D.C.: Brookings Institution. 1978, pp. 106-107. The Academy's estimates were made before such recent oil spills as the Exxon Valdez and those in the Arthur Kill of the New York-New Jersey harbour, in Europe, in the Gulf and in other places.
8. UNEP. Additional Measures and Means of Financing for the Implementation of the Plan of Action to Combat Desertification: Study prepared by a group of experts in international financing in accordance with General Assembly Resolution 32/172. (Issued initially as UNEP document UNEP/GC.6/9/Add.1, 4 April 1978.) Submitted to the General Assembly at its thirty-third session with a Note of the Secretary-General (A/33/260 of 6 October 1978).
9. Segarra, Amada. "The Question of Antarctica." Disarmament, vol. VI, No. 2, Autumn/ Winter 1983, pp. 49-53.
10. Nicol, Stephen, "Who's counting on drill?," in Bioscience, December 1990; and Shapley, Deborah, The Seventh Continent: Antarctica in a Resource Age. Washington, D.C.: Resources for the Future, 1986.
11. As a result of a sharp reduction of finfish stocks in the early 1970s, the French authorities, who exercise sovereignty over Kerguelen Island, declared an EEZ and banned fishing for two seasons. This is the only EEZ that has been declared, and it is doubtful whether the claimants to the Antarctic territory can declare EEZs under the present international law.
12. United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, art. 56.
13. As a concession to considerations of equity, the Convention gives land-locked countries equal access to the EEZs of adjacent coastal states (articles 69 and 79). In that part of the continental shelf beyond the 200-mile limit, "the outer continental shelf," the coastal state must contribute to a system of revenue sharing -1 per cent of the value or volume of production starting with the sixth year following commencement of commercial operation, then increasing by 1 per cent annually up to a maximum of 7 per cent (article 82). Less developed countries can also lease rights to the exploitation of the EEZs, although this right does not extend to land-locked countries. See United Nations Office for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea, Introduction to National Legislation on the Continental Shelf (UN sales No. E-89.V.5), pp. 5-6. Many do not consider these concessions sufficient to the gains from the establishment of the EEZs.
14. Both quotations are from Grotius' Mare Liberum.
15. UNEP, Additional Measures and Means of Financing for the Implementation of the Plan of Action to Combat Desertification. op. cit. and Cooper, Richard, "The Oceans as a Source of Revenue." In Bhagwati, J.N., ed. The New International Economic Order: The North-South Debate. Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 1977, pp. 108 and 111.
<section>An ocean assembly</section>
Alexander Yankov and Mário Ruivo
<section>Introduction</section>
During the last two decades the expansion of the multiple uses of the oceans and the degradation of the marine environment have accentuated the need of enhancing international cooperation and coordination in the field of management, and protection of marine resources. A significant number of international legal instruments have been adopted to that effect, and existing intergovernmental organizations have been assigned with specific responsibilities in ocean affairs. New predominantly regional institutions, have been established, and at the same time institutional adjustments made at national level. Thus, an impressive legal and institutional network has been set into operation in the management and protection of the marine environment; this wide network could provide a viable basis for the global governance of the oceans. Efforts have been made to achieve better coordination between ongoing programmes, projects, and activities on ocean affairs undertaken by competent
international organizations. In this context, it should be noted that an effective global management regime of the oceans would require a two-dimensional integration: horizontal and vertical.
The horizontal integration would reflect the interdisciplinary and interdependent nature of ocean affairs. It requires a coordinated intersectoral approach in dealing with a wide range of issues relating to the management of the oceans and their resources. We can identify four main problem areas which by their nature imply global cooperation and coordination:
1. Developmental and related issues, including the functioning of the worldwide system of navigation, management and conservation of highly migratory species, sustainable technology development, marine scientific research, and other economic issues of global significance.
2. Environmental problems of global dimensions, such as climate change, reduction of the ozone layer, sealevel rise, decreasing biological diversity, disposal of hazardous wastes, and other problems requiring global action.
3. Peaceful uses of the oceans and enhancing international security through special agreements on naval arms control and disarmament, confidence-building measures and reduction of naval operations.
4. Legal problems with special emphasis on universal adherence to the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea of 1982 (the 1982 Convention), further codification and progressive development of the Law of the Sea, elaboration of guidelines on integrated global ocean management, harmonization and unification of the rules of maritime law, and promotion of international environmental law, particularly in the field of the protection of the marine environment.
The vertical integration of ocean management comprises an interface of national actions, regional and global cooperation. International organizations and inter-agency bodies provide multilateral institutional mechanisms for coordination, supervision, decision-making and implementation of policies, and generally agreed rules relating to ocean affairs.
The Report of the World Commission on Environment and Development in assessing the requirements for ocean management in the next century states that:
Three imperatives lie at the heart of the oceans management question:
- The underlying unity of the oceans requires effective global management regimes.
- The shared resources characteristic of many regional seas make forms of regional management mandatory.
- The major land-based threats to the oceans require effective national actions based on international co-operation. (WCED. Our Common Future, p. 264)
Therefore the effective governance of the oceans requires both horizontal and vertical integration with the relevant institutional implications deriving from the nature of the marine ecosystems and the sustainable development of their resources. This is the leading principle determining the concept of an "Ocean Assembly" as a world forum for the consideration of issues of common interest and coordination of national, regional, and global efforts on ocean affairs.
<section>Characteristics of the present state of ocean governance</section>
The existing situation has been characterized in most instances with sectoral approach; fragmented national, regional, and international institutions, often guarding their special domain of responsibilities; prevailing zonal approach in dealing with sea management and protection of the marine environment; "effects oriented" and "clean-up pollution" control measures; and discrepancy between the environment and development components of ocean policy and planning.
As the World Commission on Environment and Development pointed out:
The integrated and interdependent nature of the new challenges and issues contrasts sharply with the nature of the institutions that exist today. These institutions tend to be independent, fragmented, and working to relatively narrow mandates with closed decision processes. Those responsible for managing natural resources and protecting the environment are institutionally separated from those responsible for managing the economy. The real world of interlocked economic and ecological systems will not change; the policies and institutions must. (Our Common Future, p. 310)
This assessment is even more valid to ocean governance, for in the field of ocean affairs the interaction between environment and development is much more evident.
A similar conclusion is contained in the Report of the Secretary-General of the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development which states that:
Management units for ocean and coastal affairs are generally weak and disperse. They currently reflect agencies' sectoral responsibilities rather than boundaries of coastal systems. There is now a widespread recognition that sectoral approaches to managing coastal zones fail to resolve conflict. The responsibilities of national agencies must integrate the environmental limits of the ecosystems under management with the sectoral economic instruments." (Doe. A/CONF. 151/PC/69 of 4 July 1991, para. 11, p. 4. See Chapter 17, Agenda 21.)
<section>The evolving idea of a global ocean forum</section>
Proposals at UNCLOS
The perception that problems of ocean space are closely interrelated and need to be considered as a whole led, at an advanced stage of the negotiations in UNCLOS, to the recognition that institutional adjustments were required to meet the new challenges of ocean governance. The traditional sectoral structures of public administration could not adequately meet the new requirements of the expanding use of oceans and their resources. The same deficiency was noticeable, in most instances, in the activities of international organizations when dealing with ocean affairs.
During the Seventh session of UNCLOS in 1978 three formal proposals referred to various institutional implications as a follow-up of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea. The delegation of Peru proposed the establishment of an International Commission on the Law of the Sea (Doe. A/CONF.62/L. 22 of 10 April 1978). This Commission was contemplated "as an intergovernmental body responsible for the examination of problems which arise in connection with the application of the provisions of the present convention, as well as from situations not covered by it." Members of the Commission had to be ipso facto all States Parties to the convention. The functions and powers of the Commission were confined to the legal field which is evident by the name of the Commission. The Commission was envisaged "as a forum for the examination of proposals aimed at improving or supplementing the provisions of the present Convention and for the preparatory work of conferences convened
with the view to amending or revising the Convention." It is obvious that the proposal of Peru preceded the adoption of the provisions on the amendment of the Convention, the present articles 312, 313 and 314 of the 1982 Convention which provide for a different procedure for amending the Convention.
Nevertheless, leaving aside the outdated suggestions of a procedural nature, the ideas reflected in the proposal of Peru were an indication of the keen interest given to some legal and institutional problems relating to the implementation of the Law of the Sea Convention. When listing the powers and functions of the proposed International Commission on the Law of the Sea special reference was made to the "development, consolidation and coordination of the activities of international organizations related to marine affairs through recommendations of a legal nature on conceptual, technical or operational questions, including the preparation of standards, general guidelines and uniform methods of interpretation or application." It was also contemplated that the commission may "serve as a forum for the examination of proposals aimed at improving or supplementing the provisions of the present Convention."
The most closely connected with the idea of a "World Ocean Forum" or an "Ocean Assembly" was the proposal of Portugal regarding periodic conferences on international ocean affairs (Doe. A/ CONF, 62/L.23 of 4 May 1978). In fact it was a most cogent initiative responding to the new requirements for better cooperation and coordination in order to overcome the sectoral approach in ocean management. The core of the Portuguese proposal was the provision authorizing the Secretary-General of the United Nations to convene a periodic conference open to all States Parties to the Convention and entailed undertaking "a comprehensive review of the manner in which the regime established by the convention is being applied, with the exception of part XI and its annexes;" (this exception follows from articles 154 and 155 of the 1982 Convention containing special rules for undertaking the review of the system of exploration and exploitation of the resources of the Area). It further provided
that in the exercise of its powers the review conference "shall take into account major trends in ocean uses, new technologies, progress in scientific knowledge, management and protection issues of international significance, institutional and legal developments and other relevant aspects of international ocean affairs." Another important function of the proposed conference was, in a special session "to review the state of ratification of the Convention and, if necessary, to propose measures to encourage further participation."
In contrast to the above-mentioned Peruvian proposal, the periodic conference under the Portuguese proposal was not empowered to amend the Convention. This provision is in accordance with the procedural rules on the amendment of the Convention, embodied in its final clauses.
The Portuguese proposal was followed by another proposal (Doe, A/CONF. 62/30 of 18 May 1978) also submitted by Portugal, cosponsored by seventeen other delegations from all geographical regions (from Western Europe - France, the Netherlands and Spain; Eastern Europe - Bulgaria and Poland; Africa - Cape Verde, Egypt, Kenya, Liberia, Morocco and Senegal; Asia - Indonesia, Iran and Nepal; and Latin America Chile, Mexico and Uruguay). The main purpose of this document was to draw to the attention of UNCLOS that "the implementation of the Convention of the Law of the Sea calls for an active and increased role of the appropriate international organizations with competence in ocean affairs, especially those which are part of the United Nations system." The proposal also noted that:
Further strengthening of these organizations and increased cooperation among them are required, so as to allow Member States to benefit fully from the expanded opportunities for economic and social progress offered by the new ocean regime and to meet their responsibilities in scientific research, protection of the marine environment, transfer of technology, conservation and management of resources, and other relevant activities.
This comprehensive approach to ocean affairs was supported by two important suggestions of institutional character. First, "to consider ways and means of rationalizing further the work of the international organizations through the improvement and strengthening of coordinating mechanism," and "improve inter-agency coordinating mechanisms with particular regard to the need for harmonizing the discharge of the functions of the international organization." Secondly, to establish "on broad geographical basis, an ad hoc study group of not less than 14 or not more than 20 eminent persons intimately acquainted with international ocean affairs to review and identify gaps in the present institutional arrangements in the field of international ocean affairs, evaluate the institutional implications resulting from the implementation of the Convention, and formulate alternative proposals aimed at improving where appropriate, the effectiveness of the United Nations system in the sector of
ocean affairs, and on its gradual adjustment to the functions referred to in the Convention."
The above-mentioned three proposals on the institutional implications of the new ocean regime, taken together could have provided a sound basis for effective cooperation and coordination in the management of the oceans on global level. They would have contributed to using the 1982 Convention as an appropriate legal and institutional framework for global ocean governance. While receiving encouraging support from many delegations in UNCLOS these proposals were overshadowed by the negotiations on some critical issues relating to the deep seabed mining regime and other controversial issues. Thus, institutional arrangements in ocean management lost momentum and became a matter of research and academic debate. Several studies on the subject were undertaken, including some within the framework of the International Ocean Institute (IOI) and the Pacem In Maribus (PIM) conferences.
Present developments on national, regional, and global levels
Confronted with practical problems of discharging their respective responsibilities, in the context of a new ocean regime under the 1982 Convention, various UN agencies undertook moderate institutional adaptations. Cases in point are, for instance, IOC - in relation to marine scientific research, ocean services, regional cooperation, training, education, and mutual assistance; IMO - in respect of international shipping, safety of navigation, and pollution from vessels; UNEP - on regional seas management and protection of the marine environment through its Ocean and Coastal Areas/Programme Activity Centre (OCA/PAC) coordinating an extensive global network of regional seas-related programmes. In the United Nations the Office for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea (UN/OALOS) was established with a wide range of responsibilities, incorporating functions previously assigned to other organs. Other international organizations such as FAO, maintained their traditional structure at
global level but introduced adjustments in their regional subsidiary fishery bodies.
These developments have proved that the magnitude, complexity, and urgency of environmental problems, and the long-term solutions to the critical issues of ocean management, require a comprehensive integrated approach and coordinated efforts of governmental agencies, intergovernmental institutions with the increasing involvement and participation of the non-governmental sector on the national, regional, and global levels.
Institutional adjustments to deal with ocean affairs at the national level have made surprisingly limited progress during the last two decades, with a few exceptions. In fact, even in those countries which are signatories or have ratified the 1982 Convention, the traditional sectoral approach continues to dominate national administration. This is so despite increasing and intensive multiple use of the oceans and the growing difficulties faced in ocean management and environmental protection.
Rather than attacking the problem at its roots, and undertaking an in-depth restructuring of their marine affairs institutions, governments have tried, on the one hand, to improve the efficiency of existing institutions and, on the other hand, to develop cooperation among them with a view to responding in a more efficient way to specific issues. Under crisis, ad hoc arrangements have been established, involving the various departments concerned. This was done in connection with large-scale marine pollution accidents having detrimental ecological and socio-economic impacts.
Nevertheless, some governments, considering the advantages of more stable and efficient mechanisms to deal with national ocean affairs on an intersectoral basis, moved a step forward. One should refer to the creation of Ministeries of the Sea, some of them with short duration, as was the case of France, Norway, Chile, Peru, and Portugal. In the last case, a Ministry of the Sea has recently been reestablished. Other countries, like India, followed a more decentralized approach based on the principle of a central formulation of policies and priorities in ocean affairs. This was supported by funding and coordinating procedures, aimed at the mobilization of national capabilities in the relevant fields, through involvement in the process of decision and implementation of public administrations and institutions concerned. The Department on Ocean Development of India proved to be an effective mechanism with some striking successes, namely regarding India's role in deep sea research
and exploitation, and research in Antarctica.
In spite of the need for vertical interface at national, global, and regional levels, and their mutual impact and feedback, effective and stable progress in international ocean affairs has been hampered up to now by the institutional inertia at national level, as well as by the vested interests of existing organizations and agencies. Therefore the concept of an "Ocean Assembly" at national level involving all the parties concerned, is of particular practical significance.
The UNCED, inspired by the principle of sustainable development, has imposed a critical review and evaluation of the state of ocean resources and the marine environment, as well as the need to urgently respond to some new forms of degradation and to consequences of human activity, such as that resulting from the greenhouse effect and related sealevel rise. UNCLOS and UNCED are, thus, closely interlinked components, and part of a process of new governance of international commons, including ocean governance.
Institutional arrangements at regional level have been aimed mainly at responding to immediate needs for improved management and cooperation in selected areas, for example, fisheries, research, and monitoring. In a few cases, joint efforts between organizations having complementary responsibilities were undertaken, namely in connection with marine environment protection and related monitoring, and scientific advice (e.g. between IOC and UNEP regional subsidiary bodies). In this context special reference should be made to the pioneer approach, inspired by the 1982 Convention, under the Indian Ocean Marine Affairs Cooperation (IOMAC), involving Member States of the region, including land-locked ones, as well as major user States. Initiated at a conference convened in Colombo in 1985 by the Government of Sri Lanka and further developed at IOMAC-II (Arusha, Tanzania, 1990), IOMAC led a formal agreement signed by nine countries and ratified so far by five. The new institution
intends, inter alia, to promote the integration of the marine sector into national development strategies, the harmonization and strengthening of management arrangements, and cooperation amongst marine affairs institutions of Member States within the concept of an integrated ocean management. (See Hiran Jayewardene chapter 13)
In our view, IOMAC reflects adequately the new philosophy and the need for an enhanced ocean governance based on international cooperation provided under the 1982 Convention. The establishment, for these purposes, of "national focal points" also reflects the need for simultaneous and parallel action at national level. It would be advisable for similar arrangements to be undertaken by the organizations of the United Nations system involved in ocean affairs and carrying out substantive activities in the respective region. Thus, IOMAC offers a possible institutional model for dealing with international ocean affairs at regional level. In fact, it performs similar functions to those of a regional Ocean Assembly.
Notwithstanding the outcome of the conference, the preparatory work for the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) brought attention to the fact that:
There are numerous global and regional institutions with competence in marine issues. A comprehensive convention and a number of other legal instruments deal with the various aspects of ocean affairs. However there is no appropriate global forum where the international community can consider interrelated problems as a whole, and thus identify important issues, priorities and strategic planning needs, promote intra- and interregional cooperation, and mobilize funding. There are also several mechanisms for United Nations system cooperation and coordination, but none at present has the necessary comprehensive responsibilities. A global forum for intergovernmental discussion and mechanisms for coordination among the relevant agencies and bodies concerned with ocean-related activites could provide an integrated process. (Doc.A/CONF.151/PC/42/Add.6 of 3 July 1991, para. 54, pp. 15-16)
This brief overview of the evolving idea of global institutional arrangements on ocean issues may provide the background for determining the concept and institutional features of an "Ocean Assembly."
<section>The concept of an ocean assembly</section>
The idea of an Ocean Assembly should be considered in the context of the need to establish new integrated global arrangements, or adjusting and strengthening existing institutions which at present perform primarily coordinating functions. The underlying perception apparently is the fact that the existing network of coordinating structures should be adapted to the new requirements for an integrated ocean management. The main objective of such a reform should be the advancement of more operational-oriented arrangements responsive to a comprehensive and intersectoral approach to ocean affairs. The solution to this problem should be sought not in the establishment of a single structure, but in the compatibility of several options which may be provided both by newly established and existing arrangements.
There are some other general requirements for a coherent institutional framework in the field of ocean management at global level, such as:
- flexibility in adopting the appropriate institutional arrangements and related mechanisms depending upon the relevant priorities in carrying out an integrated ocean policy;
- refraining from proliferation of new institutions making full use of the existing institutions and their adjustment in conformity with intersectoral approach and horizontal and vertical integration of environment and development; and
- attributing special attention to cost-effective considerations and adequate use of funds for operational activities.
The report of the Secretary-General of the conference to the Third Session of the Preparatory Committee of UNCED, while indicating that "(the) United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea contains a comprehensive global framework and lays down fundamental rules for all significant ocean-related activities and environmental protection," suggested that the General Assembly of the United Nations "could decide on establishing a global forum on ocean issues and introduce coordinating mechanisms." (Doc.A/CONF.151/PC/42/ Add.6 of 3 July 1991)
The same report further elaborated on new integrated global arrangements by the suggestion of setting up one or more of the following:
(a) A high-level intergovernmental forum through the General Assembly, which will meet periodically and include all relevant agencies and bodies of the United Nations and development and donor institutions.
(b) Expanded General Assembly plenary annual consideration on ocean affairs with appropriate reporting arrangements between the GA and the governing bodies of the relevant agencies and bodies.
(c) Related intersecretariat coordinating mechanisms, including the formalization of the existing ad hoc UN/OALOS and UNEP consultations as well as the specialized processes of ICSPRO and GESAMP; and as required, ad hoc joint advisory expert groups.
(d) A Conference on Ocean Affairs to be convened every 5 years;
(e) ...;
(f) ...;
(g) The establishment by the United Nations Secretary-General of a Standing Commission on Ocean Affairs (constituted of distinguished independent members) which would report periodically to the General Assembly on major issues affecting the oceans and possible means of solution. " (Doe. A/CONF.151 IPC.42/Add.6)
The International Ocean Institute added to this list of possible arrangements with suggestions for a biannual Special Session of the United Nations General Assembly and periodic meetings of States Parties to the 1982 Convention, as provided for in articles 154 and 155, to review the operation of the international regime of the Area or the review of the provisions of part XI and the relevant annexes of the Convention.
All these and other possible arrangements which may form a comprehensive global institutional framework for international cooperation in ocean affairs should be set up or used severally, as distinct arrangements, or jointly, as appropriate. Thus, for instance, the intersecretariat coordinating mechanisms on one hand, and the Standing Commission on Ocean Affairs on the other, should be considered as distinct bodies, since they have specific missions. While the first has coordinating and possibly operational functions, the latter as a commission of distinguished independent personalities would perform advisory functions on major ocean issues. In the case of a regular General Assembly session with expanded agenda on ocean affairs and a special session of the General Assembly on such issues, the difference is more of a procedural nature. The convening of a biannual special sessions appears quite cumbersome with serious financial implications. This does not mean that the
convening of a special session should be excluded altogether even when warranted by important circumstances.
The above-mentioned suggestions for global institutional arrangements, therefore, should be considered as possible options. In this case the requirements for flexibility, rational employment of the most pertinent structure and cost-effective considerations should prevail when choosing the appropriate option.
Taking into account various proposals which have been advanced with regard to a global institutional framework, it may be inferred from the preliminary discussion on this matter, that "an Ocean Assembly" is an absolutely essential part of the institutional framework for an ocean governance in the twenty-first century. The emerging concept of an Ocean Assembly should comprise two intrinsic components, namely, the deliberative functions of a world forum and the decision-making powers of a high-level intergovernmental conference. A global institution of such character has to be supported by appropriate mechanisms, which would ensure the operational effect of its proceedings. The Ocean Assembly may be established by the General Assembly of the United Nations, and in this way will be integrated into the United Nations system. The establishment of UNCTAD by resolution of the General Assembly (Res.1995 (XIX) of 30 December 1964) and its functioning could serve as a model for the
Ocean Assembly.
<section>Powers and functions</section>
The purposes of the Ocean Assembly may include the following:
1. to promote integrated policies in ocean affairs and the peaceful uses of the oceans;
2. to be a world forum of discussions, exchange of information and experience of global character;
3. to serve as catalyst of coordination and cooperation between states in the implementation of international rules, standards, and programmes for the protection of the marine environment and sustainable development of its resources;
4. to act as a centre for harmonizing the activities of States, intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations on ocean environment and development issues; and
5. to strengthen the legal and institutional framework for cooperation and coordination on ocean-related matters.
In the pursuit of these purposes the Ocean Assembly should be entitled to the following powers and functions:
a. to set out guidelines, general standards, and economic instruments on integrated ocean management and protection of ocean resources by the promotion of new concepts of liability for environmental harm and "precautionary approach;"
b. to advance new strategic planning for integrated ocean management;
c. to facilitate the elaboration of general principles and guidelines for the progressive development of the international law of the sea and encourage the universal adherence to the 1982 Convention, and wider recourse to dispute settlement procedures;
d. the elaboration of model rules and establishment of funding and coordinating mechanisms with the participation of competent agencies from the donor community;
e. to review the implementation of generally agreed principles, standards, and the accomplishment of multilateral programmes in the field of the uses of the oceans and their resources;
f. to supervise the functioning of existing institutional arrangements and mechanisms with the view to suggesting adjustment or improving their structure and functioning.
<section>Membership, structure, and procedure</section>
The Ocean Assembly should be a world forum of a highly representative character. Participants in the Assembly should be States, United Nations bodies involved in ocean affairs such as UN/OALOS, organizations and institutions from the UN system, donor agencies, international non-governmental organizations involved in ocean affairs, international organizations interested in marine scientific re search, ocean services, and training on ocean-related matters. The national delegations should have multiple, functional representation of public and private sectors, local authorities, representatives of ship ping, fisheries, tourism, environmental sector, and other major interests relating to management and protection of coastal and marine areas.
The structure of the Assembly should consist of plenary session and meetings of subsidiary bodies depending upon the agenda of the Assembly. The preparatory work may be assigned to UN/OALOS and a small secretariat unit. The sessions of the Ocean Assembly should be called by the General Assembly every 4 or 5 years, and the Assembly may be empowered to adopt recommendations, guidelines, model rules, long-term programmes or other instruments. The decisions of the Assembly and its subsidiary bodies should be adopted by consensus of the participating States. The representatives of intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations should have the right to take part in the discussions of any matter within their competence.
The functioning of the Ocean Assembly and its intercessional work should be assisted by a permanent secretariat. There are several options regarding the status and terms of office of such a secretariat. One solution would be the establishment of an independent subsidiary organ of the Ocean Assembly with secretarial duties within the United Nations system which would be entitled to maintain working relations not only with governmental institutions but also with non-governmental organizations and the private sector. Another possibility would be to set up an autonomous secretariat unit of UN/OALOS which would be assigned to the Ocean Assembly. There might also be other forms of secretariat depending upon its composition, functions and powers. It would be advisible, however, that in all instances this subsidiary body of the Ocean Assembly should be a cost-effective organ with a reasonable number of staff and should constitute a part of the United Nations. Consequently, the
relevant administrative and financial regulations of the UN should apply.
An Ocean Assembly should maintain relations with the institutions of the United Nations system, and other intergovernmental as well as non-governmental organizations with special interests in ocean affairs. Their cooperation and collaboration should be considered of the utmost importance for the activities of the Ocean Assembly. Particular attention should be accorded to closer cooperation with international organizations involved in the implementation of global and regional programmes, including interagency cooperation in ocean affairs, such as management of living resources, marine scientific research and ocean services, monitoring, education, and training.
<section>Conclusion</section>
The wide range of institutional issues needs thorough consideration in the context of the problem of ocean governance. The suggested arrangements for an Ocean Assembly are subordinated to the idea of integration between environment and sustainable development and their effective horizontal and vertical integration on national, regional, and global levels.
<section>Annexes</section>
<section>Highlights of reports from united nations organizations: ocean governance -institutional mechanisms for sustainable development in the oceans</section>
United Nations organizations with reports on ocean governance
Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO)
International Maritime Organization (IMO)
International Oceanographic Commission (IOC)
United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD)
United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO)
World Meteorological Organization (WMO)
Economic Commission for Africa (ECA)
Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean (ECLAC)
Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific (ESCAP)
Food and Agriculture Organization
The FAO report consisted of a paper entitled Environment and Sustainability in Fisheries (Doe. COFI/91/3, February 1991) and a portion of the Report of the Nineteenth Session of the Committee on Fisheries (April 1991) discussing this paper. Among the conclusions reached in the paper, which was endorsed by the Committee in the Report, are the following items on "integration and coordination" and "legal frameworks:"
At national level, inter-ministerial coordination should be established to deal with conflicts for the uses of the aquatic resources, taking due account of the need to ensure global sustainability and alleviate environmental constraints. Policies and mechanisms are needed to integrate fisheries protection into the pattern of resource use at the river basin and coastal areas level, encouraging an integrated management and development approach. Field activities should be developed as far as possible in support of national efforts toward integrated coastal areas management. Aquaculture should be included in rural planning.
At regional level, the work of regional fishery bodies in handling environmental matters of importance to fisheries should be reinforced. In particular, issues related to selective fishing, appropriate technology and critical habitat conservation from land-based sources of pollution should receive more attention.
At international level, collaboration between international specialized organizations is needed to develop a holistic understanding of the oceans and their resources. Experience has shown however, that a regional approach and sectoral specialization is [sic] required in order to be able to act efficiently. Collaboration on matters relating to data collection, research and training programmes for integrated development and management should be sought with other organizations working in these fields.
The United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (UNCLOS) provides a framework for the conservation and management of living resources and for the protection and preservation of the marine environment. It is dear that further progress could still be made for the full implementation of the relevant provisions of the Convention, especially with regard to high seas fisheries. Further work is needed in order to maintain or restore populations of harvested species at levels which can produce a sustainable yield as qualified by relevant environmental and economic factors, and taking into account international standards. FAO has an important role to play in assisting member countries and international organizations in such a process.
International Maritime Organization
The IMO report begins with a description of the global and comprehensive strategy developed by the IMO for the protection and preservation of the marine environment. Implementation of this strategy, which takes into account the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea and the concept of sustainable development, relies not only on the support of Member States but also on cooperation and coordination with international organizations - within and without the United Nations.
The response of the IMO to the concept of "sustainable development" is outlined next. "All of IMO's work," according to the report, "implicitly contributes to the objectives of sustainable and environmentally sound development." A recent initiative in this direction is the Global Programme for the Protection of the Marine Environment, which is part of the strategy and which commenced operations in 1990. Also, the report notes some current changes in the IMO's operational structure "in the framework of an evaluation of the problems faced by developing countries in the prevention, control and combating of marine pollution from ships and related matters."
On the question of the IMO's relationship with the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea, the matter has been clarified in a study undertaken by the IMO Secretariat completed in 1987. Accordingly, and similar to its attitude on sustainable development, "IMO has experienced no need to modify its internal structure in order to cooperate with the United Nations in respect of, or respond directly to, the provisions of the [Convention.]"
Thus, the IMO "has adhered strictly and without reservations to the coordination requirements envisaged in the United Nations Charter." However, it believes that:
concrete suggestions for adjustments or improvement in the coordination mechanism of the United Nations system can only be discussed in the light of the conclusions and recommendation of the [UNCED] ....
International Oceanographic Commission
The report of the IOC/UNESCO was prepared by its Secretary, Gunnar Kullenberg. The profound challenges of sustainable development in the field of ocean science, the report states, takes place in the current context where:
[t]he majority of intergovernmental programmes related to the development and coordination of marine science generally fall within the activities of the UN Agencies which have agreed to coordinate their work through the Inter-Secretariat Committee on Scientific Programmes Relating to Oceanography, the ICSPRO Agreement. There are other important programmes, both within the UN system (e.g., UNEP, IAEA) and outside (e.g., ICES and IHO) but the main thrust of the intergovernmental research activities will continue to be discharged by the ICSPRO Agencies, using, as appropriate, the IOC as the joint specialized mechanism for promotion, coordination and implementation of the relevant activities in marine science, ocean services related training, education and partnership development.
Given the principal goals and themes of the IOC, it has therefore articulated a "strategy for the future," with a special emphasis on the development of national capabilities for marine sciences and services. But constraints on resources demand the setting of priorities and finding new ways to fund research, concerning which a taxation system would not seem to be an appropriate solution. The report concludes:
The number of national and international agencies involved in marine research and provision for services, either directly or indirectly is constantly growing. While such growth is to be encouraged it has already outstripped the capability of existing coordinating mechanisms to provide adequate support both technical and financial. Effective regional cooperation is a vital prerequisite to identifying needs in different countries and to ensuring a coordinated approach to potential donor agencies. It is important that agencies such as IOC and UNESCO, through their regional networks and bodies, continue and strengthen their role in coordinating and facilitating the transfer of resources from donor agencies and countries to recipients.
This does not imply that donor countries or agencies should be limited in their support to working solely via the regional networks of international agencies but rather that international agencies should take into consideration existing bilateral and multilateral relationships in the design and execution of regional programmes of support to marine science and services and where possible integrate such relationships into wider regional programmes and activities.
United Nations Environment Programme
UNEP's contribution is entitled "Towards Sustainable Governance of the Oceans." It poses two questions for consideration by PIM XIX: (1) Is UNEP effective? and (2) is the Regional Seas Programme effective?
The catalytic and coordinating role of UNEP in sustainable development has been realized in indirect and subtle ways. This is seen in the manner by which UNEP has drawn the attention of the world community to environmental conditions, impacts, and norms. As for the Regional Seas Programme, which is UNEP's most effective and advanced tool for carrying out its mandate, there is a continuing necessity for political will among governments for the success of regional seas action plans.
The report, finally, offers advice on inter-agency coordination in the United Nations:
There are various mechanisms to achieve inter-agency coordination ranging from the Advisory Committee on Coordination (ACC) at the level of heads of agencies to the Interagency Consultations on Oceans and Coastal Areas Programmes organized each year by UNEP, and other more specialized or ad hoc bodies. It would clearly be beneficial to rationalize in some way the United Nations approach to ocean governance.
United Nations Conference on Trade and Development
The report of the UNCTAD Secretariat focuses on "inter-agency coordination for the formulation of an integrated ocean policy and a strategy for sustainable development." It decries the lack of improved coordination and harmonization of activities among UN institutions, intergovernmental organizations, and non-governmental organizations involved in ocean affairs. A way out of this predicament, UNCTAD suggests, is not to create a new super or central authority in or outside of the UN but to improve existing mechanisms.
A pragmatic, less costly and less bureaucratic solution, is to strengthen the existing mechanisms by ensuring the availability of complete information in all the agencies concerned through full exploitation of modern communication technology. One such method is to create a central computerized database with a data transfer facility accessible to all agencies. It may, however, prove necessary for one of the agencies to supervise the system or to play a focal role.
United Nations Industrial Development Organization
UNIDO submitted a report on its programme in a relatively new field called "marine industrial technology." The components of marine industrial technology, duly addressed by this programme, are (1) marine systems design, (2) marine transportation and communication, (3) exploitation of living resources, (4) exploitation of nonliving resources, (5) land expansion, (6) environmental protection, and (7) scientific research. The 1982 Law of the Sea Convention, according to the report, provides a vast challenge for marine industrial technology, and to which UNIDO is now responding.
The mechanisms by which UNIDO implements its programme are varied. For instance, through centres of excellence which UNIDO helps in promoting, technology transfer and co-development will be facilitated. Centres of excellence in the Mediterranean and the Caribbean have been studied for this purpose. Other vehicles to realize the aims of the programme include information dissemination, technical assistance for, and training of personnel from developing countries, expert group meetings, and establishing industrial and academic contacts.
World Meteorological Organization
The report from the WMO initially describes the tasks of the WMO and the large number of projects it carries out in cooperation with other UN agencies or international organizations. The various, seemingly complicated, coordinating mechanisms in operation to support WMO's undertakings, the report observes, have proven effective in facilitating an efficient approach to marine data collection and the provision for marine services.
The WMO welcomes its enlarged role in sustainable development strategy. However, the report expresses some concern about national capacities for coordination, which are decisive in enhancing global coordination:
There is one specific area in the field of ocean management which WMO sees as in need of enhanced integration and coordination. Bearing in mind the formally recognized status of routine ocean observations in support of operational meteorology and oceanography, .. . there remains a potential problem in the application of the provisions of the UN Convention on the Law of the Sea to the conduct of marine scientific research within the EEZs, specifically in the context of approved international research projects and related global monitoring programmes. While it is true that Article 247 is clearly intended to facilitate such activities, it is also usually the case that national agencies or authorities which agree to and participate in those activities are not the same as those which regulate the passage of ships and the conduct of research and monitoring within the national EEZs. Worse, these agencies or authorities often do not coordinate their policies at all at the national
level, which can and has given rise to specific and anomalous difficulties in certain instances.
Meteorological and oceanographic research, including especially global climate studies, require ocean data on a global basis, including from EEZs of all coastal nations. Such observational data are always required in the context of approved international programmes, and freely and openly exchanged on a global basis. It is therefore essential that some appropriate mechanism be established to ensure that coordinated global monitoring and research can proceed without impediments caused by lack of proper coordination at the national level.
Economic Commission for Africa
The ECA reports that its marine affairs programme is handled by a unit called Natural Resources Division. Recent marine-related activities of the ECA include organizing intergovernmental meetings on the Law of the Sea and Seabed Mining, publishing technical materials, and providing advisory services on a host of subjects. It had successfully coordinated projects with the International Hydrographic Organization (IHO), IOC, FAO and the IOMAC.
Economic Commission for Latin America and the Caribbean
The report of the ECLAC puts forward the conviction that "ECLACs analysis of ocean affairs must be conditioned by two factors: i) the current process of realignment of the social and economic sectors of the United Nations; ii) the principles contained in the International Development Strategy for the Fourth [UN] Development Decade, and consequently in the New International Economic Order and in the Charter of Economic Rights and Duties of States." More particularly, ECLAC's regional priorities on ocean affairs are found in the Tlatelolco Platform on Environment and Development, adopted by ECLAC state representatives in March 1991. The Natural Resources and Energy Division of ECLAC, through its Marine Resources Unit, has expanded its oceans-related activities since it was established in 1985.
Economic and Social Commission for Asia and the Pacific
The ESCAP, according to its report, adopted a marine resources programme in 1984, whose focus as it developed was "on strengthening member countries' capabilities in planning, assessing, developing and managing non-living resources under national jurisdiction." ESCAP also collaborates with a range of regional and subregional organizations like the Association of South-East Asian Nations (ASEAN), Forum Fisheries Agency (FFA), South-East Asian Fisheries Development Centre (SEAF-DEC), South-East Asian Project on Ocean Law (SEAPOL), Committee for Coordination of Off-shore Prospecting in Asian Off-shore Areas (CCOP), South Pacific Applied Geosciences Commission (SOPAC), and the Indian Ocean Marine Affairs Cooperation (IOMAC). Within the UN system, ESCAP is represented in the Ad hoc Inter-agency Meeting on Ocean Affairs which meets annually.
<section>Pacem in Maribus XIX - Background paper</section>
Elisabeth Mann Borgese
<section>Introduction</section>
Halfway on the road from Stockholm (1972) to Rio de Janeiro (1992) - from a still somewhat sectoral emphasis on the conservation of the environment to the more comprehensive concept of "integrating Environment and Development" - there is a milestone: Montego Bay (1982) with the adoption of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
This Convention contains the first comprehensive, binding, enforceable international environmental law. It is the first legal instrument effectively to integrate environment and development in the concept of sustainable development. It is the first to provide for a system of mandatory, binding settlement of disputes arising from environmental issues as well as from all other issues relating to the uses of seas and oceans.
The Convention is based on two other fundamental concepts: the Common Heritage of Mankind and the concept that the problems of ocean space are closely interrelated and need to be considered as a whole. Sustainable development, the Common Heritage of Mankind, and the interdependence of all uses of ocean space conceived as an integrated ecological system, all have important institutional implications which are yet to be explored. The institutional framework of the Convention is incomplete. The Convention is a process that needs to be continued through interpretation, implementation and progressive development.
Another milestone, halfway between Montego Bay (1982) and Rio (1992), is Geneva (1987), with the publication of the Report of the World Commission on Environment and Development (WCED), Our Common Future. From it we distil three more basic concepts which will help shape the institutional framework we are trying to project.
First, the boundaries between sectors of government or governance, have become "porous," due to the interlocked, interdisciplinary character of the issues to be dealt with.
The integrated and interdependent nature of the new challenges and issues contrast sharply with the nature of the institutions that exist today. These institutions tend to be independent, fragmented, and working to relatively narrow mandates with closed decision processes. Those responsible for managing natural resources and protecting the environment are institutionally separated from those responsible for managing the economy. The real world of interlocked economic and ecological systems will not change; the policies and institutions concerned must.^1
Second, the boundaries between "public" and "private" sectors are becoming porous. This applies to public and private law, which interact more intensely than in the past; and it applies to relations between business and government. New forms of public/ private cooperation are needed, at the national as well as the international level.
Many essential human needs can be met only through goods and services provided by industry, and the shift to sustainable development must be powered by a continuing flow of wealth from industry.^2
These recognitions imply the need for horizontal, intersectoral, and interdisciplinary integration in the planning, regulatory, and decision-making mechanisms.
Third,
National boundaries have become so porous that traditional distinctions between local, national, and international issues have become blurred.^3
This recognition implies the need for vertical integration among levels of governance: local, national, regional, and interregional.
In the marine sector, where everything flows and everything is interacting, the need for both horizontal and vertical integration is more marked than in any other realm of governance.
The Report of the WCED sums it up in three short paragraphs:
- The underlying unity of the oceans requires effective global management regimes.
- The shared resource characteristics of many regional seas make forms of regional management mandatory.
- The major land-based threats to the oceans require effective national actions based on international cooperation.^4
Pacem in Maribus XIX will examine various models of horizontal and vertical integration at the national, regional, and interregional level. Ocean development, however, does not take place in a vacuum. Ocean development strategy needs to be integrated into general development strategy, and this process will have institutional implications. Pacem in Maribus (PIM) XIX will study the institutional requirements of sustainable development in the marine sector and of ocean governance in the twenty-first century.
Considering the crucial importance of the oceans (a) in the global economy; (b) as a determinant of global climate change; and (c) as a lead sector in international law and international relations, such a study is timely and necessary.
<section>The national level</section>
In his report, "Realization of benefits under the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea: Needs of States in regard to development and management of ocean resources"^5 the Secretary-General stresses the need for the establishment of mechanisms for integrated ocean management at the national level.
In view of the dramatically increased administrative challenge under the integrated marine resource policy approach, most States expressed the need for a more coordinated and cohesive institutional arrangement, moving away from the traditional dispersed approach. Traditional division of responsibilities within Government has resulted in the allocation of competences over different aspects of ocean uses and ocean resource exploitation, often jointly with aspects of land-based activity. In many cases there has not been a review of marine-related activity in a single integrated context. Many States seek assistance in devising appropriate institutional arrangements, based on the experience of other States that have successfully addressed the matter. ^5
The specific form of these mechanisms for integrated ocean policy making will vary from country to country, depending on the existing infrastructure and resource base as well as on ideological orientation. PIM XI (1982, Mexico) was devoted to the impact of the Law of the Sea Convention on national legislation and infrastructure and presented a number of case-studies. Other case-studies have been assembled by the Office of Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea at the UN Secretariat.
Almost every conceivable government department is involved, in one way or another, with ocean affairs, and it deals with them from the perspective of its own priorities. Integration would require, first of all, strengthening of awareness and competence in ocean affairs within each department concerned, and this requires changes in the recruitment of staff within each department. Secondly, there must be some interministerial coordination mechanism for the integration of policies. On the whole, the establishment of new departments or ministries for ocean development has had only limited success in the making of integrated oceans policy. In India, for example, this new department has greatly enhanced the development of specific new ocean activities, such as deep seabed mining or Antarctic exploration, but it has not influenced policies of other departments, concerned, e.g., with fishing or shipping.
The most successful attempt to create integrated and coherent legislation in the marine sector has been, and remains, the Mexican Federal Law of the Sea. But its influence on the institutional infrastructure has not yet been pervasive.
One of the most interesting examples of institutional integration - at least conceptually, if not yet fully developed at the practical level - remains the National Aquatic Resource Agency (NARA) in Sri Lanka. Here we have an institution actively engaged in executing and coordinating marine and freshwater activities, supervised by a Committee representing all government departments involved in ocean affairs.
Another, more recent example of promising institutional innovation, cited in the Secretary-General's Report on the Law of the Sea^6 is the new system developed by Ecuador. Ecuador has established special management zones, five on land and the sixth in the Galapagos Archipelago, for the development of the coastal areas within a framework of conservation of the resource base, through intersectoral integration. A complex institutional framework has been created for this purpose, at national and local levels to ensure proper interaction between all levels of governance in policy making, planning, and implementation. It is also worth noting that, in this scheme, implementation and enforcement is largely entrusted to the port authorities, which generally could play an active and constructive role in coastal and marine management.
The Secretary-General's report cites a number of other cases. At the practical level, especially with regard to coastal management, Brazil appears to be particularly successful; other States (e.g. Argentina) have established parliamentary committees on ocean policy: parliamentary secretaries can play an extremely useful role in the process of integrating oceans policy. It is difficult, however, to assess fully the potential of these developments, since they do not take place in a vacuum, or in a stable environment, but interact with national and international factors, such as the debt problem or civil strife which may severely limit their potential.
It is not only government departments, furthermore, that need to be involved in the making of an integrated oceans policy. Such a policy must integrate politics, economics, and science in new ways, through new decision-making mechanisms, and this will involve, together with the governmental, also the non-governmental sector: industry (employers and employees), science, and the non-governmental organizations, including consumers. Canada has attempted to establish a Council representing all these sectors; but its function is merely advisory, and its impact on government decision-making is negligible.
New trails will have to be blazed. To fulfil the participatory requirements, stressed in the Report of the World Commission on Environment and Development, it may even be necessary to call periodically - perhaps biannually - an "Ocean Assembly" at national level, or a Special Session of Parliament (or Congress or National Assembly) for the discussion of ocean affairs in an integrated manner. One could imagine that the agenda for the decisions to be taken should be prepared by a National Ocean Institute reporting to Parliament and that industry, science, the NGO sector and local authorities would have the right to propose items for inclusion. Industry could be represented through the Chamber of Commerce on the one hand, and the national trade unions, on the other. Science could be represented by the national branch of the International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU). To find proper spokesmen for the more amorphous and complex non-profit NGO sector may be more difficult,
but precedents for NGO coordination at the national level are not lacking, for example, through annual or biannual conferences of interested organizations.
One could even imagine that decisions affecting the industrial sector would have to be approved by a separate vote of representatives of industry and labour in the National Ocean Assembly; that a decision involving science would have to be approved by a second vote of representatives of science; and that decisions concerning the environment be approved by a second vote of representatives of interested NGOs and local authorities. This might be one way of integrating politics, science, and economics in decision-making, through a sort of rotating bicameral system, as proposed, in 1967 by the Centre for the Study of Democratic Institutions.'
What should be emphasized, in any case, is that this integration does indeed have institutional implications which have to be faced in a spirit of innovation. While integration is essential at all levels of ocean policy-making, operation and administration, the developing countries may have a special and urgent need, described in annex VI to the Final Act of the Third United Nations Conference on the Law of the Sea as:
action..., aimed at strengthening national capabilities in marine science, technology and ocean services ... with a view to ensuring the rapid absorption and efficient application of technology and scientific knowledge available to them.
Any consideration of the institutional needs of the developing countries must begin at the fundamental level of basic education. Thus governments should consider the introduction of oceanography into the curricula of primary and secondary schools, augmenting at this broadest and most fundamental level a population's awareness of the oceans' wealth, the sensitivity of the marine environment, the values of conservation, the goals of sustainability and, importantly, of career opportunities in the marine sector. Such action, as well as the establishment of national institutions at the technical training (as distinct from university or research) level, should be recognized as priority sectors for national and international institutional support, including but not limited to, the provision of funds. It is an area in which UNESCO, by itself and in collaboration with such NGOs as the International Ocean Institute, might well make a contribution of vital significance. In all
countries, the mass media of communication should be encouraged to play a more important role in consciousness-raising and education in ocean affairs.
The creation of an integrated system for planning and decision-making in the marine sector would be a pilot experiment - like everything else relating to the new order for the seas and oceans. If successful for the management of ocean affairs, similar integrative systems might be created for sustainable development in other sectors: energy; food; atmosphere; outer space; etc. Needless to say, there is a financial cost attached to such a development, and this must be kept in reasonable proportion to the economic benefits to be derived from an integrated ocean policy. A cost/benefit analysis of the marine sector therefore should precede institution building.
<section>The regional level</section>
National and regional ocean management are intimately linked, and one is not possible without the other. Without regional cooperation, national development would be handicapped in sectors where issues transcend the boundaries of national jurisdiction, such as fisheries of straddling stocks or transboundary pollution, or where economies of scale are needed, as, for example, in the advancement of the marine sciences or the development of marine technologies. Without strong national infrastructures and broad national constituencies, regional organization remains ineffective. National and regional institutional frameworks will have to be matched to be able to interact. Capacity has to be built nationally and regionally at the same time.
The development of regional organization is bound to be flexible and varied, depending upon the characteristics and needs of the region concerned: whether it is centred an enclosed or semi-enclosed sea, consists of a group of island States, a group of mainland States, or States bordering a wider ocean, and whether the countries included therein are developing States, industrialized, partly autonomous territories, or a combination thereof. Another consideration to be taken into account is the impact of overlapping continent-centred regional development and its institutions such as the Regional Economic Commissions, Regional Development Banks, and other regional institutions, and whether of an economic, environmental or scientific/technological character. Thus the Mediterranean Regional Seas Programme necessarily interacts with the European Community and its institutions, as well as with the Organization of African Unity and the League of Arab States.
The most advanced example of regional cooperation and organization for integrated ocean management, cited in the Secretary-General's Report on the Law of the Sea, is the Indian Ocean Marine Affairs Cooperation (IOMAC), established in 1990. Its purpose, as stated in its Plan of Action is:
to take measures to integrate the marine sector into development strategies; to give due regard to the rights and needs of land-locked and geographically disadvantaged States among them; to take measures to establish a system to acquire and disseminate marine affairs information; to make, harmonize or strengthen arrangements in implementing cooperation with other States active in the region; to formulate and establish marine affairs policy, and to coordinate them at the national and international level; to develop and maintain safe and efficient maritime transport services; to support and strengthen existing marine affairs institutions and, where necessary, to establish new ones; to influence international organizations to accord greater emphasis to marine affairs; and to cooperate with each other's initiatives and to take all measures necessary in accordance with these principles.
IOMAC's scope is more comprehensive than that of any other regional organization: both functionally - it covers all uses of the ocean - and geographically, it includes the hinterland of land-locked States, which are as yet excluded from other programmes such as the UNEP-initiated Regional Seas Programme. The inclusion of land-locked States into regional arrangements is not only highly desirable from the point of new of economic development and distributional justice, it is an absolute necessity for environmental conservation, considering that pollution is largely carried by rivers which may originate in land-locked countries. The inclusion of landlocked States in regional seas programmes will require institutional changes within the land-locked countries themselves, just as in coastal States. The scope of the new institutional framework in land-locked countries will have to be integrated with the policy and management of aquatic resources, including freshwater resources as
well as seawater. A unique precedent for this integration is given by Sri Lanka's institutional framework NARA (National Aquatic Resources Agency) which covers both freshwater and marine aquatic resources. IOMAC's institutional framework is at an early stage of its evolution, and will have to develop in harmony with the national institutions of its Member States.
UNEP's Regional Seas Programme, a pioneering effort initiated in the wake of the 1972 Stockholm Conference on the Human Environment, started on the basis of the then still prevalent sectoral concept of action and institution-building. UNEP's focus is the conservation of the environment. Its very establishment as a separate organization, just as the establishment of separate Departments of the Environment within States, reflects the kind of sectoral approach that has now reached its limits. UNEP itself, however, and, in particular its Regional Seas Programme, has been a catalyst in the great transformation in thinking that has marked the two decades from Stockholm (1972) to Rio de Janeiro (1992), from "Environment" to "Environment and Development."
The Regional Seas Programme quickly realized that, to be effective in the protection and conservation of the marine environment, one had to deal with all major uses of the sea as well as a number of land-uses. Activities in the Regional Seas' Plans of Action indeed cover a wide range, from fisheries and aquaculture to the extraction of energy, from coastal management to the development of technology. The Mediterranean Blue Plan is an exemplary document, from the point of view of the broadness of its scope. The institutional framework, however, remained as it has been conceived in the early seventies: sectoral. Policy is defined by a biannual meeting Of States Parties to the Barcelona Convention. States are, of course, free to send whomever they wish to represent them at these meetings. Thus far, however, it has generally been the Ministries of Foreign Affairs that have been represented. There have been no linkages to other national government departments engaged in ocean
affairs, such as agriculture and fisheries, energy, mining, shipping, science and technology, etc. Clearly, here is an example of the "institutional gaps" noted in the Report of the WCED.
The objective of sustainable development and the integrated nature of the global environment/ development challenges pose problems for institutions, national and international, that were established on the basis of narrow preoccupations and compartmentalized concerns. Governments' general response to the speed and scale of global changes has been a reluctance to recognize sufficiently the need to change themselves. The challenges are both interdependent and integrated, requiring comprehensive approaches and popular participation.^8
At the regional level, just as at the national level, "there is recognition of the need to integrate science, technology, and economics more closely into the decision-making processes involved," as stated in the Secretary-General's Report on the Law of the Sea (November 19,1990).
The changes needed at the national and at the regional level thus are strictly interrelated. If, at the national level an institutional infrastructure is created that transcends the sectoral approach and integrates decision-making on ocean policy, it will be this infrastructure, rather than a sectoral ministry, that will be the "constituency" on which the Regional Seas Programme will be based. This will change the character of the Meeting of States Parties, which will become a form of regional "Ocean Assembly," also including non-governmental sector as well as the intergovernmental organizations engaged in marine affairs at the regional level.
As regards the non-governmental sector, an interesting precedent is given by the Council of Europe's system of representation at meetings of the North-South Institute in Lisbon. Building on an earlier precedent set by the International Labour Organisation (ILO), this system provides for each national delegation to consist of four members, one representing the government, one the parliament, one the local authorities, and one the NGO sector including science, each delegate acting and voting on his/her own. This is to ensure the participation of all sectors in decision-making and to facilitate effective implementation of decisions taken in common.
As far as the intergovernmental organizations are concerned, most of them (FAO, IOC/UNESCO, IMO) already have regional offices in most of the regions. They have made crucially important contributions to regional development and cooperation. They must now be organically linked in the regional infrastructure responsible for integrated policy-making in ocean affairs. They would then become the regional executive departments responsible for the implementation of this commonly designed, integrated regional ocean policy.
Thus while every existing institution should be utilized as a building block for the new, integrated system, there will also be a need for the establishment of some new institutions at the regional level: first of all the Regional Centres for the advancement of marine sciences and the development of marine technologies, prescribed in articles 276 and 277 of the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea.
A great deal of work has already been done on the establishment of these Centres. The initiative came from the International Ocean Institute which, in 1986, published a policy study, followed by a feasibility study, for a Mediterranean Centre for Research and Development in Marine Industrial Technology. The project was endorsed by the Government of Malta, and supported by UNEP and UNIDO - a cooperation symbolic, one might say, of the integration of Environment and Development.
The main question was how to create such a centre without creating a new bureaucracy, and how to generate investments rather than create costs. The answer was sought in a flexible, decentralized, project-oriented network with a small coordinating centre, patterned after the European EUREKA system. This is a new, highly cost-effective form of industrial/scientific, private/public, international cooperation in the development of research and development in high technology, which, in the span of just a few years, has generated investments of tens of billions of dollars. The problem was: to open up the EUREKA formula to the participation of developing countries, and to pay for this participation with public funds (World Bank, UNDP, regional banks, etc.).
Obviously there is a need for such an institution, and other initiatives are now converging with the Maltese. One should mention in particular the project for the establishment of an Arab-European Centre for Environment and Development, initiated by UNDP and to be located in Cairo, which, among other things, will deal with the development of pollution-combatting technologies and with coastal management.
The newly established "Route des Hautes Technologies de l'Europe du Sud" is another example. This initiative seeks to consolidate into a South-Western European "Silicon Valley" the research and development centres of various high-technology industries: biotechnology, information technology, pharmaceuticals - all relevant to marine technology - in Northern Italy, Southern France, and North-Eastern Spain. This initiative stimulates, in turn, new relationships between industry and university research resources: a new source of science-based productivity for the region which could, in time, extend to embrace, first, collaboration with an analogous subregional structure nearby: the so-called "Pentagonale," developing between Italy, Yugoslavia, Austria, Czechoslovakia, and Hungary, and later also the southern shores of the Mediterranean, beginning with the States of the Maghreb.
Equally obviously, there is need for coordination and integration of all these initiatives into an effective network that should be beneficial to all participants through the synergism it could create. Furthermore, there is no reason to delay the participation of the developing countries of the Southern and Eastern Mediterranean shores which can and must be achieved if the goal of sustainable development is to be pursued in earnest.
In the meantime, an analogous initiative has been taken by Venezuela for the establishment of such a system in Latin America and the Caribbean. President Perez announced it in October, 1990, under the title Project Bolivar. Taking his cue from UNIDO, he, too, proposed a scheme for joint research and development in high technology on the pattern of EUREKA. A sector devoted in particular to the development of marine technologies, starting with ocean energy, aquaculture and depolluting technologies, will be part of this system, just as EUROMAR - especially devoted to the development of marine technologies - is part of EUREKA. The coordinating Centre of the Caribbean system for R&D in Marine Industrial Technology will be at INTECMAR, an Institute at the Simon Bolivar University in Caracas, Venezuela.
Other types of regional institutions may become necessary as new activities emerge. Data banks, the dissemination of information as well as training, will be increasingly important at the regional level. Examples in this latter area are the regional training programmes carried out by the International Ocean Institute in the Mediterranean, the Caribbean, and the Indian Ocean.
A second major gap in regional cooperation in the seas and oceans exists with regard to the management of non-living resources. The Law of the Sea Convention mandates regional cooperation with regard to fisheries, the protection of the environment, marine scientific research, and the development of technology. It is silent with regard to offshore oil and gas development, inasmuch as this was assumed to be carried out strictly under national jurisdiction.
As it turns out, however, there may be as many straddling oil fields as there are straddling stocks of fish. During the past years, these have given rise to numerous shelf disputes and conflicts - whose solution often was costly, and inconclusive. In recent years there has been a new trend to obviate such disputes through the creation of Joint Management Zones, in some cases, with an elaborate institutional framework for joint exploration, production, and profit-sharing. An example is the Memorandum of Understanding between Thailand and Malaysia (signed on 21 February 1979, entered into force on 15 July 1982) on the establishment of a joint authority for offshore oil and gas exploitation. A similar agreement between Thailand and Vietnam is also reported to have been concluded recently. Yet another example could be the Agreement between Australia and Papua New Guinea (December 1978). The International Herald Tribune recently (24 November 1990) carried an article, "Nations
shelve old disputes for more oil," illustrating this trend: "Spurred by the need to reduce reliance on energy imports and increase economic growth, countries of South-East Asia are shelving longstanding maritime boundary disputes and agreeing instead to joint development of offshore oil and gas zones that have been subject to overlapping claims." This trend also affects wide areas of the South China Sea.
Such formulas might be generalized and applied to regional seas as a whole. The regime might even include land-locked States (as, we have seen, does IOMAC), thus solving a problem of distributive justice which the United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea had left unsolved.
One further aspect of the emerging regional institutional framework for sustainable development should be mentioned: peaceful uses; reservation for peaceful purposes; and naval issues, in the context of surveillance and enforcement. This is particularly important in consideration of the imperative linkage between disarmament, development, and the environment. As the Report of the World Commission on Environment and Development states,
Among the dangers facing the environment, the possibility of nuclear war is undoubtedly the gravest. Certain aspects of the issues of peace and security bear directly upon the concept of sustainable development. The whole notion of security as traditionally understood - in terms of political and military threats to national sovereignty - must be expanded to include the growing impacts of environmental stress - locally, nationally, regionally, and globally. There are no military solutions to "environmental insecurity."^9
The 1990 Secretary-General's Report on the Law of the Sea summarizes surveillance and enforcement needs with regard to regulations for safety of navigation, conservation of living resources, preservation of the environment, conduct of scientific research and survey, prevention of customs, fiscal, immigration and sanitary laws, and implementation of special measures that regulate nuclear-powered vessels, or those carrying dangerous or noxious substances. It points out that surveillance would also be called for in the suppression of illicit drug trafficking and to exercise civil jurisdiction over liabilities incurred or assumed during a voyage through coastal State waters, and some other sea uses.
The Report on the Law of the Sea also states that:
It may be important to note the expert view that regional agreements or other arrangements are likely to prove the most useful, considering that maritime security, for many countries, is more linked to tensions relating to resources and to the delimitation, policing and protection of EEZs. Ecological threats to the marine environment are also increasingly seen as a more serious threat to national security.^10
The Report then cites two examples where regionalization of surveillance and enforcement is under discussion or in progress, namely, the South Pacific and the Eastern Caribbean.
Arrangements for joint surveillance and enforcement, and all other peaceful uses of navies, could be complemented by the establishment of nuclear weapons-free zones, as in the South Pacific, and the Secretary-General's Report notes that:
Committee-level consensus was reached at the Fourth Review Conference of the Treaty on Non-Proliferation of Nuclear Weapons on the importance for disarmament of nuclear weapon-free zones based on arrangements freely arrived at among States of a region.... The Conference Committee agreed that note should be taken of the 1986 Treaty of Raratonga, which is now in force....
The integration of denuclearization as a means of enhancing environmental security at the regional level, and of joint regional surveillance and enforcement measures to create economies of scale, has important institutional implications. It requires linkages between the regional institutional framework and national navies, departments of defence and coastguards, as well as linkages between the regional institutional framework and global arms control and disarmament efforts. Surveillance and enforcement may give rise to disputes. Therefore, an effective system for the peaceful settlement of disputes will enhance the acceptability of surveillance and enforcement.
An essential institutional element in the management of complex legal and economic relationships among sovereign States, such as those arising in the course of interpreting and applying the new regime of the oceans, is a scheme for the amicable resolution of disputes. The United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea offers the most comprehensive and advanced international dispute settlement system so far devised. It incorporates the traditional choice of the means of resolving disputes, together with a residual system of compulsory settlement applicable to a wide range of disputes including those to which States, international organizations or private persons may be parties. The system, which provides inter alia, for recourse, in appropriate cases, to the International Court of Justice as well as to a new judicial institution, the International Tribunal for the Law of the Sea, and for important roles for specified "competent international organizations" in the arbitration
of certain disputes, needs to be complemented through linkages to national judicial and enforcement systems for its full potential to be achieved.
The Caribbean Regional Seas Programme, through the Cartagena Convention, provides for a regional system for the peaceful settlement of disputes. In some cases, such regional systems may be desirable to reduce the cost of dispute settlement and enhance confidence: in judges or arbitrators knowledgeable of local circumstances and familiar to the litigants.
The global level
As the Secretary-General's Report on the Law of the Sea points out:
While there has been a long-standing international consensus that the main opportunities for internationally agreed regulations and other actions lie at the regional level, it is also clear that regional action alone will not suffice in every case. Some environmental problems - ozone layer, hazardous wastes, loss of biological diversity and climate change - are understood to require global action, supplemented by regional arrangements.... The eight regional seas conventions and their associated protocols also require close global coordination in order, inter alia, to avoid codification of conflicting interests for parties adhering to several regional conventions, as well as to global conventions, including particularly the Convention on the Law of the Sea.
In the scope of the Regional Seas Programmes now broadened to integrate environment and development and cover all major sea uses, one should lengthen this list of global issues calling for interregional action. A number of shipping problems as well as the problems associated with highly migratory species (especially tuna) in the fisheries sector belong to this category. So do many aspects of marine scientific research, also disarmament issues.
The United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea contains about 60 references to the "competent international organizations" - named only once, in annex VIII of the Convention: IMO, for issues arising from shipping and vessel-source pollution; FAO, for fishing; IOC/UNESCO, for marine science; UNEP for the protection of the marine environment, to which one has to add the International Seabed Authority (ISA). These are the best prepared to take care of "global issues" and of coordinating interregional issues, besides the many other tasks which the Convention imposes on them: from the establishment of lanes for vessel traffic control to the assistance to be given to developing countries in all sea uses and coastal management and the development of human resources.
There are, besides the above-mentioned five, other UN Agencies involved in ocean affairs: above all, UNCTAD (in the economics of shipping; commodities, including those produced from the sea; technology transfer; the development of land-locked and small island States); UNDP (development cooperation in the marine sector); WMO (ocean/atmosphere interaction); ILO (labour in the marine sector); WHO (health in the marine sector). There are, as a matter of fact, as many specialized agencies and institutions involved in marine affairs at the international level as there are government departments within nation States. This entire institutional framework is in need of exactly the same kind of overhauling as national government structures. Each institution needs to be strengthened internally, in structural as well as in financial terms, to be able to cope with its new tasks; and inter-agency linkages must be intensified or newly created, to enable these institutions to generate an
integrated oceans policy.
There are, furthermore, a growing number of increasingly important NGOs, who must also be included in the making of such a policy and in the monitoring of its execution. It is significant, for example, that they were represented at UNCED in Brazil, 1992, by as many as 30,000 delegates from all parts of the world!
Individually, the "specialized agencies" dealing with ocean affairs will have to undergo a twofold development - both aspects being interconnected. First, they will have to develop from a merely coordinating role to an operational role, and this development is well on its way.
At the time of their establishment, nearly half-a-century ago, the responsibilities of intergovernmental institutions consisted essentially in coordinating the activities of a limited number of mostly industrialized countries, each with its own well-developed scientific and technological infrastructure. Today this membership has tripled and includes a majority of developing countries lacking this infrastructure. Coordination is not, itself, operational. Assistance in the building of national infrastructure, which is what is required today, is necessarily operational. The ISA, which is the youngest of these organizations, clearly points in this direction. The ISA is itself a producer of goods and services. Training/development of human resources; marine scientific research; sustainable technology development; environmental monitoring; hydrological measurements; the establishment of traffic lanes; a far more active role in the management of fisheries; the development of the
relevant technologies: all this will transform the "competent international organizations" increasingly into a global service sector in the twenty-first century. The second change follows from the first. New ways of paying for these goods and services will have to be devised.
The Report of the World Commission on Environment and Development stresses the need for new sources of revenue and automatic financing to pay for sustainable development. It cites a series of studies and reports which have identified and examined a growing list of new sources of potential revenue, including:
revenue from the use of international commons (from ocean fishing and transportation, from seabed mining, from Antarctic resources, or from parking charges for geostationary communications satellites, for example).
The Commission
particularly considers that the proposals regarding revenue from the use of international commons and natural resources now warrant and should receive serious consideration by governments and the General Assembly.
The IOI has advocated the introduction of such a tax ever since the first preparatory efforts in 1967. We pointed out, at that time, that a tax, to be successful, needs two things: a clearly defined institutional infrastructure and a clearly defined purpose, close and tangible to the taxpayer. The institutional infrastructure is now in the making, the goods and services it is to produce define the purpose of the tax.
If closeness to the taxpayer is important, it will be useful to collect the tax at the regional level. Regional trust funds already exist within the framework of the Regional Seas Programmes. In most cases, they are severely underfunded thus flouting the purpose of sustainable regional development. In the Mediterranean, the Blue Plan estimated that about 15 billion dollars would be needed during the current decade to cope with the sources of land-based pollution and install an economic regime of sustainable development. Only 1 billion dollars has been collected so far.
The International Ocean Institute recently completed a study, financed by the Ford Foundation, on "Alternative Modes of Financing the Mediterranean Trust Fund for the Conservation of the Mediterranean Environment." The study is a pilot experiment. The Blue Plan tells us that, today, about 100 million tourists visit the Mediterranean annually, and by the end of the century, it is anticipated that they will be 300 million annually. They have a vital interest in the conservation of the Mediterranean environment, so if it were to be allowed to deteriorate further, that would be the end of Mediterranean tourism. On the other hand, tourists' budgets allow for some flexibility; tourism, after all, is an extra, if not a luxury.
The IOI distributed 3,000 rather complex questionnaires in several languages among Mediterranean tourists in the summer and autumn of 1990. The replies have now been carefully evaluated, and the unambiguous result is that tourists are largely unaware of the existence of the Mediterranean Action Plan and Trust Fund, but they would be happy to contribute up to $5 a person per vacation to the Trust Fund. This alone would be sufficient to pay for the entire Mediterranean Action Plan gradually. The IOI study also proposes a number of mechanisms for the cost-effective collection of such a tourist tax. If this pilot experiment were to be successful, similar taxes might be imposed on other ocean uses, whether regionally or globally.
Another new, effective way of generating international income for the action plans of the specialized agencies would be participation in the Regional, EUREKA-type Centres for the development of environmentally sustainable technology (including the development of pollution-abating technologies), described in the "Regional Level" section of this annex.
As to improving coordination among the agencies and institutions at the global level, so as to enable them to formulate an integrated ocean policy, the Secretary-General's Report on the Law of the Sea contains a section, entitled "Cooperation within the United Nations System," in which it enumerates a number of coordinating mechanisms such as the Joint Group of Experts on Scientific Aspects of Marine Pollution, the Joint United Nations/IOC Programme on Ocean Science in Relation to Non-living Resources; the Joint United Nations/FAO/IOC Aquatic Sciences and Fisheries Information System (ASFIS); or the Intersecretariat Committee on Scientific Programmes Relating to Oceanography (ICSPRO). The Report also points out that:
The Office (for Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea of the UN Secretariat) is currently preparing, jointly with the relevant agencies as appropriate, its contribution to the comprehensive report with recommendations for action to be drafted by the Conference secretariat for the Preparatory Committee on the topic of protection of the oceans and all kinds of seas, including enclosed and semi-enclosed seas, and coastal areas and the protection, rational use, and development of their living resources....
Clearly, progress is being made. But all these initiatives still fall short of the making of a comprehensive, integrated ocean policy, based on the awareness that "the problems of ocean space are closely interrelated and need to be considered as a whole."
As already noted by the Delegation of Portugal, just before the end of UNCLOS III, a forum is needed where States can discuss the problems of ocean space in their close interrelation, where they can consider them as a whole, and take decisions on an integrated ocean policy. This then can be implemented by the specialized agencies and their international civil service functioning like government departments at the international level.
Such a forum, which must also include the non-governmental sector, could take a number of forms: a permanent Conference, like UNCTAD; a Special Session of the United Nations General Assembly, perhaps every two years; a wider mandate to the periodic meeting of States Parties to the Convention, already foreseen in the Convention; or some other form. But such an "Ocean Assembly" is an absolutely essential part of the institutional framework for ocean governance in the twenty-first century. Multiple, functional representation within each delegation, as proposed for the regional "ocean assemblies" - and as practiced by some States (e.g., Canada) throughout UNCLOS III! might solve the problem of grass-root participation in decision-making.
<section>Conclusion</section>
Considering the "porousness" of the boundaries between levels of governance national, regional, global - this institutional framework is highly interdependent and interlinked.
Clearly, the structure of international relations has been in a process of transformation for some time. Suffice it to refer to the Preamble of the United Nations Charter. The opening words refer to the fact that "We, the Peoples of the United Nations" have undertaken and shall undertake in the present and in the future a number of principles and obligations. While the basis of the international system is still the nation State - in ocean affairs as in other sectors of international relations increasingly, the pivot of the system is shifting from the national to the regional level in production, trade, financing, just as in the ocean sector. The regional level of organization cannot function properly, however, without effective national infrastructures and proper linkages to national and local levels, or without an effective global institutional framework and proper linkages to it. In the marine sector - due to the very nature of the marine environment in which everything
flows and everything is linked together - the development is most advanced and offers concrete opportunities, or more than that, an ineluctable necessity, for action. Here we can build the prototype for global governance in the twenty-first century.
In a democratic society, decisions should be taken at the level closest to the individual: family; municipality; province; national government; regional organization; global organization - rising on the scale as issues transcend boundaries of jurisdiction. It should be noted also that the emergence of new levels of decision-making and governance, progressively internalizing "externalities," does not abrogate the principle of national sovereignty and the equal sovereignty of all nations. It does not abruptly - or idealistically - change the structure of international relations which will be based, for some time to come, primarily on the nation States, still the main actors on the international scene, even though others - non-governmental, intergovernmental - are beginning to play an increasingly important role.
What it changes, instead, is the nature of Law, and this, again, is happening at intranational as well as international levels concurrently. What it implies is an enlargement of the concept of "legislation": its loosening up over an ever-wider range of "laws" or "norms," "regulations," "directives," "recommendations," and "opinions." This appears to be a general phenomenon, also at the level of federal or even unitary States. It is connected with the role of planning. Planning transforms and enlarges the concept of law. Planning plays a vital role in the ocean regime. Without long-term planning there is no solution to the environment/development problem: as clearly stated in the Brundtland Report. The apparent contradiction of contempary trends: towards more and more "privatization" and "free enterprise" on the one hand, and towards global planning to save our planet on the other, must be resolved through new forms of public/private cooperation.
Planning is a function distinct from that of law-making. It really adds a fourth dimension to government or governance. Western constitutional theory is as deeply imbued with the notion that government can only have three branches as people used to be with the conviction that space had three dimensions. Then came Einstein and proved that there was a fourth dimension, time. With planning, a fourth dimension is added to government. It may even turn out that government has more branches or dimensions than four. Chinese constitutional theory recognizes five. Riemann space is multi-dimensional. We must shed Western prejudices as our interests curve round the globe, into outer space, into ocean space.
Plans do not have the character of "laws" in the technical sense. It is not of decisive importance whether they are "enforceable" or not; it is far more relevant that they benefit those who comply, and exclude from benefits those who do not comply. In other words, they are based on cooperative rather than coercive law. And this accords with the sovereignty of nations.
As Ambassador Pinto of Sri Lanka put it, one of the innovating features of the new Law of the Sea is indeed that it recognizes and gives textual expression to a "new international law of cooperation" which is the cornerstone of the United Nations Charter and must prevail in the twenty-first century. What seems to be lacking is the will of certain States to live up to their legal commitments in this respect. It is our obligation to accept, and live up to, the interdependence that binds us together rather than the atavistic forces that try to tear us apart. Our globe's landmasses, oceans, atmosphere and outer space, as well as the manifold species of fauna and flora that enrich our globe, must be accepted and cherished as the global commons of humankind.
<section>Notes</section>
1. WCED. Our Common Future, Oxford: Oxford University Press, p. 310.
2. Ibid, p. 16.
3. Ibid, p. 312.
4. Ibid, p. 264.
5. United Nations Doc. A/45/712, 16 November 1990.
6. United Nations Doc. A/45/721, 19 November 1990, pp. 10-11.
7. Centre for the Study of Democratic Institutions. The Ocean Regime, Santa Barbara, CA, 1968.
8. WCED. Our Common Future, Oxford: Oxford University Press, p. 9.
9. Ibid, p. 19.
10. Secretary-General's Report on the Law of the Sea, pp. 14-15.
<section>PIM XIX honorary committee</section>
Mário Soares
President of the Republic of Portugal
João de Deus Pinheiro
Minister of Foreign Affairs of Portugal
Eduardo Azevedo Soares
Minister of the Sea of Portugal
Elisabeth Mann Borgese
Chairman of the Planning Council of the IOI, Professor of International Relations
Kenneth K.S. Dadzie
Secretary-General, United Nations Conference on Trade and Development (UNCTAD
Tommy Koh
Chairman of the UNCED Preparatory Committee, former President of the Third UNCLOS (1981-1982)
Gunnar Kullenberg
Secretary, Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission (IOC)
Jorge Borges de Macedo
President of the National Archive Torre do Tombo
Federico Mayor
Director-General, United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO)
M.G.K. Menon
President, International Council of Scientific Unions (ICSU)
Satya N. Nandan
Under-Secretary-General, Special Representative of the Secretary-General for the Law of the Sea
William A. O'Neil
Secretary-General, International Maritime Organization (IMO)
Jan P. Pronk
Netherlands Minister for Development Cooperation
Jean-Charles Rouher
Secretary-General, International Chamber of Commerce (ICC)
Mário Ruivo
Chairman of the Preparatory Committee of PIM XIX, Member of the Board of the IOI
Edouard Saouma
Director-General, Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO)
Domingo L. Siazon Jr.
Director-General, United Nations Industrial Development Organization (UNIDO)
Helena Vaz da Silva
President, Portuguese UNESCO Commission
Heitor Gurgulino de Souza
Rector, United Nations University (UNU)
Maurice F. Strong
Secretary-General, United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED)
Mostafa K. Tolba
Executive Director, United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP)
Layashi Yaker
President of the Board of the IOI, Member of the South Commission
<section>Contributors</section>
Agustin Ayala-Castañares is with the Instituto de Ciencias del Mar y Limnologia, Universidad Nacional Autonoma de Mexico.
Elisabeth Mann Borgese is Professor of Political Science at Dalhousie University. She is the Founder of the International Ocean Institute and acts as Chairperson of the IOI Planning Council.
Max Börlin who is based in Founex, Switzerland, is a independent consultant in economics of environment, resources and development. He is also Co-Director of the Present Life Institute in Geneva.
Jon M. van Dyke is Professor of Law at the William S. Richardson School of Law, University of Hawaii. He is consultant to the Office of Hawaiian Affairs regarding claims of Native Hawaiians against the United States and State of Hawaii, and Member of the Board of Advisors of the Center for International Environmental Law.
Jan van Ettinger is Director of Van Ettinger & Associates, Policy Advisers, at Krimpen a/d IJssel, The Netherlands. He is also the Coordinator of The Hague Peace Initiative, a nongovernmental project of the Institute of Social Studies International Services (ISSIS), The Hague.
Tsutomu Fuse is Director-General of the International Ocean Institute, Japan. He is also Professor of International Law at the Yokohama City University.
Nikolaus Gelpke is a doctoral student with the Institut für Meereskunde an der Universitat Kiel, Germany.
Hiran W. Jayewardene is the Secretary General of the Indian Ocean Marine Affairs Cooperation (IOMAC).
Stjepan Keckes was for 15 years the head of UNEP's oceans programme. He now works as a freelance consultant for a number of international and national organizations.
Alexander King is the Honorary President of the Club of Rome.
Gunnar Kullenberg is the Secretary of the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Commission, UNESCO.
Ernst Lutz is Senior Economist in the Policy and Research Division, Environment Department, of the World Bank in Washington, D.C.
Ruben P. Mendez is Historian of the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP), Adjunct Professor at New York and Yale Universities, and Adviser to the Commission on Global Governance and to the Yale University Secretariat of the Independent Working Group on the Future of the United Nations.
Thomas A. Mensah is Professor of Law at the William S. Richardson School of Law, University of Hawaii, and Director of the Law of the Sea Institute, based in Honolulu.
Joseph R. Morgan is Associate Professor of Geography, University of Hawaii and Adjunct Professor of Law at the William S. Richardson School of Law, University of Hawaii. He is Co-editor of Ocean Yearbook.
Mohan Munasinghe is the Chief, Policy and Research Division, Environment Department, of the World Bank in Washington, D.C.
Satya Nandan is the Permanent Representative of Fiji to the United Nations.
Frank X. Njenga is the Secretary-General of the Asian-African Legal Consultative Committee (AALCC).
Peter B. Payoyo is Assistant Professor of Law at the University of the Philippines.
M.C.W. Pinto is Attorney of the Supreme Court of Sri Lanka; of the Inner Temple, Barrister-at-law.
Jacques G. Richardson is a Partner of Text Image, a communication consultancy based in France.
Mario Ruivo is Professor at the University of Oporto, a Member of Board of the Portuguese National Commission of Portugal, and Representative of Portugal to the Executive Council of the Intergovernmental Oceanographic Committee.
Krishan Saigal is the Executive-Director of the International Ocean Institute, with Headquarters in Malta.
Jean-Paul Troadec is Directeur de Reserche, Institut Francais de Reserche Scientifique pour le Developpement en Cooperation (ORSTOM) based in Plouzane, France.
Stella Maris Vallejo is an Officer of the Division of Ocean Affairs and the Law of the Sea, Office of Legal Affairs of the United Nations Secretariat.
Francisco Orrego Vicuña is Professor of International Law at the School of Law and the Institute of International Studies of the University of Chile, and Membre Associe de l'lnstitut de Droit International.
Alexander Yankov is Professor of International Law, a Member of the Bulgarian Academy of Sciences, and Member of the UN International Law Commission.
<section>Other titles of interest</section>
Hydropolitics Along the Jordan River
Scarce Water and Its Impact on the Arab-Israeli Conflict
By Aaron T. Wolf
This new UNU book argues that the Jordan River watershed - a region where some of the worst Arab-Israeli conflict has occurred - might be the very place to bury ancient hatreds and work to give birth to new and more enlightened environ mental collaborations.
ISBN 92-808-0859-1
US$50- airmail US$55
Developing country price: US$25
Arid Zone Water Resources Planning for Peace
Applications of Non-conventional Alternatives in the Middle East
By Masahiro Murakami
This forthcoming volume evaluates some non-conventional approaches to resolving water resources issues in the Middle East. The text draws on studies involving Kuwait, Jordan, Palestine, and Israel.
ISBN 92-808-0858-3
US$ 50; airmail US$55
Developing country price: US$25
Long-Distance Water Transfer
A Chinese Case Study and International Experiences
Edited by Asit K. Biswas, Zuo Dakang, James E. Nichum, and Liu Changming
This book discusses the social, environmental, economic, and institutional implications of long-distance water transfer. It deals with water transfer in China, exploring the ideological, climatological, agricultural, economic, and environmental factors involved.
ISBN 0-907567-52-5 (cloth); 0-907567-53-3 (paper)
US$65 cloth, airmail US$72; US$37.50 paper, airmail US$42
Sustainable Management of Soil Resources in the Humid Tropics
By Rattan Lal
This book focuses on conversion of humid tropical forest to agricultural land use and soil and crop management systems that allow for the sustained use of soil and water resources.
ISBN 92-808-0876-1
US$35; airmail US$40
Developing country price: US$17.50
The "Deep Blue Sea," methaphor for vastness and unbounded wealth, is like other ecosystem, vulnerable to overexploitation. Greater awareness and a heightened sense of urgency have led in recent years to a determination to ensure sustainable use of the marine environment, which in turn has resulted in the formulation of pioneering ocean-related legal initiatives.
This book examines the institutional implications of sustainable development of the ocean. The book explores the national, regional, and global dimensions of ocean governance and draws attention to the basic issue and approaches concerned with achieving the difficult task of institutional integration for the long-term sustainability of the seas. This study makes a strong case for the critical importance of the oceans in any strategy aimed at a new, sustainable world order.
This volume represent the collaborative efforts of a diverse group of political leaders, scientists, scholars - from both North and South and the public and private sectors - and top UN officials; their thoughts on the practical mechanisms and requirements of sustainable development in the oceans and the likely trends in ocean governance in the coming years are especially relevant and urgent as we enter the twenty-first century.
Peter Bautista Payoyo is currently engaged is studies towards a Doctorate of Juristic Science at Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia.
United Nations
University Press
TOKYO o NEW YORK o PARIS
UNUP-847
ISBN 92-808-0847-7
05000 P
