<title>Sustainable management of soil resources in the humid tropics</title>
BY RATTAN LAL
The United Nations University is an organ of the United Nations established by the General Assembly in 1972 to be an international community of scholars engaged in research, advanced training, and the dissemination of knowledge related to the pressing global problems of human survival, development, and welfare. Its activities focus mainly on peace and conflict resolution, development in a changing world. and science and technology in relation to human welfare. The University operates through a worldwide network of research and postgraduate training centres, with its planning and coordinating headquarters in Tokyo.
The United Nations University Press, the publishing division of the UNU, publishes scholarly books and periodicals in the social sciences, humanities, and pure and applied natural sciences related to the University's research.
United Nations University Press
TOKYO o NEW YORK o PARIS
© The United Nations University. 1995
The views expressed in this publication are those of the author and do not necessarily reflect the views of tile United Nations University.
United Nations University Press
The United Nations University.
53-70. Jingumae 5-chome,
Shibuya-ku, Tokyo 150, Japan
Tel: (03) 3499-2811
Telex: J25442
Fax: (03) 3406-7345
Cable: UNATUNIV TOKYO
Produced by Emilia, Inc., Tokyo
Printed by Permanent Typesetting and Printing Co.. Ltd., Hong Kong
UNUP-876
ISBN 92-808-0876-1
03500 P
<section>Note to the Reader from the UNU</section>
The work presented in this volume emanates from a United Nations University project on Climatic, Biotic, and Human Interactions in the Humid Tropics. The project was conceived to tackle the complex problem of reducing environmental degradation while simultaneously satisfying the development needs and aspirations of populations in the humid tropics.
Particularly important for the preparation of the present volume was a comprehensive field study carried out on the transformation of the tropical rainforest in Southeast Nigeria. The study investigated the effects of deforestation and land use on soil, hydrology, micro-climate, and productivity, with the specific objectives to (i) build a basic scientific body of knowledge that enables the rational use of land and water resources; (ii) provide guidelines for the management of land resources for economically viable and sustained productivity; (iii) create awareness of the food production potentials and limitations of the humid tropics; and (iv) provide training opportunities.
This volume draws upon the above, as well as other related research carried out under the United Nations University project, to provide guidelines for sustainable management of soil resources in the humid tropical regions of the world
<section>Summary</section>
The humid tropics ecosystem covers about 1.5 billion ha of land area, has a total human population of about 2 billion distributed over some 60 countries, and contains about I billion ha of the remaining tropical rainforest of the world. Relative distribution of the humid tropics comprises 45% in Latin America, 30% in Africa, and 25% in Asia. Rainfall of the humid tropics ranges from 1500 to 6000 mm/yr, with constantly high temperatures exceeding 18°C throughout the year. Predominant soils of the humid tropics are Oxisols (525 million ha) and Ultisols (413 million ha), comprising 63% of the total land area. These soils are old, highly weathered, and low in inherent soil fertility. Soils of intermediate fertility include Entisols (212 million ha) and Alfisols (53 million ha), comprising about 18% of the land area. Soils with good fertility and high productivity include Inceptisols (226 million ha), Histosols (27 million ha), and Mollisols (7 million ha), and comprise only
17.5% of the total land area. Other soils also are found in the humid tropics, but in very small proportions. The rate of tropical deforestation for the decade ending in 1990 was estimated at 0.9% for Latin America, 0.8% for Africa, and 1.2% for Asia. Deforestation is estimated to contribute between 1.1 and 3.6 pa-C as CO[2] per year to the atmosphere, a major factor in the so-called "greenhouse effect".
Predominant farming systems of the humid tropics include shifting cultivation and bush fallow systems in Africa and Latin America, rice based cropping systems in southeast Asia, tree crops and plantations in lowland wet forest and pre-montage moist and wet forest ecoregions, and livestock-based systems in Central and South America. The resource-based agricultural systems are subsistence and sustainable only at low levels of productivity and low demographic pressure. Introduction of intensive agricultural systems can lead to problems of soil and environmental degradation. Principal soil degradative processes include soil erosion, leaching, fertility depletion and nutrient imbalance, decline in soil organic matter content and soil biodiversity, deterioration of soil structure, and disruption in mineral recycling mechanisms.
Consequently, sustainable use of soil and water resources is a major concern. Because sustainable development implies meeting the needs of the present without compromising future needs, it is important to manage soil and water resources successfully to satisfy changing human needs. In this context, there are several improved and innovative technological options for sustainable management of soil resources in the humid tropics. These include ecologically compatible methods of deforestation and land development, and science-based techniques of soil and crop management of existing lands. If deforestation is inevitable, it must be done either manually or by shear-blade methods followed by in situ burning. It is desirable that cleared land is sown with an appropriate cover crop for providing an immediate ground cover. Installing erosion control measures and adopting erosion-preventive systems is a high priority. Mulch farming, conservation tillage, and vegetative hedges and
strips established on the contour are conservation-effective measures.
Nutrient management is crucial for sustainable use of those soils with low inherent fertility. Nutrient recycling is important so that losses can be reduced, and requirements for chemical fertilizers can be minimized through returning crop residues and other organic wastes. Crop residues contain large quantities of nutrients, including 5 to 35 kg of N. 1 to 4 kg of P,5 to 30 kg of K,4 to 25 kg of Ca, 1 to 8 kg of Mg, and 30 to 100 kg of total nutrients per Mg of crop residue. In addition to crop residue, appropriate cover crops can be grown to produce in situ mulch. The biomass from leguminous crop cover is rich in N. P. and other plant nutrients, and biological nitrogen fixation is important to enhancing the nitrogen supply of these soils.
Agroforestry systems are also important in erosion control and nutrient recycling. There are several tree species with high net biomass production. These trees are also efficient in nutrient recycling from the sub-soil horizons. Pruning and foliage from these trees in one year may contain 100 to 800 kg/ha of nutrients. With proper management, 20% to 30% of these nutrients can be available for crop production.
Research conducted in different agro-ecoregions has shown that substantial increases in production of crops, livestock, and trees can be achieved by adopting these improved and science-based technologies. Synergistic effects are achieved if supplemental doses of chemical fertilizers are used in conjunction with organic residues and pruning from woody perennials and leguminous trees. For each hectare of already cleared land on which these improved techniques of soil and crop management can be adopted, several hectares of tropical rainforest can be saved from the urgent need for deforestation and conversion for food crop production.
Sustainable systems of soil and water management have distinct attributes and characteristics. Principal attributes include erosion control, maintenance of soil organic matter content, enhancement of soil structure, replenishment of nutrients harvested through a judicious combination of organic residues and chemical fertilizers, and improvement of soil resilience and quality. Major characteristics of sustainable systems are highenergy flull that leads to an increasing trend in per capita productivity, and soil restorative ability to sequester carbon in soil and biomass, thus Improving environmental quality.
Considerable progress has been made in developing improved and creative technologies for increasing and sustaining production in the humid tropics. However, a lot remains to be done in understanding the basic principles and processes that govern soil degradation and soil quality; developing and adapting soil restorative technologies; developing local adaptive research networks in fine-tuning problem-solving technologies; disseminating existing knowledge through training; and identifying policy considerations that promote the use of improved technologies.
<section>I. Introduction</section>
Agricultural sustainability and judicious use of soil and water resources in the humid tropics are major global issues of modern times because of the interplay among human population, socio-economic and political factors, and natural resources of the fragile ecoregion. Mismanagement of soil resources and inefficient, resource-based agricultural systems are causing serious degradation of the ecoregion and perpetuating food deficit, malnutrition, and poor standard of living. In an attempt to develop the "last frontier", vast areas of tropical rainforest (TRF) are devastated annually by fire, machete, axe, chainsaw, bulldozers, and defoliants to grow food for the ever-growing population produce industrial raw material, and develop the infrastructure for new migrants into the region (NRC, 1993a). Ecologically incompatible methods of forest conversion, inappropriate land uses, and unscientific systems of soil and crop management based on fertility-mining techniques accelerate
soil erosion, pollute natural waters, disrupt water and energy balances at micro- and meso-scales within the ecosystem, and disrupt cycles of elements (e.g., C, N, and S) with global ecological consequences (Post et al., 1990). A major global consequence of deforestation, burning, and conversion to unsustainable land uses is the release of staggering amounts of CO, and other radiatively active or greenhouse gases into the atmosphere (Woodwell et al., 1983; Detwiler, 1986; Detwiler and Hall, 1988a, b; Crutzen and Andreae, 1990; Houghton, 1990a, b; Houghton and Skone, 1990; Schlesinger, 1991, 1993; Lal et al., 1994). If improved and scientific methods of forest conversion, land uses. and agricultural systems are not adopted in the near future, gross disturbances of the fragile TRF ecoregion can lead to irreversible degradation of soil and the environment (WRI, 1992 93; Oldeman, 1994).
<section>A. Sustainability and soil quality</section>
Sustainable agricultural systems imply successful management of resources for agriculture to satisfy changing human needs while maintaining or enhancing the quality of the environment and conserving natural resources (TAC, 1989; CGIAR, 1990b). High productivity is an important aspect of agricultural sustainability in the humid tropics. However, most of the prevalent land uses and predominant agricultural systems in the humid tropics are characterized, with a few notable exceptions of silviculture and rice-based systems, by low crop and animal productivity, rapid decline in productivity with continuous use, and high rates of soil and environmental degradation. Land-use systems based on fertility-mining practices of low input are usually unsustainable. Sustainable management of soil resources implies maintaining high productivity per unit area on a continuous basis, enhancement of soil quality, and improvement in environmental characteristics (Lal and Miller, 19931. Major
attributes of sustainable land use are:
- using land resources on a long-term basis;
- meeting present needs without jeopardizing future potential;
- enhancing per capita productivity;
- maintaining/enhancing environmental quality; and
- restoring productivity and the environmental regulatory capacity of degraded and impoverished ecosystems.
The principal objective of a sustainable land-use system is to maintain a high level of productivity, maintain or improve environmental and aesthetic attributes, and enhance soil quality. Sustainability is intimately linked to soil quality (Fig. 1), which must be maintained or enhanced. Inputs in Fig. 1 refer to additions of off-farm essential nutrients and amendments, while management refers to judicious use of on farm resources to minimize waste and the risks of soil and environmental degradation.
Soil quality refers to the soils ability to produce economic goods and services, and maintain acceptable standards of environmental quality and functions within the ecosystems potential and constraints (Lal and Miller, 1993). Soil quality depends on a range of soil properties and processes. Soil properties important to its quality are soil structure, soil organic matter content, plant-available water and nutrient reserves, aeration, and rate and magnitude of nutrient cycling and transformations. Deterioration in soil quality affects the soils life-support processes. Soil processes important to soil quality include accelerated erosion, leaching soil organic matter, and fertility depletion leading to nutrient deficiencies and toxicities, and anaerobiosis.
<section>B. Sustainability and forest conversion</section>
Deforestation of TRF by unsuitable methods and conversion to agricultural land use with resource-based systems can adversely affect the soil properties and processes that lead to a rapid decline in soil quality with a negative impact on sustainability and environmental quality. These adverse and negative effects have been the basis of rethinking about continuous cultivation in the humid tropics (Fearnside, 1987; Lugo, 1988; Goodland, 1991). In these cases, anthropogenic perturbations set in motion interacting soil and environmental degradative processes (Fig. 2). Soil degradative processes include: (i) decline in soil structure as related to compaction, crusting, decrease in water retention and transmission properties, poor aeration, and impeded root growth: (ii) reduction in the quality and quantity of soil organic matter and disruption in cycles of C. N. P, and S. leading to nutrient depletion and toxicity and decline in soil biomass carbon and soil biodiversity; (iii)
perturbation in the hydrological cycle, in conjunction with deterioration in soil structure, leading to high losses due to runoff and accelerated erosion, high evaporation causing frequent drought stress, and increase in leaching losses of bases and other plant nutrients; and (iv) perturbation of energy balance leading to high soil and air temperatures decrease in the minimum relative humidity, and overall aridization of the micro- and meso-climates. There are, of course, some positive effects favorable to crop growth (e.g., increase in radiation and less competition for water from deep-rooted trees).
<section>C. Attaining sustainability</section>
The objective of using improved technology is to minimize the magnitude and rate of soil degradation set in motion by conversion of TRE to agricultural land uses, and to enhance soil quality and resilience so that productivity can be sustained with minimal adverse impact on soils and environment. Some data with promising results from on-station experimentation in Africa, Latin America, and Asia are available on sustainable use of soil resources in the humid tropics. Given the re search information on productive potential and technical know-how available for sustainable management of these regions, it is technically feasible to manage these resources intensively for sustained agricultural production without jeopardizing their future potential (Jurion and Henry, 1969; Sanchez et al., 1982, 1983; Sanchez and Benites, 1987; Lal, 1986a, 1987c, 1989c; Juo, 1989; Alegre and Sanchez, 1991).
<section>D. Objectives</section>
The objective of this compendium is to collate available research information on scientifically proven methods of deforestation for conversion to agricultural land use, and on soil and crop management systems for sustained use of soil and water resources in the humid tropics. The compendium provides an overview of the improved and science-based technological options for sustainable production and cites examples of appropriate techniques along with their impact on production, soil properties, and environment. The material presented is written simply so that it can be used by practitioners, extension agents, policy makers, and others interested in developing and managing TRF ecoregions. Careful evaluation is also done to identify knowledge gaps and the need to fine-tune technology by adaptive research for representative soils and ecological conditions. Although most of the examples cited are drawn from the research done in West Africa, the compendium identifies generic
technological options that can be adapted further to achieve sustainable use of soil resources in the TRF ecoregion. The focus of this compendium is on soil and water management, with full realization that other aspects (i.e., pest management, improved crops and cultivars, cattle ranching, socio-economic and policy considerations) are also important to sustainable use of these resources. Therefore, readers are referred to other literature on these important topics (Fearnside, 1983, 1986; Hecht et al., 1988: Ehui and Hertel, 1989, 1992a, b; Buschbacher, 1990: NRC. 1993a).
<section>II. Humid tropics</section>
The humid tropical bioclimate occupies a vast region of the world (Fig. 3) and contains parts of as many as 60 countries that are partly or completely located within this bioclimate. By the year 2000, as much as 33% of the world population, or about 2 billion inhabitants, will be living in the humid tropics (Bonell et al., 1993). NRC (1993a) estimated that relative distribution of the humid tropics includes about 45% in the Americas, 30% in Africa, 25% in Asia, and only a small fraction in the Oceania and Pacific islands.
<section>A. Climate</section>
Humid tropics are the climatic regions where mean monthly temperatures are consistently high and exceed 18°C throughout the year, and where rainfall exceeds evapotranspiration for at least 270 days in a year (Salati et al., 1983; CGIAR, 1990a; Lugo and Brown, 1991). Detailed analysis of forested bioclimates in the tropics is given by Holdridge (1967). The annual rainfall ranges from 1500 to 2500 mm, with some regions receiving rainfall in excess of 6000 mm per annum. The mean rainfall in the humid tropics is about three times the world average. On the basis of moisture regime and temperature, the humid tropics are also termed "warm humid tropics". It is the amount and distribution of rainfall rather than variations in the temperature that determine the seasons (e.g., rainy season vs. dry season).
<section>B. Vegetation</section>
A wide range of vegetation types grows in the humid tropical bioclimate (Plate 1), with numerous tree species of varying height, canopy structure, and biomass (Holdridge, 1967; Lanly, 1982; Whitmore, 1984; Brown et al., 1989; Grainger, 1991). The most predominant vegetation of the humid tropics consists of TRF in the lowlands, moist deciduous forest in regions with a pronounced dry season, and montane forest in the high lands (Holdridge, 1967). The TRF, the climax vegetation of the humid tropics. is diverse and complex (Wilson and Peters, 1988; Myers, 1989), and occupies about 10% of the worlds land area. Distribution of different types of vegetation within the humid tropics is described in the report by the Forest Resource Assessment Project (FAO, 1992). The TRF vegetation is characterized by:
- high biodiversity comprising 40%, to 50% of Earth's five to ten million species;
- high plant biomass ranging from 200 to 400 Mg/ha, with most of the biomass accumulating in the first 8 to 10 years;
- concentration of a large proportion of the total nutrient capital within the plant biomass;
- rapid rate of nutrient recycling;
- multi-storey canopy of mature TRF containing numerous species occupying different strata; and
- a virtually closed ecosystem for most nutrients and water within the mature or high TRF.
<section>p013.jpg Fig. 3 Geographical distribution of the humid tropics</section>
Table 1 Ecological constraints to sustainable land use for intensive agricultural production
Ecoregion
Mean annual temperature (°C)
Mean annual rainfall (mm)
Constraints
Lowland rainforest
Forest conversion and land development. disposal of large biomass. Acid soils, low nutrient reserves, especially P. Al, and Mn toxicity, Ca deficiency, accelerated erosion, soil compaction, leaching losses, weed and pest incidence, grain drying and storage.
Pre-montane forest
Forest conversion methods mechanized on fragile soils on undulating to steep terrains, mass wastage, and accelerated soil erosion and land degradation, acid soils of low fertility, nutrient imbalance (e.g., Al and Mn toxicity, P deficiency), weed and pest incidence. crop drying.
The principal ecological constraints of the TRF ecosystem for intensive agricultural land use are shown in Table 1. These constraints are primarily biophysical due to climate, vegetation, and land characteristics.
<section>C. Soils</section>
Similar to vegetation, the soils of the humid tropics are also diverse and highly variable (Sanchez and Buol, 1975; Van Wambeke, 1992). Predominant soil types are shown in Table 2 and are briefly described below:
Oxisols:
Oxisols are the predominant soils of the humid tropics and occupy 35.3% of the total land area. These are old, highly weathered, acidic, permeable, and well-drained soils and occur in regions without a marked dry season. Clay minerals are predominantly kaolinitic, and occur with or without plinthite or laterite. The TRF is the climax vegetation of these soils. The occurrence of savanna-type vegetation in Oxisols may be due to degradation of TRF and soil resources.
Table 2 Predominant soils of the humid tropics
(10^6ha)
Soil
Total area
Regional distribution
Americans
Africa
Asia
Oxisols
Ultisols
Inceptisols
Entisols
Alfisols
Histosols
Spodosols
Mollisols
Vertisols
Aridisols
Total
(Recalculated from NRC, 1993a)
Ultisols:
These soils are similar to Oxisols but are relatively less weathered and younger, and occupy 27.7% of the humid tropics. These soils occur in regions with isotherms between 25° and 28°C, with annual rainfall between 1500 and 2000 mm, and in warm humid climates with a marked seasonal deficit of rainfall. The knolinitic clay minerals are relatively more active, and Ultisols have relatively higher nutrient reserves and effective cation exchange capacity than Oxisols.
Inceptisols:
These are young soils, but they have distinct horizonation and are very fertile. They occupy about 15.2% of the land area in the humid tropics. Three principal types of Inceptisols occur in the humid tropics. Aquepts are alluvial soils formed along the flood plains and occupy 120 million ha or 8.0% of the humid tropics. Andepts are soils of volcanic origin, young, extremely fertile, and occupy only 12 million ha or 0.8% of the humid tropics. Tropepts occur in warm humid climates, have base saturation of about 50%, contain relatively high amounts of soil organic carbon (SOC) ranging from 8 to 12 kg/m^2/m depth (Van Wambeke, 1992), and occupy 94 million ha or 6.3% of the humid tropics.
Entisols:
These are also young soils but without distinct horizonation. These soils are generally featureless because of the shorter time they have had to form distinct characteristics or because they have been formed on relatively inert parent material. There are three distinct suborders within Entisols. The most predominant sub-order is Psamments. These are coarse textured soils with high permeability. low water holding capacity, and low nutrient reserves. Psamments occupy about 90 million ha or 6.0% of the humid tropics. Fluvents are formed along flood plains and are recent alluvial deposits. These soils occupy about 50 million ha or 3.4% of the humid tropics. The Lithic sub-order or shallow and rocky soils occupy 72 million ha or 4.8% of the humid tropics. Lithic soils are marginal for agricultural production. Together, Entisols cover about 14.2% of the humid tropics.
Alfisols:
These soils occur in the semi-humid and sub-humid tropics in cool to hot humid areas with a prolonged dry season. Alfisols are less weathered in comparison with Oxisols and Ultisols but are more strongly weathered than Inceptisols. In general, Alfisols are fertile and productive soils but have the severe soil physical limitations of crusting. compaction, erosion, and drought stress during the dry season. Alfisols occupy 3.6% of the land area and are of relatively minor importance in the humid tropics.
Histosols:
These soils have relatively high organic matter content, with carbon content ranging from 12% to 18% in the surface horizon. These soils are formed in wet conditions. With good water management, they can be highly productive. These soils occupy only 27 million ha or less than 2% of the humid tropics.
Spodosols:
These soils are characterized by a sub-surface horizon (illuvial) with relatively high organic matter content along with high concentrations of aluminum and iron oxides. The surface horizon is usually leached (eluvial) and is often light (albic) in color. Spodosols occupy only 19 million ha or about 1% of the humid tropics.
Other Soils:
Mollisols and Vertisols also occur in the humid tropics. Mollisols occupy 7 million ha (0.5%) and Vertisols 5 million ha (0.3%). Mollisols are highly productive, dark-colored, and are agriculturally important soils. The surface horizon is characterized by high soil organic matter content and a well-defined granular or crumb structure, and responds favorably to inputs. In comparison, Vertisols are also dark-colored soils, but they contain a high content of expanding-type clay minerals. On drying, these soils develop wide and deep cracks and have poor trafficability.
Soil-related constraints to crop production for different soil orders are shown in Table 3. Oxisols and Ultisols together cover about 63%] of the total land area of the humid tropics. These soils are highly acidic (pH 4 to 5), often contain toxic concentrations of Al and Mn, and are usually deficient in essential plant nutrients (e.g., N. P. Ca). Liming and frequent additions of phosphorus are essential to improving agronomic productivity. Once nutritional constraints are alleviated, decline in soil structure can also be a problem under intensive mechanized agriculture. Deterioration in soil structure leads to crusting, surface and sub-soil compaction, surface runoff, and accelerated erosion. Alfisols are relatively more productive soils with favorable soil fertility and nutritional properties. However, Alfisols have more severe soil physical constraints than Oxisols and Ultisols. Alfisols are severely constrained by rapid decline in soil structure, crusting, compaction,
hard setting, high losses due to surface runoff, and accelerated soil erosion.
Highly productive soils of the humid tropics with only slight or moderate constraints to intensive agriculture are Inceptisols, Histosols, and Mollisols. These are young and fertile soils, and those of alluvial and volcanic origin and Mollisols are extremely productive. However, the distribution of these soils is extremely limited, covering only 17.5% of the area in the humid tropics. Although these soils are less prone to soil physical and nutritional problems, mismanagement and inappropriate land-use systems can lead to compaction, erosion, and nutrient depletion.
Table 3 Soil-related constraints to intensive agriculture in the humid tropics
Soil
Nutrient deficiency
Nutrient toxicity
Structural deterioration
Compaction
Erosion/ landslides
Effective rooting depth
Oxisols & Ultisols
N. P. Ca Zn
Al. Mn
Crusting. hard setting
Surface and sub-soil compaction
Sheet/rill erosion
Shallow to medium
Inceptisols
P
Gully erosion
Entisols
P
Single-grained loose structure
Gully erosion
Shallow
Alfisols
P
Crusting. hard setting
Surface and sub-soil compaction
Accelerated erosion
Shallow to medium
Histosols
Spodosols
N, P
Al
Sub-soil compaction
Sheet erosion
Shallow to medium
Mollisols
Vertisols
P
Cracking trafficability
Sub-soil compaction
Severe sheet erosion
Medium
<section>D. Predominant farming systems</section>
The term "farming system" implies a resource management strategy involving integrated management of crops, trees, and animals, along with labor and capital to optimize the use of land resources. Primary land resources involved are climate, vegetation, soil, and water. Types of major farming systems prevalent in the humid tropics are outlined in Fig. 4, and briefly described in Table 4.
Traditional Systems:
These are extensive farming systems involving the harvesting of minor forest products, shifting cultivation and related bush fallow systems, or nomadic herding. These systems are subsistence, resource-based, and rely primarily on labor input. In the humid tropics of Africa and America and parts of southeast Asia, traditional systems are based on shifting cultivation and bush fallow rotation (Okigbo and Greenland, 1976; Ruthenberg, 1980), on extractive use of native forest (Fearniside, 1983; Asabere, 1987), or on traditional agroforestry systems (Denevan et al., 1984; Gomez-Pompct, 1987a, b). Shifting cultivation is practiced primarily on low-fertility acid soils (Nye and Greenland, 1960; MacArthur. 1980; Ewel et al., 1981) for growing a mixture of crops involving root crops, plantain (Musa balbisiana) and bananas (Musa acuminta), upland rice (Oryza sativa), and beans (Phaseolus vulgaris) (Plate 2). Because these systems are based on little or no inputs and are practiced on
infertile soils, they are usually inefficient and less productive. These systems have the following characteristics:
Table 4 Predominant farming systems for different ecoregions in the humid tropics
Ecoregion*
Rainfali* (mm/yr)
Farming systems
Lowland
Moist forest
Root crops (yam. cassava sweet potato), rice
Wet forest
Plantations (e.g. bananas plantain citrus)
Rainforest
Tree crops (e.g. rubber, cocoa, oil palm)
Pre-montane
Moist forest
Root crops upland rice beans
Wet forest
Coffee, tea pineapple. cocoa
Rainforest
Timber crops and tree plantations
Lower montane
Moist forest
Suh-tropical vegetable, root crops
Wet forest
Coffee. tea cash crops
Rainforest
Tree crops
* (From NRC 1993a)
Yam = Dioscorea spp.
Pincapple =. Ananas comosus
Cassava = Manihot esculenta
Cocoa= Theobroma cacao
Sweet potato = Ipomea batatas
Coffee = Coffea arabica
- highly diverse and complex, involving simultaneous growing of as many as 12 crops on the same field because mixed cropping is the general rule,
- resource-based and labor-intensive, with minimal dependence on purchased inputs. Restoration of soil fertility is based on lengthy fallows. The duration of cropping vis-à-vis fallow depends on climate, vegetation, soil type, and demographic pressure: and
- small farms of I to 2 ha that can be managed by manual operations performed by the farm family.
Traditional systems are ecologically viable and socially acceptable as long as there is enough land for lengthy (10 20 years) restorative fallow and expectations for yield and standard of living are not too high. In fact, introduction of alternative farming systems in some ecologically sensitive regions of the humid tropics has met with only limited success.
Semi-Commercial Farming Systems:
These systems are used widely in southeast Asia, Central and South America, and parts of Africa. Systems based on intensive wetland rice cultivation have been used successfully for centuries in southeast Asia (Plate 3). Agroforestry systems based on growing food crops in association with small-holder perennial crops are other examples of such systems. Perennial crops most commonly grown are rubber (Heavea brasiliensis) coffee (Coffea arabica), oil palm (Elaeis quineensis) and tea. Coffee - and tea-based systems are prevalent in premontane ecoregions, and rubber and coffee based systems are practiced in lowland rainforest biome
In contrast with traditional systems of shifting cultivation, some purchased inputs are used in semi-commercial farming systems. It is common to use chemical fertilizers on tree crops. Most management inputs are directed to cash crops rather than food crops. In addition to chemical fertilizers soil fertility is also maintained through application of organic manners involving compost, household wastes. and crop residue mulches.
Commercial Agriculture:
In general, commercial agriculture in the humid tropics has so far been based on tree crops (Plate 4) and livestock production (Plate 5). Tree crops have been grown successfully since the nineteenth century without severe problems of soil and environmental degradation (Lugo and Liegel, 1987). In most commercial systems, tree crops are extremely important to sustainability (Vergara, 1982; Fearnside, 1983; Harwood, 1987). Plantation forestry is an important component of the production system (Evans, 1982; Lugo and Brown, 1991; Lugo, 1992) and tree plantations are grown as cash crops for a range of commercial products, including:
- fruit production (e.g., bananas, plantain, citrus (Citrus Sp.));
- beverages (e.g., coffee (Coffea arabica), tea (Camellia sinensis), cocoa (Theobroma cacao)); industrial raw material (e.g., rubber (Hevea brasiliensis), oil, gum, starch, pharmaceuticals); and
- timber (e.g., teak (Tectona indica), Gmelina (Gmelina arborea). cassia (Cassia siamea)).
The success of plantation crops depends on management. The chances of sustaining production in tree-based systems are high with science-based inputs. However, mismanagement of tree crops can also cause soil and environmental degradation. Food crops are often grown in association with tree crops (Harwood, 1987) to minimize the risks of soil degradation during the initial phases of development and to augment income.
Large-scale ranching and livestock production is an important commercial system for the humid tropical regions of Central and South America (Hecht, 1982; Hecht et al., 1988; Hecht and Cockburn, 1989). These systems have been successful wherever stocking rates have been kept low and improved pasture species have been grown with recommended inputs. Because most soils are low in inherent soil fertility, excessive and uncontrolled grazing can lead to compaction and erosion, and degradation of pasture to weeds and unpalatable species.
Attempts at introducing large-scale and commercial crop production systems in the humid tropics have met with only limited success (Lal, 1987b). There are several climatic limitations to grain crop production (e.g., high relative humidity, low levels of radiation during the growing season, high incidence of diseases and pests, high storage losses). Mechanized harvesting is also inefficient and causes severe soil compaction.
<section>E. Soil degradation in the humid tropics</section>
The total area degraded by different soil degradative processes in the world is estimated at about 2 billion ha (WRI, 1992 93). The largest area of degraded soil is in Asia (38%) and Africa (27%). Most of this degradation is caused by accelerated erosion, which is a serious problem in the humid tropics. Jansson (1988) reported that high sediment yields are observed from river basins draining humid tropical climate regions (A[f] in Koppen's classification). High sediment yields are reported from humid regions of Costa Rica, Java, Malaysia, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Australia, Philippines, and Thailand. High rates of soil degradation are observed in the humid tropical regions of Central America, Africa, and Asia (WRI, 1992 93; Oldeman, 1994). Severe water erosion is extensive in the humid regions of southeast Asia, including Burma, Thailand, Malaysia, and Indonesia; many islands in the Pacific and Oceania; along the mountains of the Pacific coast in Central America, including
southeastern Mexico, Honduras, Nicaragua, and Costa Rica; and in the drastically disturbed regions of the Amazon Basin.
Indiscriminate and intensive land use for seasonal crop production or for pastures at high stocking rates, resource-based production systems with non- or low-purchased inputs to replenish nutrients harvested in crops and animals, inherently poor soils, and harsh environment are some of the factors responsible for the high rate of soil degradation observed in the humid tropics. The severity of soil degradation is due to the interactive effects of the causes, factors, and processes of soil degradation (Fig. 5). The causes or agents of soil degradation are socio-economic and cultural forces driven by demographic variables (e.g., population density and transmigration); strategic reasons for deforestation to create access to potential resources, including national policies and institutional factors such as logistic and technical support; land tenure customs; and several other cultural and ethnic characteristics that determine the demand on natural resources. Factors of soil
degradation are relevant to biophysical resources, including micro- and meso-climates, hydrology, terrain and landscape, vegetation, land use, and soil and crop management systems. Factors arc manifestations of biophysical resources, land-use activities, and the level of science-based input to harness resources. The interactive effects of causes and factors set in motion several mechanisms and processes that lead to decline in soil resilience and quality, environmental quality, and productivity of the resource base. Three important processes of soil degradation in the humid tropics are briefly described:
Table 5 The magnitude of soil erosion by water observed in some countries in the humid tropics
Country
Soil erosion rate (Mg/ha/yr)
Brazil
Ecuador
Guatemala
Guinea
Côte d'lvoire
Jamaica
Madagascar
Nigeria
Papua New Guinea
Peru
(Lal, 1984)
Physical Degradation:
Soil physical degradation is related to decline in soil structure leading to crusting. compaction, excessive overland flow, and accelerated erosion (Plate 6). Estimates of the extent of physical degradation have also been made by Oldeman (1994). Depending on soil properties and terrain characteristics, sheet and rill erosion can also change to gully erosion and other forms of mass movement. High rates of soil erosion by water are reported from several countries in the humid tropics (Table 5). High soil temperature, exceeding 40°C at 5 cm depth for 4 to 6 hours a day, is another factor that accentuates soil physical degradation by affecting soil structure and the rate of several processes within the soil. Physical degradation is also aggravated by drastic changes in energy balance and hydrological cycle by deforestation and intensive agricultural activities.
Chemical Degradation:
Disruption in cycles of C, N. P. S. and other minerals leads to chemical degradation of the soil. The most important form of chemical degradation is acidification due to depletion of bases (Ca, Mg, K) and accumulation of H and Al on the exchange complex. Depletion in soil reserves of plant nutrients (N. P, K, Zn, S) is another cause of chemical degradation. The effects of chemical degradation are drastic on Oxisols and Ultisols which have low inherent soil fertility.
Biological Degradation:
Reduction in the quantity and quality of soil organic matter, and biotic activity and species diversity of soil fauna are important forms of biological degradation observed in the humid tropics. Soil fauna play an important role in nutrient cycling and in maintaining soil structure. Land-use and soil and crop management systems with adverse effects on soil fauna accentuate biological degradation. Biological degradation also refers to change in the climax vegetation. Vast areas of the humid tropics previously covered with TRF are now infested with spear grass (Plate 7).
<section>III. TRF in the humid tropics and its conversion</section>
Despite several reports on the rates of tropical deforestation (Myers, 1989; NRC, 1993a), there are no reliable estimates of the extent of TRF. Available estimates (Table 6) vary widely, often by a factor of 2 to 4. Large differences in the statistics on TRF are due to many factors:
- There are differences in the criteria used to define TRF (e.g., closed forest, open forest, wooded land, primary forest, secondary forest).
Table 6 Estimates of the area of TRF
(10^6 ha)
Region
Lanly (1982)
Postel (1984)
WRI (1992 93)
FAO (1990)
Tropical America
Tropical Africa
Tropical Asia
Pacific area
World total
It is important to standardize the terminology and clearly define what constitutes a TRF and what does not.
- The methodology used to assess the area is not reliable. Most often, the results of aerial surveys are not checked with the ground truth. - Most data are 10 to 20 years old, and statistics are often obsolete. Because of the high rates of deforestation and obsolete statistics, it is difficult to assess the exact area under TRF at any given time.
The extent of the original area under TRF is estimated at 1.5 billion ha, of which about 600 million ha have been converted to other land uses (Ehrlich and Wilson, 1991; NRC, 1993a). World Bank (1991) estimated the area under TRF at I billion ha, with an additional 0.5 billion ha of deciduous forest.
<section>A. Forest conversion</section>
Similar to the area under forest cover, the actual rates of TRF conversion are also difficult to obtain. In addition, estimates of the rate of TRF conversion vary widely, depending on what is considered forest and what is conversion. FAO (1992) estimated that the rate of deforestation is 17 million ha/yr. The rate of deforestation increased from 0.6% in the 1980s to 0.8% in the 1990s. The deforestation rate is high est in Asia (1.2%/yr), followed by Latin America (0.9%,/yr) and Africa (0.8%,/yr) (Table 7). The regional rate of deforestation is in the order of West Africa (2.1%/yr)>Central America and Mexico (1.8%/yr)>south east Asia (I.6%/yr)>Africa (1.2%,/yr) (WRI, 1992 93).
Table 7 Estimates of the rate of deforestation of TRF
Region
O'Keefe and Kristofferson (1984)
WRI (1992-93)
FAO (1990)
Africa
Latin America
Asia
Total
<section>B. Effects of forest conversion</section>
There are several major concerns about deforestation of TRF. These concerns are related to local, regional, and global effects (Fig. 6). Local effects are the most drastic and are related to changes in soil properties, vegetation, and micro-climate. Regional effects are related to hydrological characteristics and changes in meso-climate. Global effects are due to changes in global cycles of C and N and water vapor and may be related to global warming or the greenhouse effect.
<section>1. Local effects</section>
The principal local effects of deforestation are related to changes in microclimate and soil properties.
(i) Micro-climate:
Deforestation of TRF leads to drastic changes in microclimate (Lal and Cummings, 1979), as outlined in Fig. 6. In general, deforestation eliminates the buffering effect of vegetation cover and accentuates the extremes. Fluctuations in micro-climatic parameters are greatly enhanced (e.g., relative humidity, maximum and minimum temperatures for soil and air). Deforestation decreases rainfall effectiveness and increases aridization of the climate. Forest removal increases the magnitude and intensity of net radiation reaching the soil surface. Ghuman and Lal (1987) observed that in south central Nigeria, on average, 10.5 and ll.5 MJ/m^2/day of insolation were received on a cleared site compared to 0.4 and 0.3 MJ/m^2/day in the forest during the dry seasons of 1984 and 1985, respectively. There was no appreciable difference in solar radiation received under forest during the rainy (May) and dry (December) seasons (Table 8). Vegetation removal also increases wind velocity
(Table 8).
Deforestation decreases the maximum relative humidity, especially during mid-day. There is also a corresponding increase in air temperature and evaporation rate. Perhaps the most drastic effect of deforestation is on soil temperature. The maximum soil temperature at I to 5 cm depth can be 5° to 20°C higher on cleared land on a sunny day compared with land under TRF cover. Because of high soil evaporation, the soil moisture content of the surface layer is also lower in cleared than in forested soil (Fig. 7).
(ii) Soil Properties:
Deforestation also has a drastic impact on the physical, chemical, and biological properties of soil. The magnitude of deforestation-induced alterations in soil properties depends on antecedent soil conditions, tree density and species of the forest and under story vegetation, and methods of lend clearing used. Experiments on land-clearing methods throughout the tropics have shown that deforestation results in degradation of soil structure, decrease in porosity of the surface layer, increase in soil compaction, and decrease in infiltration rate (Lal and Cummings, 1979; Ghuman et al., 1991; Lal, 1992). Although increase in soil bulk density may be only 10% to 20%, it is the reduction in volume fraction of the macropores that may cause a drastic reduction in infiltration rate (Fig. 8). Densification of the soil, as evidenced by increase in bulk density and decrease in infiltration rate, is greater with mechanized than with manual methods of deforestation(Lal, 1981, 1992;
Hulugalle et al., 1984). Soil wetness at the time of land clearing plays an important role in clearing-caused alterations in soil physical properties. The higher the soil wetness at the time of land clearing, the more deleterious is the effect on soil physical properties (Ghuman and Lal, 1992). Soil physical properties and infiltration rate are also affected by burning (Plate 8). Intense burning. as is the case in the windrow zone, may increase soil aggregation and improve infiltration rate (Ghuman et al., 1991). Biomass removal by a mechanized system without burning may cause drastic adverse effects on soil physical properties (Lal and Cummings, 1979).
Table 8 Effects of deforestation on solar radiation and wind speed recorded at Okomu, south central Nigeria
Parameter
Under forest
Cleared
Solar radiation (MJ/m^2/day)
December 1984
December 1985
Wind velocity 1986 (m/s)
Daytime relative humidity (%)
23 May 1984
17 July 1984
Maximum air temperature (°C)
31°C
36°C
Maximum soil temperature (°C) at 1 cm depth
Sunny day
Cloudy day
Pan evaporation (mm/day) in dry season
(Ghuman and Lal 1987)
In addition, deforestation affects the chemical properties of soil (Table 9), and the magnitude of changes in soil chemical properties following land clearing depends on the nature of vegetation, antecedent soil conditions, and methods of land clearing. Biomass burning is a major factor responsible for changes in soil chemical properties. Shifting cultivation does not drastically alter nutrient cycling (Nye and Greenland, 1960; Andriesse and Schelhaus, 1987), but clear cutting does. Burning releases plant nutrients immobilized in the biomass. However, ash contains mostly cations (i.e., Ca, Mg, K) and several elements (i.e., N. S) are volatilized. Burning also releases a considerable amount of carbon and nitrogenous compounds into the atmosphere (Crutzen and Andreae, 1990). The magnitude of changes in soil properties also depends on the quantity of biomass being burnt and soil temperature during burning. Ghuman and Lal (1989) observed that clearing and collecting biomass from
a high forest in south central Nigeria involved a biomass of about 500 kg/m^2, which formed a 30- to 55-mm-thick layer of ash on the soil surface after burning (Plate 9). During burning, the maximum soil temperatures rose to 218°C at 1 cm depth, 150°C at 5 cm depth, 104°C at 10 cm depth, and 70°C at 20 cm depth. Because of drastic changes in soil color, from yellow-red to black interspersed with grayish-white, the maximum soil temperatures remained higher than the unburned non-windrow zone even 24 months after burning. High soil temperatures are likely to cause severe losses of N by volatilization.
Table 9 Possible effects of land clearing and biomass burning on soil chemical and nutritional properties
Soil property
Biomass burning
Biomass removal
Windrow zone
Non-windrow zone
In situ burning
Soil organic carbon
Increase*
Decrease
Increase
Decrease
Soil pH
Increased
Decrease
Increase
Decrease
1-2 unit
(0.2-0.5 unit)
0.5-1 unit
(0.2-0.5 unit)
Total acidity
Decrease
Increase
Decrease
Increase
Exchangeable cations
Increase
Decrease
Decrease
Decrease
8-10 times
Base saturation
Increase
Decrease
Increase
Decrease
Al and Mn concentrations
Decrease
Increase
Decrease
Increase
Available P
Increase
Decrease
Increase
Decrease
4 10 times
1 2 times
Total N
Decrease
Decrease
Decrease
Decrease
* The increase in soil carbon following burning may be due partly to addition of ash and unburnt biomass.
There are also changes in the biological properties of soil. Burning may change soil fauna population and species composition (Plate 10). Intensive burning especially in the windrows, usually increases soil temperature to above 100°C down to a 10 cm depth. Soil temperatures in excess of 60°C may persist for 30 hours or more. The burnt soil is essentially sterilized to a 10 or 20 cm depth (Raison, 1979; Ghuman and Lal, 1989). The sterilization may cause drastic, albeit short-term changes in soil biological properties (e.g. biomass carbon; activity and species composition of macro-fauna, including earthworms and termites).
(iii) Hydrological Properties and Processes:
Deforestation leads to drastic changes in components of the hydrological cycle and of the energy balance, the two being intimately linked through evaporation and evapotranspiration. The hydrological balance can be expressed by the simplified equation
P = R + l +D S+¦ E dt
where P is precipitation, R is surface runoff, I is interflow or deep seepage, AS is change in soil water storage, E is evapotranspiration, t is time, and dt implies derivative with respect to t. Deforestation increases the amount of precipitation directly reaching the soil surface increases losses due to surface runoff and soil evaporation, decreases total evapotranspiration because of the removal of deep-rooted vegetation, decreases soil water storage in the root zone because of alterations in soil structure and increased losses due to runoff and evapotranspiration, and increases seepage and interflow components. The data in Table 10 from western Nigeria indicate that deforestation caused a drastic increase in runoff and interflow. An increase in runoff rate and amount increases soil erosion and interflow. An increase in interflow is attributed to the absence of deep-rooted perennials. Deforestation may also increase leaching losses of minerals and dissolved organic
carbon.
<section>2. Regional and global effects</section>
The regional and global effects of deforestation are difficult to quantify. Deforestation of large watersheds increases stream discharge due to increase in runoff and interflow (Hibbert, 1967a; Pereira, 1973: Lal, 1992). Some researchers argue that large-scale deforestation may change the rainfall amount and distribution pattern over the region (Salati and Vose, 1985). On a regional scale, deforestation also influences the transport of water and nutrients out of the ecosystem.
Table 10 Deforestation effects on components of the hydrological cycle in western Nigeria
Component
Pre-clearing 1975
Partial clearing 1978
Post-clearing* 1979
Rainfall (mm/yr)
Runoff (mm/yr)
Runoff (% of rainfall)
Interflow (mm/yr)
Interflow (% of rainfall)
Total water yield (mm/yr)
Total water yield (% of rainfall)
* Post-clearing by tree pusher root rake combination.
(Lal 1992)
A major global effect of deforestation is related to global carbon balance. Deforestation of TRF is considered to contribute substantially toward emission of about 1.6 pg-C/yr, or 30% of the total carbon emission into the atmosphere (Houghton, 1990a, b; Houghton and Skole, 1990; Post et al., 1990; Schlesinger, 1991). It is difficult to estimate how much of the total carbon released by deforestation of TRF comes from soil compared with that from the biomass. Burning may affect global carbon balance directly and indirectly. Directly, it releases carbon from the biomass during combustion. Indirectly, it accentuates carbon release from soils from which vegetation has been burnt. Soil exposed by burning undergoes drastic changes in soil properties that can possibly enhance the rate of carbon mineralization. It is estimated that loss of carbon from soil by shifting cultivation practiced over some 25 million ha annually may be as much as 6.25 tg/yr (Lal, 1993b). These effects of
deforestation and related activity on global carbon balance are extremely important and need to be quantified.
<section>IV. Basic concepts of sustainable land use in the humid tropics</section>
Traditional farming, labor-intensive and resource-based, is compatible with an ecological environment as long as the pressure of the human and animal population is low, and yield expectations are not high. The system is workable if: (i) a favorable level of soil structure is main tained; (ii) soil erosion is controlled; (iii) nutrients are effectively recycled through the addition of ash, and seasonal crops grown in association with deep-rooted perennials; (iv) pests are kept under check through biodiversity; and (v) food security is guaranteed by mixed and multiple cropping. Most of these requirements in the past have been met through low-cropping intensity based on lengthy forest/bush following. Until the 1950s, population densities were generally low, and food needs and basic necessities were met through the cultivation of food staples grown in association with trees, other woody perennials, and some animals. Farm size was limited to what could be managed comfortably by
family labor. The success of the system was attributed to a limited number of people living on land sufficient to provide a subsistence way of life. The system fails because of the high pressure of the human and animal population, a lack of sufficient land for lengthy fallow, the non-availability of off-farm purchased inputs, rapid soil degradation, low yields and dwindling returns, and the high aspirations of modern living that subsistence agriculture cannot fulfill.
<section>A. Requirements of a sustainable improved agricultural system</section>
Creative and sustainable agricultural technologies must promote symbiosis between humans and the environment. Sustainable technologies must conform to and address the specific ecological constraints and long-range consequences of the simplification of the complex, diverse, and unperturbed natural ecosystems. Sustainable development must address the issue of assuring food supply, enhancing the soils productivity, preserving environmental quality, and transforming subsistence farming into economically viable commercial agriculture. The latter is possible only if the size of farm-holdings is economically viable, and agri-based supporting industries are developed to absorb labor displaced by transforming labor-intensive farming into science-based commercial enterprise. For an improved and new agricultural system to be sustainable, it must have the following characteristics:
<section>1. High energy flux</section>
The overall energy input and output must be regulated to enhance the output/input ratio, and attain positive thermodynamic energy balance with respect to biological yield vs. production inputs. Both energy efficiency and flux must be increased. A low-output subsistence system can be highly efficient in terms of energy use, but is unsustainable because of low productivity. The energy efficiency of a high-input system can, however, be improved by reducing nutrient losses by effectively containing leaching and erosion, and enhancing nutrient capital through judicious inputs of chemical fertilizers and organic amendments. Nitrogen deficiency is a major constraint in most soils of the tropics and subtropics. Locale-specific research is needed to ensure an adequate supply of nitrogen for the desired level of high yields through the input of synthetic chemical fertilizers supplemented by alternate sources of nitrogen (e.g., symbiotic nitrogen fixation through legume-based rotations
and agroforestry systems, organic manures and composts, azolla). Similarly, the productivity of soils notably deficient in available P can be enhanced only through substantial and regular additions of phosphatic fertilizers (Sanchez and Salinas, 1981). The efficiency of fertilizer use can no doubt be increased by use of new cultivators, and through mycorrhizal infection. The use of synthetic fertilizers being inevitable, the strategy is to decrease their rate of application through better systems of soil and crop management. Hoping to increase and sustain agricultural production by adding chemicals alone, without improved and efficient systems of soil and crop management, is bound to cause frustrations and disappointments. It is the judicious combination of both management and inputs that is crucial to a sustainable development of agriculture. With the worlds highest rate of population observed in many countries of the humid tropics, low-input systems alone are obsolete,
environmentally incompatible, soil degradative, and responsible for perpetuating low standards of living.
<section>2. Less drudgery and more dignity</section>
Agriculture must be made a respectable, dignified, and comfortable profession devoid of drudgery and undue misery. The approach adopted should be dynamic to replace labor-intensive systems with labor efficient technologies. The new technologies may be based on animal power or motorized farm operations with varying degrees of mechanization. The scientific community, including social scientists and anthropologists, must address the issue of human values and dignity. Tilling land with obsolete manually powered tools, controlling weeds with a back-breakhig hoe, threshing grain by beating with a stick or trampling by human and animal is not an inspiring profession. Concern about over-dependence on nonrenewable and rapidly dwindling fossil fuels is genuine but is not a justification for condemning resource-poor farmers to sub-human operations.
<section>3. Effective water management</section>
A suitable combination of soil and crop management techniques for in situ conservation of soil water is needed to enhance production and regulate environmental quality. For these regions, small-scale irrigation in the valleys can help to grow short-season crops during the dry season or prolong the growing season.
<section>4. Soil restorative</section>
Improvement of subsistence farming is realizable through increasing production, sustaining the higher level of net output, and preserving the productive potential of natural resources through restorative measures of soil and crop management. The desired high net output must be achieved with a minimum of soil degradation. The soil quality and its productive capacity must be preserved and improved by preventing soil erosion, promoting the high biological activity of soil fauna, improving soil organic matter content, and replacing the nutrients harvested in crops and animals through chemical fertilizers and organic amendments supported by effective nutrient-recycling mechanisms. The productive efficiency of a system must be evaluated in terms of its effect on the natural resources (e.g., change in soil organic matter reserves, pH, nutrient status, exchangeable cations, plant-available water capacity or effective rooting depth). Suitable farming systems are those that enhance
soil quality. Fertility-mining and soil-degrading low-input systems must be stopped.
<section>5. Ecologically compatible</section>
Simplified agricultural ecosystems are more productive but often susceptible to environmental stresses compared with the natural ecosystems. The objective of sustainable management is to minimize the vulnerability of these systems to the degradative effects of accelerated erosion, rapid depletion of soil organic matter and nutrient reserves, and excessive build-up of unfavorable flora and fauna. The risks of instability or fragility created through the simplification of an ecosystem must be minimized through appropriate soil and crop management.
<section>B. Components of a sustainable system</section>
The extensive agricultural systems based on fertility-restorative measures involving shifting cultivation or bush-fallow rotation are no longer economically viable or ecologically compatible. Sustainable systems are those that produce continuous economic returns without causing large or long-term changes to the environment, or being ethically or aesthetically unacceptable. Locale-specific and on-farm validation is needed in adapting the research information already known. There is also a need for creating new knowledge through biotechnology and other modern innovations. Nonetheless, several proven sub-systems or components are available and can be used as building blocks for formulating sustainable systems for a range of agro-ecosystems. Some relevant components/sub-systems are:
<section>1. Nutrient management</section>
Nutrient management is crucial to sustained production. Highly weathered Oxisols/Ultisols and Alfisols, being inherently low in nutrient reserves, must have a regular and supplemental nutrient supply to facilitate intensive cultivation for increased food production. Intensive land use and high yields on soils of low inherent fertility can be achieved only by raising the nutrient levels through the use of inorganic fertilizers, organic amendments, and nutrient recycling. Nutrient enhancement for these soils is indispensable.
Although crop production can be increased by increasing fertilizer use, many small land holders and resource-poor farmers cannot afford the expense. Policy makers and economic planners must develop long range strategies to ensure a dependable and timely supply of chemical fertilizers at affordable prices. Over-dependence on synthetic fertilizers and other agricultural chemicals must be avoided because the energy and economic costs of using them are prohibitive for the small land holders of the tropics. A combination of inorganic and organic fertilizers is, therefore, a useful strategy to minimize dependence on synthetic fertilizers, and enhance soil structure and physical characteristics. The rate of application of inorganic fertilizers can also be reduced by minimizing losses and increasing the recycling of nutrients. Losses by volatilization, leaching? and erosion can be controlled through conservation tillage, timely application by split doses, fertilizer placement, and
slow-release formulations. Technological options for nutrient recycling include crop residue management and mulch farming, legume based rotations, ley farming with low stocking rate and controlled grazing, and agroforestry systems including alley cropping. Nutrient recycling mechanisms can work only if there is something useful to recycle. The systems are ineffective in highly weathered Oxisols and Ultisols which predominantly contain Al^+3 and Mn^+3 in the sub-soil horizons and are devoid of basic cations. In alley-cropping systems, crop yields can be decreased due to competition for nutrients water, and light (Lal, 1989a, 1990a). There are some advantages in substituting biological nitrogen fixation for inorganic fertilizers. However, the economics of growing nitrogen versus buying nitrogen have to be carefully evaluated in terms of thee, land scarcity. and efficiency of nitrogen availability.
<section>2. Erosion management</section>
Soil erosion control is crucial to the sustainable management of soil resources. Several technological options are available for erosion management. The choice of an appropriate option should be carefully made, with due consideration of soil types, land form and terrain characteristics. rainfall regime and hydrology, cropping/farming system, and the socioeconomic factors.
Erosion preventive measures are those that enhance soil structure, decrease raindrop impact, improve infiltration capacity, and decrease runoff rate and amount. These techniques are judicious systems of soil and crop management (e.g.. mulch farming through cover crops and planted fallows, multiple cropping, multi-storey canopy including agro-forestry, and conservation tillage). The latter is a generic term (Lal, 1989c) and encompasses a wide range of tillage systems that provide at least 30% of ground cover through crop residue mulch. Conservation tillage systems are generally reduced tillage systems that eliminate or decrease the frequency of soil inversion (e.g., no-till, chisel-till, plow plant). The no-till system is generally suitable for structurally active soils and in regions with sufficient availability of crop residue for mulch and of herbicides for weed control. The suitability of different tillage systems depends on soil properties, climate characteristics, and a
range of other factors, including socioeconomic and anthropological considerations (Lal, 1986b). Soils highly susceptible to erosion should, however, be managed by no-tillage or ridge tillage systems. Ridge tillage, a series of alternating ridges and furrows formed on the contour, is a widely adapted conservation measure (Lal, 1990a). The system is used with variations ranging from ridges with gentle gradients to facilitate water harvest to cross-ties to form a series of basins to conserve water in situ by the tied-ridge system (Lal, 1987c). The practice is useful on shallow soils to increase the effective rooting volume, on poorly drained soils to grow upland crops, on nutrient-deficient soils to heap up the fertile top soil, on steep lands to provide a system for safe disposal of excess runoff, and in all conditions to facilitate the harvest of roots and tuber crops.
<section>3. Residue management</section>
A regular and sizable addition of organic material is essential to maintain a favorable level of soil organic matter content and to stimulate the biotic activity of soil fauna (e.g., earthworms and termites). The structural collapse of soils with predominantly low-activity clays can be avoided by maintaining high organic matter content and enhancing the activity of soil fauna. Crop residue mulch is an important ingredient of any improved farming/cropping system. Frequent applications of 4 to 6 t/ha of residue mulch applied to the soil surface are beneficial for soil and water conservation, regulating soil moisture and temperature regimes, improving soil structure, enhancing the biological activity of soil fauna, and protecting soils from high-intensity rains and from ultradesiccation. Mulching also suppresses weed growth.
While the beneficial effects of mulching are widely recognized, procuring a mulch material in sufficient quantity is a serious practical problem. The management of crop residue as a source of mulch is, therefore, linked closely with cropping system, tillage methods, and planted fallows. A range of cultural practices is available to ensure an adequate amount of residue mulch for soil protection and fertility enhancement.
Live mulch, alley cropping, ley farming, planted fallows, and use of industrial by-products are some of the cultural practices specifically adopted to procure the mulch. Once again, the suitability of a practice depends on the locale-specific biophysical and socio-economic environment.
<section>4. Crop management</section>
A continuous ground cover is necessary to provide a buffer against sudden fluctuations in micro- and meso-climate, and to prevent the degradative effects of raindrops or high-velocity winds. Timely planting, use of viable seed at optimum rate, improved cultivars and cropping systems, fertilizer use, and pest control are all important aspects related to crop management. The benefits of timely planting include a buffer against uncertain rains, an unfavorable soil temperature regime, pest infestation, and an unfavorable market. Planted tallow's, both legume and grass covers, are generally more effective in restoring soil fertility and improving soil physical properties than natural fallows. Soil organic matter can be increased and soil structure improved over a short period of two to three years.
There are several methods of managing cover crops. Live mulch is a system of growing grain/food crops through a low-canopy cover crop. The latter is suppressed chemically or mechanically. Mixed cropping, sequential cropping, and relay cropping are recommended to create diversity, so that many crop species of varying growth cycles, canopy structures, root systems, and water and nutrient requirements can be grown to maximize the use of a limited resource. The benefits of mixed cropping, growing more than one species simultaneously on the same field, are generally greater under adverse conditions with low inputs than in regions of few constraints with high inputs (Willey, 1979; Okigbo, 1987).
Agroforestry involves growing trees and woody shrubs in association with food crop annuals and/or animals. Alley cropping is a special system of agroforestry whereby food crop annuals are grown between rows of specially planted woody shrubs or trees. Shrubs are pruned regularly during the cropping season to prevent shading, provide mulch, and reduce water use by perennials. If properly managed, pruning from these crops can provide 30 to 50 kg/ha of N (Ghuman and Lal, 1990). When planted on the contour, hedges also decrease losses due to runoff and soil erosion (Lal, 1989a).
Mixed farming can be a stable system for small land holders, provided pastures are lightly grazed, the stocking rate is low, and animal waste is applied to the land to replenish soil fertility. Mixed farming with an excessive stocking rate and uncontrolled grazing is usually unsuccessful and degradative to soil and environment, as is the case in the African Sahel.
<section>5. Water management</section>
Water management is crucial to avoid mid-season drought, prolong the growing season, enhance rainfall effectiveness, reduce the risks of accelerated erosion, and minimize leaching losses of nutrients. The effectiveness of rainfall is drastically reduced by soil degradation, and can be enhanced by in situ conservation of water by increasing infiltration and reducing runoff, and improving soil water retention in the root zone by decreasing soil evaporation. In situ conservation of soil water is achieved by conservation tillage, mulch farming, and appropriate cropping systems. Runoff management, safe disposal of excess water and its storage in small reservoirs for supplementary irrigation and for livestock, is also an important strategy.
<section>C. Systems approach</section>
Although general principles may be the same, technological packages (systems) for the sustainable management of soil and water resources are site-specific and depend on farming/cropping systems, farm size, the availability of essential inputs, and socio-economic factors. Locale specific and on-farm synthesis of packages is needed on the basis of the components and sub-systems described above. The agronomic productivity, economic profitability, and ecological compatibility of such packages need to be assessed through research. The systems research is conducted preferably on ,benchmark" soils of "ecological regions". By so doing, the agro-economic productivity of different production systems can be related to soil and climatic characteristics. Systems research necessitates a pan-disciplinary approach involving scientists with expertise in soil science, hydrology, climatology, agricultural mechanization, agronomy, plant improvement, pest management, economics, sociology, and
anthropology. Results obtained from field experimentation can be validated against predictive models. The latter may be biophysical models, economic-productivity models based on linear programming, or statistical models based on systems analysis of, empirical data. The alternate agronomic approach is field experimentation on a step-by-step gradual improvement level, by substituting the component that is the major constraint to crop and animal production. Identification of, the major constraint and alleviation through technological options are once again topics of on-farm research. The agronomic approach is a long-term strategy aimed at transforming low-input subsistence farming into science-based commercial agriculture. Researchable priorities in this approach involve an assessment of the components or subsystems outlined in three stages (i.e.. traditional farming, improved farming, and commercial agriculture). In addition, specific research priorities should be given to
soil and crop management practices that increase the efficiency of water and fertilizer use, and restore eroded and degraded lands. There is also a need for more research into the development of high-yielding crops/cultivars through biotechnology.
<section>V. Characteristics of an improved cropping/farming system</section>
A truly sustainable system must (a) maintain the long-run biological and ecological integrity of natural resources, (b)) sustain a desirable level of support to a farms, community's, or regions social, political, and economic well-being, and (c) enhance quality of life. To be operational, however, sustainability must have tangible and objective criteria (e.g., soil and water conservation, productivity restoration, improvement in water quality in relation to dissolved and suspended loads, a positive thermodynamic energy balance, improvement in air quality, reduction in use of off-farm input for the same level of production and profitability, and acceptable life style as influenced by socio-political factors). All of these criteria are quantifiable but also have a time dimension. Over what period of time are these changes desired or achieved months, years, decades, or centuries,? Is the system that we desire to achieve closed, static, steady state, or dynamic,! Obviously,
closed or static systems, though ecologically stable, are not productive enough to meet present demands and future needs. Because the system is dynamic, what are the energy fluxes involved in terms of output/input ratio and what is the carrying capacity of such a system? It is not only the energy efficiency but also the total energy flux that is very important in sustainability. What are the indirect costs of achieving such a goal? Indirect costs are indeed important goals to be considered. For example, reducing the use of off-farm input may necessitate bringing additional land into production. The latter may be marginal, subject to severe problems of accelerated erosion and other degradative processes. Substitution of inorganic fertilizers with organic amendments of, green manure may equally endanger the quality of surface and ground water and emit radiatively active gases into the atmosphere, thereby aggravating the greenhouse effect. Will substitution of, input by
management have serious social and economic implications?
Sustainability must be assessed at different levels or hierarchies (e.g., technology, sub-system, or system). Therefore, the choice of a criterion to assess sustainability would depend on the hierarchy to be evaluated. Agronomic yields and productivity are useful criteria at the level of crop or cropping system. Profit rather than production is the suitable criterion at the level of farm household or farming system. An assured supply of raw materials, off-farm income, and preserving the productive potential of land resources and environmental quality are appropriate criteria for evaluating the sustainability of a community or a region. A system sustainable at a lower level (crop or cropping system) may, however, not be sustainable at a higher level (community or nation). An ideal system would be one that is sustainable at al] levels.
Furthermore. a system that is economically viable in the short run may not be ecologically viable in the long run. Farm households or communities may adopt systems that are economically viable in the short run but are ecologically detrimental to the community or region in the long run. Typical examples of ecologically incompatible systems include resource-based agriculture with little or no input, intensive use of steep slopes and other marginal lands, uncontrolled grazing at excessive stocking rates, etc. The strategic questions to be considered are:
(i) What system or systems should be made sustainable?
(ii) What policies or incentives are needed to bring about these changes,?
(iii) Who is responsible for Implementing these policies,?
These are difficult but relevant policy questions, because in most cases the beneficiary may be a community or a region rather than the individual household. Furthermore, some of the benefits may not be strictly in economic terms. A critical appraisal of the first question is important. Should the farm household, community, or national policy makers decide which fanning systems should be made sustainable (e.g., intensive food crop production, plantation crops, or food crops)? Keeping national interests in perspective, policy makers can provide appropriate incentives to transform subsistence agriculture into intensive systems of food crop production. Once that decision is made, policy makers have several options/tools for using technologies associated with sustainable management of soil and water resources for a chosen system (e.g., conservation tillage, mulch farming, agroforestry, water harvesting, fertilizer use, cover crops, and multiple cropping). The choice of these
technologies involves several considerations, including the following:
<section>A. Land-use planning</section>
Soil degradation, a symptom of land misuse, can be curtailed if land is used for whatever it is capable of and by using methods of soil and crop management that are ecologically compatible. An important prerequisite of appropriate land-use planning is inventory and assessment of land resources (e.g., soil, hydrology, vegetation, and climate). Detailed surveys (at 1:10,000 or 1:50,000) are needed for systematic evaluation of natural resources. Site-specific use of these surveys can be made through the use of Geographic Information Systems (GIS), Global Positioning Systems (GPS), or the Digital Elevation Model (DEM). The assessment of socio-economic factors is also an important aspect of the evaluation of natural resources. While soil mapping and classification may be important, what is required is an assessment of the potential and constraints of natural resources. The nutrient capital of the soil, effective rooting depth and plant-available water reserves, soil structure and
physical characteristics, including irritability, are all important factors that affect crop yield, cropping systems productivity, and household income. These properties also influence how soils are managed. The choice of an appropriate farming system for a land type also depends on its capability as determined by an evaluation of soil properties, hydrological characteristics, vegetation type, and climatic attributes.
<section>B. Watershed management</section>
The sustainable management of soil and water resources is based on judicious and scientific management of all landscape units within a watershed. Widespread and severe problems of accelerated erosion and sedimentation, perpetually devastating floods, land degradation beyond the point of no return, and pollution and eutrophication of water and environment are traceable to poor planning and mismanagement of landscape units within a watershed. The choice of an appropriate land use, exploitation of water resources for irrigation and domestic purposes and the development of an infrastructure including access roads should be done on the basis of watershed as managerial and planning unit. Some landscape units are marginal for agricultural or forestry purposes and should be lets alone under the protective cover of natural vegetation. Degraded landscape units, due to previous mismanagement, should be reverted back to planted fallows or quick growing human-made forests for restoration
of their biological and ecological integrity. Grass waterways, water reservoirs, salutation dams, and engineering structures (e.g., gabions, chutes, drop structures, graded channel terraces) should be installed for safe disposal of excess water, runoff management, and erosion control. Land deemed suitable for intensive food crop production should be managed by conservation effective cropping systems with a judicious combination of on-farm and off-farm inputs.
The scientific use of a watershed for sustainable land and water development is more easily said than done. The problem is caused by the private ownership of small land holders. Farm boundaries cut across landscape units and natural waterways. The problem is aggravated by dubious land tenure systems and ownership rights. Legislation, policies, and incentives are needed to foster cooperation among farmers and promote the ecologically compatible development of natural resources.
<section>C. Sustaining soil productivity</section>
An important factor responsible for low yields is the neglect. misuse, and mismanagement of soil resources and the resulting widespread degradation of soil and environment. The amount, frequency, and type of off-farm inputs depend on land resources and the yields desired. Substantial amounts of nutrients harvested annually must be replaced. Some highly weathered and excessively leached soils of the tropics and sub-tropics are virtually devoid of essential plant nutrients (e.g., N and P). For these soils, the addition of organic amendments may enhance soil structure, but they may not eliminate the need for balanced fertilizer because large amounts of nutrients are required in easily available forms to produce economic returns. In addition to the supply of major nutrients (N. P. K), some soils are deficient in certain micro-nutrients (Nz, Cu), while others may have toxic levels of other elements (Al, Mn, and other salts). Low or high pH may require ameliorative measures for
high yields. In the human time frame, soil is a non-renewable and finite resource. A national, regional, and world soil policy is needed to advocate the judicious use of soil resources.
An Improved system must alleviate the soil-related and other biophysical constraints to intensive land use for high and sustained production. The conceptual bases of new and innovative systems are known and have been described by Okigbo (1991) with special reference to Africa, and by Beets (1990) with special reference to small land holders of the tropics. There are two approaches: one is to bring new land under cultivation and the other is to restore the productivity of degraded land (Fig. 9).
<section>1. Bringing new land under cultivation</section>
This is usually done by deforestation and the removal of existing vegetation cover. If deforestation is absolutely necessary, it must be done in a way to cause the least damage to soils and the environment. Sustaining the productivity of new land requires maintenance of its life-support processes by:
- minimizing disturbance in the delicate balance between hydrological cycle and energy budget. Regulating the hydrological cycle on cleared land similar to that under TRF would lead to erosion control and a favorable soil moisture regime.
- while maintaining the energy budget would regulate the soil temperature regime. maintaining regular and substantial additions of organic residues to the soil surface, as is the case of litter fall and forest floor in TRF. The application of organic residue is necessary to enhance soil structure, improve soil biodiversity and faunal activity, and maintain soil organic matter.
- replenishing nutrients harvested in crops, trees, and animals. This should be done through a judicious combination of inorganic fertilizers and organic amendments.
<section>2. Managing existing lands and restoring the productivity of degraded lands</section>
Because of a shortage of prime agricultural land, an increase in production in several countries will have to be achieved by more intensive cultivation of land already developed (Ruttan, 1987). Furthermore, vast areas of land previously developed from TRF have been degraded because of land misuse, adoption of productivity-mining cultural practices, and use of resource based rather than science-based production systems. It is important to restore the productive capacity of these lands so that the need for deforestation and bringing new land under cultivation can be minimized. Restoring these lands requires:
- controlling soil erosion through runoff management and ground cover establishment;
- improving soil structure through appropriate measures of soil surface management;
- establishing vegetative cover through growing an appropriate combination of aggressively growing cover crops and quick-growing perennials;
- replenishing plant nutrients lost out of the ecosystem; and preventing additional losses of water and nutrients from the ecosystem.
Once restored, the land should be managed judiciously to maintain its productive capacity, life-support systems, and environmental regulatory mechanisms.
The following chapters elaborate innovative technological options relevant to these strategies.
<section>VI. Techniques for forest conversion and new land development</section>
The conversion of TRF should be done with careful planning and thorough analyses of all the factors and processes involved. An important step in this endeavor is land-use capability assessment. Subsequently, only land suitable for arable, pastoral, or silvicultural use should be cleared by appropriate methods.
<section>A. Land-use capability</section>
Successful land development from TRF depends on careful planning by assessing climate, vegetation, terrain, and soil characteristics. Suitability assessment of TRF lands at a detailed level is critical to sustainable land use. General guidelines for conversion of TRF to different land uses are outlined in Table 11 and briefly described below:
Protected Forests:
These are marginal lands and should be left untouched as "protected forest reserves". These lands are characterized by steep slopes, shallow soils, and rocky and uneven terrain. Such forest reserves can be used for harvesting minor products and/or as wildlife reserves.
Plantation Forests:
Soil and terrain characteristics are favorable for complete removal of existing vegetation and planting quick-growing timber or plantations (e.g., rubber, oil palm, Gmelina, teak).
Pasture:
Terrain and soils are suitable for conversion to pastoral land use with improved pastures and a low stocking rate.
Arable Crops:
Suitable land characteristics for arable land use include deep and fertile soils responsive to science-based inputs, gently rolling or flat terrain with predominant slopes of less than 5%, and the availability of institutional support, marketing facilities, and post-harvest drying and storage technology.
A capability assessment for these land uses can be done through an assessment of natural resources (e.g., biophysical and socio-economic factors). A flow chart indicating a sequence of steps required for the detailed assessment of resources for scientific land use is indicated in Fig. 10. Institutional support for the development of appropriate farming systems is critical for the sustainable use of these land resources.
Table 11 Guidelines for forest conversion to different land uses
Land use
Ecoregion
Terrain
Soil
Social factors
Protected forest
Pre- montane
Steep lands. slope > 20%
Shallow, rocky. low fertility
Low demographic pressure, inaccessible
Production forest
Pre- montane
Undulating. slope 10-20%
Medium depth. low water and nutrient holding capacity
Modest access and infrastructure
Planted forest
Lowland
Rolling terrain, gentle slopes 5-10%
Deep soils with good water and nutrient- holding capacity
Good infrastructure. and accessibility, timber-processing facilities
Pasture land
Pre- montane/ lowland
Rolling terrain. gentle slope 5-10%
Good and productive soils
institutional support, marketing facilities
Crop land
Lowland
Gentle to flat terrain, slightly sloping < 5%
Deep soils. good fertility input-responsive
Good infrastructure. institutional support, marketing, storage and drying facilities
<section>B. Land clearing and development</section>
Land clearing or removal of TRF vegetation is the first step toward bringing new land under cultivation. Improper and incompatible methods of deforestation and subsequent land development can lead to soil degradation and a rapid decline in crop yields (Weert, 1974; Seubert et al., 1977; Lal, 1981a, b; Hulugalle et al., 1984; Lal et al., 1992). The severity of soil degradation depends on the intensity and speed of mechanized methods of land clearing. The heavier and quicker the equip mental the more the degradation of soil structure. Different types of equipment and attachments used for manual and mechanized clearing techniques are shown in Plates 11-15.
Technological options for different methods of deforestation, land development, and trees, pastures, and crop management are outlined in Fig. 11. These technological options for land clearing are based on the following assumptions:
- The food production capacity of most potentially available soils of the humid tropics (especially Oxisols and Ultisols) is low and inferior to areas already producing food crops. Therefore, it is important to adopt improved soil and crop management practices to improve production on existing lands rather than clear new land.
- If deforestation for developing new land is deemed absolutely necessary, it must be done with careful planning after land evaluation and assessment of all natural resources.
- Whenever possible, manual clearing is preferable to mechanized clearing. If burning fell biomass is necessary, it must be done in situ. Indiscriminate use of heavy machines is to be discouraged.
- If mechanized clearing is inevitable, the use of front-mounted shear blades is preferred over tree pushers/tree crushers and other equipment that causes severe soil disturbance. Root rakes are to be avoided.
- Soil and water conservation measures are installed and the cleared land is immediately sown with an aggressively growing cover crop.
Guidelines for land clearing and development were outlined in the symposium held at IITA (Lal et al., 1986), and some important dos and donuts of land clearing are listed in Table 12. These guidelines are based on the assumption that locale-specific packages of cultural practices for improved cropping and farming systems are available. It is difficult to sustain productivity on newly cleared lands if these cultural practices are not known. If not available, these cultural practices are to be developed on the basis of the following research information available for site-specific ecological conditions:
- the comparative economics of land clearing by different methods (e.g., manual vs. mechanized);
- permissible slope limits for different land uses (e.g., arable, pastoral. silvicultural, and mixed farming systems);
- restorative technologies for compacted soils and those with low soil pH;
- nutrient management techniques based on soil test values;
- appropriate cover crops, woody perennials, and herbaceous shrubs for use in innovative farming/cropping systems; and - mulch farming techniques, including ways to procure mulch and grow crops through it.
Table 12 Some dos and don'ts of land-clearing methods in the humid tropics
Dos
Don'ts
Increase production from existing land to reduce the need for clearing new land
Clear steep lands > 5% slope
Use shear-blade clearing where possible
Construct windrows too far apart
Burn biomass in situ rather than in windrows
Drag trees over long distances
Sow cover crops soon after clearing land clearing with untrained operators
Use construction equipment for
Adopt conservation tillage with residue mulch
Remove litter roots and stumps
Use multiple cropping systems to provide ground cover implement soil and water conservation measures
Scrape off or disturb the top soil
Adopt controlled grazing with low stocking rate on pasture land
Follow plow tillage and equipment that cause soil disturbance
Use science-based inputs for soil, crop. trees, and pasture management
Follow productivity mining techniques and resource-based methods
<section>VII. Runoff management and erosion control</section>
High surface runoff and accelerated soil erosion are major degradative problems on newly cleared land. Immediately implementing appropriate erosion management techniques is therefore, essential. Accelerated erosion can be most severe in the very first season after land clearing (Lal, 1981a). Soil erosion is caused by raindrop impact surface sealing, and crust formation leading to high runoff rate and amount, high runoff velocity on long and undulating slopes, and low soil strength of structurally weak soils with high moisture content due to frequent rains. Effective erosion management lies in:
(a) preventing or minimizing the raindrop impact, through mulching and canopy cover;
(b) maintaining favorable soil structure for reducing crusting; (c) managing soil surface to enhance infiltration rate;
(d) reducing slope length to minimize runoff build-up; and
(e) disposing excess runoff safely through protected waterways and graded channels.
Based on these principles, erosion control measures are grouped into two broad categories: erosion preventive techniques and erosion control measures (Fig. 12).
<section>A. Preventive measures</section>
Preventive measures are based on the principle of soil management that minimizes the raindrop impacts enhances and maintains favorable soil structure, minimizes surface crust, favors a high infiltration rate, and reduces runoff rate and amount. The most commonly recommended soil management techniques for erosion prevention are cover crops (Plate 16), residue mulch (Plate 17), and conservation tillage (Plate 18). Relevant crop management techniques for erosion control involve those that provide continuous ground cover (e.g., mixed cropping (Plate 19), strip cropping (Plate 20)), and improved systems of crop management (e.g., new varieties, good-quality seed, early planting, balanced fertilizer use, pest control measures, and other agronomic techniques of good farming that ensure optimum crop stand, vigorous growth, and high yields).
<section>1. Mulch farming</section>
Mulch is a layer of crop residue placed on the soil surface. There are different types of mulches, depending on the source and method of mulch procurement and application (Fig. 13). The technological methods of mulch farming differ on the basis of whether mulch is brought in or produced in situ. Although a wide range of materials is used as mulch, the most practical and feasible material is the residue from a previously grown crop. The beneficial effects of mulching are attributed to:
(i) physical effects that minimize raindrop impact, improve rainfall acceptance through enhancement of soil structure and reduce runoff and erosion;
(ii) biological effects that increase the activity and species diversity of soil flora and fauna, notably earthworms increased biomass carbon, and improved crop growth; and
(iii) chemical effects that alter nutrient status and influence crop growth.
A principal benefit of mulch farming is reduction in runoff and soil erosion. The data in Table 13 from slopes of 1% to 15%, show that a mulch rate of 4 Mg/ha effectively reduced runoff even on a 15%, slope. The data in Table 14 show the negative value of the exponent of mulch rate (M), indicating that runoff and soil erosion decrease exponentially with an increase in mulch rate even without a crop cover. In addition to increasing the infiltration rate, mulch also decreases soil evaporation and conserves water in the root zone. The major limitations lie in the large quantities of residues required (usually 4 Mg/ha/yr) for regular and frequent applications economic uses of mulch (as fodder, fuels or construction material) and the additional cost of labor involved in mulch procurement and application. Consequently, mulch farming is likely to be feasible on a small scale for high-value commercial crops.
Table 13 Effect of mulch rate on runoff on different slopes
(mm)
Slope (%)
Mulch rate (Mg/ha)
No tillage
First season runoff (April July)
Second season runoff (August November)
* Rainfall first season 510 mm second season 249 mm.
(Lal, 1976)
A tillage system that ensures a maximum retention of crop residue on the soil surface is called mulch tillage or stubble mulch farming. It is defined as a method of seedbed preparation that involves leaving crop residues or other mulching materials on or near the surface. When a grain crop is seeded through the mulch of a chemically killed cover crop, it is called sod seeding. If the cover is only suppressed temporarily or not killed, the system is called live mulch. A cover crop, usually a legume, is grown specifically to break the cropping cycle, to produce mulch material, to improve soil structures and to enhance soil organic matter content.
Table 14 Mulch rate effects on runoff and soil loss for an Alfisol on different slope gradients
Slope (%)
Regression equation
Correlation coefficient
Runoff
R = 0.39 M ^-9.73
R = 1.16 M ^-0.36
R = 5.53 M ^-0.27
R = 5.26 M ^-0.55
Soil erosion
R = 0.19 M ^-0.54
R = 1.25 M ^-0.71
R = 1.09 M ^-0.67
R = 0.98 M ^-0.24
M = Mulch rate in Mg/ha
R -- Mean annual runoff (mm)
(Lal. 1976)
<section>2. Conservation tillage</section>
Soil structure is extremely prone to intense tropical rains and harsh climate. Mechanical soil disturbance and exposure to climatic elements are major factors that degrade soil structure and accelerate soil erosion. Plowing and soil turnover lead to soil exposure and increase susceptibility to erosion. An effective erosion-control strategy, therefore lies in minimizing soil disturbance and keeping the soil surface covered A system of seedbed preparation based on the concept of minimum soil disturbance and maintenance of crop residue mulch is called "conservation tillage". Mulch cover is an important component of conservation tillage. Weed control, a major function of plowing and inversion tillage, is achieved through one of several options: (i) applications of herbicides and growth regulators; (ii) inter-cultivation based on secondary tillage; (iii) manual hoeing/slashing; (iv) smothering by cover crops and planted tallow, and (v) suppression by mulches.
A broad range of conservation tillage systems is used to reduce the risks of soil and water losses (Lal, 1989c, 1990c). Some commonly used variants are shown in Fig. 14 and are briefly described below.
(i) No-Till
This is a tillage system whereby pre-planting seedbed preparation is zero and most crop residue is left on the soil surface (Plate 21). The combination of no soil disturbance and the presence of crop residue mulch minimizes erosion risks. Several experiments conducted throughout the humid tropics have demonstrated the erosion-control effectiveness of no-till farming. The data in Tables 15 and 16 show that no-till with crop residue mulch was effective in runoff and erosion control even on steep slopes of up to 15%. In comparison with a cowpea-maize plow-till system the no-till system reduced runoff by 59% at 1% slope, 87% at 5% slope 63% at 10% slope, and 79% at 15% slope (Table 15). The mean (average of all slopes) reduction was extremely effective in soil erosion control. Soil erosion was negligible even on a steep slope of 15% (Table 16). However, to be versatile and effective a no-till system should be adapted to locale-specific conditions. There are several variants
of no-till systems that can be adapted to address soil-specific constraints. These variants include the following:
Table 15 Effects of no-till system on runoff from different slopes in western Nigeria in 1973
(mm/year)
Slope (%)
Bare fallow
Maize-maize(mulch)
Maize-maize (plow-till)
Maize-maize (no-till)
Cowpea-maize (plow-till)
Mean
Total annual rainfall = 1397.4 mm
(Lal, 1976)
Table 16 Effects of no-till system on soil erosion from different slopes in western Nigeria
(Mg/ha)
Slope (%)
Bare fallow
Maize-maize (mulch)
Maize-maize (plats-till)
Maize-cowpea (no-till)
Cowpea-maize (plow-till)
Mean
Lal (1976)
Sod Seeding:
Planting is done directly in chemically killed or mechanically suppressed sod, weeds, cover crops or in previous crop residue. Paraquat or any other contact herbicide is often used to suppress weeds or cover crop. Residual herbicides (e.g., atrazine lasso) are also used for pre-emergence weed control. Crops can be planted either by hand planter or by opening a narrow trench (5 to 7 cm wide and 5 cm deep) for the seed (Plate 22).
Live Mulch:
This system involves growing grain or food crops through a cover crop specifically grown to produce a protective ground cover. A live mulch system is based on the principles of mixed cropping.
A fast-growing perennial legume is established with the objectives of smothering perennial weeds and growing a seasonal grain crop through it without severely suppressing the growth and yield of the food crop. A small strip is opened with or without herbicides to seed a seasonal food crop through an established live cover crop. The system works if the live mulch is a low-growing non-climber and is not competitive for lights moistures or nutrients. Drastic yield suppression of food crops can occurs however, due to allopathic effects, smothering, and competition for moisture during periods of drought stress. The live mulch is usually a low-growing, shallow rooted legume (Plate 23). However, there can be severe competition between live mulch and the food crop for soil moisture and nutrients. Some live mulches are climbers and can smother the food crop (Plate 24) and drastically reduce the yield.
Ley Farming:
This system of no-till farming involves light grazing of the cover crop before sowing a food crop with a no-till system. The system can be useful if the cover crop is managed properly and grazing is strictly controlled.
(ii) Zonal-Till
This system refers to mechanical soil disturbance in the row zone only. The inter-row zone is kept undisturbed and protected with crop residue mulch. Zonal-tillage involves opening a small slot, or rotating a small strip to facilitate seed-soil contact and minimize competition. Common variants of zonal-tillage include the following:
Strip-Tillage:
Tillage is eliminated in most of the inter-row areas and a narrow strip is opened to facilitate planting and the placement of fertilizer. The crop residue is left undisturbed in the inter-row zone (Plate 25).
Chisel-Tillage:
Primary tillage is replaced by sub-soiling with a chisel plow in the row zone. Sub-soiling is done to a depth of 30 or 50 cm. The primary objective is to loosen the compacted sub-soil.
Para-Plow:
A slanted plow is used to loosen the sub-soil without soil inversion. This system requires a large tractor to operate and is expensive (Plate 26).
(iii) Minimum-Till
The term "minimum-till" is commonly defined as "the minimum soil manipulation necessary for crop production or meeting tillage requirements under the existing soil and climatic conditions". It often means any system that has fewer tillage operations than the conventional plow based system. However, "conventional" tillage is soil- and ecoregion specific. The conventional tillage system in the humid tropics is based on a manual source of power or animal traction and consists of a ridge furrow system or hillocks (Plate 27). In some cases, traditional tillage simply means dropping seeds in a hole made with a digging stick and sowing immediately after the first rain. Some variants of minimum-till include the following:
Stale Bed:
In this system, soil inversion by moldboard plowing is done at the end of the previous crop cycle or growing season. The next crop is seeded with a minimum of seedbed preparation, such as disk harrow performed at the onset of the next rains.
Ridge Till:
The practice of planting or seeding crops on ridges is a widely adopted system in tropical climates. The crop may be planted on the ridge top, along both ridge sides, or in the furrow. Ridge tillage facilitates mixed cropping systems such as a rice-based cropping system, whereby upland crops can be grown on the ridge top and rice in the furrow.
Ridges may be made every season. Alternatively, in a semi-permanent ridge-furrow system only the necessary repair is done at the onset of a new cropping cycle. The ridges may be on the contour with graded furrows draining into a grassed waterway or the ridges may have short cross-ties to create a series of basins to store water. The latter system with cross-ties is called the tied-ridge system (Plate 28).
The wide range of tillage systems described in this section indicates the soil-specificity for appropriate tillage methods. In fact, it is difficult to adopt a tillage system for a wide range of ecoregions, soils. crops and cropping systems. The outline shown in Table 17 is an attempt to describe the suitability of different conservation tillage systems for soils and ecoregions of the humid tropics.
Table 17 Suitability of different conservation tillage systems for soils of the humid tropics
Soil types
Rainfall (mm/yr)
Slope (%)
Cropping system
Conservation tillage system
Alfisols, Oxisols. Inceptisols. Ultisois, Entisols
Grain crops.
No-till. sod seeding, slot tillage strip-tillage
Alfisols, Oxisois, Ultisols
Root crops
Ridge tillage, tied ridges, rough seedbed
Alfisols, lnceptisols, Ultisols
Grain ridges
Ridge tillage, tied- ridges, chisel-tillage, pare-plow
Histosols, Mollisols
10 Root crops
No-till, chisel-till, para-plow. ridge tillage
<section>3. Strip cropping</section>
Contour strip cropping divides a steep land into contour strips that cut across the path of overland flow and retard its velocity. Low-growing soil conserving crops (e.g.. cowpea, soybeans, Stylosanthes, Pueraria) are grown in alternate strips with open-row soil-degrading crops (e.g.. maize, rice). A soil-conserving crop is grown in a contour strip down slope of the erosion promoting crop to absorb runoff, retard runoff velocity, and encourage sedimentation of entrained sediment (Plate 29). Various categories of strip cropping include the following:
Contour Strip Cropping:
Alternate strips are established on the contour. These contour strips facilitate the performance of all farm operations on the contour.
Buffer Strip Cropping:
Buffer strips are installed on a rolling topography with complex slopes where contour strips are difficult to establish. This is done by expanding the filler areas into a continuous buffer strip. Buffer strips are generally planted to cover crops and trees.
Field Strip Cropping:
This practice involves establishing rectangular strips parallel to one side of a field. This type of strip cropping can be done only on gentle slopes with soils of low erodibility.
Barrier Strips:
These strips involve a single or double row of closely growing grass or cereals established on the contour to provide protection against runoff. Vetiver hedges come under the category of barrier strips (Plate 30).
Border Strips:
Property boundaries are often established with hedges of perennial vegetation. These strips also minimize the risks of erosion.
In addition to controlling erosion, cultivating land in alternate strips in alternate years may regenerate soil fertility, improve soil structure, and restore productivity. The biomass produced in these fallow/ buffer strips can be used as mulch, fodder, and for comporting. Buffer strips are usually planted with quick-growing and easy-to-establish forage legumes. Some common forage legumes suitable for the soil and environment of the humid tropics are listed in Table 18.
Strip cropping is generally effective on gentle slopes (< 7%) on rolling terrain. For steep slopes, strip cropping should be reinforced with engineering structures.
<section>4. Contour farming</section>
The simplest approach to erosion control is contour farming (e.g., performing all farm operations on the contour rather than up and down the slope or parallel to field boundaries). Important farm operations to control soil erosion include plowing, ridging, sowing, fertilizer application. and inter-row cultivation.
The effectiveness of contour farming decreases with increase in slope gradient and slope length, and increasing intensity of rains. If the rainfall exceeds the surface detention capacity of the contouring system, concentrated runoff flowing downstream unchecked can lead to accelerated erosion and even severe gulling. Therefore, contour farming alone is not sufficient to control erosion on steep, long slopes, erodible soils, and during erosive rains. The major drawbacks of contour farming are frequent turning involving extra labor and machinery time, and loss of some area that may have to be put out of production.
Table 18 Some commonly grown legumes in buffer strips
Centrosema pubescens
Desmodium buergeri
Medicago sativa
Mucuna puriens
Phaseolus acontifolius
Psohocarpus palustris
Pueraria phaseocoides
Stizolobium deeringianum
Stylosanthes guianensis
Trifolium alexrium
Vigna catjang
(Lal. 1984)
<section>5. Cover crops</section>
Growing grass or leguminous cover crops once every two to three years may be necessary for the sustainable management of soil and water resources. Cover crops have many advantages for the sustained use of natural resources (e.g., restore fertility, control weeds, avoid repeated seeding and cultivation traffic, conserve rain, and reduce energy costs). In addition to controlling pests, cover crops improve soil physical properties and soil filth and reduce soil erosion.
Cover crops have long been used in the tropics for soil and water conservation, especially on steep land plantation crops (Plate 31). In addition to augmenting soil fertility, cover crops also improve soil structure and increase macroporosity. However, the principal benefit of a cover crop lies in erosion control. The data in Table 19 show that runoff and soil erosion under a Mucuna cover crop were low and the cover was extremely effective in decreasing erosion losses, even on eroded and compacted soils.
A wide range of cover crops can be used for soil and water conservation in the humid tropics (Table 20). There is considerable scope for selecting appropriate species and cultivars for suitable cover crops. The choice of an appropriate cover crop for different soils and ecological regions depends on many considerations, including:
- the ease and economics of establishment, including the availability of seed;
- quick ground cover and growth rate during the off-season;
- N-fixing rather than N-consuming;
- deep-root system and low consumptive water use;
- feed value for livestock;
- low possibility as alternative hosts for pests and cover for wildlife;
- low canopy height;
- ability to suppress weeds;
- growth duration (i.e., permanent versus annual);
- shade tolerance; and
- ease of management for growing a food crop with conservation tillage.
Table 19 Effects of Mucuna fallowing on runoff and erosion as compared with alley cropping and maize-cowpea rotation in 1982
Treatment
First season
Second season
Annual total
Runoff (mm)
Erosion (kg/ha)
Runoff (mm)
Erosion (kg/ha)
Runoff (mm)
Erosion (kg/ka)
Maize-cowpea
Mucuna
Alley cropping
Forest fallow
Rainfall (mm)
The data on runoff and soil erosion arc averages of the sub-watersheds listed for each treatment.
All sub-watersheds sown with maize-cowpea were managed with a no-till system of seedbed preparation.
(Lal 1992)
Table 20 Some cover crops used for soil and water conservation in the humid tropics
Cover crop
Grasses
Axonopus micay
Brachiaria brizantha
Brachiaria decumbens
Brachiaria mutica
Cenchrus ciliasris
Chlorea gayanu
Eragrostis curvula
Glycine wightii
Panicum antidotala
Panicum coloratum
Panicum maximum
Paspalum C conjugatum
Pasoalum notatum
Pennisetum purpurcum
Setaria sphacelata
Tripsacum laxum
Legumes
Centrosema pubescens
Desmodium buegeri
Mucuna pruriens
Phaseolus aconitifolius
Psophocarpus palustris
Pueraria phaseoloides
Stizolobium deeringianum
Stylosanthes guinetances
Vigna catijang
(Modified from Lal, 1984)
Managing cover crops for food crop production is an important consideration in choosing an appropriate cover crop. A difficult-to-suppress cover crop can be expensive and energy-intensive. Consequently, the concept of live mulch or a green seedbed has been proposed and was discussed in the previous section.
<section>6. Vegetative hedges or strips</section>
Runoff velocity can be reduced drastically by planting vegetative hedges, bunch grass, or shrubs on the contour at regular intervals (Plate 32). These hedges can increase the time for water to infiltrate into the soil, and facilitate sedimentation and deposition of eroded material by reducing the carrying capacity of the overland flow. Vegetative hedges or narrow grass strips serve as porous filters. These hedges may not reduce runoff amount but can drastically decrease soil loss. The data in Table 21 from Puerto Rico show that narrow grass strips reduced total soil loss compared with a conventional tillage system. Similarly, the data in Table 22 from Java show that 0.5- to 1-m-wide grass strips were extremely effective in controlling runoff and soil erosion. By the fourth year of establishment, grass strips reduced erosion to zero.
Table 21 Effect of grass strips on runoff and soil erosion for three soils in Puerto Rico
Treatment
Typic tropuhunuh
Vertic eutropepts
Typic drystropepts
Erosion (Mg/ha)
Runoff (mm)
Erosion (Mg/ha)
Runoff (mm)
Erosion (Mg/ha)
Runoff (mm)
Conventional tillage
Mulch tillage
Grass strip
SOC cover
Barnetl et al. 1972)
Table 22 Effect of grass strips on runoff and soil erosion from an Inceptisol on 15% to 20% slope in Java
Treatment
Years after establishing stripes
Runoff (mm)
Control
Brachiaria decumbens
(0.5 m)
Paspalum notatum
(m)
Erosion (Mg/ha)
Control
Brachiaria decumbens
(0 5 m)
Paspalum notatum
(1 m)
(Ahujamin et al. 1984)
A wide range of grasses is commonly used as hedges (Table 23). A widely adopted grass for growing vegetative hedges to control erosion is vetiver or khus grass (NRC, 1993b). Vetiver is a densely tufted, aweless, wiry, and glabrous perennial grass. It has a deep, strong, and fibrous root system. It grows in large clumps from the root stock and is propagated vegetatively. The grass can be planted on the contour to establish protective contour hedges (Plate 33). Vetiver can also be established on earth banks or buns and on terraces to reinforce and stabilize these structures. Its thick root system prevents slope failure due to rifling, gullying, or tunneling. The establishment of continuous hedges of vetiver with no gaps provides maximum protection. While controlling soil erosion, vegetative contour hedges of vetiver also conserve soil water by enhancing infiltration and decreasing losses due to runoff.
Table 23 Commonly used grasses for establishing vegetative hedges
Axonopus micay
Brachiaria brizantha
Brachiaria decumbens
Brachiaria mutica
Cenchrus ciliaris
Eragrotis curvula
Molasses grass
Panicum antidotala
Panicum coloratum
Panicum maximum
Paspalum c conjugatum
Paspalum decumbens
Paspalum notatum
Pennisetum purpureum
Setaria vetiveria spp.
Vetiveria zizanioide
(Lal, 1984)
Growing perennial shrubs as contour hedgerows is another commonly used form of vegetative hedge. This topic is discussed under the subsection on agroforestry under nutrient management systems.
<section>B. control measures: engineering structures</section>
Erosion-control measures are designed to reduce runoff rate and its velocity. Runoff management involves safe disposal of excess runoff at low velocities, energy dissipation through drop structures, runoff storage in reservoirs to facilitate sedimentation, etc. Erosion-control measures are used to complement erosion-preventive measures, and should not be installed if erosion can be curtailed adequately by preventive techniques. However, preventive measures based on soil and crop management practices are generally inadequate on steep lands, highly erodible soils, or in regions characterized by intense rains and heavy downpours. In such situations, engineering structures are necessary as backstop measures to cope with the safe disposal of excess runoff. A major objective of all engineering structures is to reduce the shear strength of the overland flow by reducing its amount and velocity, and, therefore, its cutting and carrying capacity. Engineering structures for runoff
management are permanent structures, require engineering skills to design and install, and are expensive to establish and maintain. The benefits and returns from engineering structures are observed after a long time. Furthermore, the installation of engineering structures requires additional land, such as that needed for the construction of terraces, drop structures, reservoir construction, etc. Engineering structures require very careful planning, meticulous installation, and regular maintenance. The failure of engineering structures can lead to deep gullying and mass movement. Damage to soil productivity caused by faulty structures, or those inadequately maintained, can be very severe and often expensive, if not impossible, to repair.
There is a wide range of earthworks and mechanical structures (Fig. 15). These structures can be grouped into three categories.
<section>1. Structures to prevent run-on</section>
Run-on prevention from adjacent land is achieved through the installation of a "storm water diversion drain", or "diversion ditch", or "channel" These channels are designed to divert runoff originating off the farmland.
<section>2. Structures to reduce runoff velocity</section>
Commonly used engineering devices to reduce runoff velocity include terraces and waterways.
(i) Terraces:
Long slopes are broken with earthworks installed at right angles to the steepest slope to intercept the surface runoff (Plate 34). An earthwork consists primarily of two parts: an excavated channel, and a bank or ridge on the downhill side formed with the spoil from the excavation. There are different types of terraces based on the design and shape of the channel and the ridge. A terrace with a channel upsweep is called a channel terrace, and the one with a gentle grade in the channel is called a graded channel terrace. A terrace constructed strictly on the contour is called an absorption terrace. The latter may be open-ended or close-ended, depending on whether the terrace is diked at the ends or not. In addition to using earth-moving equipment's terraces can also be constructed by natural sedimentation facilitated by vegetative hedges, and agroforestry systems. Agroforestry systems are discussed in another section.
A lot of research information is available indicating that properly constructed terraces can drastically reduce runoff and soil erosion. The data in Table 24 compare the effects of terracing on runoff and soil erosion on Alfisols in Nigeria. The data show that although graded channels did not decrease the total runoff amount, soil loss was reduced drastically. Another experiment conducted at Ibadan showed that with adequate spacing and regular maintenance, terraces were effective in decreasing runoff and soil erosion. The mean runoff and erosion from an untreated watershed were about 3 and 16 times more than those from the terraced field (Lal, 1982). The data in Table 25 from Sierra Leone show that bench terraces effectively reduced soil loss compared with bundling and no control measures. Similarly, the data in Table 26 from Burundi show that soil erosion from terraced cassava decreased by a factor of 6 to 16 compared with that from unterraced cassava.
Table 24 Runoff and soil loss from terraced and unterraced catchments at Ibadan, Nigeria, from a single rainstorm received on 6 July 1981
Catchement
Runoff (mm)
Soil erosion (Mg/ha)
Terraced
Unterraced
(Lal, 1982)
Table 25 Comparison of soil erosion losses from various conservation techniques in Sierra Leone
(Mg/ha)
Terraces
Soil loss
Rice
Cassava
Bench terraces
Stone bunding
Stick bunding
Contour bundling
No conservation
(Millington. 1982)
Table 26 Effect of terracing on soil erosion from cassava plantation steep lands in Burundi
Treatment
Slope (%)
Soil erosion (Mg/ha/yr)
Forest
Cassava (terraced)
Cassava (unterraced)
Bare plowed
(Durand 1984)
(ii) Waterways:
Excess runoff from channel terraces is discharged into artificial or natural waterways (Plate 35). These waterways are called grassed waterways, sod waterways, or meadow strips, depending upon the nature of the protective material planted to create the desired roughness. These waterways are constructed along the slope and have protective embankments on both sides to contain the runoff. The capacity of waterways is designed on the basis of expected runoff rate and amount.
<section>3. Structures to dissipate runoff energy</section>
Drop structures and other engineering devices are installed to dissipate the energy of concentrated runoff, flood water, or flows of long duration. Some commonly used structures include:
(i) Concrete Structures
There are several permanent structures usually made from concrete. These include:
Drop Structures:
These are energy-dissipating devices (Plate 36), and are designed with the following objectives: (i) to stabilize steep waterways and other channels; (ii) to level waterways so that they need not be planted with grass; (iii) to serve as outlets for concentrated flow from sods and drain bed culverts; and (iv) to serve as sediment traps.
Drop structures are generally effective when installed as a pair. The level of toe wall (outlet) of the upstream structure should be the same as the level of the inlet or spillway of the downstream structure so that the flow between the two will be gentle or slow enough to cause sedimentation. Drop structures can fail if the soils have a high swell-shrink capacity and develop large cracks (e.g., Vertisols). Drop structures can also fail if the anchoring wall and toe wall crumble from water washing away the soil, undercutting, and scurrying.
Chutes:
These are specially designed spillways that collect flow at one elevation and discharge it down a slope at a lower elevation. The shape of the inlet and outlet is important to stabilize the chutes and prevent failure. Some energy-dissipating structures are necessary at the outlet of the chutes. A box-like device filled with stone is generally suitable for most conditions.
(ii) Porous Barriers
Stream bank erosion is a common problem, especially during periods of high flow. Although the total surface area affected by stream bank erosion is small, land eroded by stream bank erosion is completely and irretrievably lost. Such erosion can also threaten other civil structures (e.g., roads, railway lines, bridges). The risk of stream bank erosion is accentuated if flood plains, because of their usual high fertility and productivity, are also cultivated or grazed.
Two strategies can curtail stream bank erosion. The first is to divert the water away from the susceptible bank or to slow its current down to render it less erosive. The second strategy is to protect the bank against erosive currents by installing some protective devices. Porous structures permit water to seep through them but serve as sediment traps. Both of these strategies are briefly described below.
Check Dams:
There are several types of check dams, depending on the objectives. Check dams are constructed to stabilize waterways, store excess water, or trap sediment. Sediment storage (trap) dams are designed to intercept sediment. These dams have a spillway to discharge water slowly and facilitate sediment to settle out. Dams are also designed to stabilize waterways (or prevent gully formation). These dams are constructed at the site of the over fall. If the site of the gullyhead (over fall) is unsuitable, dams can also be located a short distance downstream. If a gully is long, it is advisable to construct a series of dams at frequent intervals. The stabilization of dams is usually more effective when some land forming is done toward the upstream side.
Gabions:
Gabions are porous structures comprising pre-fabricated baskets made of heavy-duty wire netting. The basket is placed in position, filled with stones, and covered with a protective wire lid (Plate 37). The dimensions of these baskets are variable, but they can be 4 m long and 1 x 1 m in cross-section. Several baskets can be placed on top of one another. Gabions are flexible to adjust for subsidence or loss of adjacent land due to scurrying. A stream current can also be slowed or deflected by installing permeable spurs made of timber or pre-fabricated metal frames.
<section>VIII. Nutrient management</section>
An adequate supply of plant nutrients is essential for efficient crop production on the highly weathered and leached soils of the humid tropics. Effective nutrient management requires two steps: (i) increase nutrient reserves in the soil and their availability to crops; and (ii) assess the nutrient requirements of the crops to be grown. Effective nutrient management involves meeting the nutrient requirements for expected yields from soil reserves and supplemental additions of chemical fertilizers and organic manures. Most soils of the humid tropics (e.g., Oxisols, Ultisols, and Alfisols) are low in nutrient reserves. Therefore, it is necessary to supply nutrients from external sources. There are diverse sources of nutrients, including chemical fertilizers, biological nitrogen fixation, and nutrient recycling.
<section>A. Chemical fertilizers</section>
The use of chemical fertilizers is essential for obtaining high yields in the highly weathered soils of the humid tropics. However, many small land holders and resource-poor farmers cannot afford costly fertilizers. Most soils in the humid tropics are so deficient in primary nutrients that it is imperative that strategies be developed for adding them from outside the ecosystem. Otherwise, sustainable cropping systems cannot be developed.
The most deficient nutrients in the soils of the humid tropics are N. P. and Ca as macro-nutrients and perhaps Zn as a micro-nutrient. There is some potential for enhancing N supply by biological N fixation. Other nutrients have to be supplied. The concept of low external input must clearly be examined in view of the limited nutrient reserves of these soils. However, the requirements for chemical fertilizers can be reduced drastically by decreasing losses, recycling nutrients, and through biological N fixation (Fig. 16).
<section>B. Reducing nutrient losses</section>
Nutrient losses occur through accelerated erosion, leaching, and volatilization. Soil and crop management systems must be adopted to minimize these losses:
<section>1. Soil erosion</section>
The magnitude of nutrient loss through accelerated erosion can be very high. The data in Tables 27 and 28 show examples of the magnitude of nutrient loss in runoff and eroded soil for different systems of soil and crop management in western Nigeria. Expectedly, nutrient losses are very high in bare uncropped land. Nonetheless, losses of nutrients are also high in cropped plow-till systems of seedbed preparation. Total nutrient loss in maize-maize plow-till treatment was 32.2 kg/ha/yr in runoff and 35.0 kg/ha/yr in eroded soil. Similarly, nutrient loss in cowpea-maize plow-till treatment was 23.4 kg/ha/yr in runoff and 29.3 kg/ha/yr in eroded soil. In contrast, nutrient loss in runoff was decreased to 1.1 kg/ha/yr with mulch and to 4.0 kg/ha/yr with no-till systems of soil management. Because the use of mulch and no-till systems reduced soil loss to zero, there was practically no nutrient loss in eroded soil. The judicious use of erosion preventive and control measures
described in the previous sections can drastically reduce nutrient loss in runoff and eroded soil.
Table 27 Management effects on nutrient losses in runoff from an Alfisol at 5% slope in 1973
(kg/ha/yr)
Treatment
NO[3]-N
PO[4]-P
K
Ca
Mg
Total
Bare
Maize-maize (mulch)
Maize-maize (plow-till)
Maize-cowpea (no-till)
Cowpea-maize (plow-till)
Maize = Zea mays
Cowpea =Vigna unguiculata
(Lal, 1976)
Table 28 Management effects on nutrient losses in eroded soil from an Alfisol at 5% slope in 1973
(kg/ha/yr)
Treatment
Organic carbon
Total N
Bray- P
Ca
Mg
Total
Bare
Maize-maize (mulch)
T
T
T
T
T
T
Maize-maize (plow-till)
Maize-cowpea (no-till)
T
T
T
T
T
T
Cowpea-maize (plow-till)
T = < 0. 1 kg/ha/yr
(Lal, 1976)
<section>2. Leaching</section>
Similar to soil erosion, leaching losses can also be high in the humid tropics. The data in Table 29 from Alfisols in western Nigeria show that losses of nutrients leached out of the root zone with seepage water can be substantial, amounting to 300 to 500 kg/ha/yr of nutrient loss. It is likely that the assessment of leaching losses measured by the Iysimetric technique used in this experiment is biased because it used a confined volume and no provisions were made for runoff disposal. Because surface runoff had no outlet. it accentuated leaching losses.
Leaching losses of plant nutrients can also be minimized by soil, crop, and fertilizer management techniques. In terms of crop management, the best strategy is to maintain an actively growing crop on the soil surface. Also, incorporation of a deep-rooted crop to capture nutrients translocated to the sub-soil is essential to reduce leaching losses. Soil management systems that enhance the water-holding capacity of the root zone can be useful in decreasing leaching losses. In this regard, maintaining high levels of soil organic matter content is an important strategy.
Table 29 Effect of soil and crop management systems on nutrient losses by leaching from Alfisols in western Nigeria in 1985
(kg/ha/yr)
Treatment
NO[3]-N
NH[4]-N
PO[4]-P
Ca
Mg
K
Total
Maize-cowpea
Mucuna
Maize-cowpea (after pasture)
Pasture
Maize-cowpea
Forest
(Lal. 1992)
Fertilizer management is also important in decreasing leaching losses. Split applications and use of slow-release formulations are some options. However, split applications may be labor-intensive and slow-release formulations are expensive and probably not available to resource-poor farmes of the humid tropics.
<section>3. Volatilization losses</section>
High soil temperatures and moist conditions throughout the year may accentuate volatilization loss of nitrogen contained in the soil and applied in fertilizers and organic amendments. Soil temperatures of 40° to 50°C at 1 cm depth are commonly observed. Several soil and fertilizer management options are available that can decrease volatilization losses. Use of crop residue mulch and no-till systems are useful techniques to regulate soil moisture and temperature regimes. Maintaining continuous ground cover through mixed and relay cropping is another useful strategy. Volatilization losses can also be reduced by the incorporation of fertilizers and organic amendments into the soil rather than broadcast on the soil surface.
There are fertilizer formulations that are less soluble and decrease volatilization losses. Coating nitrogenous fertilizer with material that decreases solubility also decreases volatilization losses. The slow release formulations are effective in reducing losses due to leaching and volatilization. The use of nitrification-inhibiting compounds is another strategy to inhibit oxidation of ammonia into nitrates. These compounds are usually applied at low rates of 0.5 to 1.0 kg/ha.
Weed Control:
Effective weed control can be achieved through appropriate measures of soil and crop management. Although weeds compete for limited resources, nutrients absorbed by weeds are temporarily immobilized and remain within the ecosystem. Judicious weed control can be achieved through crop management, soil management and application of herbicides. The soil and crop management techniques of weed control are more appropriate than chemical control measures for resource-poor farmers.
Table 30 Tropical legumes that can be grown as cover crops to procure in situ mulch
Common name
Scientific name
Calopo
Calopogonium mucunoides
Centro
Centrosema pubescens
Glycine (perennial soybean)
Glycine wighrii
Huban clover
Arachis prostrata
Kudzu
Pueraria phaseoloides
Mucuna
Mucuna utilis
Phasey bean
Phaseolus lathyroides
Pigeon pea
Cajanus cajan
Psophocarpus
Psophocarpus palustris
San hemp
Crotalaria juncea
Spanish clover
Desmodium ucinatum
Stylo
Stylosanthes gracilis
Townsville stylo
Stylosanthey humilis
Velvet bean
Stizolobium deeringianum
Nutrient contents (%)
N
P
K
Calopogonium spp..
Desmodium trifolium
Mucuna sp..
Pueraria spp.
(Adapted from Lal. 1990c.-FAO, 1990)
<section>C. Biological nitrogen fixation (BNF)</section>
Augmenting the nitrogen supply to crops through BNF is a viable option for resource-poor farmers of the humid tropics and must be exploited to its fullest potential. The amount of N fixed by legumes can range from 20 to 200 kg/ha/yr depending on the species, soil type, climate, and agro-ecoregion. Some common legumes that can be grown as cover crops to procure mulch and increase BNF are listed in Table 30. Several perennial shrubs and woody species also can be used to enhance the nitrogen status of the soil. These species and their role in nutrient cycling and N fixation will be discussed in the following section.
<section>D. Nutrient cycling</section>
Nutrient cycling and re-use is an important strategy for sustainable crop production in the humid tropics. It involves returning nutrients removed by crops and animals to the soil for future use. In addition to crops and animals, soil fauna (e.g., earthworms, termites) also play an important role in cycling of several elements, including C, N. P. S. B. Cu. Zn, and Mo. Growing deep-rooted plants is important in order to cycle nutrients from the sub-soil by returning them through crop residue to the surface where the following shallow-rooted crops can use them. Used effectively, recycling can substantially reduce chemical fertilizer requirements. Some important recycling strategies outlined in Fig. 17 include crop residue mulch, deep-rooted perennials, and animal wastes.
<section>1. Crop residue mulch</section>
Crop residues contain substantial quantities of plant nutrients. The data in Table 31 show the nutrient composition of the crop residues of some crops grown in the humid tropics. The concentration in oven-dry tissue ranges from 0.58% to 4.0% for N. 0.1% to 1.1% for P. and 0.2% to 3.4% for K. Nitrogen and phosphorus concentrations are generally higher in legumes than in cereals. On a weight basis, the major plant nutrients contained in 1 Mg of crop residue may range from 15 to 60 kg of N. P. and K (Table 32).
The beneficial effects of returning crop residue as mulch on crop yield are well known. These benefits are due not only to the recycling of plant nutrients but also to improvements in soil moisture and temperature regimes, enhancement of soil structure, and erosion control. However, the use of crop residues as fertilizers is especially important to resource-poor farmers. Some examples of the beneficial effects of crop residue mulch on crop yields are shown by the data in Tables 33 through 37. The data in Table 33 show that compared with an unmatched control, crop yields were improved with any mulch material. Rice husks increased maize yield by 0.7 Mg/ha and cassava yield by 12 Mg/ha. The data in Table 34 on yam production on an acid soil in eastern Nigeria show that mulching significantly increased the yam tuber yield. Mulching increased tuber yield by 20% on both ridge till and flat seedbed.
Table 31 Nutrient composition of crop residues of some crops grown in the humid tropics
(kg/ha/yr)
Crop/species
N
P
K
C/N ratio
Cowpea stem
Cowpea leaves
Rice
Maize
Oil palm (processed fibre)
Sesbania leaves
Crotolaria
spp.
Tephrosia
spp.
Water hyacinth
Azolla
spp.
Typha
spp.
(Modified from FAO, 1990)
Returning crop residue as mulch may also have synergistic effects with fertilizer use. The data from the eastern Amazon by Schoningh and Alkamper (1984) showed that crop residue mulches with low C:N ratios had more beneficial effects than those with high C:N ratios (Table 35). On an Ultisol in eastern Nigeria (Tables 36 and 37), the yield of plantain and bananas was drastically improved by residue mulch.
Table 32 Plant nutrients contained in 1 Mg of dry straw
(kg/Mg)
Crop/species
N
P
K
Total
Cowpea stem
Cowpea leaves
Rice
Maize
Oil palm (fibre)
Sesbania leaves
Crotolaria spp.
Tephrosia spp.
Water hyacinth
Azolla spp.
Typha.spp
(Recalculated from the data in Table 31)
Plantain yield was five times more with mulch than with chemical fertilizers alone. The data in Fig. 18 show that returning crop residue mulch enhanced the beneficial effects of fertilizer application in maize yield (Kang, 1993). Without fertilizer application, residue retention had little effect on maize grain yield.
Table 33 Crop yield response to 22 different mulch materials applied on Alfisols in Nigeria
(Mg/ha)
Mulch
Cassava (fresh roots)
Maize
Cowpea
Soybean
Bare soil (control)
16.4 def
3.0 e
0.6 a
0.6 de
Maize stover
16.4 def
3.3 cd
1.1 a
1.5 abc
Maize cobs
17.8; cdef
3.3 cd
1.1 a
1.4 abed
Oil palm leaves
17.1 def
3.2 cd
1.2 a
0.9 bcde
Rice straw
17.9 cdef
3.5 bed
1.0 a
1.5 abc
Rice husks
28.3 a
3.7 abc
1.1 a
0.8 de
Kikuyu grass straw
14.2 ef
3.3 cd
1.2 a
1.4 abed
Elephant/napier grass (Pennisetum)
16.6 def
3.3 ed
0.9 a
1.3 bed
Guinea grass
15.5 f
3.6 bed
2.1 b
1.5 ab
Andropogon straw
18.5 cdef
3.5 bed
1.0 a
1.2 bcde
Cattail straw (Typha)
16.7 def
3.1 cd
1.0 a
1.1 bcde
Cassava stem (chipped)
20.9 cd
3.8 abc
0.9 a
1.4 abcd
Pigeon pea tops
22.9 be
3.7 abc
1.1 a
0.9 cde
Pigeon pea stem (chipped)
19.9 café
3.5 bed
1.0 a
1.3 bcd
Legume husks
26.4 ab
4.4 a
1.0 a
1.5 abc
Soybean tops
22.9 be
4.2 ab
1.0 a
1.2 bcde
Hemp (Eupatroium)
18.8 cdef
3.6 abc
1.0 a
1.2 bcde
Mixed twigs (chipped)
18.5 cdef
3.4 bed
1.0 a
1.2 bcde
Sawdust
20.5 cde
3.7 abc
0.9 a
1.9 a
Black plastic
30.5 ab
3.0 cd
0.9a
1.1 bcde
Transluscent plastic
27.7 ab
2.7 d
1.0 a
1.1 bcde
Fine gravel
22.9 be
3.1 cd
1.0 a
1.0 bcde
Figures followed by similar Ietters are stastically similar within vertical roust (Okigbo and Lal. 1980)
Table 34 Effects of tillage methods and mulching on yield and yield components of yam tubers in eastern Nigeria
Treatment
Diameter (cm)
Length (cm)
Number
Mean tuber yield (Mg/ha)
Ridge, mulch
16.7 a
23.5 b
9936 b
15.4 a
Flat, mulch
17.1 a
21.7a
12916a
16.1 a
Ridge, no mulch
13.3 b
20.7 a
10385 b
12.8 b
Flat, no mulch
13.8 b
20.6 a
10128 b
13.4 b
Figures followed by similar letters are statistically similar within vertical rows.
(Maduakor et al., 1984}
Table 35 Yield response of maize and cowpea to different mulch materials and mineral fertilizer in an eastern Amazon Oxisol, Capitao Poco (CPATU) Para, Brazil, 1983
(kg/Mg)
Mulches used (10 Mg/ha of dm)
First crop (maize)*
Second crop (cowpea)**
NPK (kg/ha) 20-80-60
NPK 0-0-0
NPK 30-80-60
NPK 0-0-0
Elephant grass
Pueraria
Weeds
Sec. Forest (2 3 years)
Sec. Forest (4 5 years)
Rice husks
Maize cobs + husks
Bare soil
LSD. 5%
LSD. 1%
LSD. 0.1%
* Grain moisture content 14. 5%
** Grain moisture content 13, %
(Schoningh and Alkamper 1984)
<section>2. Agroforestry systems</section>
Agroforestry systems involve growing woody herbaceous species and perennials in association with food crops and livestock on the same piece of land. Agroforestry systems have been described extensively in several reports (i.e., Kang et al., 1981, 1989, 1990; Harwood, 1987;
Nair. 1989; Szott et al., 1991). They are known to increase ecological diversity within a landscape unit and optimize the use of limited resources through the integration of complementary components. There are three principal types of agroforestry systems (Fig. 19).
Table 36 Effect of mulching and fertilizer on yield of plantain and banana on an acid soil in eastern Nigeria
(Mg/ha)
Treatment
Plantain
Banana
Giant
Medium
No mulch, no fertilizer*
No mulch, fertilizer
18.0 a
16.7 a 7.5 a
Mulch, no fertilizer
17.2 a
15.8 a 9.5 a
Mulch and fertilizer
31.3 b
19.8 a 13.3 b
* Most plants broke.
Numbers in the same column followed by the same letter are not significantly different at 5%.
(IITA. 1981)
Table 37 Comparative effects of fertilizer and mulch on plantain yield on an acid soil in eastern Nigeria
Parameter
Mulch
Fertilizer
Yield (Mg/ha)
Bunch weight (kg)
Plants harvested (% of planted)
Harvest duration (months)
(IITA. 1981)
(i) Agrisilvicultural:
This system involves simultaneously growing crops and trees on the same piece of land. Some commonly used agrisilviculture systems include alley cropping (Plate 38) and hedgerow cropping.
* N[0]P[0]K[0], = control with no fertilizer. (a) years 1 4: N[1] = 80 kg N/ha, N[2] = 160 kg N/ha; (b) years 5 8: Ni = 100 kg N/ha, N[1] = 200 kg N/ha; (c) years 9 10: Ni = 75 kg N/ha, N[2] = 150 kg N/ha. P[1] = 30 kg P/ha. P[2] = 60 kg P/ha, K[1] = 40 kg K/ha. K[2] = 80 kg K/ha.
(Kang, 1993)*
(ii) Silvopastoral:
This system involves raising livestock on improved pastures grown in association with trees. Some commonly used systems are alley farming and live fences (Plate 39).
Table 38 Commonly recommended species for agroforestry systems in the humid tropics
Species
Growth characteristics
Uses
Acioa bateri
Fast-growing shrub
Alley cropping, nitrogen fixation
Albizia falcate
Tree grows to 30 m
Erosion control, nitrogen fixation
Albizia lebbeck
Tree grows to 25 m
Erosion control, nitrogen fixation
Anthonotha
Fast-growing shrub
Alley cropping, nitrogen fixation macrophylla
Calliandra calothyrsus
Fast-growing shrub to 8 m, on acid soils
Alley cropping, nitrogen fixation
Cassia siamea
Shrub grows to 8 m. vigorous coppicing
Fuelwood, nitrogen fixation, lumber
Erythrina spp.
Tree grows to 20 m, often thorny, coppices shell
Live fences, nitrogen fixation, fuelwood, fodder
Flemingia macrophylla
Shrub grows to 3 m
Alley cropping, nitrogen fixation
Gliridia sepium
Fast-growing tree to 20 m. vigorous coppicing
Alley cropping, nitrogen fixation. forage, fodder. staking material
Inga spp.
Nitrogen-fixing shrub, acid- tolerant
Alley cropping. nitrogen fixation
Leucaena leucocephala
Tree grows to 20 m, fast-growing on non-acid soils. vigorous coppicinig
Fodder. fuelwood. erosion control, nitrogen fixation, alley cropping. staking material
Panagomia pinneta
Small tree. grows to 8m
Erosion control live hedges
Sesbania spp.
Fast-growing loss: tree
Erosion control, nitrogen fixations
(NRC, 1993a)
Table 39 Merits and limitations of agroforestry systems
Merits
Limitations
Reduction in fallow period and high cropping intensity over longer time period
High labor input
Erosion control and runoff management
Highly skilled management
Strengthening of nutrient cycling mechanisms leading to savings in fertilizer use
Low yields due to allelopathic effect and competition among trees and food crops for light, water, and nutrients
Alternate products (e.g., fodder, fuel, staking water mulch and food crops)
Limited application on soils of moderate to low soil fertility
Saving, land and decrease in need for clearing new land
Potentially high risks of pests and diseases
Improved traditional system, therefore, ecologically compatible
Difficulties in adoption due to traditional land tenure system
(iii) Agrisilvopastoral:
This system involves a three-way mixture based on a combination of crops, trees. and animals. Such a system requires skillful management, and can be sustainable even in harsh environments and fragile soils.
A wide selection of tree species and woody shrubs can be used for agroforestry systems (Table 38). Some of these trees are suited for acid soil conditions and others for erosion control, some are more appropriate as forage trees, and still others are useful for pruning to be used as mulch. The choice of appropriate species is critical to the success of agroforestry systems. In addition to the intended use, the choice of tree and associated crop species also depends on cultural and ethnic factors of social importance.
The merits and limitations of agroforestry systems are shown in Table 39. A principal advantage of these systems is the reduction in the length of the fallow period and the potential for continuous and intensive cropping. Agroforestry may facilitate intensive land use for multiple uses on relatively fertile soils. It may also enable relatively more intensive use on steep lands and marginal soils, which cannot be used otherwise. A major advantage of agroforestry systems on sloping lands is erosion control. Closely spaced contour hedgerows of suitable woody perennials and shrubs can drastically reduce the risks of runoff and accelerated soil erosion. The data in Table 40 indicate large reductions in runoff and soil erosion with hedgerows of Gliricidia and Leucaena established at 2 and 4 m intervals.
Table 40 Alley-cropping effects on runoff and soil erosion from maize-cowpea rotation measured in 1984
Treatment
Runoff
Erosion (Mg/ha/yr)
Total (mm)
Fraction of rainfall (%)
Plow-till
No-till
Leucaena 4 m
Leucaena 2 m
Gliricidia, 4 m
Gliricidia. 2 m
(Lal, 1989a)
Table 41 Net primary production of biomass for commonly recommended multi-purpose tree species in the humid tropics
Species
Net primary production of biomass (ka/ha/yr)
Acacia auriculiformis
Acacia mangium
Albizia falcata
Alchornea cordifolia
Calliandra calothyrsus
Cordia alliodora
Dalbergia latifolia
Erythrina poeppigiana
Gmelina arborea
Leucaena leucocephala
(NRC, 1993a)
Table 42 Nutrient composition of foliage of some trees and woody perennials grown with agroforestry systems in the humid tropics
Species
N
P
K
Cassia siamea (leaves)
Tephrosia sp.
gliricidia sp.
Leucaena leucocephala
Erythrina sp.
(FAO. 1190)
Another benefit of growing woody perennials and trees in association with crops is the large quantity of biomass produced. The net primary production of biomass for perennials ranges from 1.5 to 6 Mg/ha/yr (Table 41). This biomass is a valuable resource for small land holders of the humid tropics. In addition to its use as forage, fuel, and staking material, the biomass can also be returned to the soil as mulch for soil protection and nutrient recycling. The nutrient content of the foliage of some of these species ranges from 2% to 4% for N. 0.2% to 0.3% for P. and 1% to 3% for K (Table 42). Consequently, a substantial amount of plant-available nutrients can be added to the soil by returning 3 to 7 Mg/ha of biomass. The data in Table 43 show that nutrients contributed by the biomass returned to the soil from Leucaenu can be 275 to 440 kg/ha of N. 15 to 49 kg/ha of P. 133 to 264 kg/ha of K, 74 to 195 kg/ha of Ca, and 17 to 52 kg/ha of Mg. Nutrients contributed vary widely
among different species (Table 44). Rather than prunings, even the litter fall from some trees can add substantial amounts of nutrients (Table 45). Not all the nutrients recycled in the biomass, however, are available to crops. The nutrient use efficiency may be only 20% to 30% or less.
Table 43 Amount of nutrients in Leucaena leucocephala prunings
(kg/ha)
Year
Nutrients
N
P
K
Ca
Mg
Total
(Hauser and Kang, 1993)
Table 44 Estimated nutrient addition through prunings of four woody shrubs grown at 4 m intervals on an Alfisol in western Nigeria
Species
Biomass yield (Mg/ha/yr)
Nutrient yield
N
P
K
Ca
Mg
Total
Acioa barteri
Alchornea cordifolia
Gliricidia sepium
Leucaena leucocephala
(Kang and Wilson. 1987)
Table 45 Biomass and nutrient addition by litter fall of a three-year-old plantation of Cassia siamea
(kg/ha)
Month
Leaf fall (Mg/ha)
Nutrient addition
N
Ca
Mg
K
January
February
March
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December
Total
(Ghuman and Lal. 1990)
Table 46 Grain yield of maize alley cropped with Leucaena leucocephala hedgerows and in plots with no hedgerows (control) on an Alfisol in southwestern Nigeria, and absolute and relative yield advantages of alley cropping
(kg ha)
Grain yield
Mean
Alley cropping
4890 a
3470 a
5657 a
Control
3990 b
2240 a
5084 b
Difference
Relative %
(Kang., 1993)
Table 47 Effects of agroforestry systems on relative grain yields of cowpea a tropical Alfisol
Treatment
Relative grain yield for different years *
Mean
Plow-till
No-till
Leucuena, 4 m
Leucaena, 2 m
Gliricidia 4 m
Gliricidia, 2 m
* Relative yield is calculated as a ratio of actual yield to average yield of all seasons and all treatments. expressed in percent. No fertilizer was applied.
(Lal 1989a)
Table 48 Grain yield of rice from an experiment conducted at Yurimaguas, Peru, with three species of shrubs
Species
Row from the shrub
Grain yield (kg/ha)
Inga
Erythrina
Leucaena
(TROPSOIL.1987)
Because of added nutrients and other favorable soil physical factors, total production can be more with agroforestry than with simple crop-based, tree-based, or animal-based systems. However, the yield of individual components may be decreased. The data in Table 46 show that the yield of maize was the same or better with alley cropping than without. However, the data in Table 47 on cowpea yield show a significant yield reduction with alley cropping, probably due to allelopathic effects. The reduction in average cowpea yield was as much as 11% by Leucaena at 4 m intervals and 38% by Leucaena at 2 m intervals. Yield reduction may also happen due to competition for nutrients between perennials and annuals. An example of the competition is shown by the data in Table 48 on an acid soil at Yurimaquas, Peru. Rice crop yields increased with wider spacing between hedgerows, and with increase in distance from the hedgerow (Fig. 20). The grain yield of the row next to the hedge of Inga
or Erythrina was about 1300 kg/ha. The yield was about 1500 kg/ha or less for the fourth spacing The grain yield increased to more than 2000 kg/ha for the eighth row from the hedgerow. The grain yield of the row next to the hedgerow decreased by about 40% regardless of the hedgerow species. In addition, the high labor requirement is another limitation of agroforestry systems. The system is labor-intensive and complete mechanization is often difficult and not feasible to achieve.
<section>IX. Ecological approach to sustainable land use in the humid tropics</section>
Attempts at "modernizing" traditional agriculture in the humid tropics have met with limited success. Drastic perturbations in the ecosystem are likely to cause serious disruptions in cycles of H[2]O, C, N. S. P. and other elements and disturb the energy balance. Resource-based and low-input systems, although subsistence and less productive, have been ecologically compatible because they do not overly disturb the ecological processes (e.g. energy balance, hydrological balance? and mineral cycling). The successful transformation of subsistence agriculture to productive systems must be based on understanding and the ability to manipulate processes governing: (i) energy and biomass flow from and into the ecosystem; (ii) mineral recycling; and (iii) the water balance of the ecosystem at micro- and meso-scales. A sustainable system must have favorable attributes and desirable characteristics (Fig. 21).
Maintenance of soil quality is critical to the success and sustainability of land-use and farming systems. The soil quality depends on several attributes, described below.
<section>A. Soil erosion control</section>
Accelerated soil erosion must be controlled. Because the nutrient reserves of most soils are mostly concentrated in the upper 10 to 15 cm layer of soil developed in situ (e.g., Oxisols, Ultisols, Alfisols), the loss of top soil has drastic impacts on productivity. Soil erosion control is the most important attribute of an ecologically compatible and productive land-use system.
<section>B. Soil organic matter maintenance</section>
Maintenance of a high level of soil organic matter content is crucial to the enhancement of soil structure and other life-support processes and in environmental regulatory mechanisms. Although soil organic matter content is not a nutrient, its concentration must be maintained above the critical level for maintaining and enhancing soil properties and processes. The critical level of soil organic matter content varies among soil types, ecoregions, and land-use systems.
<section>C. Soil structure</section>
Soil structure must be maintained to allow the functioning of the dynamic processes (e.g., aeration, water transmission and retention, root growth). Different manifestations of soil structure include aggregation and its stability; porosity and pore-size distribution, especially macropores; water retention and transmission properties; and compatibility. Once destroyed, these favorable attributes of soil structure are difficult to restore.
<section>D. High soil biodiversity</section>
High soil organic matter content and favorable soil structure depend on the activity and species diversity of soil fauna. The activity of soil macrofauna (e.g., earthworms, termites) is critical to the maintenance of favorable soil structure and mineral cycling. Management practices with detrimental effects on soil biodiversity lead to a rapid decline in soil structure and degradation of the resource base.
<section>E. Mineral cycling</section>
It is important that the nutrient reserves of the ecosystem are not depleted but are enhanced and recycled. The recycling mechanisms (e.g., a combination of deep-rooted and shallow-rooted species, returning biomass to the soil surface, high soil biodiversity) must be strengthened. The loss of nutrients by erosion, leaching, and volatilization must be minimized.
<section>F. Soil resilience</section>
A sustainable system must enhance soil resilience or the soils ability to restore its life-support processes. A resilient soil must not only resist degradative processes but also respond to science-based inputs and judicious management. Soil resilience also depends on land use, and the choice of an appropriate land use is crucial to a soils ability to withstand perturbations.
<section>G. Ecological compatibility</section>
Environmental compatibility is an important characteristic of a sustainable system. Deforestation of the TRF ecosystem supposedly contributes 1.1 to 3.6 pg-C/yr as a principal greenhouse gas into the atmosphere (Houghton, 1991). The TRF ecosystem should be managed to sequester carbon into the soil and biomass rather than release carbon and nitrogen into the atmosphere, improve water quality rather than accentuate sediment load and eutrophication of surface and ground waters, and increase soil biodiversity within a simplified and managed ecosystem. Next to production, environmental concerns are very important for the sustainable management of the humid tropics.
The sustainability of a land-use system depends on a set of science based agronomic practices. These practices involve appropriate methods of forest conversion, erosion preventive and control measures, nutrient management techniques involving nutrient cycling through returning biomass and organic wastes to the soil, and production systems that optimize the use of the most limiting resources. A flow chart depicting the interaction among these technological options is depicted in Fig. 22. These practices interact with soil properties in determining productivity and impact on the environment, and are very specific to soil types and ecoregions.
The adoption of improved technologies on existing land can reduce pressure and the need for deforestation and clearing new land. Sanchez (1993) estimated that the adoption of science-based improved technologies on I hectare of land can save between 5 and 11 hectares of TRF from deforestation (Table 49). However, these technologies have to be adapted for soil and environmental conditions specific to each ecoregion. Developing locale-specific packages for alleviating specific soil and environmental constraints to sustainable land use requires fine-tuning and adaptive research for specific regions. In fact, it is difficult to provide blueprints for soil- or site-specific cropping/farming systems. Some systems have proven successful on research farms and under farmers, conditions and can be applied to similar soils and ecological conditions elsewhere in the humid tropics. Examples of such systems are outlined in Table 50.
Table 49 Estimates of TRF saved from deforestation by adoption of improved technology
Sustainable (1 ha)
TRF saved (ha)
Flooded rice
Low-input cropping
High-input cropping
Legume-based pastures
(Sanchez. 1993)
Improved germplasm plays an important role in the development of sustainable land-use systems. It is important to select new crops and develop improved varieties that can tolerate acid soil conditions and high concentrations of Al and Mn in the sub-soil, and grow under continuously warm and humid environments with high pressure from diseases and pests. The positive role that genetic resources and improved germplasm can play in developing sustainable systems cannot be overemphasized.
Table 50 Examples of potentially sustainable land-use systems in the humid tropics
Ecoregion
Sail type
Rainfall (mm/yr)
Potentially sustainable system
Lowland moist forest
Alfisols, Ultisols
Root crops, plantain, banana with mulch farming and chemical fertilizers
Lowland wet forest
Oxisols, Ultisols
Tree crops (e.g., rubber, oil palm, Gmelina, teak with cover crops and fertilizer use) and agro-forestry systems
Pre-montane rainforest
Oxisols, Ultisols
Coffee, pineapples, pastures with low stocking rate and live fences
<section>X. Research and development priorities</section>
TRF ecosystems cover a vast area and are a major global resource. Mismanagement of this fragile and ecologically sensitive resource can lead to: (i) degradation of soil by erosion, fertility depletion, decline in soil organic matter content and biodiversity; (ii) contamination of environments through eutrophication and pollution of surface and ground waters; and (iii) decline in productivity. In contrast, a large number of improved and science based technological options can lead to innovative, creative, and sustainable land-use systems. Judiciously implemented and properly managed, these technological options can lead to: (i) enhanced and sustained production; (ii) reversal of degradative trends and improvements in soil quality and soil resilience; and (iii) enhancement of environmental quality through sequestration of carbon into the soil and biomass, and improvement in water quality.
These innovative systems are based on six attributes: (i) soil erosion control; (ii) improvements in soil organic matter content; (iii) enhancement of soil structure; (iv) increase in soil biodiversity; (v) strengthening of nutrient cycling mechanisms; and (vi) increase in soil resilience. Improved systems enhance soil quality and strengthen its resilience, which governs its productivity and environmental regulatory mechanisms. Important characteristics of the improved system are high energy flux, and their soil restorative and environmentally friendly properties. Several proven agricultural practices are crucial to the development of sustainable land-use systems. These practices include:
1. appropriate methods of forest conversion (e.g., manual or shear blade clearing followed by in situ burning and growing a leguminous cover crop to provide an immediate ground cover). (Land clearing and development in the forest region is still a major problem. With increasing labor constraints in the future, mechanized methods of land clearing will be increasingly relied upon. It is therefore important to develop systems of land clearing and management that minimize the degradative effects of mechanized clearing.);
2. adoption of erosion preventive and control measures, including an appropriate combination of mulch farming, conservation tillage, vegetative hedges, and engineering structures;
3. nutrient management based on enhancement of the nutrient capital of the ecosystem through a combination of nutrient cycling, biological N fixation, and supplemental use of chemical fertilizers and organic amendments;
4. adoption of new crop species and improved germplasm adapted to acid soil conditions and harsh environments; and
5. use of new and innovative farming systems based on a synthesis of these practices into efficient, productive, and environmentally friendly land-use systems.
Although a considerable body of research information on the potentials, constraints, and technological alternatives for the sustainable use of TRF is available, a lot remains to be done. There is a need for developing both disciplinary and interdisciplinary research into some key issues, including:
<section>A. Understanding the processes and mechanisms responsible for</section>
1. rapid soil and environmental degradation in the humid tropics. Why do soils degrade so rapidly after deforestation and conversion to agricultural land use? How can these degradative trends be reversed?
(a) The problem of soil compaction is extremely severe with intensive land use and mechanization. There is a need to develop routine and standardized procedures for characterizing soil compaction.
(b) More basic data are needed for predicting water runoff and soil loss under different land uses and farming systems. There is a need to establish the numerical limits of "soil loss tolerance." Also needed are conceptual and empirical models relating crop yield and soil loss to different levels of management to assess the economic consequences of accelerated soil erosion.
(c) Management of soil structure is important. Why does the structure of the soils of the humid tropics deteriorate so rapidly and how can this be prevented? The development of, crust and surface seal is a major problem in soils containing predominantly low activity clays.
(d) The study of soil dynamics or the evolution of physical, chemical, and biological properties over time in some representative farming systems and varied land uses is needed to establish the cause-effect relationship between land use and soil properties.
2. mineral cycling under intensive and productive land-use systems. How can mineral cycling be strengthened, nutrient losses reduced, efficiency enhanced, and use of the limited resources be optimized? The soils of the humid regions have special toxicity constraints. Research is needed to determine crop adaptation to these nutrient constraints. Basic studies on nutrient and water balance in different farming systems and in different ecologies should provide the basis of management systems to overcome these problems.
3. enhancing soil resilience and improving soil quality. How can mechanisms and processes responsible for enhancing soil resilience and its restorative capacity be strengthened, and used to restore degraded ecosystems?
4. improving soil organic matter content and biomass carbon. The maintenance of high levels of soil organic matter content is critical to the sustainable use of soil and water resources.
5. greenhouse gas emission from soils and vegetation of TRF ecosystems. How can the gaseous emissions from TRF ecosystems be minimized, and soil resources and live biomass be used for carbon sequestration?
<section>B. Developing new and innovative management systems for</section>
1. decreasing pressure on the TRF so that the rate of deforestation is brought under control. How can the productivity of land already developed be enhanced? Proven innovations and sub-systems to alleviate specific biophysical constraints related to soil and environment should be integrated into farming systems. Methodology should be standardized to facilitate the establishment of farming systems for locale-specific situations on the basis of sub-systems and component technology already developed.
2. restoring the productivity of degraded lands. How can the restoration of vast areas of land that were once productive be achieved,? What are the environmentally friendly systems of soil and vegetation restoration? Restoration of degraded lands deserves high priority, particularly to reduce the need to clear and develop new lands. Methods should be developed to restore and rehabilitate degraded lands. Land evaluation criteria should indicate the time when soil should be taken out of production and put under a restorative and ameliorative phase. Establishing the critical limits of soil properties in relation to severity of degradation is crucial in this endeavor.
3. promoting agribusiness and secondary industry so that economic pressure on land resources is lessened. How can sources of off site income be developed through encouraging agro-industrial development,?
<section>C. Transferring technologies already known through</section>
1. site-specific, production-oriented, and problem-solving research. How can farmers participate in research so that crucial technology developed at research stations can be applied on-site?
2. identifying policy considerations that promote science-based land use systems.
<section>D. Developing the predictive capacity for extrapolating results from one region to another by</section>
1. building a base of scientific knowledge that allows the rational use of the land and water resources of TRF ecosystems;
2. developing predictive models to assess the effects of TRF conversion on micro- and meso-climates, hydrology, soil properties, and productivity; and
3. providing guidelines for the sustainable management of TRF resources.
<section>E. Developing appropriate indicators of sustainability by</section>
1. identifying quantitative criteria for assessing the sustainable use of soil and water resources in the humid tropics; and
2. developing objective and quantifiable indices of sustainability.
There are still many myths about the actual potential and constraints of tropical ecosystems. Although considerable progress has been made in the recent past toward replacing myth with fact, the reasons for the lack of sustainability in tropical ecosystems are not fully understood. The research and development objectives are to achieve high and sustainable yields with less damage to soil and environment.
The TRF ecosystems have a vast productive potential. However, there is a need to create an awareness of the food production potentials and limitations of the TRF ecosystem. These ecosystems also play a major role in global environmental regulatory mechanisms, and should be judiciously managed to enhance production and improve environmental quality.
<section>References</section>
Abujamin, A.. S. Abujamin, and U. Kurnia, 1984. Soil and crop management practices for erosion control. Pembr. Pen. Tanah Dan Pupuk 3: 7 12.
Abujamin, S., A. Abdurachman, and M. Suwardjo. 1984. Contour grass strips as low cost conservation practice. In Proceedings Soil Erosion and Its Countermeasures. 11 19 November 1984, Chiang Mai, Thailand.
Abujamin, S., A. Abujamin, and U. Kurnia, 1983. Permanent grass strips as one of soil conservation methods. Pembr. Pen. Tanah Dan Pupuk 1: 16 20.
Alegre, J.C., and P.A. Sanchez, 1991. Central continuous cropping experiment in Yurbilaguas: Y-101. Pp. 249 251 in TROPSOIL Technical Report, 1988-1989. Raleigh, N.C.: TROPSOIL Management Entity, North Carolina State University.
Anderson, A.B., 1990. Deforestation in Amazonia: dynamics, causes, and alternatives. Pp. 3 23 in Alternatives to Deforestation: Steps Toward Sustainable Use of the Amazon Rain Forest, A.B. Anderson (ed). New York: Columbia University Press.
Andriesse, J.P., and R.M. Schelhaas. 1987. A monitoring study of nutrient cycles in soils used for shifting cultivation under various climatic conditions in tropical Asia. Agric. Ecosyst. Environ. 19:285 332.
Asabere, P.K., 1987. Attempts at sustained yield management in the tropical high forests of, Ghana. Pp. 47 70 in Natural Management of Tropical Moist Forest. F. Mergen and J. Vincent (eds). New Haven, Conn.: Yale University School of Forestry and Environmental Studies.
Barnett, A.P.. J.R. Caroeker. and F. Abruna, 1972. Soil and nutrient losses in runoff with selected cropping treatments in tropical soils. Agron J. 64: 391-395.
Beets. W.C.. 1990. Raising and Sustaining Productivity of Small Holder Farming Systems in the Tropics. Alkemaar, Holland: Ag. Be Publishers.
Bonell, M., M.M. Hutschmidt, and J.S. Gladwell (eds), 1993. Hydrology and Water Management in the Humid Tropics: Hydrological Research Issues and Strategies for Water Management. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press. 500 pp.
Brown, S., A.J.R. Gillespie, and A.E. Lugo, 1989. Biomass estimation methods for tropical forest with applications to forest inventory data. Forest Sci. 35: 881 902.
Brown, S., A.E. Lugo, and L.R. Iverson, 1992. Processes and lands for sequestering carbon in the tropical forest landscape. Water, Air, Soil Pollution 64: 139 155.
Buschbacher, R., 1990. Natural forest management in the humid tropics: ecological, social, and economic considerations. Ambio 19(5): 253 258.
Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research (CGIAR), 1989. Sustainable Agricultural Production Final Implications for International Research. Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
CGIAR, 1990a. Report of the Fifty Third Meeting of the Consultative Group on International Agricultural Research, Washington, D.C.
CGIAR, 1990b. Sustainable Agricultural Production. Final Report of the CGIAR Committee. MT/90f 18. Presented at the CGIAR meeting, The Hague, Netherlands, 21-25 May 1990.
Crutzen, P.J., and M.O. Andreae, 1990. Biomass burning in the tropics: impact on atmospheric chemistry and biogeochemical cycles. Science 250: 1669 1678.
Denevan, W.M., J.M. Treacy, J.B. Alcorn. C. Padoch, J. Denslow, and S. Flores Pairan, 1984. Indigenous agroforestry in the Peruvian Amazon: Bora Indian management of swidden fallows. Interciencia 9(6): 346 357.
Detwiler, R.P., 1986. Land use change and the global carbon cycle: the role of tropical soils. Biogeochemistry 2: 67 93.
Detwiler, R P.. and C.A.S. Hall, 1988a. Tropical forests and the global carbon cycle. Science 239:42 47.
Dctwiler, R.P., and C.A.S. Hall, 1988b. The global carbon cyclic. Letter. Science 241: 1738 1739.
Durand, P., 1984. Rèsultats des expérimentations sur l'érosion des sols. Département des Eaux et Fôrets, Burundi, East Africa: Bujumbura.
Ehrlich, P.R., and E.O. Wilson, 1991. Biodiversity studies: science and policy. Science 253: 758 762.
Ehui, S.K., and T.W. Hertel, 1989. Deforestation and agricultural productivity in the Côte d'lvoire. Amer. J. Agric. Econ. 71: 703 711.
Ehui, S.K., and T.W. Hertel, 1992a. Testing the impact of deforestation on aggregate agricultural productivity. Agric. Ecosystems Envir. 38:205 218.
Ehui, S.K., and T.W. Hertel, 1992b. Measuring the Value of Marginal Forest Conservation in Côte d'lvoire. Draft Paper. Addis Ababa, Ethiopia: International Livestock Center for Africa.
Evans, J., 1982. Plantation Forestry in the Tropics. Oxford: Clarendon.
Ewel, J., C. Berish. B. Brown, N. Price, and J. Raich, 1981. Slash and burn impacts on a Costa Rican wet forest site. Ecology 60:816 829.
FAO, 1982. FAO Forestry Paper 30 and 37. Rome: FAO.
FAO, 1990. Comparative analysis of organic manures. Project Field Document v.24, Rome: FAO.
FAO, 1992. Forest Resource Assessment, 1990 Project. Third Interim Report of the State of Tropical Forests. Tenth World Forestry Congress. 17 26 September 1991. Paris, France.
Fearnside. P.M., 1983. Development alternatives in the Brazilian Amazon: an ecoIogical evaluation. Interciencia 8(2): 65- 78.
Fearnside, P.M., 1986. Human Carrying Capacity of the Brazilian Rain Forest. New York: Columbia University Press.
Fearnside, P.M., 1987. Rethinking continuous cultivation in Amazonia. BioScience 37(3): 209 214.
Ghuman, B.S., and R. Lal. 1987. Effects of partial clearing on micro-climate in a humid tropical forest. Agric. and Forest Met. 40: 17 29.
Ghuman. B.S., and R. Lal, 1989. Soil temperature effects of biomass burning in windrows after clearing a tropical rainforest. Field Crops Res. 22: 1 -10.
Ghuman, B.S.. and R. Lal. 1990. Nutrient addition into soil by leaves of Cassia siamea and Gliricidia sepium grown on an Ultisol in southern Nigeria. Agroforestry Systems 10: 131 133.
Ghuman, B.S., and R. Lal, 1991. Land clearing and use in the humid Nigerian tropics 11. Soil chemical properties. Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J. 55: 184 Ids.
Ghuman, B.S.. and R. Lal, 1992. Effects of soil wetness at the time of land clearing on physical properties and crop response on an Ultisol in southern Nigeria. Soil and Tillage Res. 22: 1 11.
Ghuman, B.S., R. Lal, and W. Shearer, 1991. Land clearing and use in the humid Nigerian tropics. In Soil physical properties. Soil Sci. Soc. Am. J. 55: 178183.
Gomez-Pompa, A., 1987a. On Maya silviculture. Mexican Studies 3(1): 1 17.
Gomez-Pompa. A., 1987b. Tropical deforestation and Maya silviculture: an ecological paradox. Tulane Stud. Zool. Bot. 25: 19 37.
Goodland, R.. 1991. Tropical Deforestation: Solutions, Ethics and Religion. Environment Working Paper No. 43. Washington. D.C.: World Bank.
Grainger, A.. 1991. The Tropical Rain Forests and Man. New York: Columbia University Press.
Harwood, R.R., 1987. Agroforestry and mixed farming systems. Pp. 273-301 in Ecological Development in the Humid Tropics: Guidelines for Planners, A.E. Logo. J. R. Clark, and R. D. Child (eds)). Morrilton, Ark.: Winrock International.
Hauser, S., and B.T. Kang. 1993. Nutrient dynamics. maize yield and soil organic matter in alley cropping with Leucaena leucocephala. Pp. 215-229 in Soil Organic Matter Dynamics and Sustainability of Tropical Agriculture. K. Mulongoy and R. Merckx(eds). U.K.: J. Wiley & Sons.
Hecht. S.B., 1982. Cattle Ranching in the Brazilian Amazon: Evaluation of a Development Strategy. Ph.D. dissertation. Berkeley, Calif.: University of, California.
Hecht, S.B., and A. Cockburn. 1989. The Fate of the Forest. London: Verso.
Hecht, S.B., R.B. Norguard, and G. Possio, 1988. The economics of cattle ranching in eastern Amazonia Interciencia 13(5): 233 239.
Hibbert, A.R.. 1967a. Forest treatment effects of water yield. Proc. Int. Symp. Forests Hydrology, 537-543.
Hibbert, A.R., 1967b. Moisture and energy conditions within a sloping soil mass during drainage. Pp. 597 543 in International Symposium on Forest Hydrology, \V.E. Sopper and H.W. Lull (eds). New York: Pergamon Press.
Holdridge. L.R., 1967. Life Zone Ecology, rev. ed. San Jose, Costa Rica: Tropical Science Center.
Houghton, R.A., 1990a. The global effects of tropical deforestation. Environ. Sci. Technol. 24:414-422.
Houghton, R.A., 1990b. The future role of, tropical forests in affecting the carbon dioxide concentration of the atmosphere. Ambio 19(4): 204-209.
Houghton, R.A.. 1991. Tropical deforestation and atmospheric carbon dioxide. Climatic Change 19: 99-118
Houghton. R.A., and D.L. Skone, 1990. The long-term flux carbon between terrestrial ecosystems and atmosphere as a result of changes in land use. Report CO[2]. Research Program, Washington, D.C,.: USDA. Oft ice of Health and Environment Research.
Hulugalle. N.R., R. Lal, and C.H.H. ter Kuile, 1984. Soil physical changes and crop root growth following different methods of land clearing in western Nigeria. Soil Sci. 138: 179-179.
IITA, 198I. IITA Research Highlights. Ibactan. Nigeria: IITA.
IITA. 1986. IITA Annual Reports and Research Highlights. Ibadan, Nigeria: IITA.
Jansson. M.B.. 1988. A global survey of sediment yield. Ggografiska Annalar 70A: 81-98.
Juo, A.S.R., 1989. New farming systems development in the wetter tropics. Exp. Agric. 25: 145-163
Jurion. F., and J. Henry. 1969. Can Primitive Farming be Modernized,? Hors Série, Publication INEAC. Brussels:: Institute National d'Études Agronomiques du Congo.
Kang. B.T., 1993. Changes in soil chemical properties and crop performance with continuous cropping on an Entisol in the humid tropics. Pp. 797 306 in Soil Organic Matter Dinamics and Sustainability of Tropical Agriculture. K. Mulongoy and R. Merckx (eds). U.K.: J. Wiley & Sons.
Kang, B.T.. and G.F. Wilson, 1987 The development of alley cropping as a promising agroforestry technology. Pp. 227 243 in Agroforestry: A Decade of Development. H.A. Steppler and P. K. R. Nair ((eds). Nairobi, Kenya: ICRAF.
Kang, B.T., L. Reynolds, and A.N. Att-Krah, 1990. Alley farming. Advances Agron. 43: 315-359.
Kang, B.T., A.C.B.M. van der Kruijs, and D.C. Cooper, 1989. Alley cropping for food production. Pp. 16-26 in Alley Farming in the Humid and Sub-humid Tropics, B.T. Kang and L. Reynolds (eds)). Ottawa, Canada: International Development Research Centre.
Kang, B.T., G.F,. Wilson, and L. Spiken 1981. Alley cropping maize with Icucaena hi southern Nigeria. Plant Soil 63: 165 179.
Lal. R.. 1976. Soil erosion problems on Alfisols in western Nigeria and their control. IITA Monograph 1, 208 pp.
Lal. R., 1981a. Deforestation and hydrological problems. Pp. 131 140 in Tropical Agric. Hydrology, R. Lal and E.W. Russell (eds). U.K.: J. Wiley & Sons.
Lal. R.. 1981b. Clearing a tropical forest II. Effects on crop performance. Field Crops Res. 4:345-354.
Lal. R., 1982. Effect of slope length and terracing on runoff and erosion on a tropical soil. IAHS Publ. 137:23 31.
Lal, R., 1984. Soil erosion from tropical arable lands and its control. Adv. Agron. 37: 183-248.
Lal, R.. 1986a. Conversion of tropical rainforest: agronomic potential and ecological consequences. Adv. Agron. 39: 173 264.
Lal, R., 1986b. Soil surface management in the tropics for intensive land use and high and sustained production Adv. Soil Sci. 5: 1 109.
Lal, R., 1987a. Approaches to and needs for land clearing. IBSRAM Proc. Series 3, Bangkok, Thailand.
Lull, R.. 1987b. Tropical Ecology and Physical Edaphology. U.K.: J. Wiley & Sons. 732 pp.
Lal, R.. 1987c. Managing soils of sub-Saharan Africa. Science 236: 1069-1076.
Lal, R.. 1989a. Agroforestry systems and soil surface management of a tropical Alfisol. 1 V. Agroforestry Systems 8: 1-6; 7-29: 97-111: 113-132: 197-215: 217-238: 239-242.
Lal, R.. 1989b. Land degradation and its impact on food and other resources. Pp. 85 140 in Food ant Natural Resources, Pimental et al. (eds). New York: Academic Press.
Lal, R., 1989c. Soil management options in the tropics as alternatives to slash and burn. Soil Technology 2:253 270.
Lal. R.. 1990a. Low-resource agriculture alternatives in sub-Saharan Africa. J. Soil Water Cons. 45:437-445.
Lal. R., 1990b. Managing soil carbon in tropical agro-ecosystems. EPA Workshop on Climate Change. Washington, D.C.
Lal, R.. 1990c. Soil erosion in the tropics: principles and management. New York: McGraw Hill.
Lal, R., 1992. Tropical Agricultural Hydrology and Sustainability of Agricultural Systems: A Ten Year Watershed Management Project in Southwestern Nigeria. IITA Report, Columbus, Ohio: The Ohio State University. 303 pp.
Lal, R., 1993a. Global soil erosion in the tropics and carbon dynamics. Proc. Int'l. Symp. Soil Processes and Management Systems: Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Carbon Sequestration, 5 9 April 1993, Columbus. Ohio.
Lal. R., 1993b. Agricultural activities and carbon emissions from soils of the tropics. Proc. Int'l. Symp. Soil Processes and Management Systems: Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Carbon Sequestration, 5 9 April 1993, Columbus, Ohio.
Lal. R.. and D.J. Cummings, 1979. Clearing a tropical forest. Effects on soil and microclimate. Field Crops Res. 2:91 107.
Lal, R., and F.P. Miller, 1993. Soil duality and its management in humid subtropical and tropical environments. Proc. XVII International Grassland Congress, Massey University. NCSA, Zealand.
Lal, R., B.S. Ghuman, and W.A. Shearer, 1992. Cropping systems effects of a newly cleared Ultisol ha southern Nigeria. Soil Tech. 5: 27-38.
Lal, R., P.A. Sanchez, and R.W. Cummings, Jr. (eds), 1986. Land Clearing and Development in the Tropics. Rotterdam, The Netherlands: A.A. Balkema.
Lal, R., D.J. Eckert. N.R. Fausey, and W. M. Edwards, 1 990. Conservation tillage in sustainable agriculture. Pp. 203 225 in Sustainable Agricultural Systems. C.A. Edwards et al. (eds). Ankeny, Iowa: SWCS.
Lal, R., J. Kimble, E. Levine, and B.A. Stewart (eds), 1994. Soils and Global Change. Chelsea, Mich.: Lewis Publishers (in press).
Lanly, J.P., 1982. Tropical Forest Resources. Forestry Paper No. 30. Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations. 106 pp.
Lugo, A.E., 1988. The future of the forest. Ecosystem rehabilitation in the tropics. Environment 30(7): 16-20, 41 45.
Lugo, A.E., 1992. Comparison of tropical tree plantations with secondary forests of similar age. Ecol. Monogr. 62(1): 1-41.
Lugo, A.E., and S. Brown, 1991. Comparing tropical and temperate forests. Pp. 319 330 in Comparative Analysis of Ecosystems, J. Cole, G. Lovett, and S. Findlay (ads). New York: Springer Verlag.
Lugo, A.E., and L.H. Liegel, 1987. Comparison of plantations and natural forests in Puerto Rico. Pp. 4l 44 ha People and Tropical Forest, MAB Program.
MacArthur, J.D.. 1980. Some characteristics of farming in a tropical environment. Pp. 19 29 in Farming Systems in the Tropics, H. Ruthenberg (ed). New York: Oxiord University Press.
Maduakor, H.O., R. Lal, and O.A. Opare-Nadi, 19X4. Effects of methods of seedbed preparation and mulching on the growth and yield of white yam on an Ultisol in southeast Nigeria. Field Crops Res. 9: 119-130.
Millington, A.C., 1981. Relationship between three scales of erosion management on two small basins in Sierra Leone. IAHS Publ. 133:485 492.
Millington, T., 1982. Soil conservation techniques for the humid tropics. Approp. Tech. 9: 17-18.
Myers, N., 1984. The Primary Source: Tropical Forests and Our Future. New York: W.W. Norton.
Myers, N.. 1989. Deforestation Rates in Tropical Forests and Their Climatic Implications. London, U.K.: Friends of the Earth.
Nair, P.K.R., 1989. Classification of agroforestry systems. Pp. 39 52 in Agroforestry Systems in the Tropics, P.K.R. Nair (ed). Boston: Kluwer.
NRC, 1993a. Sustainable Agriculture and the Environment in the Humid Tropics. Washington, D.C.: National Research Council. 702 pp.
NRC, 1993b. Vetiver Grass: A Thin Line Against Erosion. Washington, D.C.: National Academy Press. 171 pp.
Nye, P.H., and D.J. Greenland, 1960. The Soil Under Shifting Cultivation. Commonwealth Bureau of Soils. Technical Communication No. 51. Harpenden, U.K.: Farnham Royal.
O'Keebe, P., and L. Kristofferson, 1984. The uncertain energy path and the Third World Development. Ambio 13: 168-170.
Okigbo, B.N., 1987. Shifting cultivation FAO Soils Bull. 57, Rome.
Okigbo, B.N., 1991. Development of Sustainable Agricultural Systems in Africa. Distinguished African Scientist Lecture Series No. 1. Ibadan. Nigeria: IITA.
Okigbo. B.N., and D.J. Greenland, 1976. Inter-cropping systems in tropical Africa. In Multiple Cropping, R.l. Papendick. P.A. SanclIez, and G.B. Tripiett (eds). ASA Publication No. ,7. Madison, Wisc.
Okigbo, B.N.. and R. Lal, 1980. Residue mulches. intercropping and agrisilviculture potential in tropical Africa. Pp. 54 69 in Basic Techniques in Ecological Farming, S. Hill (ed). IFOAM Conference. Montreal, Canada.
Oldeman,, L.R., 1994. The Global Extent of, Soil Degradation. Pp. 99-118 in Soil Resilience and Sustainabie Land Use, D.J. Greenland and I. Szaboles (eds). Wallingtord, U.K.: CAB International.
Pereira, H.C.. 1973. Land use anti water resources in temperate and tropical climates. Cambridge, U.K.: Cambridge University Press.
Peters, C.M.. A.H. Gentry, and R.O. Mendelsolm, 1990. Valuation of an Amazonian rainforest. Nature 339:655-656.
Post. W.M., T.H. Peng, W.R. Emmanuel, A.W. King. V.H. Dale, and D.L. DeAngelis, 1990. The global carbon cycle. Amer. Sci. 78: 310-396.
Postel, S.. 1984. Protecting forests. Pp. 75 92 in State of the World, 1984, L.R. Brown (ed). World Watch Institute, Washington, D.C.
Raison, R.J., 1979. Modification of the soil environment by vegetation fires, with particular reference to nitrogen transformations: a review. Plant Soil 51:73-108.
Ruthenberg, H., 1980. Farming Systems in the Tropics. 3rd ed. Oxford, U.K.: Oxford University Press.
Ruttan, V.W., 1987. Institutional requirements for sustained agricultural development. In Sustainability Issues h1 Agricultural Development, T.l. Davis and l.A. Schrimer (eds). Washington, D.C.
Salati, E., and P. Vose, 1983. Depletion of tropical rainforest. Ambio 12:67-71.
Salati, E., and P.B. Vose, 1984. Amazon Bashl: a system in equilibrium. Science 225: 129-138.
Salati. E., and P.B. Vose. 1985. Depletion of tropical rainforest. Science 225: 129-137.
Salati, E., T.E. Lovejoy, and P.B. Vose, 1983. Precipitation and water recycling in tropical forests. Environmentalist 3:67-72.
Salezar. A., and C.A. Palm, 1987. Screening of leguminous trees for alley cropping on acid soils of the humid tropics. by Special Publication 87 01. Turrialba, Costa Rice: Nitrogen Fixing Tree Association/CATIE.
Sanchez. P.A.. 1993. Alternatives to slash and burn agriculture. In Technologies for Sustainable Agriculture in the Tropics, J. Raghand and R. Lal (eds). ASA Special Publication, Madison, Wise.
Sanchez. P.A.. and J.R. Benites, 1987. Low-input cropping for acid soils of the humid tropics. Science 238: 1521-1527.
Sanchez, P.A.. and S.W. Buol, 1975. Soils of the tropics and the world food crisis. Science 188: 598-603.
Sanchez. P.A.. and J.G. Salinas, 1981. Low input technology for managing Oxisols and Ultisols in tropical America. Adv. Agron. 34:279 406.
Sanchez. P.A.. J.H. Villahica, and D.E. Bandy, 1983. Soil fertility dynamics after clearing a tropical rainforest ha Peru. Soil Sci. Soc. Amer. J. 47: 1171-1178.
Sanchez, P.A., D.E. Bandy, J.H. Villachica, and J.J. Nicholaides III, 1982. Amazon Basin soils: management for continuous crop production. Science 216: 821-827.
Schlesinger, W.H., 1991. Biogeochemistry: analysis of global change. San Diego: Academic Press.
Sehlesinger, W.H., 1993. An overview of the global carbon eyelet Proc. Int'l. Symp. Soil Processes and Management Systems: Greenhouse Gas Emissions and Carbon Sequestration, 5 9 April 1993, Columbus, Ohio.
Schoningh, E.. and J. Alkamper, 1984. Effects of different mulch materials on soil properties and yield of maize and cowpea in the eastern Amazon Oxisol. Proc. First Symp. Humid Tropics, EMBRAPA, 12 17 November 1984, Belem, Brazil.
Seubert, C.E., P.A. Sanchez, and C. Valverde, 1977. Effects of land clearing methods on soil properties and crop performance in an Ultisol of the Amazon Jungle of Peru. Trop. Agric. 54: 307-321.
Szott, L.T., C.A. Palm, and P.A. Sanchez, 1991. Agroforestry in acid soils of the humid tropics. Advances Agron. 45: 275 300.
Technical Advisory Committee (TAC), 1989. Sustainable Agricultural Production: Implications for International Agricultural Research. Washington, D.C.: CGIAR.
TROPSOIL/NCSU, 1987. Technical Report for 1986-87. Raleigh, N.C.: North Carolina State University.
Van Wambeke, A., 1992. Soils of the Tropics: Properties and Appraisal. New York: McGraw Hill, Inc. 343 pp.
Vergara, N.T., 1982. Sustained outputs from legume tree-based agroforestry systems. In New Directions in Agroforestry: The Potential of Tropical Legume Trees, N.T. Vergara (ed).
Virginia, R.A., 1986. Soil development under tree legume canopies. Forest Ecol. Manag. 16: 69-79.
Weert, R. Van Der, 1974. The influence of mechanical forest clearing on soil conditions and resulting effects on root growth. Trop. Agric. 51: 325-331.
Whitmore, T.C., 1984. Tropical Rain Forests of the Far East. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Willey, R.W.. 1979. Intercropping: its importance and research needs. I. Competition and yield advantages. Field Crops Abst. 32: 1-10.
Wilson, E.O., and F.M Peter (eds). 1988. Biodiversity. Washington, D.C.,.: National Academy Press.
Wilson, G.F., and R. Lal, 1986. New concepts for post-clearing land management in the tropics. Pp. 371-382 in Land Clearing and Development in the Tropics, R. Lal, P.A. Sanchez, and R.W. Cummings, Jr. (eds). Rotterdam, The Netherlands: A.A. Balkema.
Woodwell, G.M.. R.A. Houghton, J.E. Hobbie, J.M. Melillo, B. Moore, C.A. Palm, B.J. Peterson, and G.R. Shaver. 1983. Global deforestation: contribution to atmospheric carbon dioxide. Science 222: 1081-1086.
World Bank, 1991. The Forest Sector: A World Bank Policy Paper. Washington, D.C.
WRI, 1992-93. World Resources: A Guide to the Global Environment, Toward Sustainable Development. Washington, D.C.: World Resources Institute.
<section>Other titles of interest</section>
The Fragile Tropics of Latin America
Changing Environments and Sustainable Management
Edited by Toshie Nishizawa and Juha I. Uitto
This book addresses the dilemma confronting Latin American counties of desiring to utilize their tropical resources to improve the living standard of their citizens on the one hand, while, on the other, dealing with a growing concern about the ecological fragility of such regions and the realization of the urgent need for sustainable alternatives to prevailing models of economic development.
ISBN 92-808-0877-X
US$35; airmail US$40
Developing county price: US$ 17.50
Managing Water for Peace in the Middle East
Alternative Strategies
By Masahiro Murakami
This volume offers some non-conventional approaches to resolving water resource issues in the Middle East. It outlines a plan for joint basin development of the Jordan River and the Dead Sea and a workable sharing arrangement of a critical resource. The volume draws on studies involving Kuwait, Jordan, the Palestinian territories, and Israel.
ISBN 92-808-0858-3
US$50; airmail US$55
Developing country price: US$25
South-East Asia's Environmental Future
The Search for Sustainability
Edited by Harold Brookfield and Yvonne Byron
This book considers the constraints and possible solutions to achieving improved environmental management in the region and examines the policy options available to planners and development practitioners.
ISBN 92-808-0823-0
US$40; airmail US$47
Developing county price: US$20
Misuse of the soil and inappropriate agricultural systems are causing serious degradation of the humid tropical eco-region and perpetuating food shortages, malnutrition, and poor standards of living.
What is needed are sustainable agricultural systems that can satisfy human needs while maintaining soil fertility and the integrity of the environment. This publication makes available research information on scientifically proven methods of deforestation for conversion to agricultural land use, and soil and crop management systems that allow for the sustained use of soil and water resources in the humid tropics. The reader will find numerous examples of appropriate techniques with explanations of their impacts on production, soil quality, and the environment. Information is provided on the characteristics of an improved farming system; new land development; run-off management and erosion control nutrient management; and, in the final section, research and development priorities are outlined.
This compendium will be of particular use and interest to planners, practitioners, extension agents and others involved in humid tropical soil resource management.
Dr. Rattan Lal
is Professor of Soil Science in the School of Natural Resources at the Ohio State University, Columbus, Ohio. Prior to joining Ohio State in 1987, he served as a scientist for 18 years at the International Institute of Tropical Agriculture, Ibadan, Nigeria. Professor Lal is a Fellow of the Soil Science Society of America, American Society of Agronomy, and the Third World Academy of Sciences. He is recipient of both the International Soil Science Award and the Soil Science Applied Research Award of the Soil Science Society of America. He received the Distinguished Scholar Award of the Ohio State University in 1994.
UNUP-876
ISBN 92-808-0876-1
03500 P
United Nations
University Press
TOKIO o NEW YORK o PARIS
