<title>Development policy and strategy for the benefit of rural women</title>
<section>1</section>
Part I - analysis of the situation
Invisible rural women
Women as objects or subjects of rights?
Labourers or farmers in their own right?
Women in development as protagonists or extras?
Women as traditionalists or innovators?
Women speak out
Women's demands as the basis for policies of integration
The favourable political context
The conviction not yet fully established
The lack of methods
The lack of gender-differentiated statistics
The need for information and training
Towards a coherent approach to planning
Complex alliances and relations among institutions
Government institutions
Non-governmental organizations
Organizations for cooperation and funding
Part I - analysis of the situation
Invisible rural women
Is the situation of Peulh women in Guinea comparable to that of Muhutu women in Burundi'? Is it possible to draw conclusions that are applicable to all women regardless of the differences in their societies? Even within one group or society' can women be considered as a single entity?
The immediate response to this type of question is clearly negative. A positive answer would imply reductionist views of what women are - how they live, suffer, want and choose - as individuals, producers, mothers and citizens within the family, community, society and country.
The female canvas is painted with a full palette of colours, giving a myriad of different tones and shades; its forms are expressed in a thousand complex facets and surfaces, and in teens of space it covers a wide range of environmental landscapes. Nonetheless it is possible to discern a certain genuine unity, with clear lines and features revealing conditions and situations common to all rural women in the various spheres in which their lives unfold.
Without repeating the many analyses and diagnoses made previously concerning the condition of women, a quick run-down of the specific problems of rural women can be helpful, using knowledge acquired through the course of FAO studies and support programmes. This summary of restraints or limitations is meant to extract and highlight the obstacles that should be removed by a development policy satisfying the demands and interests of women and of rural society in general, as well as the priorities of individual governments.
Women as objects or subjects of rights?
All women - including the rural women of Africa have to face many questions that are:
· constitutional: such as recognition of their existence as adults, equality in their rights as citizens, capacity to bring legal actions, rights to vote and to be elected;
· economic: such as the right to inherit' the capacity to engage in business, access to land as owners, access to sources of finance, banking institutions and credit;
· social: such as access to and equality in work, tasks and pay. access to subsidies, welfare and family allowances. recognition of their status as parents, economic producers and workers.
The weakness, if not absence, of a recognized legal status for women is partially explained in terms of the mechanisms of society (see, for example, Meillassoux, 1977; Balandier, 1974; Droy, 199()). Rural societies are made up of family groups organized into production units under the supervision and authority of a family head. The survival of these units is dependent on their productive capacities and, even more so, on their reproductive capacities. The labour factor is of primary importance here and must always be available. The continuity of the human factor is dependent on reproductive women, who are thus invested with a value and become subject, as though they were property, to the laws of exchange.
For women, this situation is manifested by their weak or non-existent legal capacity. It is an exception for women to have authority over management, decision making and control of resources and property (which, in any case, can only rarely belong to them).
The most crucial element in women's dispossession of rights concerns land, its ownership, access and use. Rural women are often excluded from owning this primary production factor through either inheritance systems or land tenure regulations. Land succession rules favour men, and land reforms and laws inadvertently divorce women from the land.
The criterion for being awarded land, whether it is distributed on the basis of inheritance or after rehabilitation or development, is status as family head. Although rural women often fulfil this function^1 in the absence of men (through migration, death or divorce), they are still not eligible to hold land since the law does not recognize their status as family heads.
^1 At Fouta-Djallon in Guinea it is estimated that women are responsible for 30 percent of agricultural enterprises.
All countries set goals or self-sufficiency and food security based on rising food crop production and productivity, which are in practice the responsibility of women. The contradiction is clear; if women neither have access to land nor are guaranteed rights to its use, why should they invest in increasing its productivity? Their production responds primarily to the elementary demands of individual and family consumption and not to those of security for the country as a whole.
Women, thus dispossessed of their source of work by traditional practice and civil law, are unable to join programmes the technical improvement of the soil, rational farming or the protection of resources. They are thus deprived of the benefits of development. The gap between men and women is widening and is giving rise to a social imbalance greater than any imbalance that development intervention could create. Over half the population is being left behind, and in social costs this will weigh increasingly heavily, penalizing whole countries. All of the investments and efforts made will have been in vain.
Women must have rights equal to those of men. especially when they are in practice the heads of households. When land reforms and laws are being drawn up, the forms of dispossession to which women are subject should be analysed so that they can be remedied in a socially and economically just way. Obstacles in existing legislation and traditional practice must be identified and laws and regulations promulgated to broaden women's powers and legal capacity in obtaining their due rights. These texts must then be disseminated and explained to those concerned. The majority of the rural population tends to have a low literacy level, especially in French, the language used for laws in French-speaking Africa. How many legal texts have benefited one section of the population alone because they have not been brought to the attention of the general public just because "ignorance of the law is no defence"?
Labourers or farmers in their own right?
It is estimated that women's participation in agricultural production is at least equal to that of men and often considerably greater. Nevertheless, the role of rural women and their importance as producers in their own right are rarely recognized. Their role in reproduction (as wives and mothers) is often the only one taken into consideration.
Apart from the significant contribution they make to increasing resources and production. women's working hours (over 12 per day) and variety of activities (production of cash and food crops, market gardening, animal husbandry, etc. ) provide further proof; if any is needed, of their participation. In agriculture women take part in all the activities of harvesting, storage, processing. picking and marketing. Moreover, the list of difficulties faced by women is long and daunting; it includes outdated tools. rudimentary technology, lack of machinery, unrefined methods, scant access to credit and an almost total lack of training.
Furthermore, after carrying out all their farming tasks and taking care of the household (fetching water and fuelwood from considerable distances, preparing meals, bringing up and caring for children in areas where social services are not readily accessible and are often expensive), women often have to pursue other activities on their own account in order to earn a personal income, since income resulting from their labour on the farm does not go to them but is managed by the head of household, who distributes it according to his own criteria. As rural women are responsible for household food security they find themselves forced to earn extra money to meet this responsibility.
The results of development programmes and projects show that they are still not designed to enhance the role of rural women as producers in their own right. Rural women are rarely the beneficiaries of rural services and support (see box opposite) and this is partly the result of the foundations of the agricultural production system.
In the agricultural production system, in addition to being constrained in their activities. women have no access - or can obtain access only with difficulty - to the production factors of land, capital and labour. Land is subject to rules on purchase, access and use. Acquisition of capital is subject to rules on guarantees and capacities to enter into trade agreements. For rural women, the quality and quantity of labour often depends on their own efforts.
The figure indicates rural women's position in the production system and their degree of access to production factors ( land, capital. Iabour)^2 and resources.
^2 Land: all available resources (land and natural resources) that can be used for productive purposes; subject to rules of purchase, access and use.
Capital: constituted resource used for ends other than personal; financial inputs, fixed capital, etc.; subject to guarantees.
Labour: productive human resources the quality of which depends on education, training, etc., and the quantity of which is subject to working hours, seasonal fluctuations, the availability of workers, their age etc.
The first observation to be made is that rural women are close to the labour factor in production as quality and quantity are often equivalent to their own efforts. Women count mainly on themselves, while the land is totally beyond their grasp. They can acquire capital to the extent that certain marketing activities sometimes allow them to generate an income. Women's access (or lack of access) to resources and the question of whether or not they are taken into account in development projects are conditioned by these production factors.
EXCERPTED FROM THE THIRD PROGRESS REPORT ON THE WCARRD PROGRAMME OF ACTION (FAO, 1991 b)
Rural poverty
Often the burden of droughts, famines and seasonal troughs fall[s] disproportionately on female members within poor households - in terms of consumption adjustments, asset depletion, work burden and, in extreme cases, destitution and abandonment.
Literacy
Women's literacy was consistently lower than men's. In some cases, as many as 70 percent of rural men were illiterate, compared with 82 percent of rural women, although the gain in agricultural productivity resulting from education was larger for female than male farmers.
Infant mortality and malnutrition
Infant mortality was in inverse proportion to the mothers' literacy level. The percentage of underweight children was higher among females in Asia.
Work
Women typically work more hours per day than men. They were more likely to be engaged in casual labour contracts than permanent ones, generally earning 30 to 40 percent of men's wages.
Technology
In some specific cases, the effects of new technologies on women were not altogether favourable. In the Gambia, for example, an attempt to introduce new technology in the cultivation of rice (a food and cash crop traditionally cultivated by women) resulted in the expansion of household farming under male control and in the displacement of women by men in the cultivation of rice.
Savings and credit
Programmes for granting credit and guaranteeing loans benefit male farmers, while women, who have no land or guarantee, are excluded from these, although it is recognized that they are less likely to default on payments and that they have a greater propensity to save.
Land
The distribution of land rights under communal tenure often became less equitable. Women not infrequently saw their land rights eroded. Land redistribution programmes usually targeted the household unit, with little attention to the distribution of land within the household or to women's special needs.
Extension work
The bias against women was particularly striking, especially in Africa where agricultural extension systems often did not serve women farmers as effectively as male farmers. The role of female labour in food and cash crop production, food processing, food storage and marketing was critical. In Africa, the low proportion of female extension workers (11.1 percent of extension personnel, 7 percent of field staff) contrasts with the rural population as a whole where there were more women than men.
Rural organizations and cooperatives
Women represented a very small proportion of the total membership of agricultural cooperatives.
Rural women and production management
The second observation is that access to resources is in direct proportion to access to production factors. The labour factor, being equivalent to their own efforts, often corresponds to the work done. It is hence easier for women - although still not altogether easy - to claim and benefit from such forms of support as extension work and training and to join informal mutual aid groups.
Any activity that requires investment, financial contributions, working capital or cash-flow - and hence a minimum of management ability and recognition - is linked to the capital factor. This factor entails the acquisition of inputs, machinery, technological expertise and credit. Capital is often linked to status and to eligibility to join farming and community organizations. Women very seldom have their own income, personal capital or a recognized status, and since development action is subject to the availability of capital, this means that women are often overlooked in development programmes.
Development actions are based on the principle of the working or family unit, and their beneficiaries are therefore family heads (men) or legally or socially recognized organizations. There is, therefore, a tendency to develop specific projects for women concerning: agricultural processing activities, such as milling and grain hulling projects; income-generating activities, such as market gardening and cottage industries; and women's organizations for production or marketing. In this there is a very real danger that women become segregated from the rest of the rural world.
The land factor is closely linked to status and the right to make decisions. Access to land leads to social recognition and the opportunity to belong to professional organizations, unions and cooperatives. Few development programmes or projects envisage the involvement of women on this level.
Women in development as protagonists or extras?
In most cultures, women are excluded from positions of command and policy-making and are not admitted to the decision-making process at family, community or national levels. They are very poorly represented in political parties, public institutions and workers', farmers' and professional organizations. It is essential, however, that their capacities for decision-making should now be recognized on every level.
The question of women's role in decision-making processes is far from simple. The interests of men and women in rural areas do not always converge. Women should nevertheless have the same opportunities as men and under the same conditions - to speak out, participate and take decisions. At the same time, men must shoulder their responsibilities in fields that have traditionally been left to women for the sake of convenience. A family, society or nation cannot hope for rational management, healthy functioning and balanced organization if not all members are consulted on all matters. No problem can be solved on the basis of the views of men or women alone.
The approaches that most reliably promote the role of women in decision-making and management are support for organized groups and the training of women and men.
Groups, whether mixed or solely female, increase women's visibility at village level by representing them and ensuring that their right to play a real part in making decisions regarding the village, projects and actions to be taken is respected. Groups also help women to overcome their reluctance to speak out, act or intervene on their own. This factor is particularly significant when it comes to obtaining credit, machinery, tools, land and access to services.
Groups are also excellent structures for all types of training - technical, management, negotiation, literacy and social. Mixed audiences allow discussion and help improve the position of all members. Raising the level of knowledge boosts technical and economic capacities, improves status and increases the ability to make decisions. If men and women share in management and organization, the sharing of benefits and resources will also be facilitated.
Women as traditionalists or innovators?
It is an accepted fact in all discussions that in African society rural women have always made an active contribution to agricultural production and family subsistence. Since they already form such an integral part of the process of development, why should the discussion be about women's integration? Would it not be more appropriate to examine the relations between men and women and the capacities of each to bring about change?
A fairly common observation is that it is women themselves who resist change, by putting forward conservative arguments referring to tradition, customs, the established order and the need to preserve the cultural heritage untouched and by claiming that change would be impossible.
The relationship between rural women and development projects, however, gives a different answer to the question of whether they are innovators or traditionalists. Women have a remarkable capacity for assimilating and appropriating projects and the measures they introduce. Both individually and collectively, women are the "big consumers" of projects. They readily accept the point of view and reasoning of donors and support bodies that they see as meeting their needs. This observation applies to small-scale projects involving relatively few beneficiaries.
Women have a high regard for anything concerning collective organization. The creation and continuation of such organizations are made all the easier by the fact that every woman is a stranger when she first arrives in the village. Apart from the family into which she has married, her immediate rallying point is the other women. Such groups (mutual aid, work, social, tontine) are not only traditional for women, but also respond to their need to have some control at least in one area of their lives. Women are traditionally excluded from political and social power, and technical developments can sometimes deprive them of their economic control as well. In groups, women have their own rules, working systems and mechanisms. Men are excluded, except for those the women themselves have invited - often to give technical help or to facilitate negotiations with the rest of the community. For women the group is a means of acquiring resources and production factors for themselves and
of assuring that they will benefit from the investment they have made in energy, time and finance.
Women know that such groups may enable them to obtain means of production (land, inputs and machinery), to gain access to certain resources (credit) and to benefit from services (professional training and literacy education). As soon as a path to improvement and change is opened to them, women respond. Credit is certainly the most significant example here.
Savings and credit systems, whether mutualist or not, were created with the male economic agent, as family head, in mind. Banking mechanisms have been opening progressively to women in response to their demands. Although women may not be in the majority numerically, they are unfailingly the best clients in the contractual relationship in terms of mobilization of personal contributions, meeting commitments regularly and capacity for repayment.
It is still rare for a man and woman to share control of the family budget, and women are forced to generate a daily income in order to assure family subsistence. Imagination, creativity and drive are indispensable. When labour is divided according to gender, so are budgets. Each individual is responsible for his or her financial commitments and for making payments at specified times. The time unit of a man's budget is the agricultural year, for a woman's it is the day. Women have to seize every opportunity to increase their resources or income and create new opportunities to replace those of which they have been dispossessed.
The modernization of some occupations, such as rice cultivation, market gardening and small-scale animal husbandry, transfers profits that used to be women's to men. One constant, which often emerges from research on the effects of technological innovations on the situation of rural women, is that, for all income-generating activities, the higher the income and the lighter the overall workload, the more the activity, its control and its profits shift towards men.
Women are both traditionalists and innovators. They need to be convinced that the possibility for change rests first and foremost with themselves before they are likely to act. On the other hand, as soon as they see that a certain action is in their best interests, women's potential for change and the speed at which they bring it about are striking.
Analysis of rural women's experience shows constant interaction among the different spheres (political, economic and social) in which they move. A linear presentation of their role and status is, therefore, inappropriate.
All women, particularly rural women, are involved in all these activities equally in qualitative terms and for them there is no clear dividing line between the economic and the domestic spheres. The guiding principle for women's activities is first and foremost the survival and continuation of the family. Although profitability and productivity may be considerations, they are not given the same importance they get in an exclusively economic approach; instead elements based on the social relations within families and rural communities come into play.
This attitude is not, of course, confined to rural women; male agricultural workers follow a similar approach. This fact, which is seldom taken into account, affects the activities carried out during the implementation of development programmes and projects.
The "systems", "farmers' knowledge" and "development research" approaches, set aside productionist and sectorial points of view in order to interpret and try to understand the choices and mechanisms of the rural world. The farm is often taken as the basic unit of reference. These effective and interactive analytical approaches tend, however, to obscure the priorities of some groups of the population, including women. Each element in the farming system has its own internal mechanisms of actions and reactions that lead to contradictions, malfunctions or imbalances.
Women speak out
In the 1960s, first in the United States and then in other developed countries, a wave of feminism began to sweep the world, with feminist intellectuals setting out to explain women's subordination in terms of a social rather than a natural fact.
The year 1970 saw the publication of Women' s role in economic development by Ester Boserup. A pioneer in the field, she highlights the fact that, whatever the development theories being advanced, whoever the authors and whatever the works, there are very few reflections on women's specific problems and those that there are tend to be fairly superficial. She points out the progressive losses in terms of status and autonomy suffered by rural women in developing countries as development programmes and projects are established and implemented.
Since 1970, the number of symposia, seminars and workshops on women and their situation has increased rapidly. Women in development (WID) networks were set up first in northern countries, then between northern and southern countries and now among countries in the south. The questions that Boserup raised in 1970 have been taken up by research experts. There have been more and more writings on women's integration in development and, although these are catalogued in information centres, it has become almost impossible to take into account all the articles, books and studies that have been appearing on the subject since the 1980s.
Women's demands as the basis for policies of integration
In 1975. which was International Women's Year, the United Nations Decade for Women was inaugurated in Mexico, with the integration of women in economic development being chosen for special attention. About I ()() countries adopted and signed a world plan of action benefiting women and this was then the subject of a midterm progress appraisal in Copenhagen in 1980. In 1985, the decade was closed in Nairobi, with an appointment being made for 1995, when advances in the sphere were to be evaluated. In 1989 over two-thirds of UN Member States ratified the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, which had been adopted by the UN General Assembly in 1979.
As well as these events and achievements, there have been other government-level demonstrations of a concern not to neglect women, with such measures as: the establishment of the right to vote and be elected; the recognition of women's status as adults; the proclamation of equality between men and women; and the outlawing of polygamy.
In more specific terms, major attention was given to a regional conference of West African countries which met in 1988 and 1990 to draw up a plan of action for African women. This became known as the Lomé Conference for the Integration of Women in Development.
The Decade for Women really did mobilize countries and had some concrete outcomes. It influenced ways of thinking and encouraged governments to give close attention to the question of women's position in society. People became aware of an unjust situation and of the vital need to involve women in development.
The favourable political context
In recent years, the populations of African countries have been affirming their desire to take charge of their own destinies. They have placed transitory or new governments in power, with mandates to, for example, establish democracy, develop equitable policies, draft new and just constitutional and legislative texts and recognize human rights.
The political and social movements have made it possible to demand equality between women and men, the elimination of sexual discrimination and the improvement of women's status. Equality is proclaimed or confirmed when constitutions and legislation are revised and governments place women's problems on the agenda when drafting mainstream policy guidelines. General behaviour and the attitudes of society are more open, so people are freer to discuss the question of women's equality.
The conviction not yet fully established
Technical or financial cooperation organizations back the concept of women's integration, and their guidelines and directives now explicitly include the consideration and involvement of women in the whole process of development programmes and projects. The effective participation of women is an increasingly significant factor in the approval, extension or refusal of funding.
Social pressure, together with foreign funding that favours programmes linking women with change, have prompted governments to develop effective lines of action that meet women's interests. In recent years, the large number and wide variety of government applications to FAO for assistance in this sphere demonstrate a growing concern and an increasingly favourable attitude (see box below).
A note of caution must be sounded, however, because the proclaimed conviction seems to lose momentum as soon as it comes to concrete actions. There is a considerable hiatus between stated political commitment and effective action. Unless agricultural end rural policymakers are reminded that women are full citizens and producers in their own right, it is a sad fact that women will not be taken into much account in any planned action. However, it has already been agreed that the necessary integration of women in development and the means of Implementing this will be discussed. A necessary starting point is that all the parties involved should be convinced that this concept and idea are relevant and important.
GOVERNMENT APPLICATIONS AND FAO RESPONSES REGARDING THE INTEGRATION OF WOMEN IN DEVELOPMENT
Institutional reinforcement of women in development (WID) units
Central African Republic 1992
· support of a national seminar to draw up a plan of action benefiting rural women
· reinforcement of the Agriculture Ministry's new WID unit
· formulation of a technical cooperation project
Egypt 1992
· support for the Agriculture Ministry's new WID unit
· support for the establishment of a technical secretariat on gender and development at the Agriculture Ministry
· formulation of projects to assist these units
Sudan 1990
· support for programmes and strategies for rural women
· formulation of a project
Training and support for the creation and maintenance of WID units
Mauritania 1991
· support for the inclusion of women in project planning
· training of officials and technical staff in gender analysis
· formulation and implementation of a technical cooperation project
Definition of a policy and national strategy benefiting rural women
Benin 1991
· definition of strategic guidelines for WID
· review of rural development projects and national policy proposals
Central African Republic 1991
· assistance in formulating a national policy for rural women
· revision of programmes and formulation of new projects
Egypt 1990
· study to establish a WID planning unit at the Agriculture Ministry
Guinea-Bissau 1991
· assistance to the Ministry for Women's Promotion regarding:
· a cereal-bank system for women
· formulation of projects for women's integration
· elaboration and implementation of a technical cooperation project
Guinea 1992
· reinforcement of a training programme for rural women
· formulation of a project for technical cooperation in training supervisory and field staff in gender analysis
Madagascar 1992
· support to the Population Ministry in drawing up a national strategy for rural women
· participation in the national seminar on women in development
· formulation of project identification sheets for rural women
· integration of women-oriented activities in the emergency programme for the drought-affected southern region
Mali 1991
· support to the Agriculture Ministry in defining national strategies for rural women
· designing a strategy and plan of action for the Agriculture Ministry
Niger 1991
· support to the Ministry of Social Affairs in designing a national plan of action for rural women
· formulation and implementation of a technical cooperation programme
· support for the national seminar on formulating a plan of action
Tunisia 1989
· support in designing a national plan to benefit women
· national seminar on extension work among women, consideration of recommendations for a pilot operation
Specific technical assistance to WID units
Guinea-Bissau 1992
· training of extension workers in health and environment
Interstate programmes or the establishment and management of networks
Eastern Region 1990
· regional workshop of the interregional assistance and monitoring project for population services and women in development services of rural and agricultural development administrations in the following countries: Lesotho, Malawi, Tanzania, Uganda, Zambia and Zimbabwe
Women's issues are often perceived superficially and they are, at best, grouped together with issues that affect the rural sector in general. In other cases women are considered an underprivileged group, according to the same line of reasoning that sees handicapped children and juvenile delinquents as welfare cases. Actions to benefit women are still too often confined solely to the social sphere, ignoring the economic and political dimensions. The causes of discrimination and the very real marginalization that women suffer are not explicitly identified, leaving women's true situation unknown and unrevealed.
Women's integration in development tends, therefore, to be seen as a political catch-phrase that sets the tone for the overall approach, rather than as an indispensable element of any sustainable development. From this, it is hardly surprising that national policy-makers and authorities are not concerned about integrating women into development whenever they design programmes and projects. Since they are far from convinced of the merits and advisability of this new dimension, they will obviously question the need for a new deployment of investments and energy.
The lack of methods
Such an attitude cannot be explained away by reference to the de facto subordination of women in practically all societies. Its origin lies, instead, in difficulties in understanding the concept of integrating women in development. The concept has emerged without enough explanation and its importance in the design and implementation of programmes and projects has not been made clear. In addition, there has been little effort to equip people with the decision-making and priority establishing methods and instruments that would help them to take account of the issues specific to women as well as to women's complementarily with men.
The absence of such expertise is a real stumbling block. Work carried out jointly by governments and FAO has highlighted a major methodological problem over implementing government guidelines intended to benefit women. This shortcoming emphasizes the view that women band together spontaneously and naturally and not because they are a distinct group with its own mechanisms and interests. Such an attitude leads to a leisurely approach to the translation of intention into action.
Young ( 1979) and Rogers ( 1981 ) introduced a concept that distinguished sex from gender and made it possible to study the social and economic mechanisms underlying relations between men and women. This is known as the "gender and development" approach and is not to be confused - as often happens - with the women in development (WID) approach. Gender and development issues are the starting point; they concentrate on highlighting the importance of women's role, the inequalities to which women are subject and the pressures and restraints they encounter. Obtaining a clear picture of women's position in the rural system and the development process is essential.
The shift to the gender and development approach can be made with relevant and reliable information. Gender and development is a more wide-reaching approach that takes account of development mechanisms as a whole by systematically examining the relations between men and women. Instead of understanding a given situation in terms of women only, relations between men and women and the significance of these relations within an evolving society are emphasized. Then the production, management and decision-making capacities of the whole population, especially women, should be increased in order to balance relations that are unequal and unfair.
On the basis of the gender and development concept, Overholt et al. ( 1984) have developed a method known as "gender analysis". This makes use of a variety of instruments for systematic data collection, thus allowing a greater understanding of the roles of women and men in a given context. Reproduction and production activities are decoded within the context of the gender-based division of labour and the roles that society and production systems have attributed to men and women. Gender analysis of programmes and projects in the rural sector looks at: the activities and responsibilities of women and men; the resources to which individuals have access, those that they control and the benefits they obtain from them: and the influence of social, economic and environmental factors.
The lack of gender-differentiated statistics
Methods of data collection and processing (handling and application) are also problematic, especially where statistics are concerned. Women tend to be largely ignored and are thus invisible. National and agricultural statistics lead to "an underestimation and underrating of women's activity. Not only are women excluded from consideration in surveys of the economic activity of a given population, but the monetary value of their subsistence production is systematically (and by convention) excluded from national accounts. The use of loaded economic indicators leads to a false perception of a country's economy and human resources. If the number of economically active women is underestimated, when undifferentiated data on activities are used for planning purposes they lose their significance." (Slothouber, 1992)
Social assumptions mean that married women are seen as economically inactive and they are therefore either omitted from the figures or included in the category of unpaid family help. The reality - that women are farmers who have taken on responsibilities and tasks that generate productive and financial results - goes unrecognized.
In the agricultural sector, activities categorized as economic are included in accounts while those categorized as non-economic are not. Production intended for family consumption or small-scale marketing is not counted, but full-scale stock farming and produce sold on the wholesale market are; sowing is an economic activity, whereas processing the product is not, and so on.
Statistics on employment and activity in the agricultural sector are used as a basis for the planning of rural development and the designing of projects, so the collection and processing of reliable data is important. Gender analysis can be a good starting point for data collection by clarifying the working-hours, activities and pay of men, women and children, as well as the benefits and effects of the process of change.
The need for information and training
It is important that policy-makers and planning and supervisory staff be briefed and trained in practical and efficient methods and instruments that take into account all the agents of change. Information and training help people to recognize the fact that certain categories of the population are being deprived of the benefits of development. Information and training also encourage a process of consideration that no longer isolates women's problems.
Perceiving, understanding and accepting the validity of an approach that encompasses the whole rural world, with its various population categories, its interrelations and its influences, represents the first step on the path to creating a policy benefiting women. Information and training develop the nation's abilities and are a basis for the formulation of a rational policy for the benefit of rural women.
Towards a coherent approach to planning
Government applications for support in the conception and drawing up of a policy to benefit women in general, or rural women in particular, often fall short on two points; their content and their tinning.
Clarification of content is always essential. Applications are often the result of a conjunction of conditions connected with individuals, finance and the availability of resources, rather than of a deep reflection leading to a substantial and increased demand for change.
If a policy benefiting women is to be coherent with national and sectorial plans, reflection and decision making should take place at strategic points in the overall planning process, such as when formulating or revising development plans, drawing up a plan for the rural sector or deciding on sectorial strategies. Integrating and linking a policy benefiting women with these other operations would thus be the first step towards guaranteeing coherence and coordination between different plans of action.
Donors are increasingly insistent on the consideration of women as a precondition for funding. The automatic response of governments, which are all in very serious economic and financial situations, is to fall in with this principle in order to assure themselves the maximum resources available. However, it is hard to accept that bilateral or international bodies for technical and operational aid should be responsible for perpetuating this type of situation. It thus seems reasonable to suppose that the institutions whose action guidelines include plans of action benefiting rural women, also have a similar mechanism regarding the preparation, monitoring and appraisal of programmes and projects. Formulating a policy benefiting rural women should not be an isolated exercise. Nor should it be a response to pressure. Instead, it should form an integral, necessary part of a country's whole planning process.
Complex alliances and relations among institutions
African countries that assert their wish for fuller integration of women in development now have a wide variety of concerned, interested and involved institutions to support them. These include: governmental and non-governmental bodies; national, international and private institutions, associations and donor agencies; and (if only timidly as yet) professional organizations.
It is reasonable to ask why changes benefiting women should take so long to come about when all sides are declaring good intentions and concern for this half of the population. Part of the explanation lies in lack of coordination, conflicts of interests, the absence of clear, explicit policy and the lack of sufficient authority at the various levels. There is a deeper problem, however, which is the failure to grasp the importance of women's integration in development as a guarantee and response to sustainable development in terms both of national and individual economic results and of social and personal change.
Although the economic and social spheres are not incompatible, contradictory or conflictual with each other, the points where they overlap and intersect are sources of friction for institutions. Each structure has a field of jurisdiction that is linked primarily to the economic or the social sector, so its strategy, ideology, legal status and place in the state machinery all orient it towards one sphere more than the other. Although it would be more efficient for the various institutions to combine their efforts, the fact that each of them is convinced of having the best operational approach means that they have a tendency to cut themselves off from one another.
Government institutions
After the government has laid down the principle that "if women do not play an effective part in development, there can be no question of development", two structures come into play immediately and involve rural women. These structures are' on the one hand, the ministerial body entrusted with the promotion of women and, on the other hand. the body responsible for agricultural and rural development.
The institutions with an official mandate and jurisdiction in women's issues - henceforth referred to as structures for the integration of women in development (WID) - are now being revived in response to political and social movements.
Initially, structures with a title indicating they had responsibility with regard to women seldom achieved anything of real substance. Policies and strategies benefiting women were not explicit, and programmes and actions were directed on the whole towards social aspects and social and community well-being, reducing women to a solely reproductive role.
At present, political and social changes, access to and appropriation of power, the international economic context and relations that are based on cooperation mean that WID structures are receiving fresh life. Governments are indicating a desire to include women as specific beneficiaries and agents of development.
However, this revival is not necessarily accompanied by a situation favourable to the Implementation of appropriate policy, strategy, programmes and actions. The overall mandate is explicit; to make sure that women are taken into account as beneficiaries of development both in mainstream policy and in sectorial policies. This means:
· encouraging decisions that allow women to profit, on an equal footing to men, from the results of development under the general and sectorial policies of the country;
· assisting technical ministries in identifying women's specific development problems;
· taking part in the design, review and appraisal of programmes and projects that respond to women's expectations and needs.
Attempts to follow these guidelines come up against a number of limitations from the very start. The fact that WID structures are institutionally anchored in the state machinery is in itself restrictive. WID structures tend to be associated with exclusively social spheres - health care, welfare and the family - and to be confined to departmental, service and secretariat levels. They carry little political weight and communications with the technical ministries that are their - immediate partners come up against two stumbling blocks: the fact that their jurisdiction is confined to social matters; and the long, complex hierarchical and administrative channels that are involved.
In addition, resources (human, technical and financial) are often inappropriate, inadequate and insufficient: staff are minimal; very often they have a social assistance background or teacher training; exclusively or for the far greater part they are female; and frequently they are allotted tasks for which they have not been trained. Although the experience and abilities of such staff meet some needs, fundamental areas, such as economics, politics, planning and sociology, tend to be neglected. The programmes developed lack real substance and are limited and partial, which means that the mobilization of funding becomes problematic.
The main operational shortcoming of WID structures is their limited human resources, especially in terms of quality. It is vital for anyone undertaking specific tasks to know, understand and have the skill to do what is expected of them. Interest alone is not enough.
Once a WID structure has become official, endowed with a broad mandate and a restrictive institutional organization, it marshals its forces in order to act. The first task it tackles is often, justifiably. that of formulating a rational policy benefiting women that will tee approved and recognized by the government, technical ministries, donor agencies and other development partners. WID structures often apply for help to bilateral and international cooperation bodies that are recognized as advanced and favourable to this process; such as the United States Agency for International Development (USAID), FAO, the Netherlands, the Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA), the United Nations Children's Fund (UNICEF) and the united Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM).
Questions on the implications of the mandate come to light while the policy is being drawn up. These questions are concerned with areas of responsibility, spheres of jurisdiction, tasks, content, collaboration systems and, most crucially. intervention. The issues of women cut across all sectors of development. This means that the questions of who is in charge, who takes the decisions and who does what can be the source of conflict over primacy and prerogative.
Formulation of a policy benefiting women is, therefore, more a theoretical exercise than a practical application of government choices and decisions. The role of the WID structure as catalyst is recognized and its capacity and right to act as guarantor of and expert in female interests and problems for the technical ministries is accepted. However, the ministries, in their various sectors of authority, retain the position of specialists and supervisors of policies benefiting women. The WID structures' mandate is clear, but their sphere of jurisdiction is circumscribed.
Once policy has been decided, its practical implementation is another hurdle. Although WID structures would like to cover all spheres, they admit some doubt as to their capacity to do so. The institution responsible for the rural sector, secure of its authority, declares that anything concerning agriculture and rural development falls under its exclusive jurisdiction. On one side, there is a degree of confusion and on the other a resistance to cooperation. Both sides, in mutual opposition, would like to have prime charge of all operations. There are various explanations for this difficult situation.
All the countries concerned are to a large extent economically and socially dependent on the agricultural and rural sector, which makes a major contribution to the national product and tries to guarantee food security. A ministry of the rural sector, therefore, has great importance because of the major role it plays in the general policy of a country and for its extensive experience. Such a ministry is very often large, well established endowed with wide-ranging powers and has little difficulty in obtaining operating resources.
In contrast, WID structures are the result of political and social currents of thought aiming at justice and equality. Not everyone sees them as economic imperatives. WID structures do not have a position within the state machinery that enables them to influence policies and decisions. They are still new, and obtaining resources is a complex process for them because they have to demonstrate that they are not merely a fleeting phenomenon or fashion.
Obtaining resources is now even more of a challenge since all the countries of Africa are in the throes of structural adjustment programmes entailing stringent financial policies. The conditions attached to the granting of financial resources call for immediate quantifiable results. Adjustment with a human face is often sacrificed to the rate of domestic profitability. The ministries responsible for planning and finance tend to be relatively ignorant on gender issues and give exclusive attention to macroeconomic aspects, forgetting that the sidelining of women in policy-making and planning tends to be paid for in terms of the national economy and the quality of life.
A unit (or person) with special responsibility for women's issues has sometimes been set up at focal points within technical ministries. Such units are the result of mechanisms for interinstitutional cooperation. They have the task of acting as a reference or meeting point and as a source of information for problems relating to women. Devoid of resources and authority and suffocated by bureaucracy, these units are effectively invisible. Nonetheless, the potential represented by the links they forge may bring about changes in attitude and exert pressure when decisions are being taken.
Non-governmental organizations
In recent years' ordinary people have emerged from their silence and passivity, succeeded in making their voices heard and their views felt, caused established powers and accepted beliefs to waver and, thus, deserve credit for the democratic processes now taking place.
Non-governmental organizations (NGOs), which were already numerous prior to this period of change, have multiplied quickly. The emphasis has moved from cooperation and technical assistance NGOs to local NGOs.
NGOs are a force to be reckoned with, because they represent a way of exerting pressure and influence on government attitudes to make them take into account the needs' interests and possibilities of change for various categories of the population. Fully operational NGOs are familiar with rural and urban environments, use highly participatory methods and are demonstrably efficient. They have preferential relations with funding agencies, which see them as "spearheads" and "front line elements". Donors involve them (or use them ) in testing out innovative approaches to new projects in restricted geographic areas and in direct contact with the ultimate beneficiaries. According to the results and government response they get, these projects may become watchwords, the new approaches become strategies and the area affected be extended. The NGOs respond favourably to such a role, because it corresponds perfectly to their own philosophy of intervention; entailing creativity, change,
room for manoeuvre and flexibility.
Women's associations often find it difficult to cut the link between themselves and the state. They have always been attached to the state machine and the prevailing political approach, and it is difficult for them to distinguish between which issues fall within the state sphere and which come into their own sphere of responsibility, or between what they can expect others to do and what they have to do themselves. In a democratic context, the process of independence that is linked to the progressive consolidation of a genuinely tree society is not easily accomplished.
Professionals also have a place in the movement to create organizations. Female lawyers, traders, entrepreneurs and agricultural producers, are joining together to form unions or federations. Some of these already existed, especially associations of female traders and entrepreneurs. In the professional and economic fields, these are the organizations most in touch with the situation and most aware of the opportunities. They also have the clearest views of possible developments.
Professional women's associations, which are ignored or dismissed in favour of men's associations, have often already established a network style of operation. They have set up listening posts and relay stations across the country and have strong contacts both regionally and internationally. They have economic and social significance and avoid bureaucratic institutionalization.
Organizations for cooperation and funding
The approaches and styles of action of these organizations confirm the belief that there is no hope of any rational development unless women are taken into account. One of the ways of measuring the relevance, effectiveness, efficiency, effects and impact of a project (from its design to its final appraisal) is to note the extent to which rural women are involved. In the face of very low results, some agencies and donors set up minimum quotas.
Although different types of organization share similar views on the issue of rural women and on the principles of coherence, harmony and coordination are not always respected.
When governments notice this kind of disagreement, they take advantage of it to canvass the potential market, submit their own applications and satisfy their needs for investment and resource mobilization. Although cooperative agencies should work with the countries involved to avoid duplications of efforts and contradictions and to respect priorities and ensure coordinated planning, it must be admitted that things do not always work this way.
Clearer justification of the request for assistance, together with information on the lines of action already under way, could reduce the excessive number of interventions that work against rather than reinforce one another. Less energy and investment would be wasted and mutual trust would increase. This would be more relevant than to talk about structural adjustment, domestic profitability rates, cost-efficiency ratios, rational planning, economy of resources, harmonious development and sustainability.
<section>2</section>
Part II - operational guidelines
Terminology
What is a development policy benefiting rural women?
General aim of the policy
Specific objectives of the policy
Preconditions, premises and principles
Features of the strategy
Limitations of the policy
Preparation of a development benefiting rural women
Content
The preparation process
Monitoring preparation of the policy
Action objectives
From policy to action
Increasing the country's capacities
Immediate action
Mechanism for policy implementation
Mobilization of resources
The system of data management
Monitoring and evaluation
Updating the policy
Part II - operational guidelines
Terminology
The full integration of women and development issues into a country's general and sectorial planning unquestionably fosters harmonious and sustainable development. Conversely, ignoring women and consigning them to invisibility can lead to imbalances and have a negative impact on the process of change.
Creating a development policy for rural women that is incorporated into planning mechanisms is a process of active involvement, leading to the discovery and implementation of solutions to the problems women face in gaining recognition and appreciation of their status as producers in their own right. Such a policy constitutes a general framework for formulating action plans based on objectives approved by all the partners in development and integrated into development programmes and projects for the agricultural and rural sector.
The preparation and implementation of a development policy benefiting rural women is closely linked to a whole series of political, economic, social and environmental factors. It cannot, therefore, be limited by an overly systematized approach and, instead, calls for a multidisciplinary one. In order to ensure the policy's relevance and effectiveness, however, an operational procedure and certain key elements will be suggested.
TERMS USED
Situation (analysis of)
This is the "what?" and involves the presentation and analysis of the facts and reality.
Principles
These are the "why?"; a group of basic points, rules and presumptions that underly the lines of reasoning taken.
Policy
This implies both intention and choice and is the approach adopted to facilitate decision-making.
Plan of action
This is the "how?" and consists of a detailed description of the approach and procedure adopted in order to reach the objectives. It includes the different steps to follow, the tasks to accomplish and the responsibilities to assume.
Objectives
These are the precise, concrete aims. They are action oriented, focused on women's interests and needs, realistic, measurable and feasible within a specified period of time and with specified means.
Strategy
This is the series of procedures devised to reach the chosen objectives. It is in keeping with the choices and priorities adopted and with their potential effects and anticipated impact. Strategy also covers the management and mobilization of available resources.
Sustainable development
This is the management and conservation of natural resources and the orientation of technical and institutional changes in such a way as to satisfy the needs of present and future generations.
Equitable development
This is development in which each and every party (individuals and groups) enjoys similar benefits while respecting and giving due value to differing individual characteristics.
Gender analysis
This is the review of the activities and responsibilities of men and women and of the specific effects that policies, programmes and projects can have on both.
Integration of women in development
This is planning that considers women's issues and programmes that give women the instruments and opportunities they need to take part in development in their own right. Women's problems, needs, interests and perspectives are, thereby, integrated into national and sectorial policies and not treated as a separate sector
For the sake of clarity some of the expressions currently used in formulating policies benefiting rural women have been defined (see box). These definitions are in no way intended as hard and fast rules, but simply as conventions to aid understanding of the issues involved.
What is a development policy benefiting rural women?
A development policy specifically for the benefit of women may seem a contradiction to the desire not to sideline or isolate women. It may also suggest that the goals or plans of agricultural and rural development policies are directed to men and exclude women.
In fact, a situation of this kind definitely does exist. as anyone can see. Assessing and evaluating the effects and impact of development programmes and projects supports the conclusion that for far too long (or for ever) women have been forgotten, unnoticed and sidelined. In the rural and agricultural sector it is impossible, or very hard, for women to gain access to production factors, resources and assets. They get few benefits from the changes that follow development and are often excluded from participation in policy-making, since their views are considered of secondary importance. These facts are undeniable, and examples are legion.
This situation is the result of the social mechanisms of control and regulation of the dominant production systems, as well as of established approaches to the design, implementation and evaluation of development programmes and projects. On the one hand, attitudes and opinions have not yet fully come to teens with the fact that rural women are producers, operators and economic agents in their own right within the production system while, on the other hand, the analytical methods and decision-making mechanisms underlying development choices do not yet incorporate gender related issues.
Planning methods still in force have disguised the extent to which women contribute to the national economy. Planners are not concerned about the negative or positive effects that their investment decisions have on this sector of the population, in spite of the fact that women's contribution to the national product is far from insignificant.
This means that a policy linked to an action plan benefiting women still needs to be formally and explicitly stated. Acknowledgment of the identity, the complementarily and the distinctive features of the female population, in comparison with the male, and linking the two groups together in a single operational approach will ensure a response to the points of view, concerns and interests of rural society (particularly rural women) and of the whole country.
General aim of the policy
The general aim of a development policy for rural women is to explicitly guarantee that they are taken into account and included in all development programmes and projects as productive agents in the agricultural and rural sector in their own right, and as agents of social continuity.
The integration of women in development is a multidimensional problem and calls for a holistic approach. Sectorial or subsectorial solutions can provide appropriate responses to specific problems but be unsatisfactory in the overall context. Coherence both within and between sectors is of vital Importance where agriculture and sustainable rural development are concerned. It is therefore essential that any development policy benefiting rural women be:
· incorporated into the context of integrated policies and good understanding among the bodies, government structures and other partners concerned;
· integrated into the country's mainstream planning as well as into that of the agricultural and rural sector;
· made clear in development programmes and projects, whether through the establishment of lines of action exclusively for women or through effective integration, promotion and participation of women in all programmes and projects for the rural sector;
· consolidated through legislation and regulations promoting the recognition of rural women in all their productive and reproductive aspects.
The means of achieving a development policy benefiting rural women will vary from country to country' as will the type and scale of the objectives. These variations will depend not only on the political situation of the country, but also on the level of awareness, knowledge, understanding and training of the various parties concerned with the issue. Whatever the context, as well as aiming to achieve its own stated aims, a development policy benefiting rural women must represent a permanent reference point for the various governmental and non-governmental institutions, with a view to:
· developing skills and boosting institutional capacities to design and implement strategies and actions that take women into consideration;
· providing the agricultural and rural sector with integrated or specific programmes and projects in keeping with the final aim of benefiting women as well as with the aims of sectorial and national policies;
· establishing mechanisms to ensure the coordination, collaboration and participation of all parties, including the main beneficiaries (men and women), in decisions, activities and appraisals;
· establishing, within the framework of the overall objectives of the agricultural and rural sector, objectives that are specifically and directly related to women's role in agricultural production and processing and rural society. These objectives should be clearly stated, realistic, feasible, measurable in terms of their success and action-oriented;
· establishing a communication and information system among the various parties - national (governmental and non-governmental), regional and international. This assumes a capacity for data management and research and the establishment of networks.
Specific objectives of the policy
The objectives of such a policy will thus match agricultural and rural sector objectives and will be in line with sectorial and national policy objectives. Consolidation of the latter will be achieved through promotion of equality between men and women as regards access to and control of resources. obtaining and enjoyment of benefits, level of participation and opportunity to make decisions. Lines of action and other measures will be drawn up with a view to:
· endeavouring to improve the legal climate and counteract reactionary attitudes, so that women can be both the agents and the beneficiaries of sustainable agricultural and rural development having had their rights and responsibilities recognized, adapted and explicitly acknowledged;
· recognizing and supporting women's contribution to economic and social development, by enforcing their right to effective access to resources, production factors, human resource enhancement services, equipment and technology;
· respecting the interdependence between the productive and reproductive spheres and linking them operationally and constructively within development programmes and projects through coordination of steps taken to improve working conditions and ensure a better quality of life;
· accepting and promoting women's participation in decision-making, recognizing their knowledge and skills, strengthening their own organizations by understanding their mechanisms, and facilitating women's entry into community, social and professional organizations and into occupations connected with the agricultural and rural sphere;
· providing men and women with information and training so that they can recognize women's rights and roles and gain a better grasp of the responsibilities of each sex.
The definition of precise and quantified objectives for a given situation is thus part of the process of preparing a development policy for rural women (see "Preparation of a development policy benefiting rural women" on p. 27).
Preconditions, premises and principles
Preconditions
The preconditions for a development policy benefiting rural women can be summarized as follows:
· the government must be determined to change the orientation of its policies and to modify its procedures so that rural women are truly taken into account in policy-making and planning processes and in current or future development programmes and projects;
· the government must be ready to allocate and mobilize the resources needed for the preparation and application of a development policy for rural women and to support this policy throughout the various phases of implementation, monitoring, evaluation and revision;
· the government must seek the support of the different institutions involved, with their respective mandates and responsibilities, and must encourage all parties to make a concerted effort and to share information.
Premises
Next, in order to ensure the usefulness and success of the development policy benefiting rural women, it is essential that the government and all the national institutions seek a consensus on the basis of' these premises:
· Women too are agents of' change. It is of prime importance that their role be explicitly and fully taken into account. Rural women invest their energies and are involved in all the production and reproduction activities of the rural sector. They respond positively to the constant challenges they meet, although they receive little support in fulfilling their tasks and responsibilities. They are often overlooked when the profits of their activities are being distributed and, although their contribution to building the country is a major one, it goes unrecognized and unmeasured. Taking women into account means: integrating the entire rural world instead of marginalizing one group; the full and total participation of all instead of the discrimination of some against others; and the harmonization of the interests of the whole population instead of the promotion of one particular kind of project.
· Custom and tradition are the products of society and as such are subject to modification. Equal recognition for women is one of the signs of a just society. The rights granted to women in constitutional texts and legislation should help to mitigate the discriminatory effects of ingrained habits which are too often seen as society's only reference points.
· The national economy and agricultural and rural development are in the hands of both men and women. Access to the means of production, income from labour and control over and enjoyment of the rewards are both necessary and indispensable for every agent of production. The inputs and services allocated to the rural sector should all be directed to all segments of the population. The way to consolidate women's place and role within the process of rural development is through promoting their abilities to organize and to negotiate for a just profit.
· Partnership between all the members of the community is possible. The history of every country, both distant and recent, as well as current development projects, demonstrate that women are ready to take their place in the forefront of efforts to develop society. However, men must be genuine partners in this, convinced of the importance of women's participation m decisions concerning the work unit, the family and the community. The nation's ability to handle integration and questions linked to the individual and complementary features of the two sexes is the indispensable key to bringing this partnership into being.
Principles
Once everyone has accepted, understood and absorbed these points, certain principles must be followed and adhered to by all the participants in change:
· The sustainability and perpetuation of human, economic and natural resources. A development policy benefiting women will prove that the involvement of women, by integrating their responsibilities and activities into the overall context, increases the capacity of the present generation to respond to its needs without compromising the potential of future generations. The establishment and mobilization of viable, feasible and acceptable projects, programmes and policies that are in keeping with national capacities will guarantee the balance between the needs of the rural world in general and those of men and women in particular. It will also maintain a direct link between the indispensable promotion of women and the necessary evolution of the rural sector.
· Equity and social justice. By this is meant the equal access to resources and production factors and a just division of the rewards. It can be brought about through the decrease, or complete disappearance, of social and economic differences between men and women and an increase in the management and decision-making capacities of both sexes.
· Grassroots participation. All those involved in development will be consulted' encouraged and invited to contribute to solving problems that concern the whole community. This in turn will lead to improved conditions and a better general situation.
· Consensus. This must be reached among all participants on the identification of problems, options and ways of resolving them.
· Transparency. Procedures, methods and results must be communicated in a way that is accessible and comprehensible to all.
Features of the strategy
Any country that wants to integrate women into development should start up a process, using participatory techniques, for planning, supervision, decision-making, monitoring, management and mobilization of domestic and foreign resources.
Such a strategy should focus on:
· self-sufficiency and resource management through boosting and developing the country's ability to mount coordinated planning that involves women right from the start;
· the commitment rural women have to the process of change, which is shown by their willingness to overcome the restraints imposed by tradition;
· mobilization of the whole population through information campaigns on the true situation of rural women, making use of all available and relevant aids and media;
· institutionalization of the concept of integrated development through commitment on the highest level and through the establishment of effective structures and mechanisms;
· a presence in all spheres, so that women's integration in development is not omitted from any agenda;
· consultation and cooperation among all parties concerned with improving women's status, with participation at all levels. Fostering such involvement requires a participatory, decentralized, bottom-up approach. The commitment of international partners is essential for the harmonization and coordination of support;
· coherence among the strategies and practical lines of action of the rural and agricultural sector, leading to a policy within the wider framework of national objectives for development and other sectors;
· action to ensure the rapid integration of women in development, in a way that is harmonious with existing male-female relations, through the immediate application of measures within current programmes
· flexibility in policy formulation and implementation so that changes and developments can be responded to quickly;
· keeping situations up-to-date by incorporating modifications based on practice and experience, using a permanent system of data management, monitoring and appraisal;
· dissemination of results and changes that are brought about through the increasing numbers of positive experiences and relations maintained among women.
Limitations of the policy
Formulating a development policy for rural women is the first step a government can take in solving women's problems and changing their situation. A policy is meant to ensure coherence among the various plans and programmes adopted by the government and the different measures they entail. However, it must be remembered that:
· A policy is only one element within a whole; it must be incorporated into the general process of the country's development and into the planning procedures established by the state on both the general and sectorial levels.
· A policy can be concerned only with what falls under the government's jurisdiction and is subject to the latter's commitments and to the current political, economic, social, national and international contexts, as well as to the availability of resources.
· A policy cannot solve everything at once; priorities must be established. Trying to cover everything at once wastes energy and resources and lowers efficiency and credibility. A policy is formulated at a particular moment in time and should therefore be seen as a stage in a process and not as an end in itself. It must be progressive and open to change.
· A policy will not get results unless it is specific; in other words, it must define what is to be done, how, with what resources, when, and who is in charge. Ways in which results can be measured and evaluated should be considered at the outset.
· A policy cannot be valid unless all parties concerned participate directly in its formulation, thus ensuring coherence, suitability and validity. A system of consultation that involves all levels is essential.
· A policy is not an end in itself: it provides a basis and guidelines for action and acts as a rallying point for resources when the time comes to accomplish specific tasks.
All this means that a development policy for rural women cannot solve all the issues of rural women their status, role, function, difficulties, concerns and desires. In addition, there are serious problem areas that cannot be solved simply by integrating women into the development process. All of rural society is involved in these problems and the response to them often lies within the realm of human rights, such as the right to adequate living conditions (water, health, food and shelter), the right to property and the right to freedom of choice.
A policy formulated with women's needs and interests in mind can help to reduce sexual and class discrimination, injustice and inequality. It is important to bear in mind, however, that the long-term objective is to make the whole concept of a policy aimed specifically at women superfluous, by completely absorbing women's needs and interests into the parameters of general policy.
Preparation of a development benefiting rural women
A development policy for rural women, together with the definition of its goals and objectives, will vary from country to country and situation to situation. Preparation time, measures to be taken, resources to be mobilized and information to be gathered will vary considerably depending on who is initiating and promoting the policy, whether there is an institution responsible for women's issues and the presence of associations, groups, etc.
Formulating a development policy for rural women should be seen as a process that allows policy-makers to follow certain clearly defined steps, to systematize various elements and to adopt a procedure that ensures the policy will be incorporated into all development plans for the agricultural and rural sector.
Content
The preparation of a development policy benefiting rural women involves:
· conceiving a policy to benefit rural women that lies within the overall plan for the agricultural and rural sector and that is consistent with it and with national policy as a whole;
· defining a strategy to implement the policy benefiting rural women;
· formulating a plan of priority actions with and for the benefit of rural women. This plan would become an integral or supplementary part of programmes and projects for the rural sector.
The main activities in achieving these results are:
· analysis of women's situation in the agricultural, rural and allied sectors; the current mechanisms; prospects; relations between sectors: and how the policy fits in with national development guidelines;
· improvement of the relevant institutional capacities to analyse, determine, plan and implement a policy for rural women;
· selection of the goals and priority objectives of a policy benefiting rural women. in terms of problems, constraints and possibilities;
· preparation and adoption of a strategy consistent with rural and agricultural development policy;
· confirmation of support for national development policies and acquisition of the necessary resources.
The preparation process
Four closely linked basic stages can be distinguished. Although they are sequential, some degree of overlapping is always possible:
· Stage 1: orientation;
· Stage 2: information and consultation;
· Stage 3: indepth review of the issue;
· Stage 4: policy formulation and planning.
Stage 1: orientation
Stage 1 starts when a country has expressed an interest in developing a policy benefiting rural women and has possibly applied for support in this undertaking. This stage should culminate in:
· clarification from the institutions involved;
· a preliminary analysis of the situation of women in the agricultural and rural sector.
Clarification. Any policy addressed to women can be claimed by many government structures as falling under their auspices. The cross-sectorial and dynamic nature of the subject can lead to enhanced importance, mobilization of resources and extended powers for the government structures involved.
Clarification of the intention of developing a policy benefiting rural women should be given careful thought. Weighing and assessing the implications, interests and expectations of the initiator and of the participants who are expected to join immediately or in the future will help to balance claims of prerogatives and other conflicts between institutions and to counter the influence of pressure groups. Each government structure has its own mechanisms, aims and objectives. Defining the limits of the mandate, scope and activities of the various structures will help avoid impasses, will facilitate decisions and will guarantee maximum success.
Preliminary analysis. Knowledge of the present situation - i.e. of what is being and has been done and of what the effects have been - is a necessary precondition for the formulation of a policy. Such knowledge illuminates crucial problems, major questions. limiting factors and possibilities. It makes it easier to define high-priority, realistic, consistent objectives based on actual rural situations. It avoids repeating approaches that have already been tried, unnecessary errors and duplication of effort and it enhances positive results.
At the same time the country's capacity to formulate and implement a policy and strategies will be appraised. Success depends on the country's capacity to take initiatives, obtain the necessary tools for intervention and plan and monitor projects and programmes for the expansion and development of the country's capacity can be drawn up if necessary.
This stage will be carried out by people with expertise in the field, an interest in the subject, a knowledge of the country and its cooperation systems and an ability to involve the beneficiaries (both men and women) in discussion and research.
The results to expect from this clarification and preliminary analysis will be:
· confirmation of one institution as being responsible for formulating a policy benefiting rural women and fully aware of its duties in this connection;
· identification of government partners who have been informed and have agreed that a specific institution has the principle role in formulating a policy benefiting rural women;
· an orientation document containing:
i) an analysis of the issue of rural women within the agricultural and rural sector and within the legal, economic, social and political spheres;
ii) an analysis of the general and sectorial political orientations of the country and the interrelations between the various sectors concerned with development of a policy benefiting women;
iii) the identification of the results, the actors involved and the existing resources of ongoing actions;
iv) the identification of limiting factors in the planning and implementation of programmes and projects that take account of rural women;
v) the identification of problems, obstacles, constraints and possibilities for the integration of women in development, listed according to urgency, size and the country's ability to handle them;
· definition of provisional objectives for a policy benefiting rural women;
· preparation of a work plan specifying tasks and completion dates as well as complementary research areas;
· preparation of a project to develop and increase the country's capacity, if needed.
The main activities undertaken will be:
· discussion and clarification of support for engagement in policy formulation;
· confirmation of an institution responsible for this exercise;
· the agreement of government partners to contribute and collaborate with this lead institution;
· description of the present situation;
· assessment of the country's capacity;
· preparation of a work plan for drafting a policy benefiting rural women within the general context of agricultural and rural development policy and planning.
Stage 2: information and consultation
This stage should operate in parallel (or almost) with the previous one. Its goal is the collaboration and commitment of all participants in a consensus that unites everyone's interests. A mechanism for orientation, consultation and coordination is essential in this.
There are many causes of the marginalization of rural women. Social, economic and political issues must be addressed, bearing in mind their interdependence and points of overlap. The relevance and application of a development policy benefiting rural women depend on the exchange of reliable information, dialogue, discussion and the participation of all those involved in the issue.
Achieving consensus requires the participation of both government and people. The various participating groups must be identified, together with their needs, interests and capacities. Mechanisms must then be set in place that allow them to take part in drafting the policy and ensure their cooperation in preparing, formulating and monitoring it.
One possible measure is to establish a steering and coordinating committee made up of representatives of the public and private sectors, members of various associations and donors. Nationals of the country must obviously be involved; politicians, planning officials, field staff and representatives of NGOs, rural communities, male and female farmers and the various associations. Representatives of international bodies international aid agencies, financial donors and NGOs - should also be involved.
The decision-makers and authorities who oversee the country's policies and investments, are found in the ministries (or whatever name the state in question uses for similar structures) of planning, finance, education, health and, of course, the whole rural development sector. They should he fully aware of the problems involved in and raised by taking women into account in development, appreciate the importance of the issue and know why and how it should be integrated into programmes and projects. These are the people who draw up the documents for submission and who approve funding. If the country is to move on to planned, rational action, it is of utmost importance that these people fully accept the concept and value of women's participation in development.
Associations, private groups and NGOs will play a vital role in ensuring that everyone takes part. They must be actively involved to ensure that men and women at grassroots level are heard. At the same time, these are also the only groups in direct contact with the field and able to initiate a decentralized participatory procedure.
Groups and bodies from outside the country should not be overlooked. For the most part they are already convinced of the importance of a policy benefiting women and they are the ones who can mobilize the needed resources.
The functions of the steering and coordinating committee are to obtain political support, ensure collaboration among sectors, initiate debate and maintain this debate until it reaches consensus. It should reflect on the political, financial, structural and human implications of a policy for rural women, be responsible for organizing grassroots participation and propose procedures for decentralizing efforts towards coordinated involvement.
The project for developing and boosting the country's capacities should be implemented during this stage of information gathering and reflection. The steering and coordinating committee should be asked to provide its members with information on issues related to the individual features of the different genders and to encourage participation in the project.
A large number of existing or potential problems (such as conflicts of interest, struggles for influence, scarcity of resources and difficulties in forming groups to represent the beneficiaries) can be overcome by establishing collaboration at the very start of the process. Such collaboration can be backed up by a clear commitment at a high political level together with the distribution of full information on the procedures and positive effects of a policy for rural women. A national information campaign supported by the media should be a priority.
The expected results of this stage are:
· identification of governmental and non-governmental partners and human resources;
· initiation of the process of formulating policy;
· awareness of the validity of integrating women in development and a firm belief in its importance;
· collaboration on coordinated action;
· a practical start to grassroots participation.
The main activities to be pursued are:
· establishment of a mechanism to orient and promote coordinated involvement in order to supervise and monitor the process of formulating a policy for rural women;
· creation of a system of information collection;
· a national information campaign.
Stage 3: indepth examination of the issue
The aim of this stage is to gain a clearer understanding of the problems, restraints and possibilities defined in Stage 1. This stage leads to the identification of possible solution to problems confronted, the elimination of some specific restraints and the enhancement of existing possibilities. The aim is to reach a fuller, more informed diagnosis on the whole issue of the integration of' women in rural sector development.
The specific studies and complementary research identified during Stage I will be the main approaches to increasing knowledge and understanding. These studies will be action-oriented and in line with the priority objectives defined at the outset of the whole project; they will thus lead to a much better understanding of the various problems. Priorities can then be revised according to the studies' findings as part of the flexible approach adopted.
Each individual study will be concerned with the analysis of a priority problem and its causes together with the identification of possible solutions. The anticipated cost of implementing the various alternatives will also be calculated. Each research report will follow the same format so that the different studies can be compared, which in turn will allow a harmonious coordination of various measures and lines of action.
The participatory approach must be used to the full in order to achieve a thorough understanding of the situation. If the direct beneficiaries (men and women) are not consulted, some possibilities may be overlooked. Establishing priorities requires the involvement of all concerned.
The steering and coordinating committee set up in Stage 2 will now come into its own. A decentralized participatory approach will involve a series of consultations, meetings, discussions and debates with representatives of all participants of the committee. (Care must be taken that the views of rural women and men are not expressed solely through administrative, government or elitist mechanisms.)
The results of this stage will be as follows:
· a full appraisal of the issue of the integration of rural women in development, based on the preliminary diagnosis and specific studies, with the main conclusions being summarized in a document (see box below);
· examination of the policies that influence and determine the situation of rural women;
· indepth analysis of the capacities and human resources of the governmental and non-governmental institutions concerned with improving the status and role of women in development;
· identification of the alternatives for solving problems and realizing potential.
The main activities at this stage are specific studies, using the participatory approach developed by the steering and coordinating committee.
Stage 4: policy-formulation and planning
The policy formulation and planning stage has the aims of comparing possible responses to the need for genuine integration of women in development and selecting the most appropriate strategies and lines of action.
The various partners are consulted and involved in this process so as to ensure a consensus on the chosen strategies and lines of action.
The results of this phase will be:
· formulation of a development policy for rural women;
· identification of possible lines of action;
· a strategy outlining the objectives to be attained (see "Action objectives" opposite), the measures to be taken (institutional, legislative and political) and the resources needed;
· an action plan with quantified objectives, measures and lines of action, investments needed, related projects already under way and projects to be developed, along with a timetable of the main activities with the various steps involved in them.
The activities will be:
· consultation among the partners at decentralized and national levels, with presentation of a draft policy, strategy and action papers. After discussion, these documents will be revised and finalized. They will contain detailed descriptions of objectives, suggested lines of action, possible effects of the policy, priorities in implementation, costs, required investments in terms of resources and steps to be taken immediately;
· organization of a meeting with all the financial donors and aid agencies concerned with rural and agricultural development programmes and projects in which women are real and lull beneficiaries. The donors and aid agencies will be given the final document with a clear and reasoned presentation of the priorities for financing.
GUIDELINES FOR ANALYSES AND STUDIES TO INCREASE UNDERSTANDING OF THE INTEGRATION OF RURAL WOMEN
This list is not exhaustive. It indicates the main approaches and points that should not be omitted. Selection of the most appropriate of these will depend on the specific context of each country.
In the political sphere
Analysis of government policy benefiting women, national legislation and internationally ratified texts. More specifically, analysis of land tenure laws and regulations. credit and private financing through banking and mutualist agencies.
Analysis of the country's development plan objectives. planning and resources - and sectorial policies for rural development (agriculture, animal husbandry, fisheries and environment) along with their effects on the overall situation of women.
Analysis of national and sectorial budgets and of allocations to spheres that concern women and are genuinely directed towards them.
Analysis of the structural adjustment programme. its effects and the effects of the economic crisis on the position of women.
In the non-governmental sphere
Location and identification of all potential human resources. associations and groups concerned with and interested in the issue of taking account of women in development policies and strategies.
Identification of liaison and coordination committees and think-tanks to focus on this issue. and analysis of their workings and activities.
Identification of political. social and economic events in which women take part and have clearly shown their intentions.
In the sphere of government institutions
Analysis of reports of national and international institutions, the workings of structures for integrating women in development and interinstitutional mechanisms.
Survey and analysis of the finance systems and policies of national and international sponsors in the country.
Analysis of strategies developed by government and other institutions in the various spheres concerning women - economy, trade, finance, health, education, etc.
In the sphere of action
Location, collection and processing of existing data and material.
Collecting details of all actions benefiting women undertaken by the various ministries, official structures and non-governmental, bilateral and international organizations.
Analysis of the results and their effects, and identification of the potential, constraints and impasses of the various lines of action.
Assessment of the reliability and validity of national and agricultural statistics, of whether they take account of women, their contribution, their status, etc.
In the sphere of knowledge about rural women
Survey and analysis of the socio-demographic situation - population, education, health, sanitation, etc.
Analysis of women's specific experience in the different spheres of their lives (legal, political, economic and domestic), highlighting the difficulties, constraints and obstacles they face.
Analysis of supervisory, control and decision-making mechanisms within rural society, and the powers granted to men and women individually and severally.
Assessment of the constraints and opportunities for women (their room for manoeuvre) and of their contribution to economic, social and political life.
Analysis of the participation of women in the agricultural labour market, with relative wage trends, and in agricultural production, especially the production of processed or unprocessed cash crops.
Analysis of the effects and impact of men's emigration on women's activities, and also the influence of seasonal fluctuations in the labour market on women's workloads.
Assessment of women's capacity and readiness to involve themselves in improving their own situation (the mechanisms, organization and approach used).
Assessment of the readiness of society, especially men, to take women into account in the development process.
In the sphere of specific research (linked to priority problems)
Analysis of credit mechanisms, their accessibility, impact and effect in enhancing women's economic activities.
Examination of the effects of technological innovations in production sectors on women's work, resources and rewards. Involvement of women in extension and training programmes in the rural world.
Feasibility and profitability study of activities specific to women in the areas of production, processing, mechanization and cottage industries
Monitoring preparation of the policy
All these preparatory steps will be monitored to ensure they meet the prerequisites of participation, respect for coherence and collaboration among different sectors and also to establish an outline for the policy monitoring methodology. Throughout this phase a great deal of data will be gathered and processed. Analysis will then provide a reference against which to measure progress.
Action objectives
General features
The objectives will necessarily be in keeping with those of the rural sector, because there can be no question of developing objectives that could conflict with those adopted for the sector as a whole. The aim is to strengthen the mainstream rural development policy and to foster equality between men and women with regard to access to and control of resources, the acquisition of profits and the power to make decisions.
The objectives of a policy benefiting women are action-oriented and focus on women's interests and on their realistic, viable and quantified needs. Objectives are directly linked to women's activities in agricultural production and processing and aim at results to be incorporated into the mechanisms of agricultural work and strategies developed by women.
In extension programmes for example, the policy benefiting rural women will aim at involving women by using methods that make it easy to include them. This could mean: giving women a part in development research; broadening the content of extension work to include women's specific agricultural activities and those for which they are responsible; producing teaching, training and communications material suited to women; and informing and training extension workers on the involvement and integration of women in their activity programmes
To take another example; in a programme to supply equipment to rural communities, new tools and technology could be tried out by rural women with a view to improving their working conditions, extending the range of machinery and tools used in transport, processing, storage and conservation and responding to the need for technological modernization (as much for men as for women).
The following is a list of some of the objectives that could be developed within the different spheres.
In the legal sphere. Improvement and revision of legislation benefiting women would encompass:
· recognition of women as farmers in their own right;
· recognition of their status as heads of families and work units when this is the case, so that women can claim the same rights. advantages and duties as men in the same situation;
· recognition of women's right to membership in professional and agricultural organizations and trade unions;
· recognition of their inheritance rights;
· recognition of their right to use and own land of sufficient quality and quantity;
· recognition of women's capacity for access to credit under banking and financial terms that take account of the civil status of women as well as of their economic and above all human potential;
· dissemination and explanation of existing legislation so that women and men are aware of their rights and of the ensuing limitations and opportunities.
In the economic sphere. The constraints and possibilities inherent in women's economic situation could lead to the development of objectives focusing on:
· opening up research on gender issues in agricultural work and systems, traditional farming approaches, the sexual division of labour and the technological options offered to men and women;
· broadening research and experimentation within women's activities;
· access to rehabilitated, developed and irrigated land through allocation systems that favour women;
· access to extension services and adaptation of current extension systems to cater for women's activities in the various spheres of production - agriculture, animal husbandry, forestry, fisheries - and in their so-called domestic activities, taking into account their availability, workload, educational level, etc.;
· access to training in the technical skills needed to engage in profit-making economic activities on rational lines and to become competent operators with marketable working skills in a competitive field;
· access to and control over the skills, technical expertise, machinery, tools and inputs necessary for all activities (agriculture, handicrafts, animal husbandry, etc.) involving production, harvesting, processing, conservation, storage and transport;
· satisfaction of needs for natural resources (water, pasture, wood, forest products), their protection and conservation;
· access to credit, either (initially) by developing finance methods based on mutual-aid systems controlled by women, or (preferably) by adapting formalized credit systems - guarantee, initial contribution, intended purpose and repayment.
In the social sphere. Positive changes in the social sphere must be seen as affecting the whole population. The objectives must be perceived as comprising the basis, support and complement to the concerns and interests of the population as a whole. Objectives may include:
· providing information and training to men so that living conditions can be improved through a fairer division of tasks and responsibilities as well as of financial burdens;
· access to and control of safe water in sufficient quantities and within easy reach by way of rational methods of pumping, drawing and storage and sound consumption and use practices;
· access to and mastery of skills and technology for daily work; these should be improved, adapted, tested and financially viable; they should make maximum use of innovations and new, renewable and modern energy sources in order to save time and labour;
· access for men and women to information and training in order to improve the quality of life; to include management of individual and household finances, a wholesome healthy and balanced diet. health care, birth control and planned parenthood;
· addressing and improving women's levels of education through a genuine, practical literacy scheme that fosters thought and discussion and gives women the negotiating tools and skills necessary for partnership and participation
In the sphere of decision-making. A policy benefiting women must ensure that they can identify their own goals and ways of changing relations and comparisons between women and men It is of prime importance that women participate in decisions on priorities, management and organization at both community and professional levels
The policy's objectives in the sphere of decision making will call for all parties to recognize that every person, regardless of sex, class, origin or age, has needs, interests and expectations and the right or freedom to express, control and resolve them The objectives could focus on:
· real and effective participation in decision-making and management within the household and work spheres, the community, farmers' organizations and trade unions;
· establishment of mechanisms for discussion and reflection aimed at defining ways for men and women to participate on full and equal terms in decisions on the use and protection of natural resources, the guarantee of sufficient drinking water and the allocation of production resources;
· overcoming traditional attitudes and gradually eliminating all legal, civil, social, educational. economic and political barriers to women's participation in the spheres of power, control and negotiation;
· involvement of women in the ongoing, practical processes of development programmes and projects;
· support for the creation, organization, running, management and negotiations of women's organizations and links with the economic and professional sectors, as well as for private initiatives;
· extension of the initiatives taken by women's groups through exchange, travel and outside contacts;
· "male mobilization" to involve men in the process and to make them responsible for the steady evolution of society, which is closely linked to an improvement in women's situation and living conditions;
· gaining of women's support for policies, programmes and projects aimed at improving their status, function and role.
From policy to action
A development policy benefiting rural women should be implemented by the government institution responsible for preparing it. Structural changes should be avoided. The policy must be integrated into the operations of existing institutions in order to avoid its isolation from current programmes and other activities in the rural sector.
A development policy benefiting women can start, even at the planning stage, by preparing the country and deciding on which steps to take immediately. Such activities will provide the impetus to keep up the momentum throughout the preparation and implementation of the policy.
Increasing the country's capacities
One of the most important considerations for a country preparing a development policy benefiting women is its capacity to draft such a policy, to develop and implement plans and to promote any activity that has a positive impact on women's integration and women as beneficiaries. Many countries need to initiate and implement a project that develops and increases their capacities and makes them more effective in these areas.
All those involved in the rural and related sectors or those in charge of planning and/or implementing field programmes and projects, should be aware of the issue of women in development and be capable of responding. Increasing human resource capacity involves learning how to design policies and programmes that satisfy the essential needs and strategic interests of both men and women as well as fostering equity in the effects and benefits of change.
The objectives are: to report on gender-specific issues; to reflect on the political, financial, structural and human implication; and to supply the skills and tools that will enable these aspects to be included in all stages, from planning to implementation, of the various programmes and projects.
The key to this information-and-training process lies in gender analysis, which considers the roles and responsibilities of women and men in their social, political and economic contexts. Problems specific to women are integrated into the workings of society. The case-study method, which is based on the development programmes and projects already under way in the country, will be particularly helpful in this analysis, because it involves the participants and provides them with experience on how best to tackle problems.
Not only does such an approach provide human resources with support, it also has an immediate effect on operations already under way. The discussion process draws material from the day-to-day professional experience of the people involved in information, discussion, analysis and training.
This is a particularly effective device for incorporating women's viewpoints and interests into programme planning and formulation. Experience in a number of African countries has shown that all officials and supervisory staff who have taken part in this kind of project not only view it very positively but also consider it helps them to fulfill their responsibilities and tasks.
The project can be implemented by those in direct charge of drawing up the policy for women, if necessary with the assistance of domestic or foreign resource personnel who are aware that the aim is to ensure efficient national capacity. Such support will continue while the policy is being implemented. The same procedure will be repeated for all field staff and development agents (extension workers, teachers, organizers and technicians) so that they can, in turn, understand and master the mechanisms for integrating women into development.
The ultimate aim of this development and reinforcement of national capacities is based on the fact that there can be no hope of formulating successful programmes unless those in charge are skilled enough to analyse a situation and come up with solutions, using suitable tools and methods.
A project to increase human resource skills is a fundamental part of the process of designing and promoting activities that have a positive impact on overall rural development. Such a project will not only give the country human resources capable of preparing and implementing an effective policy for women, it will also help to consolidate official support. It allows for the new approaches essential to action under current programmes increases support for the various government institutions involved and facilitates participation and consensus. Investments will thus be optimized. Such a project is a key factor in the success of a development policy for rural women.
Immediate action
As soon as the policy for women is being prepared and implemented, the new climate will start to affect the intervention targets and the budget allocations, without requiring increases in funding and human resources. The need for new proposals, modifications or fresh orientations into programmes and projects for the rural sector will soon become apparent. These will be brought about mainly through ministerial decisions, backed up by guidelines and instructions for work, which will affect all the various spheres that are active, directly or indirectly. in the rural sector (see box on p. 40).
Special attention must be paid to decisions and measures to be taken in the sphere of land tenure legislation and regulations. A policy to help women must necessarily include proposals for changes in legislation and regulations governing access to and control of sufficient quantities of land that is of adequate quality. Women need security with regard to this production factor in order to ensure and guarantee the continuation of agricultural activities.
The proposals should be put into effect while the policy is still being drafted. If this is not the case, the modifications to legislation recommended by the policy must be taken up early in the implementation phase. If texts are not clear enough, analyses and studies on land tenure become essential, so that decisions that meet women's needs can be taken. Such studies should conclude with the drafting of laws, legislative amendments and new regulations, which must then be passed by the legislature and adopted by those responsible for policy decisions in the sphere of land tenure.
In many cases. laws and regulations applying to other spheres will also require study, revision and modification, for land tenure regulations and the laws on which they are based cannot be divorced from the whole body of legislation.
Mechanism for policy implementation
Implementation of the policy will be ensured by an institutional mechanism that not only respects the policy but also provides information to the various partners, encourages the representation and involvement of all parties and ensures coordination and the exchange of information.
Coordinating committee
A coordinating committee will be responsible for overall coordination of the policy implementation. The steering and coordinating committee formed to draw up the policy will take over this role. Its previous composition will be retained, although changes may be made as application of the policy benefiting women advances. The committee will have the task of facilitating the passage of legislation and ensuring that all parties concerned apply the relevant measures. It will also monitor implementation of the policy, regularly review its guidelines and ensure coordination among government institutions, other bodies and donors.
It is imperative that the planning minister sit on the coordinating committee, otherwise financial and institutional recommendations and readjustments will not be enacted or included in the various development plans concerning women's integration. Without the obvious support and active commitment of the highest levels, action plans based on the policy benefiting women will not be effective.
Government institution in charge of implementation
The most suitable institution to have charge of the development policy for rural women will be the one that had charge of drawing it up. This will be the ministry responsible for the agricultural and rural sector, which is certainly the most appropriate office to lead the way in implementing a plan of action that will be incorporated into its own policies, strategies and mechanisms.
The institution will be responsible for ensuring that the necessary steps are taken by the various parties concerned. It will be the central point of a network of information on implementation of the policy and it will collect data for analysis and subsequent distribution. First and foremost, however, the institution will be responsible for putting the action plan into practice and incorporating its objectives and activities into current and future development programmes and projects. Procedures already in existence will be used for implementing the various actions and other measures.
The lead institution in implementing the policy for rural women will have to have a harmonious relationship with the ministry or other structure responsible for general policy on women. Uniform methods will be established along with a system of contacts, information exchange and coordination. The two structures must:
· individually and together clarify their respective mandates. spheres and responsibilities;
· hold joint meetings for the exchange of information, discussion and reflection at the national level and also at the decentralized (regional, provincial, county. municipal and local) levels;
· agree on methods for intervention and funding;
· combine their field resources in order to boost each other's skills, scope and strengths.
In view of the wide range of the action plan, its implementation will require the practical participation of other ministries or bodies, which will be assigned specific responsibilities. The institution in charge will have a monitoring role here and will be responsible for distributing information
Non-governmental organizations will obviously be represented on the coordinating committee and will maintain contact with the institution in charge. The roles of NGOs will be defined jointly and their effective participation will certainly be in the field. They will be encouraged to establish a joint platform on which to exchange experiences, coordinate their activities and from which to take part in the coordinating committee. The non-governmental sector is constantly growing and has a very broad audience among the rural population. It would be a serious error to ignore it when implementing policy and plans.
Mobilization of resources
Human resources
The establishment of popular participation is a first step in the mobilization of human resources. Next comes the selection and appointment of agents (from policymaking to field level) who should be proficient and ready to assume responsibilities within the sphere of women and development.
The automatic response of recruiting women for the task of implementing actions addressed to women should be carefully considered. It takes skill and qualifications to respond to the call for women's integration. Exchange and dialogue with rural women is not a question of gender, but of mutual respect and recognition. The attempt to take women into account in development programmes and projects will not become effective simply because the number of women within the various structures has been increased. Nature has never determined function.
Although human resources should ideally include as many women as men, this does not mean that suitability can in any way be decided on the basis of belonging to one gender or the other. Similarly, although it is often agreed ( usually as a convenient catch-phrase rather than from conviction), that it is preferable to have women agents working with women, this in no way means that men should not work with women too.
It should there fore be decided to:
· pursue a policy of personnel management based on criteria linked to skill, qualifications and ability;
· identify, inform and train staff of the main ministry and other bodies concerned (associations, NGOs and other ministries) on gender-related issues;
· identify, survey and establish contact with useful local people, both female and male;
· develop a method of gender analysis suited to the country, and produce, distribute and explain technical and educational teaching material;
· pursue the activities for increasing national capacities that were started during the phase of policy preparation, paying particular attention to those aspects linked to planning, improvement of information systems, research and monitoring/appraisal.
Financial resources
A development policy benefiting rural women and its associated action plan do not necessarily require a search for additional funding. It is more a matter of ensuring that existing financial resources are of equal benefit to men and women. The mobilization of financial resources should therefore be seen as a clarification of the purposes to which investments are put and a possible reallocation for a fairer distribution of those investments.
Donors will also have to be interested in the whole process of representation so that they can pledge their commitment and give their support within the framework of the guidelines and strategies adopted. The coherence of the action plan must also be maintained when agreements are being made on foreign funding. In this way development aid can be directed towards action aimed specifically at women. Such support is forthcoming from the majority of' donor bodies who declare themselves in favour of integrating women in development. It is wise to direct funding towards the priority actions that were decided while the policy and action plans were being drawn up. Lines of action must also satisfy the demand for coherence of strategies within the rural sector. This in turn means that a system of regulating and coordinating funding of actions to benefit women is indispensable.
In collaboration with the ministry responsible for the rural sector, the ministry responsible for planning and finance must be able to respond effectively to these demands. It can do so only when women's issues are taken into account in the planning of development programmes this happens? the ministry responsible for planning and finance will be able to:
· administer and allocate financial resources from the state budget in such a way that men and women will benefit equally:
· ensure financial consistency among development plans, the policy benefiting women and the policy for the rural sector;
· ensure that lines of action avoid duplication, overlapping and contradiction;
· negotiate pledges and investments with the various financial donors;
· establish mechanisms within government planning with a view to incorporating women as both agents and beneficiaries of development.
The system of data management
The implementation of a development policy for rural women needs a reliable information system for the monitoring, appraisal and modification of plans and work programmes This is a large-scale undertaking, involving the establishment and updating of a vast amount of data. Most countries have impressive quantities of information on women, but only a few have been able to follow up and process this very mixed material. This means that, although processed data are regularly requested, such requests cannot be met. As a result there is duplication of research' analysis and diagnosis, with previous work being unable to help the growth of knowledge.
A support project specifically for the government institution responsible for implementing the policy can be designed in order to ensure efficient data management. It would have the aims of improving the procedures for data collection and handling, establishing a more efficient approach to the production of statistics and setting up an information system for monitoring and appraisal. A project of this kind will be beneficial to the whole rural sector, help bring the various interested parties into contact and allow the establishment of an information network based on knowledge of the present situation.
Monitoring and evaluation
Monitoring
Monitoring must give special attention to the fulfilment of objectives and aims and the quality of the measures adopted and activities developed, as well as to the use of resources. The government institution in charge will devise a monitoring system, adapting and developing its present procedures as necessary. Progress reports will be drawn up, containing sections on achievements, problems and lessons to be drawn. These will be submitted to the coordinating committee, which will make sure that mechanisms for the involvement of all levels of the population are established and that these are effective in making people's comments and suggestions known. This will guarantee transparency and hence the involvement of the various partners.
Evaluation
Evaluation with a broader scope than the progress reports will be carried out at regular intervals and will follow the usual procedures.
In evaluations the methods used to measure relevance, effectiveness, efficiency, effects and impact on beneficiaries often overlook women. This is caused by project design and formulation approaches that do not specify women explicitly as recipients together with ignorance of which indicators to develop to measure these elements.
The mechanism for establishing indicators is the same as that used for any other type of appraisal, in other words, criteria are established to measure and explain the gaps between the initial situation, the anticipated situation and the actual situation, in both quantitative and qualitative terms.
The reference situation is the initial state of affairs that was observed and analysed in order to draw up the policy benefiting rural women. Indicators should then be defined sector by sector, objective by objective and activity by activity to assess the rates of participation and motivation, and separate results should be obtained for men and women.
The two categories will be compared and explanatory hypotheses developed with a view to discovering the causes of the differences. Such comparison not only brings out any inequalities, but also makes it easier to readjust programmes and projects in order to improve justice, participation and continuity.
Obviously there is no point in adopting indicators that will neither be used nor usable. It is preferable to adopt only a small number of relevant indicators, such as numbers of people participating in extension and training activities, the rise in income and representation in community and rural professional bodies (see box Opposite).
Evaluation will show how far the development policy benefiting rural women has contributed to solving the problems women encounter, especially those concerning access to rural services, control of production factors and improvement of women's civil status. The effects and impact of development programmes projects on the condition of women will also be measured.
Evaluation will also verify the degree to which the policy benefiting women is integrated into national development plans, its contribution to the achievement of national goals, the changes that have been brought about, the increase in national capacities and the sustainability of investments.
Updating the policy
The policy' strategy and action plan must be regularly updated. Revisions will follow on from appraisals of development programmes and projects in the agricultural and rural sector and evaluations of the verified effects in terms of reducing inequalities between men and women. When updating the programme it will, therefore, be useful as well as possible to redefine goals and strategies, as well as to reassess the resources needed.
All concerned in revising policy must bear in mind the premise underlying the formulation of a development policy aimed specifically at benefiting rural women; that this particular exercise will eventually be superseded and totally integrated into regular national and sectorial planning.
EXAMPLES OF INDICATORS
For an extension activity:
· number and proportion of agricultural workers participating in extension activities, information days and demonstration sessions;
· breakdown of numbers and proportions of participating men and women in relation to the whole population and to each other;
· content of demonstration sessions;
· estimates of the number of subjects dealt with relating to women's farming activities, men's farming activities, farming activities performed by both sexes, farming activities as a whole, etc.
For a credit activity:
· type of credit granted, for example, labour, animal husbandry or processing;
· length of credit;
· number of credit grants to men, women and both together, according to type;
· overall number of credit grants, according to type;
· average amount of each credit grant made to men and to women as compared with total credit grants made in the category and with the overall amount;
· use and profitability of the credit grants made to each sex;
· comparison between the kind of credit granted, the request made and the needs
observed.
<section>3</section>
Part III - Summing up
Recommendations and conclusions
Do's and don't's
Follow up
Questionnaire
Part III - Summing up
Recommendations and conclusions
It seems somewhat redundant to offer recommendations and conclusions for operational guidelines, since the latter are themselves recommendations and conclusions based on analysis of the situation.
On the other hand' a reading of this document can doubtlessly lead to reflection on the professional practices, experiences and situations met with every day. All parties - policy-makers and supervisory and field staff from national or international institutions will certainly be challenged as regards their decisions, procedures and omissions. This document should not be seen so much as a conclusion but as the start or confirmation of a commitment to ensure that women are taken into account in development policies and strategies.
The document has been drawn up as a result of the efforts and investments of the various countries that have been asking for FAO's help for some years in the quest for solutions and strategies to ensure a greater integration of women in development. The commitment and determination of these countries have made it possible to gather all this information and to recommend methodological and operational guidelines. It would be a shame if all the work of study and reflection were to stop here and if this were to become simply another document.
Collaboration between FAO and the various countries took place at a precise period and within a precise framework. Time has moved on and situations have changed. Day after day, countries have been working towards enabling rural women to become partners in development. There have of course been many obstacles and some creative thinking has been needed to overcome them. It would be profitable to all parties if all of them could react on the one hand to the proposals contained in this document and on the other, and more especially, to their feasibility and relevance in view of the dynamics of the particular situation in each country.
This is the background against which the conclusions and recommendations of this paper should be taken as a support to action. The first part of this summary is given in note form to which each person can add his or her reflections, conclusions and recommendations. The second part is more interactive and aims at sharing and exchange among the countries and FAO.
Do's and don't's
Proposals and suggestions as to which actions would be relevant and helpful and which would not have been made throughout the preceding pages. A list of these here would be either repetitive or incomplete. Far more useful results will be obtained by setting out points under various headings. These can then be examined and acted on according to the current situation.
Important elements in the preparation and application of a policy and strategy for rural women are suggested in the following pages. Five key points to be observed are given for each topic. These are in no particular order as to value or importance, so they should all be taken into account and receive equal attention.
The points are based on observations of the work and procedures of all those actively involved in implementing policies benefiting women on one level or another. The knowledge, experience and the solutions to difficulties found by such groups and individuals - or the solutions suggested after examination - can be valid additional material.
The proposed headings for reflection are:
Government institutions;
Planning;
Partnership;
Information and training;
Legislation.
Other subjects, such as resources, networks, action and participation may be added according to country, context and conditions.
GOVERNMENT INSTITUTIONS
Do
Don't
Determine each institution's particular constraints and possibilities for the preparation and application of a development policy and strategy for rural women.
Don't expect any institution to agree without argument to work for women's benefit in every sphere if it has not been provided with the means or possibilities of doing so.
Clarify the mandate and define the field of jurisdiction of every national institution with regard to integrating rural women in development.
Don't think that the issue of integrating women in development is the prerogative of any single institution.
Allocate each institution its precise field of jurisdiction in solving problems specific to rural women.
Don't underrate the contribution that each institution can offer.
Establish intra- and interinstitutional mechanisms to stimulate the integration of women in development.
Don't forget that there is an institution responsible for the promotion of women.
Acknowledge and recognize that the institution responsible for promoting women in development has the right to review and provide guidelines for development programmes and projects.
Don't apply to the institution responsible for the promotion of women only when the technical and financial stakes get too high and when apparently insoluble problems arise.
PLANNING
Do
Don't
Make use of knowledge of women's present situation in order to increase, decide on and negotiate their integration into development programmes and projects.
Don't rely on generalizations and a priori arguments to justify taking account of women.
Apply recognized and relevant methods to determine and analyse the status. role and functions of rural women.
Don't confuse needs that concern men as much as women with gender-specific needs
Examine where resources for development programmes and projects are going in order to avoid discrimination and inequality.
Don't believe that any given programme and project is addressed to and concerns women as much as men just because it claims to be aimed at the population as a whole.
Apply pressure to obtain a high-level commitment to the preparation and application of a policy benefiting women.
Don't believe that mere declarations of intent and policy will foster the integration of women in development.
Insist that all planning operations include in their agendas the integration of women in development.
Don't plan a policy benefiting women in isolation from regular operations organized on the national and sectorial levels or from their mechanisms and procedures
PARTNERSHIP
Do
Don't
Identify possible collaborators and forms of collaboration on the national level in the public, parapublic and private sectors.
Don't neglect ordinary people who are the true locus of active participation.
Rely on local people with knowledge and experience in the sphere of women and development.
Don't overrate expertise at the expense of pragmatism and operational experience.
Develop and maintain relations with women's organizations.
Don't overlook organizations that have had no need of state support to structure and organize themselves and to operate.
Try to establish contacts in neighbouring countries that are also engaged in the process of implementing policies benefiting women.
Don't believe that the integration of women in development is a problem that can be solved without making use of experience gained in other places.
Seek and mobilize international support and resources only after careful reflection on expectations and anticipated contributions.
Don't automatically accept all offers of support and don't alter objectives in view of opportunities just because they increase contributions.
INFORMATION AND TRAINING
Do
Don't
Take account of existing information and analyses of women's issues in order to increase understanding.
Don't automatically start the process by following lines of action that have already been followed and don't avoid consideration of fundamental questions.
Produce up-to-date information on the evolution of policies, strategies and lines of action benefiting rural women and set up communication channels among the various partners.
Don't forget to keep everyone concerned up-to-date on the positive changes that have taken place; continued motivation and interest depend on this.
Check that both men and women receive information on implementation of the policy benefiting women and on the action pursued.
Don't imagine that rural people have little interest in what takes place or is decided and planned at the top nor that they have a low level of understanding.
Assess the degree of understanding and support for the issue of women in development among those who are active in the area (policy-makers, planners and supervisory staff) or who should be.
Don't start from the principle that integrating women in development is simple, easy and straightforward and don't hide behind words by using language that does not explain the real stakes and risks in order to respect the established norms.
Make full use of existing media to spread as much relevant information as possible to allow recognition of the true position occupied by women and the implications of integration.
Don't use the media as a passive support; they can all be used for interactive communication in which village men and women can play leading roles.
LEGISLATION
Do
Don't
Insist that all laws and regulations concerning land tenure should take account of the present constraints on female farmers.
Don't neglect to incorporate the concerns of female producers in any current or future land tenure reforms.
Apply pressure to change legislation that puts women at a disadvantage regarding access to production factors and their rewards.
Don't accept tradition. custom or usage as the only acceptable reference points, thereby justifying the perpetuation of discriminatory laws.
Secure the cooperation of female lawyers to stimulate thought and discussion about the law and enlist the support of the various bodies that defend human rights.
Don't forget that in every country there are associations of women lawyers with a local, regional and even international audience.
Involve rural women, who have first-hand experience of constraints, to suggest changes in the law.
Don't think that only legislators know what can be changed; consulting the population has always paved the way to creativity and change and the legislator can then formalize and enact such change.
Insist on compliance with the international agreements designed to eliminate discrimination that have been ratified by governments.
Don't forget that when a country signs a convention this is not merely a gesture but a commitment.
Follow up
"You can't wash your face with one finger.''
"You can't sweep a courtyard with one wisp of straw.'' "You can't put a calabash on your head with one hand.''
African proverbs remind us that nothing can be achieved by agents working in isolation. Once the following section has been filled out, sent to FAO and processed, it could provide a basis for en exchange of experiences, comparison of procedures and enhancement of the results obtained around a work table. This could become the beginnings of a network for policy-makers and planners directly involved in drawing up and implementing development policies and strategies for rural women.
The following questionnaire is easy to fill out. It is based on professional practice and on the different steps that may have been followed in the development of policy and action for rural women. If there is not enough room in the spaces provided. replies can be continued on additional sheets.
The completed questionnaire should be returned to the Chief of the Women in Agricultural Production and Rural Development Service (ESHW) of the Human Resources. Institutions and Agrarian Reform Division (ESH). FAO. Viale delle Terme di Caracalla. 00100 Roma. Italy.
Questionnaire
DEVELOPMENT POLICIES AND STRATEGIES FOR RURAL WOMEN
1. Country:................................................................................................................
2. Structure responsible for the integration of rural women in development programmes and projects:
Ministry:....................................................................................................................
Department:...............................................................................................................
Service: ...................................................................................................................
3. Is these a development policy for rural women?
YES _
NO _
If not, why not?
If there is, is it:
provisional? _
disseminated _
approved? _
applied? _
Have there been amendments and modifications?
YES _
NO _
If there have been, what are they, and why were they made?
4. Is the policy integrated into the national development plan?
YES _
NO _
And into the sectorial development plan?
YES _
NO _
What are the practical features of this integration?
5. When was the policy for the national development plan drawn up?
6. When was the policy for the development plan for the rural and agricultural sector drawn up?
7. Which official bodies were involved in its preparation?
What were their contributions?
What are they doing today to ensure application of the policy?
8. What are the principles of the policy benefiting rural women?
9. What are its priority objectives?
10. What are its priority lines of action?
11. What are the most appropriate and significant lines of action so far as results are concerned in opening the way for equitable development:
in juridical and legislative terms?
in economic terms?
in social terms?
in terms of decision-making and changes in the man-woman relationship?
12. How is the policy integrated into the development programmes and projects of the agricultural and rural sector?
Are there special projects for women, and if so what are they?
What is the form of the institutional and operational link with development programmes and projects for the agricultural and rural sector?
Alternatively, are the policy, strategies and lines of action benefiting women explicitly incorporated into programmes and projects for the agricultural and rural sector, and if so, how?
13. What are the greatest difficulties in incorporating a policy benefiting rural women into the whole planning process?
14. What are the greatest difficulties in preparing a development policy benefiting rural women?
15. What are the greatest difficulties in ensuring that a policy benefiting rural women is applied, respected and taken into account in development programmes and projects?
16. What are the main elements of advice to be given to a country or a government structure to ensure the success of a development policy benefiting rural women, from preparation to action?
17. If FAO provided support and assistance for formulation of a development policy benefiting rural women, what has been the follow-up:
by me government?
by the ministry responsible for the agricultural and rural sector?
by other ministries?
by FAO?
18. If no policy benefiting rural women already exists in the country, what should be done or not done to prepare and implement a coherent, relevant and therefore effective policy?
19. Other suggestions, comments and proposals on the issue of integrating women in development:
Name of the person who has filled out this questionnaire:
Date:..........................................................................................................................
<section>4</section>
Bibliography
Bibliography
Balandier, G. 1974. Anthropo-logiques. Paris, PUF.
Boserup, E. 1970. Women's role in economic development. London, Allen and Unwin.
Canadian Council for International Cooperation (CCIC). 1991. Un autre genre de développement, un guide pratique sur les rapports femmes-hommes dans le développement. Ottawa, CCIC.
Droy, I. 1990. Femmes et développement rural. Paris, Karthala.
FAO. 1985. Learning from rural women. A manual for village-level training to promote women's activities in marketing. Rome, FAO.
FAO. 1987. Effectiveness of agricultural extension services in reaching rural women. Harare, FAO.
FAO. 1988. Analysis of credit schemes benefiting rural women in selected African countries. Rome, FAO.
FAO. 1989. The impact of development strategies on the rural poor, World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development. Rome. FAO.
FAO. 1989a. Plan of action for integration of women in development, FAO Conference. Rome, FAO.
FAO. 1989b. A special target group of development projects: women in fishing communities - guidelines. Rome, FAO.
FAO. 1990. A field guide for project design and implementation: women in community forestry - guidelines. Rome, FAO.
FAO. 1990a. Women in agricultural development, FAO's Plan of Action, illustrated version. Rome, FAO.
FAO. 1991. Gender and development: a framework for analysis. Rome. FAO.
FAO. 1991a. La place de la femme dans les projets de développement rural: le projet d'intensification agricole de Gikongoro au Rwanda - etude de cas. Rome, FAO.
FAO. 1991b. Third progress report on WCARRD Programme of Action, FAO Conference. Rome, FAO.
FAO/Netherlands Conference on Agriculture and the Environment. 1991. Strategies and tools for sustainable agriculture and rural development. The Netherlands, Hertogenbosch.
FAO/Swedish International Development Authority (SIDA). 1988. Restoring the balance, women and forest resources. Rome. FAO/SIDA.
Gentil, D. 1979. Les pratiques coopératives en milieu rural african. Paris. Harmattan/UCI.
Gentil, D. 1986. Les mouvements coopératifs en Afrique de I'Ouest. Paris, Harmattan.
Inter-American Committee for Agricultural Development (CIDA). 1991. Towards a national plan of action for women. Washington, DC, CIDA.
Meillassoux, C. 1977. Femmes, greniers, capitaux. Paris, Maspéro.
Overholt, C., Anderson, M.B., Cloud, K. and Austin, J.E. 1984. Gender roles in development projects. West Hartford, CT, United States, Kumarian Press.
Rogers, B. 1981. The domestication of women. London, Tavistock.
Slothouber, A. 1992. Femmes et développement. Guinea, Ministry of Planning and Finance.
United Nations. 1985. The Nairobi forward-looking strategies for the advancement of women, World Conference to Review and Appraise the Achievements of the United Nations Decade for Women: Equality, Development and Peace. Nairobi, United Nations.
FAO/ESHW MISSION REPORTS
Brigatti-Carrara, P. 1992. Institutional boosting of women in development (WID) units. Central African Republic, Ministry of Agriculture.
Brigatti-Carrara, P. 1991/1992. Training and boosting of capacities for the creation and support of WID units. Mauritania, Ministry of Agriculture.
DEFINITION OF A NATIONAL POLICY BENEFITING RURAL WOMEN
Benin, Ministry of Rural Development, M.J. Mermillod/C. Drake, 1991.
Central African Republic, Ministry of Rural Development, P. Brigatti-Carrara, 1991.
Guinea, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development, A. Le Magadoux, 1992.
Guinea-Bissau, Ministry of Women's Advancement, P. BrigattiCarrara, 1991.
Madagascar, Ministry of Population, M. Randriamamonjy, 1992 and P. Brigatti-Carrara, 1993.
Mali, Ministry of Agriculture, Rural Development and the Environment, A. Le Magadoux, 1992.
The Niger, Ministry of Social Affairs, L. Koenradt and A. Le Magadoux, 1992.
Rwanda, Ministry of Agriculture and Animal Husbandry, O. Verny, 1990.
<section>e</section>
Preface
Preface
For many years FAO has been pursuing activities aimed at promoting the role of women in agricultural and rural development. A plan of action for the integration of women in development was drawn up and presented to the 98th Session of the FAO Council in November 1988 and adopted by the FAO Conference in 1989. This plan (FAO, 1989a) is the expression of FAO policies and programmes intended to improve the conditions of rural women and to provide a response to the demands of FAO Member Governments. It has its roots in the Organization's adoption of the Nairobi forward-looking strategies for the advancement of women (United Nations, 1985), in which the Member Governments of the United Nations made a commitment to taking concrete measures before the year 2000 to eliminate all forms of sexual discrimination in the political, economic and social spheres.
The aim of the plan is to induce change so that women will be afforded opportunities and rights equal to those of men and so that society will make the best possible use of the potential they represent. Strategies are proposed on three fronts:
· improvement of the database on women in agricultural development;
· formulation and promotion of policies based on this information;
· development of appropriate programmes.
The plan of action has four spheres - civil status, economic, social and decision making - which were selected on the basis of the experience FAO has amassed over the years through its contact with rural women in developing countries.
Each sphere has its own specific strategy for improving the conditions of women at all levels of society, and the lines of action essential to the plan's implementation are presented for each. As it is unrealistic to try to do everything at the same time, the following priorities were established:
· training of FAO staff on women's integration in development;
· advice to Member Governments on development policies;
· reorientation of home economics and agricultural curricula;
· project development and monitoring;
· preparation of manuals to promote women's participation in development;
· teaching on population with special reference to women's role in development;
· data collection, communications and public information;
· sustainable development, management of natural resources and environment.
Since 1988, the date of the adoption of the FAO Plan of Action for the Integration of Women in Development, and at the request and with the collaboration of various French-speaking countries of Africa, the Human Resources, Institutions and Agrarian Reform Division (ESH) - specifically the Women in Agricultural Production and Rural Development Service (ESHW) - has developed actions to help increase the integration of women in development.
The present document is a critical analysis of the lines of collaboration set up between African governments and FAO with a view to organizing action to improve the integration of women in development. Highlighting the difficulties as well as the real possibilities of attaining this objective is an exercise of interest to both governmental and FAO policy-makers and could facilitate the formulation of development policies and strategies benefiting rural women. The presentation of progressive, coherent steps to follow, together with the drafting of some operational guidelines, should support the efforts made towards sustainable and equitable agricultural and rural development that would benefit both men and women.
This document is based on the reports of missions carried out by FAO headquarters staff and consultants. Mrs Agnès Le Magadoux, an FAO consultant, was entrusted with the analysis and with the drafting of the report, in collaboration with the Women in Agricultural Production and Rural Development Service. The cover photograph was kindly supplied by Mr Roberto Faidutti.
MAJOR DATES IN FAO'S MANDATE AND ACTIVITIES CONCERNING THE ROLE OF WOMEN IN DEVELOPMENT
· FAO Council Resolution 2/66 on "Integration of women in agricultural and rural development and nutrition policies"
· FAO Conference Resolution 10/75 on "The role of women in rural development"
· Establishment of the FAO Interdivisional Working Group on Women in Development
· World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development (WCARRD); Adoption of Declaration of Principles and Programme of Action
· FAO's Home Economics and Social Programme Service restructured as Women in Agricultural Production and Rural Development Service
· FAO Report on the State of Food and Agriculture with a chapter on the role of women
· FAO Regional Conference for Africa including examination of the situation of rural women
· FAO Conference Resolution 12/85 concerning rural women's problems, especially in the areas of training and access to inputs and technology
· UN World Survey on the Role of Women in Development; preparation of the chapter on "Women in agriculture"
· FAO Conference Resolution 3/87 calling for a plan of action for the integration of women in development, encompassing strategies to ensure that all relevant FAO programmes incorporate the recommendations of the Nairobi forward-looking strategies and the System-wide Medium-term Plan
· FAO Council Resolution 1/94 adopting the Plan of Action for the Integration of Women in Development
· FAO Plan of Action for the Integration of Women in Development adopted by the FAO Conference
· Training of FAO staff in the integration of women in development
· Third progress report on the WCARRD programme of action including the role of women in rural development
