<title>The effects of HIV/AIDS on farming systems in eastern Africa</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
This publication has been produced by the Farm Management and Production Economics Service (AGSP), Agricultural Services Division, Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO), Rome, Italy. It was financed by UNDP as a TSSI programme. The publication is based on the contributions of two main authors, namely:
Tony Barnett, School of Development Studies, University of East Anglia, UK, who coordinated the programme and wrote the associated report cited below.
Martina Haslwimmer, Farm Management and Production Economics Service, FAO, who administered the project and carried out the study of the Nakambala Sugar Estate in Zambia.
However, the final text is derived from six earlier reports which provide the foundation for the present publication. These are:
* Drinkwater, M. with Fiona Samuels, The Effects of HIV/AIDS on Agricultural Production Systems in Zambia, Vol. 1, Vol.2, Mpongwe Field Report and Vol.3, Teta Field Report, Zambia, 1993.
* Mitti, G.A., The Major Farming Systems, a summary of information on the main agricultural zones and systems based on analysis of socio-economic studies and provincial reports, Adaptive Research Planning Team, Zambia, 1993.
* Haslwimmer, M., The Social and Economic Impact on Nakambala Sugar Estate, Zambia, 1994.
* Tumushabe, J., Bantebya, G., and Ssebuliba, R., The Effects of HIV/AIDS on Agricultural Production Systems and Rural Livelihood Systems in Eastern Africa, Uganda, 1993.
* Kapinga, A., Kissawike, K., Ndelike, M. and Ngasongwa, J., Report on the Study of Effects of HIV/AIDS on Agricultural Production Systems in Tanzania, Institute of Development Studies, Sokoine Agricultural University, Morogoro, Tanzania, 1993.
* Barnett, T., The Effects of HIV/AIDS on Farming Systems and Rural Livelihoods in Uganda, Tanzania and Zambia,1994.
Extensive comments on earlier drafts of this publication were provided by Daphne Topouzis and Günter Hemrich.
Alison Small was in charge of drafting and editing the text.
This publication does not constitute an exhaustive analysis of the very large amounts of material collected in the course of the project. Rather, it is an attempt to bring to the attention of a wider audience some of the major ways in which serious and fatal epidemic illnesses are currently affecting rural populations in parts of Africa and may in the near future affect other regions both in Africa and other parts of the world.
<section>2</section>
Chapter 1 Introduction
1.1 The purpose of this study
1.2 About the disease
1.3 Global and African epidemics
1.4 The nature of the impact
1.5 A diversity of results
1.6 HIV/AIDS and rural livelihoods in Africa
1.7 Who is vulnerable?
1.1 The purpose of this study
Much has been written about the medical and clinical aspects of HIV/AIDS. There is also an increasing body of work on the impact of the disease on social and economic systems, but relatively little is understood about the effects of the HIV/AIDS epidemic on farming systems and therefore on rural livelihoods.
The purpose of this study is to examine, using information collected from three countries in Africa, Tanzania, Uganda and Zambia, in which relatively high incidences of the disease have been found among their populations, the ways in which morbidity and mortality associated with HIV/AIDS are affecting farming systems and rural livelihoods.
The focus of the present study is not the disease itself but its impact, both actual and potential, on rural populations, their livelihoods and their farming systems. In order to increase understanding of this problem, the Food and Agriculture Organization (FAO) commissioned with the financial support of United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) a series of studies in each of the three countries where the disease is seen at different stages of its evolution.
Following several months of preparation, predominantly involving studies of secondary sources, three national teams, supported by an international consultant and FAO staff, carried out field work in Tanzania, Uganda and Zambia. In each case the fieldwork period was about one to two months. The results of this research are presented in the following chapters.
1.2 About the disease
HIV/AIDS is a viral disease currently without cure or vaccine which is mainly sexually transmitted, although there are other infection paths, perinatal, contaminated syringes, and contaminated blood donations. The disease has a long period of latency during which people who are HIV+ (seropositive) are infectious. The virus affects the body's ability to resist infections. This results in progressive morbidity as people fall prey to a variety of infections in their environment to which they would normally be resistant.
As far as is known HIV/AIDS is always fatal. Depending on a number of factors including the general health status of the population, and the level of infectious agents in the environment, progression from infection to manifestation of symptoms may take anything from a few months to many years. Progression from initial illness to death also varies from a few months to several years.
In healthy well-fed populations in areas of the world where there are fewer opportunistic infections a person who has contracted HIV/AIDS may remain well for several years. In other parts of the world where people are poor and malnourished and where opportunistic infections are more common, the onset of illness will be more rapid. A recent study by the United Kingdom Medical Research Council in Uganda observed 11000 individuals over three years in rural areas. An important finding of this research was that among HIV+ adults there was a mortality rate of 11.6% a year.
Even when no symptoms of the disease are apparent, a person is infectious. This means that by the time that significant numbers of people begin to exhibit illness there are likely to be many more who are infected. For this reason, it may be appropriate to describe the HIV/AIDS epidemic as a "long wave" disaster. By the time that its presence in a population is obvious, it is already widely spread in that population.
HIV/AIDS affects the health of individuals. Development of measures which will cure or protect individuals through vaccination is the business of medical scientists and clinicians. However, as with all serious illness, the effects on the individual have serious implications for others - at the household, community and ultimately the national level.
1.3 Global and African epidemics
With the exception of the epidemic in the United States of America, the disease has reached epidemic proportions earliest in Africa. However, it is important to recognise that Africa is not unique and that much of the attention that it has received stems from a number of causes. These include the fact that Africa was one of the areas where the epidemic was reported first, and this may in part have been due to the readiness of some African governments to make research results available.
Figure 1: Global incidence of HIV/AIDS (number of infected people)
Figure 2: Minimum and maximum HIV prevalence among antenatal attendees in Tanzania, Uganda and Zambia 1992
Figure 2 shows the minimum and maximum infection rates observed among women attending ante-natal clinics in different parts of Tanzania, Uganda and Zambia.
However, it must be clear that HIV/AIDS is not a disease which is restricted to the world's poorest countries. Rather the problem is that in these countries production is often heavily dependent upon human labour power and because of their strained economic circumstances, it is these countries which are least able to confront the long-term economic and social impact of the epidemic. In the world's richest countries, the epidemic is very severe. In the United States, it has been identified as the second largest cause of deaths among young men.
There are indications that HIV/AIDS will rapidly increase in Asia. Data from India suggest that at least 500000 people are currently infected, while in Thailand seroprevalence was estimated at 450000 in a population of 60 million in 1992.
1.4 The nature of the impact
In order to understand the importance of the preceding observations it is necessary to look more closely at the issue of the social and economic impacts of this epidemic as they are manifested in the world's poorer societies.
The key feature of the HIV/AIDS epidemic which makes its social and economic impact so important is that it is mainly a sexually transmitted disease. If we assume that in most societies the years between 15 and 50 are those in which people are most sexually active, then we may also assume that it is this age group which will be most vulnerable to infection. These people also constitute the main body of the labour force in any society. In poor countries as compared to rich countries this fact is of greater significance given that:
- work, particularly farm work, is more labour intensive;
- highly trained and educated individuals are rarer and their training, loss and replacement all result in greater proportional costs.
Accordingly, the epidemic affects both the quantity and quality of labour supply in the economy. This affects output and Gross National Product (GNP). In practice this means that there may be fewer teachers, fewer skilled artisans, and fewer farmers. The situation is in fact worse than the preceding statement might suggest as the economic idea of GNP conventionally used in national accounting (the value of output resulting from the use of resources - land, labour, capital - owned by national members of a society) takes no account of the unpaid labour contributed by family members. In particular this excludes both the domestic work of women in maintaining households as well as their agricultural work producing non-marketed, usually staple, crops.
A more subtle but equally serious consequence of the epidemic on the effective labour supply is that rising adult mortality adversely affects the transmission of acquired skills and knowledge both within an age cohort and from generation to generation.
However, perhaps the most important finding of this work is that the main costs to a society are not the direct costs of medical care and prevention. Rather they are other costs resulting from the loss of output plus the more complex and less easily estimated social as well as economic costs associated with the burden of looking after orphans, care of the elderly, and costs of increasing social disorder associated with the disruption of the socialisation and education of the young.
Between consideration of the micro-level impact as in the preceding example and the macro impacts predicted by econometric modelling, there lies the complexity of the links between the local and national levels of analysis. There are many ways in which the epidemic impact on the individual, local community and nation, link together to confront politicians, administrators and ordinary people with major development problems, most of them issues of social and economic policy but some inevitably with environmental implications.
1.5 A diversity of results
As will be discussed in Chapter 2 which deals with the method used to carry out these studies, the results have proved to be quite diverse, not only between countries but between different agricultural systems in the same country. For example, in studying the farming systems in Tanzania, Uganda and Zambia, account had to be taken of the dynamic endogenous impact of HIV/AIDS. There are always many variables at work within a system and the effects of changes in these variables - cropping patterns, consumption preferences, availability and prices of inputs, rainfall levels, market demand - are often difficult to distinguish from the exogenous impact of HIV/AIDS. This problem has to be borne in mind when considering the detailed data reported below.
The very diversity of the results which were obtained in this study illustrate how difficult it is to understand the impact of a disaster such as an epidemic on farming systems. Nonetheless, this complexity is itself of use in increasing our understanding of the complex inter-relations which make up a "farming system". The effects which were observed are significant enough, be they on the small farm economy, or rural households, especially on those headed by women, to be taken into account in future research on the subject, and in development work generally in countries where HIV/AIDS is present or threatening.
1.6 HIV/AIDS and rural livelihoods in Africa
Since the mid-1980s, rural communities in East and Central Africa have been increasingly affected by HIV/AIDS. At the national level, where the economies of the countries concerned are substantially or largely dependent on labour intensive agriculture for subsistence and cash crop production, this effect is becoming progressively more pronounced. Table l shows that of the three countries discussed in this study, both Tanzania and Uganda are heavily dependent upon agriculture. While Zambia appears to be an exception to this rule, agriculture still remains of great importance. Because of the role of minerals in the Zambian economy, cheap locally-produced grain is important in supporting urban purchasing power. Thus, there is a link between rural production, urban wage rates, urban purchasing power, mineral production and urban social order particularly in the mining regions.
Table 1: Agriculture as a percentage of GDP and exports (1991)
Agriculture as % of GDP Agriculture as % of Exports
Tanzania 61 84
Uganda 51 95
Zambia 16 1
Source: The World Bank, 1993
African subsistence agriculture is labour intensive and, in most cases, is heavily dependent upon women's work. Farms are small and use limited quantities of inputs such as mineral fertilisers, pesticides, herbicides and mechanisation. Table 2 indicates that the majority of the population in the selected countries (except Zambia) live in rural areas and derive their livelihoods from these activities. While population growth was long seen as the problem in Africa, in some rural communities HIV/AIDS is now resulting in labour shortages for both farm and domestic work. Seasonal labour constraints are not new. There are many reasons why this is so: farm incomes are low and adults have often spent part of the year away from the farm in search of cash incomes; in some regions rainfall distribution means . that labour has to be mobilised intensively in brief periods; and daily life requires substantial amounts of labour for non-farm work associated with maintaining the household.
Water and fuel collection may occupy as much as eight hours a day - tasks usually done by women and young girls.
Table 2: Percentage of the population living in rural areas (1991)
Total population (millions) Percentage population living in rural areas
Tanzania 25.5 66
Uganda 16.9 89
Zambia 8.3 49
Source: Op. Cit., 1993
1.7 Who is vulnerable?
Within a systems' hierarchy, AIDS is first seen at the farm household level, because it is affecting human beings . The effects of AIDS are spreading to the subordinate level, the crop/livestock system as well as on superior levels up to the national system. However, this study will concentrate on the effects on the farming system, the farm-household system and the crop/livestock system.
At the farming systems level, the study observed features relating to different kinds of farming systems which appeared to make some more or less vulnerable than others. Variables include location and climate of the system, types of crop and or livestock produced, presence of sufficient labour, etc. A system with plentiful and well distributed rainfall, fertile soil and a wide range of crops will be less sensitive to labour loss than one having limited rainfall, poor soils and a small range of crops.
Despite the appearance of excess population, subsistence agriculture often operates on the margin-labour may be in short supply at certain times and for specific tasks. This margin is rapidly disturbed when communities are affected by HIV/AIDS. The precise effect of the epidemic depends upon the particular combination of climate, soils, crops, and involvement in labour migration. Thus it is possible to describe different farming systems and their associated communities as more or less sensitive to the loss of labour.
At the farm household level in an existing farming system, the study also observed certain factors which make households - be they wealthy or poor - more or less susceptible to the effects of the disease. For example, a relatively wealthy household whose members are more mobile and who have more contact with, in particular urban centres, was sometimes found to be particularly susceptible to exposure and to contracting HIV/AIDS. As household members become ill and die, the family's resources are progressively strained and it may experience a severe fall in the standard of living. Similarly, a household which is already at or near subsistence level, is also vulnerable given that it has fewer resources to fall back on.
The loss of labour, the loss of household members to care for the very young and the elderly, increased numbers of dependent children, restriction of the range of crops grown, continue the downward spiral in living standards. In the households' efforts to cope, children may eat less well, receive less care, be withdrawn from school particularly in the case of young women who can fetch water and firewood, care for the younger children or the sick as well as work on the farm.
Figure 3: AIDS in the systems' hierarchy
Nowhere is this more so than in the case of women who are widowed. When a man dies, the ownership or cultivation rights to his land may be disputed by the wider family, leaving his widow and children landless and having to move away from the area. In a continent where few cultures accord women independent rights to land, their social and economic insecurity may be exacerbated by the impact of the epidemic.
<section>3</section>
Chapter 2 Methodology
2.1 Step I: vulnerability mapping of farming systems
2.2 Step II: selection of research areas
2.3 Step III: selection of national consultants and capacity building
2.4 Step IV: fieldwork
2.5 Step V: data analysis and report writing
This chapter describes the sequence and the method of the work. The procedure adopted is explained in a way that should enable similar studies to be repeated in any other country or area. Figure 4 shows the workplan of the whole exercise.
2.1 Step I: vulnerability mapping of farming systems
To examine the impact of HIV/AIDS on different farming systems the approach of Barnett & Blaikie (1992) was used. The underlying hypothesis is that not every farming system is equally vulnerable to the loss of labour. The degree to which a farming system is vulnerable to the HIV/AIDS pandemic depends upon a number of characteristics; most of these are linked to adaptations to the loss of labour. Farming areas with favourable agro-ecological conditions, which permit the growing of a wide range of crops and the keeping of livestock are less vulnerable than farming systems in marginal agro-ecological areas, where the range of crops grown is limited and which are already protein and energy deficient. Other factors of vulnerability are the seasonality of labour demand and the division of labour by gender and age. In addition, a significant degree of out-migration and the importance of soil conservation works, such as terracing, may also have an effect because such work is often
labour demanding.
Figure 4: Workplan of the study
Barnett and Blaikie developed an algorithm to classify the farming systems of Uganda as "not vulnerable, "moderately vulnerable", "most vulnerable" and "very vulnerable" on the basis of protein/ energy deficiency, labour supply and substitution of crops with less labour demanding crops. As a next step, a map of HIV incidence was laid over the map of farming systems. Accordingly, areas of both high labour vulnerability and a high HIV seroprevalence could then be identified.
For Zambia, the major farming systems have been described and classified in approximately the same way as was done in Uganda on the basis of labour and drought problems and on existing coping mechanisms (e.g. the use of less labour intensive crops, spreading labour peak demand periods, etc.). This farming systems map has not yet been overlaid with a Zambian seroprevalence map, because the latter is largely incomplete.
In Tanzania, regions, whose status in terms of relative food and energy availability had already been classified in the Comprehensive Food Security Study (1992), were mapped with the national sero-data. However, in this case labour peaks or the substitution of less labour intensive crops were not taken into account.
The quality of the vulnerability mapping is only as good as the available data. Comprehensive farming systems data covering the whole country is often not available or incomplete. Farming systems can also change rapidly over time due to population pressure, agricultural policy, changes in agro-ecological conditions and other factors. For the method to be effective, it is desirable that sero-data should cover the whole country, preferably disaggregated by district.
In practice, in most of the cases such data are incomplete or outdated or contain certain types of bias. For example, they may over-represent urban areas - such areas being easier to survey than rural areas. It should also be borne in mind that the seroprevalence maps do not reflect the current impact of the disease. Due to the long incubation period of the epidemic, high HIV rates in a given area provide only very limited indications of current morbidity or mortality. Tanzania is a case in point, where high levels or seroprevalence, are - with the exception of parts of Bukoba - accompanied by relatively low current rates of morbidity. One way of avoiding this problem would be to map the farming systems data with actual AIDS cases. In reality the statistics on AIDS cases are even more unreliable than on HIV rates due to underreporting. Therefore present vulnerability mapping can only give a first orientation and a rough guide to the selection of research areas. This must be
supplemented by ground-checking.
2.2 Step II: selection of research areas
The rationale for selecting the research communities was the identification of very vulnerable farming systems in combination with high HIV incidence. Apart from previous work undertaken in a specific area, security reasons, budgetary and logistic reasons were also taken into account. The farming systems of the selected areas in all three countries are briefly described below.
Maps showing the selected research areas can be found in Annex 1.
Uganda
Three communities were selected:
- Gwanda village in Rakai District
Classification: " not vulnerable "
Farming system description: located near Lake Victoria; 1140 mm annual rainfall; staples are bananas, cassava, sweet potatoes; beans and groundnuts are used as sauces or stews; coffee used to be an important cash crop, but has been neglected due ton decline in coffee prices; limited livestock keeping (poultry, and some goats and pigs); fishing activities; soils are mostly loams and clay loams with medium productivity.
The community was selected due to its very high seroprevalence rate and because Barnett & Blaikie had carried out a similar study in 1989 in the same community.
- Nakyerira community in northern Mubende District
Classification: "very vulnerable"
Farming system description: 1297 mm annual rainfall; vulnerable on both labour and protein criteria; the soils are acidic and infertile; sweet potatoes, cassava and maize are the predominant staples, livestock keeping is an important activity (cattle, pigs, goats and poultry); coffee was a dominant cash crop until 1980, today it is almost nonexistent; Irish potatoes are important cash and food crops.
- Ndaiga community in southern Iganga District
Classification: "very vulnerable"
Farming system description: located near Lake Victoria; 1200 mm annual rainfall; vulnerable on both protein and energy criteria; soils are young and fertile, the area has only been populated since the late 1960s; maize is a major food and cash crop; cassava is an additional major staple; fishing is limited as is the keeping of livestock; there is only a limited range of crops grown.
Tanzania
The rationale for the selection of the study areas in Tanzania was as follows. Farming systems in Tanzania are conventionally classified into six broad categories: coffee-banana, maize surplus, pastoralist, sorghum/millet-livestock, rice farming, and cassava. Mbeya and Tanga regions are two of the most heavily HIV-affected areas of the country apart from Kagera. Kagera was specifically omitted from the present study because both the World Bank and UNDP were either planning or executing similar studies in these areas. Within the selected regions, together with Rukwa, it was possible to find representative areas for most of the major farming systems, and including the estate and horticultural sectors. On this basis the following farming systems were selected:
Region Farming System
Rukwa: Main production systems: maize/legume/pulses; apart from maize which is generally in surplus, rice farming is also undertaken. Some 90 percent of the region's economically active population is engaged in subsistence agriculture. Limited cash crops are grown notably tobacco, some coffee, sunflower and cocoa (these later recently introduced as part of an effort to diversify crop production base).
Mbeya: The region has 13 agro-ecological zones mainly as a result of which a large variety of crops are grown and intercropping is widely practiced. Several communities within the region like Kyela, Rungwe, and Mbozi have high population densities and face land shortages. The production systems are characterised by pastoralism, smallholder paddy production and estate production. There is a high level of mobility partially as a result of the colonial period when parts of the Western, Southern and Southern highlands were designated as labour reserves for the plantation sector, the most dominant tribe in the region, the Nyakyusa continue to be highly mobile, thus the potential for the spread of HIV/AIDS is considerable.
Tanga: The region comprises four agro-ecological zones; the coastal plains, the inland plains, the highlands and plateau land. The research focused on the horticulture and cassava production systems but other crops are also grown like sisal, cashew nuts, coffee and tea. Ninety percent of the population work in the agricultural sector but only a relatively small amount of the total available land for crop and livestock development has been cultivated (some 17 percent). The region's population structure is characterised by a high ratio of men to women (while nationally there is a surplus of women to men).
Zambia
Two communities were selected. These were expected to have middle to high seroprevalence rates. The study was based on previous farming systems work carried out by the Adaptive Research Planning Team (ARPT). The communities were:
- Teta in Serenje District
Classification: "moderately vulnerable".
Farming system description: 1100 mm annual rainfall; hand hoe cultivation supplemented by oxen hire; finger millet as a chief staple; maize, sweet potatoes and cassava often supplement finger millet, maize meal is often purchased; chicken, beef and fish are purchased on occasion; maize is a main cash source, supplemented by beans and millet beer, Citemene is being replaced by hand-hoe ploughing.
The system, being based upon finger millet cultivation using the citemene system and thus being quite labour demanding would be affected by labour losses, however, cassava could be developed as a major staple. Hence the system was classified as being moderately vulnerable.
- Mpongwe in Ndola Rural District
Classification: "vulnerable"
Farming system description: 1300 mm annual rainfall; hand hoe cultivation supplemented by oxen and tractor hire; maize is the dominant starch crop with some sorghum which is also used for brewing beer; relish crops are grown together with maize, namely groundnuts and beans; cash sources are varied but include beer and fish, supplemented by maize, vegetables and chicken. The system is vulnerable to the effects of labour loss due to the insufficiency of draught power and the heavy labour inputs required to grow maize, the major staple. Large areas of land are required for maize sufficiency under this system.
2.3 Step III: selection of national consultants and capacity building
From the inception of this project, it was envisaged that national consultants and institutions from different disciplines would carry out the field studies. Full involvement of national consultants and institutions contributed to the success of the study in several ways. Although it was not the objective of the project to train nationals, in fact the research activities have contributed to a national capacity-building. As the link between HIV/AIDS and agriculture is a very new field of policy concern in all three countries, the national consultants who participated in the study are now among the first people in their countries with expertise and first-hand field experience of studying this problem. In addition to the background expertise which was gained, most of them (with the exception of the Zambian team which had considerable experience with the method) were using the Rapid Rural Appraisal (RRA) methods for the first time and thus extended their research capability.
Some of the national consultants are working as lecturers at universities where they have a forum to disseminate their knowledge to a wider audience.
2.4 Step IV: fieldwork
Various forms of the RRA method were used in all three countries. Although this is a qualitative method, efforts were made to collect some comparative quantitative information on production activities. Some of the methods used were participatory, but the exercise was essentially extractive rather than facilitative in nature, aiming at 'learning from outsiders' rather than the 'empowerment of local people' (Chambers, 1992).
The composition of the three teams varied considerably, from three people in Uganda and four in Tanzania to 25 in Zambia. But in each case, the team came from different disciplines, mostly agricultural, sociological and health fields. Apart from the Zambian team, the national researchers received a briefing in the conduct of RRA and the use of RRA tools.
During their fieldwork, the three teams used different techniques depending on the composition of the teams and their familiarity with RRA. The most common tools were:
- village walk and map
- the community transect
- farming calendar
- focus group discussions
- key informant interviews
- detailed case studies
In addition, the Ugandan team produced village demographic profiles and conducted social ranking exercises. The Zambian team elaborated a health time chart with the farmers. The amount of time taken for data collection ranged from 19 days in the case of the Zambian team to 40 days for the Tanzanian team.
While the approach used by each team is explained in more detail below, special attention is drawn to that used by the Zambian team because the ARPT has had more experience of RRA than the other two teams and has developed the RRA in some novel and effective ways.
The approach adopted by the Zambian team conforms with an intensive RRA approach which ARPT has been using in its analytical studies in the Central and Copperbelt Provinces. In all the farming systems work that ARPT has carried out in the last few years, the concept of cluster has formed the basis of the analyses undertaken. The reason for this is that rarely have households been found to exist as discrete social and economic units. Single households are usually connected to others in overlapping relationships which, if one is to make sense of them, require another analytical unit. This unit, the cluster, has been defined as:
"A group of producers between which there are multiple resource exchanges, usually based on the factors of kinship, labour and food exchange, and or common access to draught power." (Drinkwater, 1992)
Different terms are used to refer to different types of producer within a cluster. The primary producer household is that producer (and household) which produces the most food within the cluster and is primarily responsible for the food security of all the members. Secondary producer households have their own separate kitchens, but have lower production levels than the primary producer.
In various previous assessments completed by the ARPT, the following cluster types have been identified and were used in the Zambian study:
Type 1 - Small-scale commercial Primary producer grows 15+ ha of maize.
Type 2 - Successful small-scale Primary producer grows 5-10 ha of maize.
Type 3 - Vulnerable Primary producer grows 2-5 ha maize
Type 4 - Resource-poor Primary producer grows 2 ha staple
The ARPT has adopted several key principles in their approach:
- a large multi-disciplinary research team is used (some 25 individuals);
- the approach used is qualitative, but within case studies effort is made to collect comparable quantitative information on production activities. Since this information is collected within a case study framework its consistency can be checked;
the methodology is based on two types of interaction.
i) that occurring within the research team,
ii) that within the rural community.
Different scales of interaction take place. Much fieldwork takes place with the research team subdivided into smaller groups of three or four, but the initial planning and final synthesis of each of the activities occurs in a plenary session. Interaction with farmers takes place in meetings, and with smaller groups or individuals within the village environment;
- the methodology is iterative in nature, that is it proceeds through a series of cycles (or spirals). In this exercise the two main iterations were:
i) analysis
ii) validation of issues and elaboration
The research team, in addition, discussed follow-up options and issues in a final meeting. The suggestions made were in response to farmers' comments during the ultimate focus group meetings that were held, but this does not constitute a full iteration as no final discussion was held with farmers on this topic; and
- effort is also made to triangulate and cross-check information. Several means are used for doing this:
i) by using different methods to collect similar information;
ii) by having multi-disciplinary interview teams (each member should be checking that the interview is consistent from their particular perspective); and
iii) by following information (validating and elaborating data) through the iterative nature of the methodology.
With the help of the RRA tools the teams assessed the present situation as well as the future trends and the type of intervention which the affected households require.
2.5 Step V: data analysis and report writing
The research teams all commented that the most difficult part of the whole exercise was inevitably the data analysis and report writing. RRA generates a lot of information in a short amount of time. Much of this is qualitative and cannot be analyzed in a mechanical way as with quantitative data. The interpretative nature of this type of data analysis therefore requires intensive discussions within the research team if agreed conclusions which are focused on the study objectives are to be arrived at. As no template for the report was provided to the teams, the final reports followed different formats and therefore the results from each country team were not directly comparable in all respects. Instead, each report reflected the different make-up, experience and interests of the national teams as well as the national contexts within which each team was operating.
The final synthesis of the three country reports plus the studies of the major farming systems in Zambia and the Nakambala sugar estate were made by an international consultant. The present book takes the synthesis further and presents it in a form which it is hoped will be of use to others wishing to undertake similar studies.
<section>4</section>
Chapter 3 Results: The effect on small farmers
3.1 The direct costs of HIV/AIDS and the process of impoverishment
3.2 The impact on population
3.3 The impact on labour
3.4 The impact on crop production
3.5 The impact on livestock production
3.6 The impact on the agricultural extension services
3.7 The impact on the fisheries sector
3.8 HIV/AIDS and the loss of agricultural knowledge and management skills
3.9 Coping mechanisms: the role of NGOs and self-help groups
3.10 The personal and community trauma of HIV/AIDS
Like any other disease, HIV/AIDS results in direct costs, mostly medical and funeral expenses, and indirect costs, which are labour related. Potential income is lost because of the illness and death of individuals and the diversion of labour to the task of caring for the sick. If no safety net is present or is incomplete as in Uganda, Tanzania and Zambia, households and rural communities have to bear these costs alone.
Before considering the impact of HIV/AIDS on small-scale farmers, a few words should be said about the organization of the farm-household system. A farm-household system generally consists of three closely interlinked sub-systems:
- the household as a decision-making unit; establishing goals and controlling the system, providing labour, and ensuring food and cash in fulfilment of set objectives;
- the farm and its crop and livestock activities; providing employment, food and cash for the household; and
- the off-farm component, competing with farm activities for labour, providing employment and income-generating activities, becoming increasingly more important to supplement the well-being of farm families (FAO, 1990).
HIV/AIDS intervenes and affects these different sub-systems and their interlinkages as demonstrated in Figure 5. Cash and labour flows are partly diverted to AIDS leaving less labour for farm and off-farm activities as well as reducing cash for the household. Cash which is exchanged by the farm and off-farm system for the purpose of, for example, purchasing fertilizer or financing investments in off-farm activities, may also be used for AIDS related expenses.
It should be noted that this generalized definition of the farm household does not take into consideration the fact that households may be internally differentiated by, for example, age and gender. Thus it is important to recognize that distributional consumption and other entitlement inequalities may be of considerable importance in determining the precise impact of HIV/AIDS on any particular household. This point is of great importance when we consider the relative impact of any traumatic event - such as HIV/AIDS- on the internal operation of a household and thus the relative robustness of different households in the same society and similarly constituted households in different societies. Some of these issues are dealt with below.
Figure 5: Resource diversion due to AIDS in a farm-household system
3.1 The direct costs of HIV/AIDS and the process of impoverishment
In general terms HIV/AIDS has the effect of increasing poverty by escalating costs at every level, to the individual, to the community, to government and to the private sector.
At the family level, medical costs associated with caring for the sick and bedridden have to be borne along with the funeral expenses of family members who die of the disease. Besides the costs of drugs, conventional and traditional medical treatment, households caring for AIDS patients are often faced with meeting expenses for additional special foods to comfort the sick or for items such as extra blankets.
Funeral costs appear to be even higher than expenditures for medical care. A household study carried out by the World Bank in Kagera, Tanzania, revealed that on average US$ 60, of which 60 percent was spent on funeral expenses - the remaining 40 percent having gone towards medical care - was spent on the funeral expenses of a household member. This is an amount which is probably close to the annual per capita income in Kagera. Due to the nature of AIDS, as a predominantly sexually-transmitted disease, there is frequently more than one death in a household. As a result, numerous cases can be observed where a family's entire savings, often meagre before the onset of AIDS, are completely consumed.
Box 1: Case study 1 (Gwanda community, Uganda)
The cost of AIDS
Sarah is a 44-year old widow who lost her husband in 1990 due to AIDS. Apart from caring for her children, farming her 3.5 acre plot, and breeding pigs for sale, she also makes mats, baskets and table cloths which she sells to earn extra income although finding a market for her wares is often difficult.
From the time at which her husband first became ill she has had to use most of her money to pay for his treatment and for that of her mother who was also sick. This took up much of her time and thus she now has fewer hours to manage the farm. Apart from the time she spent canny for the sick, followed by a month mourning the death of her husband, the deaths of other people in the village also interrupt her farm work because she has to attend funerals and prepare food for the relatives of the dead. Since most of the people in her village are closely related and there have been many deaths, in most cases she spends one to four days in mourning with the result that much of her plot is now under weeds and she derives little income from what she is able to produce in the remainder of the time.
The high cost of treating AIDS and the expenses incurred through the death of a person with AIDS, mean that households either require assistance or cash incomes to cope with these additional expenses. Case material from Mpongwe village, Zambia, indicates that one possible source of assistance is from remittances sent by working-age relatives employed elsewhere. There are few households, however, which appear to be actually receiving such external support. This is certainly connected to the straitened circumstances of most urban households whose budgets have been affected by structural adjustment. Inflation has resulted in food and other commodity prices rising considerably in excess of any gains in wages. Within the Mpongwe case studies there were only two households out of 34 being helped by remittances sent from outside the area. Both of these were elderly retired couples; one had 10 successful children, with one son living in London. These children sent money which was
used to hire a tractor. Local sources of employment are, however, important for others. Such income sources can pay for resources such as tractor or ox hire, as well as supplementary food and household items.
In the Mgeta area of Tanzania, households headed by women are not uncommon and do not necessarily represent one of the poorest groups of the community, as they frequently benefit from the remittances sent by their husbands. The money received is often used for employing labour and thus their agriculture does not suffer from the lack of labour. Female-headed households, following the death of a husband, are in a much more difficult situation as there is no cash to replace the shortfall of workers.
An increase in the number of female-headed households might occur if women do not become infected or are infected after their partners, and without the benefit of remittances to support their production, only the wealthiest may continue to hire labour and thus for most their output will suffer. The position of women after the death of a spouse is, however, much more favourable amongst women in patrilineal systems, like the Luguru in Tanzania. Although the husband's land will be returned to the clan, the widow will still have access to the land she has inherited from her own clan. In other areas widows may become landless and forced to seek off-farm employment, but in Mgeta they are likely to be able to maintain their agricultural incomes.
The general lack of remittances, however, and the fact that many of those being affected by AIDS are employed locally, means that most of the cost of AIDS will have to be borne internally. Men will experience this cost, because they and their wives will receive the children from brothers and sisters. The brunt of the burden, however, will fall on women, because of the fact that death, like divorce, leads to the social relocation of children to matrilineal kin, which often means in practice to the care of the grandmother. Thus it happens that a number of children end up in households headed by middle-aged or older women.
Inheritance practices may have a negative effect on production and increase the vulnerability of women and children. Especially in Zambia, (but also in Uganda) property grabbing after the death of the husband is a wide-spread practice. According to customary law, in patrilineal systems, all property acquired during marriage belongs to the husband, and after his death, to the husband's family. Relatives arrive soon after the death to claim all the household's possessions which may even include cooking utensils. Despite enactment of the Inheritance And Succession Act of 1989, which was designed to prevent precisely this situation, but seldom respected, this remains a serious problem in Zambia (Foster, 1993). In Uganda, women do not have any official ownership of the land. Once widowed. they may even lose the right to use the land.
At the national level, costs resulting from HIV/AIDS include additional provision for health care directly associated with HIV/AIDS, diversion of resources from other areas of health care, and money for health-education programmes. These expenses involve not only treatment programmes but awareness-building and information campaigns. While much of this work is being undertaken by non-governmental organizations (NGOs), the effective dissemination of information requires the support of governments. Additional costs to governments may also arise from the loss of skilled labour in certain areas, to be replaced by replaced international employees, or from the import of foodstuffs or other items which may be needed to supplement the loss of production etc.
Despite wide-spread impoverishment as a result of HIV/AIDS there may also be some who benefit from the epidemic. While a large number of farmers are forced to sell farm assets like animals and implements to raise money, there are some others who have actually benefitted with the result that they can afford to acquire assets. Box 2 is an example of one such case.
Box 2: Case study 2 (Gwanda community, Uganda)
Benefitting from AIDS?
Peter, 47 is married to a strong looking wife aged 30 and has eight children between the ages of one and, 11 years. His family has so far neither been AIDS affected nor afflicted. Peter can be described as a so-called progressive farmer; he is convinced of the utility of mulching and composting practices end is open to new practices such as growing tomatoes as a cash crop.
Five years ago, this household relied totally on family labour, and owned no cattle. Today, the same household is able occasionally to hire labour, owns 20 head of cattle, a boat with a motor and a television. Peter said that this rise in wealth was possible due to hard work on his farm and to his beer brewing, which he described as a profitable business. But it also seems that his family benefitted by buying cattle from AIDS-afflicted households!, which were short of cash to pay medical bills. His boat was bought from a family who could no longer afford to keep this asset because the husband, a fisherman, had died of AIDS and, the remaining family members did not know how to manage the fishing business.
3.2 The impact on population
In the three countries studied where the HIV/AIDS epidemic has struck, or where its effects are beginning to be perceived, the disease has been both age and gender selective. In Uganda, for example, young adults above 12 and below 40 years of age have been shown to be most at risk, accounting for 91.8 percent of all HIV/AIDS cases. Of the remaining eight percent, children below the age of five account for three-quarters of the total. Men and women are also exposed to different degrees of risk at different ages. Of the 2 089 reported cases of youths aged between 13 and 19 years (June 1993), 1 736 were young women. Recent population-based studies in Uganda have shown women to have a much higher rate of HIV infection than men, sex ratios ranging from 1:1.12 to 1:1.18.
These findings are significant in the context of the present study given that the majority of Uganda's agricultural producers fall within the age group that has been shown to be most at risk of HIV/AIDS infection. This is particularly significant when considered in the light of the labour intensive nature of agriculture. Similarly, it has important implications in terms of the interconnection between domestic and farm production in rural households and the important role of women in agriculture.
In Uganda's Gwanda community, it is suspected that HIV/AIDS had a marked impact on the age pyramid shown in Figure 6. The 20 to 49 year age group is particularly under-represented as well as the very young, children between the ages of 0 and 4, in comparison to the national age pyramid.
Figure 6: Age pyramid of Gwanda
In Tanzania, of the total of 20 694 cases recorded between 1983 and 1993, the cumulative rate per 100 000 is 89.9 for men and 82.4 for women. The highest case rates per 1 000 are seen in the 30 to 39year age group for men and in the 25 to 29-year age group for women.
The situation is less clear in Zambia, since the recorded incidence of HIV/AIDS has so far been largely an urban phenomenon, with 45 percent of recorded cases within the urban areas of the country's Copperbelt. However, the pathways of the spread of infection from the main urban centres are the major transport routes. The carriers are those that use the routes regularly, traders, truck drivers, and business people. Where they interact with people from rural areas, HIV/AIDS infection will spread into the rural areas.
3.3 The impact on labour
As noted above, the effect of HIV/AIDS on the population has been to hit not only women as primary agricultural producers but also the most productive age groups generally. In terms of availability of labour this has significant implications. Population growth was long perceived as the problem in Africa. HIV/AIDS is now resulting in labour shortages for both farm and domestic work in some areas. This phenomenon is likely to become more widespread in the coming decades.
In Uganda, one of the findings has been that the negative impact of HIV/AIDS on agricultural labour is more a result of death than it is of sickness. This is due to the fact that the period between illness and death in this environment is short, reducing the amount of time required in nursing AIDS patients. Even so, in farming systems that are essentially labour dependent, the complete loss (if a person falls sick or dies) or partial loss (if time has to be diverted from farming to the care of the sick) of any household member who is involved in agricultural work, can have a severe effect on that household's agricultural production and finally on its level of consumption and general well-being.
Different factors determine the sensitivity of agriculture to labour loss resulting from AIDS (Gillespie, 1988) these are:
- Seasonality of labour demand
Seasonal labour constraints are not new, due in part to the fact that: farm incomes are low and adults often spend part of the year away from the farm in search of cash incomes; in some regions distribution means that labour has to be mobilised intensively for brief periods only; and daily life requires substantial amounts of labour for non-farm work associated with maintaining the household. Water and fuel collection may occupy as much as eight hours a day - tasks usually carried out by girls and women.
Figure 7: Activity Calendar (Women) Zambia study rainfall
Agricultural labour requirements seem to be more equally distributed over the year in the Ugandan study areas than in the communities examined in Zambia. This can be attributed to the fact that large parts of Uganda are characterized by a bimodal rainfall pattern and a wide range of crops are cultivated, while there is only one rainy season in Zambia and the predominant farming system is maize-based. Figure 7 shows labour distribution for women in Zambia with two marked labour peaks in the year.
- Degree of specialization by gender and age
While farming may be done by women or men or jointly, it is generally recognized that in large parts of Africa women carry the bulk of the farm workload in addition to the domestic activities. A study in the banana-coffee farming system in the Kagera Region, Tanzania, revealed that the asymmetric division of labour between the sexes lead to allocative inefficiency such that farms produce at less than full capacity, and this is without the existence of AIDS (Tibajuka, 1994). In cases of the death of a spouse, the impact is likely to be greater the more differentiated the gender roles are in any particular society. Traditions and a lack of agricultural knowledge generally hinder spouses from easily taking-over their partner's share of the work. Thus it is not only the person who dies, but the knowledge and skills of that individual which die with them. This situation is aggravated where women are concerned. With the death of their husbands, they are likely to lose access to
the extension service, to credit, marketing facilities, etc.
In Uganda, some women, having lost their partners, who previously handled marketing, have completely abandoned commercial farming. The widows now only plant enough for their subsistence and have grown very poor as a result. In these and other households, time accorded to nursing the sick, frequent funerals and the mandatory one-week mourning period, second burial ceremonies, deaths of progressive farmers and general demoralization, have all contributed negatively to agricultural production.
- Economic return to labour
In Gwanda community in Uganda, many households appear to be experiencing labour shortages. On the one hand, the high incidence of AIDS-related sickness and death, has caused a labour deficit. On the other hand, there are also some features of the local labour market which contribute to this shortage. In a remote village like Gwanda, agriculture itself has been extremely limited due to the lack of marketing facilities. Rural youths in particular have not found such work attractive, in addition to their perhaps natural wish to explore a wider world away from the constraints and obligations of the village. Even though it is the case that most agricultural work is done by women, it is also true that there are important tasks carried out by men, in particular the clearing and initial cultivation of land. Both men and women farmers complained about, the lack of marketing facilities, low prices for agricultural products and the deteriorating terms of trade for their produce in
comparison to products like soap, salt and paraffin.
Moreover, while the farming system changes in response to labour constraints induced by HIV/AIDS, other sectors of the local economy which require workers are nevertheless able to command some of whatever labour is available. In a fishing village near to Gwanda, in spite of numerous deaths due to HIV/AIDS, there are still plenty of fishermen. Those who die from the disease it seems are quickly replaced by others. Many youth from Gwanda and other inland villages apparently find it very hard to acquire employment in the fishing village because although, only a few kilometres away from Gwanda, there is a surplus of labour.
Thus the attraction of the fishing villages, and probably other regional towns and even the capital, Kampala, all act as competitors in the labour market for young male workers, and thus may take labour away from agriculture in the area. These constraints are then further exacerbated by the high level of deaths in an already labour-depleted farming village.
Economic returns to labour are closely linked with the level of intensification in terms of improved seeds, input of fertilizer and pesticides and the level of mechanisation. In all three countries studied, cultivation is mostly done using a hand-hoe, although in Tanzania and Zambia animal traction, and to a lesser extent tractors, are used by wealthier farmers.
- Cultural factors
One of the most significant traditions, which has an impact on labour in times of high mortality is attendance at funerals and the mourning time. Box 3 describes the tradition of mourning in Rukwa region, Tanzania.
Box 3: The tradition of mourning in a Tanzanian village
Following a death in the community of Rukwa in Tanzania, the following customs are observed:
Relatives and neighbours gather to prepare for the burial bringing with them food and livestock to assist the bereaved in feeding those who gather for the burial ceremony. Gifts of money are also made.
On the day of burial, all farm activities are suspended by the entire community. (This may involve more than one village. For example, when the research team was travelling to Lula village, it encountered many people travelling in the opposite direction to Kaengesa village where a person: had died, All of them were carrying something; one for example had a goat).
If an adult dies, mourning takes three days; if it is a child, the rite lasts for two days.
During this period, all relatives do not work while neighbours collect at the house in the evenings to comfort the bereaved family amidst eating and drinking. If the person who died had been wealthy or prominent, neighbours may remain longer still. Cattle, goats and chicken are slaughtered and the local homemade brew is drunk.
When those who were unable to attend the burial ceremony eventually come to console the bereaved family, (even if a month later), the ceremony takes on a new impetus with renewed crying, wailing and more eating and drinking.
When a man dies, his wife is inherited by one of his relatives, usually one of his brothers. The inheritor takes charge of all affairs of the deceased relation e.g. property and children.
When the loss of labour hours as a result of mourning activities is added up and multiplied by the number of burials, the economic impact can be considerable. In other areas of Tanzania traditional mourning rites are even longer. For example, in Mbeya, the period of mourning can last as long as one month. Because of the impact of this custom on the rural economy and in order to prevent the spread of HIV/AIDS during these occasions, the Kyela District Council in Mbeya region has attempted to restrict the mourning period to four days. Similar efforts to restrict funeral rites have also been observed in Uganda and are likely to be an important component of local coping mechanisms more generally.
Before the impact of HIV/AIDS on particular aspects of farming activity is described, the following example will serve to show how the farming system in a particular community changed over time without the presence of HIV/AIDS. This brief examination of developments in Nakyerira village, Uganda, illustrates not only how the labour market has changed but how this factor has impacted on the overall farming system.
For the past ten years, there have been marked changes in the types and volume of crops cultivated. Previously, the range of crops commonly included sweet potatoes, bananas, cassava, yams, peas, beans, egg plants, groundnuts, maize, sorghum and a wide variety of green leafy vegetables and fruit. All these crops, especially the vegetables, were grown for home consumption. At times however bananas, beans, groundnuts and maize were sold.
The people of Nakyerira used to employ a large number of migrant labourers from south-western Uganda, Rwanda and other parts of the country. Nakyerira farmers who could not afford to enter into exclusive contracts with migrants depended on casual labour employed elsewhere, particularly on the "Indian" tea plantations about six miles away. These casual labourers were often paid in food.
The introduction of cash crops in the other areas of Uganda and the later decline in tea production, after the 1972 expulsion of Ugandans of Asian origin, led to a drastic decline in labour supply for Nakyerira and the surrounding communities. At the same time the decline of coffee in the mid-1970s meant that many farmers could no longer afford to employ workers. Thus the youth started to migrate from the area to Kampala and Mityana town in search of employment. An agricultural system that had been a net importer of labour thus became a net exporter.
The effects on the farming system were quickly evident. Control of banana pests and diseases became difficult without the farm labourers to do the work. Farmers began to develop labour economising strategies in response to these conditions. Banana and coffee, each for different reasons, is labour demanding and became progressively less cultivated as a result. Coffee trees were cut down and replaced with drought resistant cassava that did not require either labour for mulching or hand weeding. Hardy beer bananas that neither required much labour for weeding, nor labour for cutting grass for mulching or pruning, together with sorghum, replaced banana and coffee as the new cash crops. The available labour was shifted to groundnut and bean growing as well as the production of maize and Irish potatoes. While some of these were labour demanding, the return was apparently superior and offered more food security than retaining weevil-infested banana groves. Where these crops could
not be grown, farmers started acquiring and rearing cattle.
As a result, the inadequate labour supply largely accounted for a decline in crop range and volume. Along with loss of soil fertility, high incidence of pests and diseases (see below), prolonged droughts, the main contributory factors were high labour costs resulting from demand exceeding the locally-available supply, and the frequent deaths of farmers and their children. In addition, local people made reference to other recent changes in the labour market. Two main trends were identified. Firstly, former migrant labourers no longer come to the area but instead remained in their home areas producing cash crops in those areas - for example coffee in Ankole and tobacco in Kigezi. Secondly, former migrant labourers who had settled in Mubende and having acquired land and property, have become wealthier and compete in the local labour market as employers. The end result of this labour shortage has been a reduction in the quality and quantity of crops produced.
These events in Nakyerira's recent history indicate that over the last thirty years the population has been adapting its farming system to labour deficits. It could thus be argued that they may be in a good position to cope with the future effects of the epidemic. However, it may also be the case that with poor soils and less dependable rainfall, the community could now be confronted by a dramatic decline in labour availability with results that prove even more destructive of food security on the rural standard of living than are being witnessed in Gwanda, for example.
3.4 The impact on crop production
3.4.1 Reasons for decreasing land use
3.4.2 Decline in crop yields
3.4.3 Changes in cropping patterns: a strategy for survival
3.4.4 The advantages of crop diversification
The direct impact of HIV/AIDS on crop production was observed in terms of a reduction in land area cultivated, a decline in crop yields, and a decline in the range of crops grown. However, the extent of the impact and the relevance of contributing factors differed from country to country and from one farming system to another.
3.4.1 Reasons for decreasing land use
In the first instance, the reduction in land use is attributable to a number of factors which have occurred as a direct result of the HIV/AIDS epidemic or indirectly with the effect of exacerbating existing constraints. These include: sickness and death in households leading to fewer family members being available to work in the fields and thus in the amount of land that it is possible to cultivate; the limitations of land inheritance and land tenure systems, especially as they may affect widowed and orphaned households; poverty, resulting in malnutrition, which in turn affects the health of family members and their ability to perform agricultural work, and which leads to reduced cash incomes needed to purchase inputs such as seed and fertilizer; the selling of land to meet the cost of medical and funeral expenses; and the loss of soil fertility on farms with limited land areas.
A land utilization survey carried out in Masaka and Rakai Districts in Uganda in 1991 found that 23 percent of all farms reported a reduction in land use in the preceding four years (Hunter, 1993). Death and sickness as well as old age and poverty were the leading causes for this decline in land use apart from land given to older children.
The effect of HIV/AIDS in reducing the number of household members available to cultivate crops and large areas of land, has led to substantial reductions in land use in many of the communities studied, especially in Gwanda which has been extremely hard-hit by the epidemic.
In one case, a Ugandan family in Nakyerira community, in which three sons have already died of AIDS, reported that the proportion of land now under cultivation or for livestock grazing had declined from 95 percent in 1991 to 60 percent of the total by July 1993. Furthermore, the expansion of the land which the family had started to realize through the purchase of neighbouring plots, had to be stopped in 1991 due to the sickness of two family members. Some of the land that they had hoped to buy in the neighbourhood of their existing plots had instead been bought by other people. The area which had been planted with coffee, cassava and bananas was abandoned and allowed to revert to bush early in 1992. Even the banana plantation, healthy by local standards (due to the use of cow dung as manure) was overgrown with weeds and contained weevils. Where once the family had planted beans, maize and cassava on 1.5 hectares of land, because of the time needed by family members to nurse
the AIDS sick, and due to a lack of money to hire farm workers for ploughing, substantial areas previously devoted to these crops now lay derelict.
A common farming system among the communities studied, particularly in Uganda and Tanzania, is the coffee-banana system. In the zone which forms an arc around the western shore of Lake Victoria and stretches into the north-western part of Tanzania around Kagera, for example, the majority of households cultivate Robusta coffee and savoury bananas matooke as their main crops in combination with a wide range of other annual and perennial crops.
This farming system predominates in Gwanda. Where formerly, larger land areas were planted to banana and coffee, such farms are being abandoned (many having reverted to bush) due to the lack of household labour or money to pay for temporary help to weed, mulch and control against weevil infestations. At the same time, it was observed that many households now consist of orphaned children and their grandparents or other senior relatives, with few young adult family members who would otherwise have done much of the cultivation of crops.
Farming systems which are particularly vulnerable to the impact of HIV/AIDS are likely to be those which are labour intensive in nature.
An example is the village of Mgeta in Tanzania. At the time of the study no AIDS cases had been recorded, but it is easy to see how, given the labour-intensive nature of the farming system, an overall reduction in the area of land prepared for cultivation might be expected, as a consequence of labour shortage due to sickness and death. Some households are already unable to cultivate all of their fields because land preparation is such a time-consuming activity. These are usually the poorest families who need cash incomes and so work on neighbouring fields at the expense of their own, rather than because they have insufficient labour or a large area of land.
A further expectation would be of a simultaneous increase in the land area given over to fallow crops, which require neither weeding nor irrigation. These crops include cassava, pigeon pea and sweet potato. However, households go to great lengths to ensure a rainy season crop of maize and beans so the planting of fallow crops would be likely to increase only during the dry season at the expense of the more labour-intensive cash crop production.
The nature of land tenure and inheritance
In some communities, where land tenure and inheritance traditions favour male inheritance, for example, the effect of the HIV/AIDS epidemic may be especially severe. As increasing numbers of women are left widowed, becoming de facto heads of households, with their rights to land already constrained by the traditional inheritance customs, their access to land is automatically constrained.
In Gwanda and other parts of southern Uganda, land tenure is based on the colonial reform implemented early this century. This is known as the mailo system. The reform, which was important in the colonial political settlement, ensured that the nobility were given superior land rights and the majority of the population became their tenants, whereas previously they might have been described as "serfs" within a "feudal" structure. This system has subsequently become confused in a number of ways, and today there is considerable uncertainty about land tenure.
In practice, both cultivation rights (in the case of the tenants) and land title (in the case of title-holders) are inherited through the male line and women do not inherit these rights except in certain circumstances where they hold rights of trusteeship for a limited period, for example until a male heir attains his majority. In cases where a woman holds such a trusteeship, her husband's patrilineage is likely to bring considerable pressure upon her to relinquish it. This has special implications in the case of HIV/AIDS-affected households where the woman is the survivor.
In cases where people enter into sharecropping arrangements, they may be given land which is heavily infested with perennial weeds requiring considerable manual work before planting is possible. In order that such seasonal cultivation rights do not become transformed into longer-term claims, these loans are for limited periods of around two years. The study noted that land surplus households are reluctant to lend their land because they fear losing their "ownership" rights.
The uncertainties concerning land tenure have given rise to a paradoxical situation where for some, usually poorer, households, there is an effective land shortage which may require that they enter into sharecropping arrangements with households having a surplus, while elsewhere in the community large areas of land remain uncultivated.
In Nakyerira, while local people report that they experience land shortage, in the majority of households there is insufficient labour to ensure optimum utilization. The result is that in most cases farmers have abandoned about one-third of their land to bush due to the lack of farm workers to manage the fields.
The practice of dividing land between children of both sexes (it is not uncommon for fathers to give land to daughters) when they come of age and start their own households or, at the death of the father, is prevalent. In polygamous households, different wives are given usage rights to their own individual plots. These plots will eventually pass on to the male children. As in Gwanda, this practice has the effect of reducing holding size to uneconomic proportions.
<section>5</section>
3.4.2 Decline in crop yields
A major development observed in most small farms covered in the field work has been that of a decline in the crop yield per area, especially in the last five years. The factors identified as responsible for this decline include:
- a decline in soil fertility;
- an increase in pests and plant diseases;
- changes and delays in cropping practices; and
- a decline in external production inputs.
These factors are in part attributable to the effects of HIV/AIDS morbidity and mortality on the availability of labour which has meant that certain necessary tasks like weeding, mulching, pruning, particularly, as noted above, and the clearing of land, generally, have either been inadequately carried out, or completely neglected.
Declines in yields result in a relative reduction in spending power by households which might otherwise have used cash from the sale of produce to buy basic items like soap and paraffin and to hire occasional labour, or to purchase inputs such as seed and fertilizer as well as agricultural implements.
Decline in soil fertility
There are initial signs that an indirect effect of the HIV/AIDS epidemic is to reduce soil fertility. This appears to be due, in part, to a reluctance by farmers to carry out long-term soil conservation measures. This may well be because such measures do not yield an immediate result and are also labour demanding.
Box 4: Case study 3 (Gwanda community, Uganda)
The story of Martin
The story of Martin is the history of a household which has witnessed a dramatic change of circumstances, in a large part attributable to the devastating impact of HIV/AIDS on the family. Martin was an able farmer and a former fisherman. On one acre of land he used to grow bananas, coffee, groundnuts, beans, sweet potatoes, cassava, mangoes, a variety of other vegetables, and a little maize. Most of the time he produced enough food to feed his family of ten and to earn a small amount of cash. The entire half hectare of land was cultivated, with all the family members taking part in the planting and weeding. Thus Martin was able to prepare his land early enough - planting in good time to take advantage of the rains and thereby achieving high yields. He also raised chickens, giving his family ample protein throughout the year.
Some time ago, Martin's wife left the house, but, according to him despite his unhappiness at her departure, at least his farm work did not suffer. However, since then, three of his nine children have died of AIDS and one of his sons was murdered. The shock of these deaths has left him almost mute. Three of his remaining children are also living away from home and it seems they rarely visit their now 70-year old father. These days two-thirds of Martin's land is under bush. The coffee trees, which used to yield about three sacks of coffee each year, have disappeared. Martin doesn't have anyone to tend the groundnuts because they require a lot of work and now there are no garden vegetables either. The banana plantation occupies less than 0.6 hectare and is weedy and dying, being heavily infested with weevils. Last season Martin said they could not plant maize because he could not afford the seed. Although he still produces some cassava and sweet potatoes, there is often not
enough of these basic foods to feed his family. Now, if they are lucky, they may be able to eat meat at Christmas, and once a month Martin's eighteen-year old grandson buys a little fish.
In Rakai district in Uganda, for example, the banana plantations used to be either mulched by residues of the plantation where the nutrients of the same plot are recycled, or with grass cut and carried from the open fields, the latter practice requiring considerable labour which was previously hired. This alternative practice is reportedly decreasing due to the expense of hiring farm workers. The farmers themselves frequently do not have the time and energy to carry out these tasks. They may also lack access to the financial resources to purchase fertilizer.
Conversely, soil regeneration may be aided by the fact that a large number of plots are no longer cultivated due to the numerous deaths and sickness within families in the district of Rakai, and the land is thus left fallow by necessity.
In Nakyerira, one farmer, who was considered to have been progressive and successful, reported that he was now poor partly due to a decline in soil fertility. He said that he used to have a good banana plantation, well mulched, weeded and pruned. He had used both organic and non-organic fertilizers. However, with the loss of two daughters as a result of AIDS, and the departure of other children from the home, he could not now afford to hire farm workers. At the same time, his land had suffered the effects of drought and fire. He now complains of poor crop yields due to infertile soils, the presence of banana weevils and the lack of help to do the weeding and mulching. Now, he says he grows mainly cassava, maize and sweet potatoes purely for household consumption.
Box 5: Case study 4 (Gwanda community, Uganda)
How AIDS sickness and death have resulted in a reduction in the land area and a change in the cropping practices of one family
Robert is a 38-year old primary school teacher. He has inherited two hectares of land from his father on which he owns a small mud and wattle house. Four years ago his wife died as a result of a mysterious disease leaving Robert with four young children, two of whom now live in a village 30 miles away with their grandmother. He has remarried and it is the new wife who now does both the housework and the farm work. Only one of the two hectares is cultivated with bananas, groundnuts, cassava, sweet potatoes, beans, cabbage and many other crops.
At present Robert's wife can only grow sufficient produce to feed her family since they do not have enough cash income to buy food. Since the land was only acquired in 1992, the entire area has been overrun with couch grass, Robert's wife has not had the time to do the arduous task of clearing the remaining 1.5 hectares of land, Because of the burden of having so many household and farming tasks, including caring for her father and two sisters who are dying of AIDS, Robert's wife has only been able to plant maize very late in the season. The delay in planting, she believes is the reason that her maize plants are stunted and affected by a virus. It seems that the maize crop will yield almost nothing, and in the meantime she has not had time to prepare the land in order to plant groundnuts.
In order to ensure that she has enough basic food crops for her family, Robert's wife decided to plant early-maturing varieties of cassava, sweet potatoes and bananas which were also supposed to produce good yields. Initially she had problems with banana weevils until the NGO, World Vision, advised her and her husband to control the weevils using cultural methods; this method controls the pest to levels where it does not cause much economic loss, although the weevils have not been eradicated completely.
Increase in pests and plant diseases
A common feature of the farming systems studied, particularly those where there has been a high incidence of AIDS cases, has been an increase in pests and plant diseases. A common pest, which was present or reported in a large number of farms is the banana weevil. Banana weevils used to be controlled either by traditional means, which are labour-intensive, or with the use of chemicals. A shortage of labourers hinders farmers from controlling weevils using traditional methods nor do they necessarily have the financial resources to purchase chemicals.
In the village of Gwanda in Uganda, a cause of decreased production in the coffee shambas has been an increase in insect infestations, particularly of large black stinging ants which are believed to be symptomatic of poor cultural practices. These insects now discourage farmers from working on the starchy crops which they have been trying to cultivate on their run-down coffee shambas. This situation is now described as critical, the plots in many cases, having reverted so far that it is no longer economic for all but the wealthiest or most labour-endowed households, either to recover their old coffee trees or open new areas for coffee production.
At the same time, it was also reported that coffee has generally become a less attractive crop for farmers in the last twenty years. Until the early 1970s, Gwanda was a major coffee growing area. Much of this coffee was grown on land which has now reverted to forest. A decline in world coffee prices, corrupt marketing practices and civil strife, have lessened interest in producing the commodity.
In Gwanda, weevil infestations have contributed to declining banana yields. Although it has been observed that this might have happened anyway, the absence of effective and cheap chemical control methods together with a lack of labour have meant that this problem has now become critical.
In the same village, there also appears to be an increase in the plant diseases, fusarium wilt and sikatoga. The greater incidence of these diseases may also be associated with changes in cultural practices due to a lack of farm labour. Apart from pests and diseases, couch grass, a notorious weed, poses an increasing hindrance to farmers. It is extremely demanding to dig out couch grass manually, because the roots grow very deep. Herbicides, which would be another way of fighting the plant, are too expensive.
Decline in the variety of crops
In a comparison between a study conducted in 1989 and the present fieldwork in Gwanda, marked changes were observed in cropping patterns. There was a general shift away from crops that are labour demanding, like bananas and coffee, to those that are the least labour intensive most frequently cassava and sweet potatoes.
In Nakyerira, farmers claimed that since 1980 there had been many changes in the type and volume of crops grown. Irish potatoes had recently been introduced and cassava and sweet potatoes were now being grown on a larger scale than in the past. The increased cultivation of sweet potatoes and cassava was attributed to the fact that they are easy to plant and maintain, they require less attention than other crops and are also drought resistant. Generally farmers remarked that at present, a narrower range of crops is grown, the emphasis being on sweet potatoes' cassava, beans and maize. Other crops such as sesame and vegetables are either produced in smaller quantities or have been completely abandoned.
An example of a similar trend in Zambia can be taken from the village of Teta, a community which is only just beginning to feel the effects of HIV/AIDS. In the case of one family, where both the husband and wife were ill, the couple reported that they were, as a result of their declining health, reliant both on owning or hiring oxen for planting anything but the smallest area, and that they needed to hire occasional help to weed their lands. Such labour, they noted, was expensive and they could not always afford the cost. Consequently, while the couple had recently been able to hire oxen in order to harvest their maize crop, they were not able could not afford - to grow a significant area of any other produce except for some sweet potatoes cultivated using hired workers. As a result of illness and the family's reliance on hiring oxen and part-time labourers which they could little afford, overall farm production has suffered dramatically leaving the couple with little cash
and lower yields of fewer crops.
3.4.3 Changes in cropping patterns: a strategy for survival
In order to adapt to changing, social, economic and environmental factors like disease, drought, and erosion, farmers have responded, in many cases, by changing their cropping patterns. This may be interpreted as a coping mechanism. A recurring pattern in a number of the villages visited during the study was a reduction in the cultivation of cash crops like Irish potatoes and coffee in order to concentrate all available labour on the production of the main subsistence crops like sweet potatoes and cassava. With respect to specific crops the following observations have been made.
In Gwanda, the response to declining banana cultivation has been an increased emphasis on producing the two secondary starch sources, cassava and sweet potatoes, and to a lesser degree on yams and sorghum (the latter being used for beer brewing and thus providing a source of cash income for some households). These crops, apart from being less labour demanding, are more easily stored than bananas; neither is particularly prone to disease infestation at present. However, there are indications of an increasing incidence of cassava mosaic when new cultivars have been introduced by farmers in an effort to arrive at a suitable combination of storage potential, early and late varieties, and palatability of this new staple. What appears to be occurring in Gwanda is a transition from a banana-based farming system to a cassava-based system. This may be considered a period of experimentation and forms part of the epidemic-impact coping process.
Bananas. In both Nakyerira and Gwanda, bananas have been grown for a long time. Traditionally, their production benefitted from better climatic conditions and more available manpower to tend the banana trees. Under careful management, these savoury green bananas, matooke were the staple food of the communities. However, in Nakyerira, adverse climatic conditions (especially the droughts in 1988 and 1991), poor soils, requiring intensive labour for tillage, mulching and pruning, the addition of manure or fertilizers and for the control of weevils, reduced the supply of household labour (due to migration and death), of casual labourers and the increased incidence of crop pests, especially banana weevils, have all contributed to declining banana yields.
Box 6: Case study 5 (Gwanda community, Uganda)
This story illustrates how the break up of a household due to AIDS related sickness and death changed the structure of the household's crop and livestock production
Formerly a family with ten children, the husband and wife owned half a hectare of land on which a new house had been built. The husband, the first to die of AIDS in 1991, had been a successful small trader at a nearby fishing village. Originally the family owned five cows, a banana plantation and had borrowed some additional land. The wife, before contracting AIDS herself in 1992, had made and sold handicrafts to pay her children's school fees and had even gone so far as to operate a craft shop out of her living room.
With the deaths of first the husband and then his wife, the banana plantation went progressively to weed. On the borrowed land some cassava, sweet potatoes and groundnuts were planted. However, during the wife's sickness both the banana plantation which had been briefly intercropped with beans, and the borrowed land went to bush. All five of the family's cows died from a cattle disease because the children did not have the money to pay for veterinary drugs.
Late in 1992 the brother began to reclaim the overgrown plantation. He also started to raise pigs and chickens on the plot. While some of the original land is still being used productively, the family is completely dislocated and all the children depend on the goodwill of relatives some of whom are elderly and themselves suffering from illnesses. Now only two of the ten children live in their original home, the others have gone to stay with relatives.
In the 1960s, two hardy species of beer banana were introduced and widely adopted. These varieties require minimal labour for weeding and pruning. The bananas are very leafy and the fact that they are not pruned lessens the need for mulching. Beer bananas have consequently taken over from matooke and coffee, as the major cash crop.
Other forms of coping mechanisms adopted by farmers after the failure of bananas have included:
- Increasing the cultivation of cassava, maize and sweet potatoes to replace matooke as staple foods because they are better suited to the area especially if planted in time and properly managed; and
- The substitution of banana cultivation with livestock production.
In Gwanda, it was reported that historically, matooke was cultivated by all households together with a fall-back crop of cassava and/or sweet potatoes. Today, both the area cultivated and quality of the matooke produced have declined. The proper cultivation of the savoury banana requires adequate mulching. The mulch consists of surplus banana leaves and, in some cases, additional green matter gathered from swamps. Lower levels of care have meant that there is less leaf matter available from the bananas themselves. In addition, declining household incomes, resulting in part in reduced income opportunities and thus out-migration by the migrant labour population, have meant that this swamp mulch is no longer used.
The ficus tree was also a source of crop mulch as well as improving soil fertility. Ficus trees were planted in the banana groves for this purpose as well as being a source of bark for the traditional craft of bark-cloth making. As the tree takes four years to mature, people consider it a long-term investment which they could not expect to realise in view of their perceived lower life expectancy. Adequate de-suckering and pruning of the bananas is said to be less widely practiced for the same reason and also because these are labour demanding tasks.
Coffee. Prior to 1970 Nakyerira was an important coffee growing area. From 1960 to 1980 many people were able to improve their standard of living markedly through profits made from growing coffee. Some farmers believed it worthwhile to mulch carefully and to use fertilizers. At the same time, many such farmers earned enough and thought it worthwhile to employ labour to tend their coffee plantations. In some cases they also purchased land to increase the volume of production. Today, coffee has almost disappeared from the area, many farmers having given it up completely. The reasons for this are:
- frequent droughts;
- the poor marketing system and late payment;
- HIV/AIDS-related deaths; and
- competition for land between cash and food crops among farmers who have holdings of two acres or less.
In Gwanda increased intercropping of cassava, sweet potatoes and yams, along with some beans, in coffee plantations reflects a combination of the effects of land shortage on some households as well as labour shortages, low prices and poor marketing arrangements.
Maize. White maize is one of the staple crops which has replaced matooke in Nakyerira. Today, each household ensures it has a plot of maize, often inter-cropped with cassava and beans or groundnuts. Households which produce a surplus or are short of money also sell some of the maize they produce. A review of the case histories in the area indicates a decline in maize production over the last decade. Several factors account for this decline:
- inadequate labour supply resulting in poor and often delayed land preparation, late planting and weeding. In the more severely affected households, secondary tillage operations and weeding are simply abandoned;
- crop pests and diseases, especially the maize stalk borer and maize streak virus;
- the lack of extension service advice;
- the lack of capital inputs; and
- unreliable climatic conditions.
Cassava and sweet potatoes. These two crops are important in the agricultural production system. Together with maize, they are now two of the main food crops which have compensated for the decline in matooke. Almost all families in Nakyerira have their largest cultivated area under cassava (usually inter-cropped with maize and groundnuts or beans) followed by sweet potatoes. Under conditions of labour depletion associated with HIV/AIDS, even cassava and sweet potato production may now be abandoned by some households.
Relish crops. A popular relish for people in both Gwanda and Nakyerira is a sauce made of either beans or groundnuts. But there is now insufficient labour available for many households to be able to cultivate plots devoted to these crops. In Gwanda, beans are now more usually inter-cropped among bananas, and are eaten fresh rather than dried - another indication of a decline in food security in this community - average household production having declined to a level where there is insufficient surplus to store and certainly not enough to sell, both of which had been common practices in the past. There has been a similar decline in the cultivation of groundnuts. In the case of both crops, deaths of women together with epidemic-related pressures on women's time have contributed to the declining importance of what were traditionally women's crops.
Many farmers produce between two and ten sacks of unshelled groundnuts and about one sack of beans annually. These require considerable time and labour to shell and this is not readily available. Consequently such producers now receive lower prices for their produce from middlemen who can reap the value-added through their ability to employ processing labour.
Both crops are also vulnerable to disease - groundnuts to rosette and beans to occasional attack by blight. They are also sensitive to the timeliness of planting. Thus HIV/AIDS-associated morbidity and mortality affects production with fewer labourers available to carry out seed-bed preparation, timely planting, weeding and harvesting.
Irish potatoes. Although traditionally grown as a secondary crop and often inter-cropped within the banana plantations, Irish potatoes are now a major cash and food crop. As a quick maturing food crop, the potatoes often protect households against food shortages. Timely planting, proper seed-bed preparation and the selection of varieties that are drought and disease resistant are key considerations towards ensuring a good harvest. In some cases the crop has already suffered from the loss of labour due to HIV/AIDS with whole seasons being foregone due to the lack of labour.
Other produce. Many types of fruit trees and other minor crops were once more popular than they are at present in Nakyerira. On most farms such tree crops as mangoes, pineapples, avocadoes, passion fruit, pears and jackfruit may still be grown but they receive little care from householders since they are not considered part of the normal diet. In recent years these have either been abandoned or largely overlooked and are no longer regarded as everyday crops for cultivation.
Horticultural and root crops, especially vegetables like tomatoes, pumpkin, cabbage and egg plant used to be more widely planted than they are today. Few farmers continue to grow these vegetables owing to pests and plant diseases, especially fungal diseases, which attack tomatoes and cabbages. Fungicides are generally too expensive for poor farmers to afford.
Another reason for the low priority given to these crops may be that there is a lack of understanding by farmers about the importance of fruit and vegetables both as food and cash crops. At the same time, it may be perceived that the growing of these, ostensibly less important crops, entails competition for labour with other subsistence crops like maize, sweet potato and cassava.
3.4.4 The advantages of crop diversification
The example of Teta community in Zambia is also relevant since the diversity of this labour intensive system carries both benefits and trade-offs. In Teta there are four types of production system with most households employing at least three of the four cultivation types. These are:
- upland flat production of maize, millet, possibly sorghum and groundnuts;
- upland mount (or ridge) production of sweet potatoes, beans and cassava;
- citemene production of finger millet and pumpkins; and
- dambo cultivation of maize/beans, cucurbits and Irish potatoes.
The benefits of the Teta farming system derive from the use of residual moisture in dambos to plant food crops in September and the use of composting mounts to plant beans and cassava in March. This system means that the planting season lasts for seven months. This is in marked contrast to the situation in Mpongwe, where the planting period is only two-and-a-half months before the onset of rains (usually November to January).
The advantage of the lengthy planting season lies in the diversity of food crops it is possible to grow and the alternative sources of income so derived which make it possible to supplement income from maize alone. However, one trade-off is that less maize is grown. Maize, which is a main staple may also attract less labour during the weeding months of January and February, since people tend to be busy constructing mounds and planting sweet potatoes. As a result, in 1992-93 yields were slightly lower in Teta than amongst farmers in Mpongwe. Production outputs and sales were significantly lower amongst all types of farmer. But in compensation for the reduced maize and cash outputs, other food and cash crops were able to be substituted as alternative sources of income available to the farmers.
In terms of overall livelihood and food security, the gains of diversification have to be measured against the loss of opportunities to gain a single income from one major activity.
3.5 The impact on livestock production
3.5.1 Changes in livestock raising practices: coping mechanisms
3.5.2 The impact on pastoralists
In some of the communities which were studied, changes in livestock raising practices have occurred in recent years. The direct impact of the HIV/AIDS epidemic has been felt in several ways. Firstly, cattle are frequently sold to pay medical bills and funeral expenses. Secondly, both AIDS-related death and sickness result in decreases in labour availability, as already noted, further resulting in lower levels of livestock husbandry. In Uganda, partially as a result of the latter, there appears to be a parallel trend towards the keeping of smaller stock, most notably pigs and poultry, which are less labour demanding.
At the same time, there is evidence that some households in Nakyerira, which in the past concentrated on crop production, have begun to turn to livestock production as soils become infertile and previously widespread crop management practices have become difficult to follow or are completely abandoned.
In the same village, for example, more than 50 percent of households keep some cattle and about 30 percent breed pigs. About 80 percent of households were reported to be raising poultry. Goats and sheep are also kept by some farmers. In all cases only a very few animals are held, due to the shortage of land and the incidence of animal diseases. Farmers also recognise that in an area of poor soils, animal manure is an important input for crop production and yet they are restricted in the number of animals they can keep.
Cattle. In Nakyerira, cattle used to be predominantly in the hands of settlers who had migrated to work in the coffee and tea plantations. They started by keeping small herds (8 -15 cows per household) in the 1960s. Today, however, the herds are very small, perhaps 2 - 3 cows for each household. This change is attributed by the people to:
- land shortages and a reduction in farm size per farmer (from about 7.5 hectares in 1960 to an average of approximately 1.5 hectares today);
- an increase in the price of cattle arising out of the sudden realization that cow dung is important in restoring soil fertility to the banana plantations, as well as for other cattle products such as milk and ghee;
- expanded markets for meat in the rural and growing urban centres of Mityana and Kampala which have encouraged many farmers to sell off their large herds;
- diseases such as worms, East Coast Fever, Anaplasmosis, water-borne diseases and Nagana due to tse-tse flies;
- it was also observed that grazing was poorly managed. There was no rotational grazing using paddocks which might have improved the pasture and discouraged the build-up of disease and pests. Water supply, especially during periods of prolonged drought is another major problem requiring arduous labour for water carrying, work which is mainly performed by women.
Goats. Goat raising used to be an important activity in Nakyerira with a significant number of farmers keeping as many as 10 goats up to the early 1980s. Today, the herd size among those who still keep these animals has declined to 6-7 goats. Lack of grazing land and insufficient people look after the animals are given as the reasons for the decline.
Pigs. Pig husbandry became popular in the late 1960s. It expanded in the 1970s and 1980s when women began taking up the activity in response to the increased local market associated with local beer selling establishments and at which roasted pork and beer are sold together.
Poultry. In Nakyerira it was estimated that over 80 percent of households kept poultry. As with livestock, the numbers per household have declined in recent years due to diseases such as coccidiosis and chicken worm.
3.5.1 Changes in livestock raising practices: coping mechanisms
In Gwanda, it was observed that poultry numbers have increased in AlDS-afflicted households and especially in households with orphans. Previously, the free-range system of rearing chickens did not allow farmers to keep many birds at a time, because the banana plantations used to be properly mulched and the chicken would scratch the mulch and damage the beans grown in the plantation. This generated serious conflicts where a neighbour's banana plot was involved. Therefore most households owned only 3 - 5 chicken. Nowadays however, the banana plantations are no longer mulched due to labour constraints, and more chickens are able to forage in the plantations. It was noted that orphans, in particular, tended to keep chickens as a relatively easily available income source. The hens and eggs are usually not for home consumption; they are sold to raise some income, since the orphans' guardians are often too poor to buy the clothes and pay the school fees. Sometimes even the eggs are
not sold, but reserved for hatching to produce more chicken.
However, the impact of AIDS has also had a negative side effect on poultry raising. Wild cats are the main predators for poultry. Their numbers are rising because a considerable number of banana plantations and fields have reverted to bush due to the high AIDS mortality in the community.
Pig rearing is another activity which has only been adopted recently in this community. It seemed to be especially attractive as an income-generating activity for widows. Pigs are not very labour demanding and the market price seems to be attractive. Since farmers tend gradually to substitute the production of matooke with cassava and sweet potatoes they soon have enough feed for I - 3 pigs. However, most farmers still lack marketing experience with pigs, pork or piglets.
Farmers, especially young men, also show a keen interest in taking up bee-keeping as a new income-generating activity. Honey, a nontraditional export product of Uganda, presently offers a good price.
One positive impact of the HIV/AIDS epidemic on livestock raising generally, according to the District Veterinary Officer in Rakai District in Uganda, is that farmers are becoming more open to innovations and have expressed an interest in dairy farming and cattle rearing using the "zero-grazing" method.
3.5.2 The impact on pastoralists
In Rakai, the Bahima, who are predominantly pastoralists, have close relationships with the settled farmers and have some traditions, such as the levirate, which are known to increase exposure to HIV/AIDS infection. Even before the HIV/AIDS epidemic, a high rate of tuberculosis was found in this community due to the consumption of unboilt, unboiled milk. This risk is increased insofar as the local Ankole cattle have been reported as very susceptible to bovine tuberculosis.
Among these pastoralists, there has been a tendency for herd sizes to become smaller. One of the reasons given was due to an outbreak of the disease, Contagious Bovine Pleuropneumonia. Another reason is due to HIV/AIDS. As with sedentary cattle keepers, people who fall sick sell their animals to pay for drugs and hospitalization. One example was cited in Rakai, of a farming household which had owned 15 cattle. When the parents fell sick and eventually died, five animals were sold. After the deaths of both parents, the children were forced to sell the remaining cattle, one by one in order to survive.
In Tanzania, due to the fact that the HIV/AIDS epidemic is only gradually being felt, while no specific data were available, it is believed that the situation among pastoralists of the Usangu plains in Mbeya rural district, is highly conducive to the spread of the disease. In the past, the nomadic Maasai were considered to be a closed society. However today, the Maasai mix freely with other ethnic groups as they roam through much of the country in search of pastures indeed, in the course of the research project some were seen in northern Zambia. Because of their relative wealth, as they own large herds of livestock and have been introduced to, and accepted the cash economy, the men frequently visit bars and patronise prostitutes.
The mixed population of the plains provides opportunities for the sharing of ideas and customs. For example, in the Usangu plains, there are five irrigation projects belonging to parastatal organisations. These projects employ a large number of workers, hence enhancing further contacts between the pastoralists and the settled population. The rice projects are close to major truck stops on the Dar Es Salaam - Zambia highway. According to local AIDS coordinators, Chimala is one of these settlements, Chimala has a high incidence of HIV/AIDS.
3.6 The impact on the agricultural extension services
In Rakai District in Uganda, HIV/AIDS is reported to have a marked impact on the local extension service. The District Agricultural Officer for Rakai noted that with regard to staff of the Extension Service, between 20 and 50 percent of all working time is lost due to the disease. Staff members were frequently absent from work attending funerals and caring for sick relatives. At the same time, a number of staff members at all levels had fallen sick and some had died. The problem was compounded by the fact that it is difficult to find trained people to replace former staff, both because the area is remote and also because it has the reputation of being a highly HIV/AIDS-affected area.
The epidemic had also made it more difficult for extension staff to meet the farmers. If a meeting coincides with a funeral, the meeting normally has to be rescheduled. In a community such as Gwanda where there were as many as 10 - 15 deaths a month such meetings with extensionists were thus difficult to organize.
It is also becoming apparent that, in some cases extension messages will have to be revised to take into account the impact of the disease on agricultural systems. For example, the European Union's Farming Systems Support Programme has been considering reviving coffee production and consequently promotes a high yielding, pest resistant and early maturing coffee variety. Despite the early maturity of the new variety (18 months) many young farmers do not appear interested in the crop, seeing it as a long term investment and fearing that they may fall sick or die before they reap any benefit from their investment.
3.7 The impact on the fisheries sector
In several communities where fishing constitutes an important primary or secondary activity, it appears that the sector provides a vital source of off-farm employment, in particular for rural youth. In Ndaiga village in Uganda's southern Iganga District, it was noted that for youth from fishing families, fishing is the main source of livelihood. Some of the fish is consumed or traded locally, through a cash or barter system with farmers, while the major portion is sold to local traders or exported further afield.
In both Gwanda and Ndaiga it was noted that young men preferred to work as fishermen than as farmers. In some cases this meant that young adults working away from their families remitted money back to their homes. In other cases, however, it appears that they actually deprived households of vital farm labour. This may have implications for particularly marginalized communities where incentives may be needed to encourage young adults to take on more term work. possibly through the provision of incentives.
One non-governmental organization (NGO), ActionAid in Mityana district in Uganda is reported to have had some success in persuading the youth in some sub-counties to become farmers. This was achieved partly by introducing them to the advantages of cultivating high-value crops.
3.8 HIV/AIDS and the loss of agricultural knowledge and management skills
3.8.1 The loss of other traditional skills
3.8.2 Loss of skills and the division of labour
Although more difficult to quantify, multiple references were made by respondents in the case studies to the loss of traditional knowledge and cultural practices. This was attributed in part to HIV/AIDS-related morbidity and mortality. When one or both parents die or are seriously ill, their skills may not be able to be transferred to their children or other relatives. This may have far-reaching implications in terms of the continuity of agricultural and livestock production as well as for other areas of life (such as craft production) which depend on the continuity of skills and knowledge.
In Eastern Africa, where growing coffee and bananas has been a traditional feature of the farming system, cultural practices associated with coffee and banana tree cultivation may be essential to ensure the system's survival.
As observed earlier in this chapter, the correct mulching, weeding and pruning of plantations is a fair guarantee of reasonable yields. However, in areas where there is a high incidence of HIV/AIDS, plots have become neglected or abandoned, with yields proving correspondingly poor as a result of some or all of the following: insufficient labour to carry out the work; inadequate understanding of the correct agricultural practices; and lack of knowledge about marketing aspects. In several Ugandan villages studied, many successful farmers with a variety of skills had died of AIDS and this had often led to the neglect of crops and livestock, as their surviving relatives have lacked sufficient knowledge of the correct farming practices.
In several Ugandan villages surveyed, many successful farmers, with a variety of skills had died of AIDS and this has often led to the neglect of crops and livestock, as their surviving relatives have lacked sufficient knowledge of the correct farming practices.
In one case study, a group of older men reported that a number of nutritious crops that used to be grown in the past, including certain exotic bean varieties have now been abandoned, mainly because they would require surplus labour which is not available. Groundnut production which used to be the pride and source of income of many households is also declining as middle-aged women, combining strength and knowledge for the preparation of fields; timing of ploughing, planting, weeding, and pest control, are dying, and not being replaced by younger women (among whom the number of deaths is even higher). Added to this, the changing emphasis on the production of foodstuffs, which were formerly regarded as produce of last resort, notably cassava and sweet potatoes, at the expense of other crops is leading to the loss of skills in such areas as banana weevil control, mulching, pruning and the control of stinging insects in coffee shambas.
Evidence that knowledge of cultivation techniques and cultivars is in danger of being lost, particularly among children of families in which one or both parents had died of AIDS, is available from a consideration of new coping strategies. For example, in some cases the local community was reputedly responding to orphaning by neighbours and family members specifically undertaking the agricultural training of orphaned children. Local groups were also beginning to undertake this work, especially women's groups. These might well provide a basis for future development of agricultural training among the young and in particular among those who have been orphaned. This would have a dual effect, notably it would allow for the preservation of local knowledge, while providing activities for rural youths who might otherwise be unemployed.
One example of loss of knowledge is the decline of cattle husbandry in Gwanda. Even if the cattle are not sold during the sickness or after the death of a household member, the remaining family often does not have the management skills and knowledge to care for livestock. This was observed in cases where the head of household, usually the man, died. The wife and the children did not have the time, the knowledge or the financial resources to care adequately for the cattle. The wife often did not have the same access to extension services and other ways of acquiring knowledge as her late husband. Therefore numerous cases were found in the studied communities where cattle had died soon after the death of the head of household.
3.8.1 The loss of other traditional skills
In communities like that of Gwanda where there has been a high incidence of HIV/AIDS, there is also evidence of the loss of knowledge of traditional crafts and skills. While some 5 - 10 percent of the houses in the community were built out of stone, mud and cement, the technique of stone laying has all but disappeared for a number of reasons. These included: the fact that the artisans who knew this skill have died and have not been replaced by younger men; the wealthier farmers and traders who used to provide a market for such building skills have either died of AIDS or are unwilling to invest in such costly ventures knowing that sooner, rather than later, they may be faced with dependent grand-children and other relatives to look after. And finally, apart from skills, such work requires a lot of cheap human labour, and the available labour is, of course, now insufficient for the activity (considering that many have died of AIDS and others are engaged in activities such as
trading or fishing).
The demise of the indigenous art of bark cloth making in the community, represents yet another example of how AIDS is leading to the loss of a basic local skill. In a focus group discussion with elderly men in Gwanda, and at a community self appraisal exercise, it was pointed out that now - as opposed to in the past - bark cloth making was strictly the domain of older men, and despite increasing prices for this product.
Two explanations were offered for this phenomenon. First, young men are unwilling to plant the ficus trees, the source of the bark, fearing that they might die before the trees mature. Second, such youths now prefer fishing and trading to bark cloth making. While it is the case that even in the past the men who took-up the profession were mainly middle-aged, since a significant proportion of these have died due to AIDS, it is not surprising that there are few younger people taking up this occupation even though it is perhaps more rewarding than in the past. Thus it appears that some local crafts, like bark cloth making, may be disappearing in the absence of a link between the older and younger generations.
<section>6</section>
3.8.2 Loss of skills and the division of labour
An important finding from all three countries is the significance that the loss of male household members has for the management of the household economy, and for the marketing of agricultural produce. With respect to this last, the deaths of men who were conversant with marketing, has meant that many households have had to rely on selling their produce to unscrupulous middlemen. These middlemen exploit the farmers. In so doing, farmers frequently become demoralized, sometimes to the extent that they have abandoned farming as unprofitable.
In Gwanda, there has traditionally been a marked gender division of labour, between crops, agricultural tasks and above all between domestic and other work. This has significant implications for the way in which the epidemic affects the lives of women. Most women are overburdened with housework, taking care of babies and now, in many cases, orphaned children, collecting firewood and fetching water. School children contribute little in terms of labour since most are away at school all day.
The women complained that they have to walk long distances to collect water and firewood and that it took about two hours just to fetch water, while the collection of firewood took even longer. These tasks greatly reduce the time women have to participate in agricultural activities. When a household is then confronted with the additional burden of caring for the sick, for members of related families, in mourning ceremonies, women are faced with major problems of managing their own labour and that of others in the household. It is important to note that it is not only the additional tasks which take up their time (and energy), it is also the increased management demands of the household and farm which require additional thought, worry and effort.
In addition to this problem, it is also knowledge of domestic and farm management skills, as well as the skills themselves which are threatened by the loss of mature women from the community. In Uganda, it was found that more women aged between 13 and 44 died in a two-year study period than men. Since it is the women in this age group who are primarily engaged in full-time agricultural production throughout most of the country, the rapid progression to death of this group allows little time for adjustment and coping in the household's farming practices. This inevitably has serious consequences for the affected households.
In Gwanda, the study has already noted that the rural farming system was in a stage of transition from a banana-based system to one composed primarily of what were once considered secondary crops such as cassava. Cassava, like sweet potato and to a lesser degree yam and sorghum, used to be produced by women rather than by men. Some men who have lost their wives, and who are unfamiliar with the crop varieties and cultivation methods, have found it hard to take over the cultivation of these crops. However, it was also observed in all three countries, that widowers usually remarry fairly quickly and therefore solve the problem in that way.
In Teta community, in Zambia, there are significant differences in the role and position of women within the diversified farming system, as compared, for example, with the maize-based system in Mpongwe District. In an analysis of labour and labour management in one area of Mpongwe, it was shown that the more food secure households are those in which both husband and wife are involved in agricultural production, and among these, the most efficient were those households where men were organising timely ploughing arrangements, either through tractor or oxen hire, or through labour-zpooling arrangements. This situation is due to the necessity of planting as large an area of maize as possible to ensure a surplus, and the fact that maize tends to be a crop controlled by men - since they have greater access to credit and usually control the marketing arrangements.
In Teta the situation is different. The area planted to maize and other crops grown in ploughed fields is much smaller than in Mpongwe. It is therefore easier for women themselves to manage this operation, and even to hire oxen to cultivate this smaller area. The diversity in the production system thus also gives women more independence. Dambo cultivation of local maize and beans are largely women's activities; it is only with the advent of Irish potatoes, that women have become involved with the techniques of wetland production.
3.9 Coping mechanisms: the role of NGOs and self-help groups
Given the fact that deaths from AIDS and other diseases are affecting the transfer of skills and knowledge in East African farming systems, certain coping strategies are emerging which may help to counteract the negative effects of these impacts.
At the level of the farming system, coping responses have already been touched upon. What needs to be emphasised is that these responses are not uniform and that there is a clear gradient in ability to cope in relation to the wealth of a particular household.
At the level of the community as a whole, the most important response has been the formation of self-help groups, some spontaneous and some under the aegis of an NGO. This is in itself an important development in some societies, particularly in southern Uganda, where inter-household cooperation has not been the norm. It suggests that here the traditional response may provide a firm base for future efforts to cope not only with the impact of the epidemic, but also with the wider problems of low incomes and poverty which form the background to that impact.
However, it should also be noted that in some cases the impact of the epidemic has been so severe that the limits of traditional cooperative resilience and response have now been reached and exceeded. In such circumstances, the supporting role of NGOs may be crucial in working to provide advice to farmers and extension staff in animal and crop husbandry practices. Agencies currently working in this way include, ActionAid, InterAid and World Vision International, whose activities are described below. Already, and often with the assistance of NGOs, special interest and other self-help groups have come into being with members pooling their knowledge and giving each other confidence in undertaking on-farm as well as income-generating activities.
In Gwanda, for example, World Vision International has encouraged the formation of small self-help groups primarily engaged in agriculture and handicraft making. The NGO has been instrumental in providing vocational training for groups in the field of carpentry, tailoring and construction. These are aside from the NGO's other activities like providing complete packages of school assistance to orphaned children and giving counselling and care to AIDS patients.
Box 7: Self-help group 1. Kayunga United
Gwanda Community
Kayunga United started operating in March 1992 and was aimed at improving the morale of unemployed youths by encouraging them to grow cassava cooperatively. The 1 2-member group has since offered considerable assistance to orphans, widows and the needy including house construction and repair as well as offering food.:
Recently, World Vision International gave them a donation of hoes, herbicides, pesticides and vegetable seeds. Training has been given to the group in bee-keeping and they are also expecting to receive/modern bee hives from the NGO.
In addition, the group has benefitted from the technical training sponsored and offered by World Vision International.
Action Aid is also highly active in Uganda mainly in the district of Mubende. Under its General Community Support Programme the NGO has built schools, assisted farmers in agricultural production through the provision of inputs, and through assistance to the health sector, by means of an immunization and treatment programme. Other activities have included: awareness and sensitization programmes; assistance with farm-management; and assistance in improving animal husbandry practices. In the past, farmers would only be interested in owning large herds of cattle, irrespective of how they were looked after. Recently, many farmers are adopting the practice of improved animal husbandry incorporating tick control, farm fencing and supplementary feeding of cattle. The result has been improved milk production and increased farm incomes which are reflected in a higher standard of living of farmers to the extent that households have graduated from grass thatched houses to houses roofed
with iron sheets; finally, the area under various crops has increased, for example some young people are forming cooperative farming groups and are now able to cultivate large areas.
However, AIDS is likely to affect the progress of the NGO's work in the community. Some youths have already died and many are infected. Those that are sick are unable to work effectively. Once they die, their activities are not usually taken up by survivors who are often their elderly parents or younger siblings. In some of the more affected areas, ActionAid is launching an anti-AIDS campaign through such measures as video shows, condom supply and demonstration, as well as the care of AIDS patients.
As a result of increased deaths due to AIDS, the number of orphans has risen in the area. ActionAid is now supporting local group efforts to care for these orphans.
Box 8: Self-help Group 2. Agaliawamu (Unity is strength)
Gwanda community
Agaliawamu is regarded as one of the most successful groups. It was started in 1992 for school girls to provide them with basic training in tailoring and farming. By 1993, 10 members had graduated in skills development. The group is currently also helping to look after the sick.
Agaliawamu was given a donation of US $17.00 to buy handicraft materials, and assistance in purchasing the materials. The group has also received pesticides, fungicides, vegetable seeds, implements and technical training in nursery-bed preparation from World Vision International. It is, nevertheless, experiencing similar problems as Abagalanyi, see above, i.e. a shortage of agricultural inputs especially tools and equipment and proper marketing awareness for their products.
3.10 The personal and community trauma of HIV/AIDS
In a heavily affected community such as Gwanda, the social impact of HIV-AIDS on the population has been enormous. Gwanda was one of the first communities in that country to experience the HIV-AIDS pandemic. Since little was known about the disease when it struck, few if any precautions were taken with the result that the community lost many able-bodied people, young men, women and young children. Almost every household in Gwanda is HIV-affected, afflicted or both. A walk round the community provides adequate evidence of the impact. The presence in almost every homestead of graves of people who have died of AIDS, and the incidence of AIDS-related sickness in many households bear witness to the widespread trauma. As a result, many aspects of social life and behaviour have been affected and most of the women's and youth groups are concerned with providing assistance to widows and orphans.
Given the above, it is even more surprising that many of the youth in the most afflicted communities continue to have indiscriminate sex; even having sex with widows and widowers of people who are widely known to have died of AIDS, according to discussions held with groups of local villagers. This behaviour is attributed to the fatalistic attitude most youths have towards the epidemic generally. Many of them believe that they are already infected and consequently see no reason why they should not have normal sexual lives and maximise their pleasures before they die. This may also have something to do with the nature of life in many rural areas. For example, in the Mpongwe area of Zambia where local people reported that pre-marital sex was very common, it was simultaneously pointed out that in rural areas such as these, there is no entertainment, as such, apart from beer and sexual relations.
By contrast, discussions with several groups of teenage girls in Gwanda revealed that the girls are truly frightened of contracting AIDS. Many of them believe that one can only be safe through sexual abstinence. The girls lamented that it is material poverty which compels them into early marriages or to have premarital sex. They claimed that if they had financial support, mainly in the form of access to income-earning activities, they would abstain from premarital sex and early marriages to much older men, both of which increase their exposure to infection. Widows in the same community likewise believed that if they were given financial support, they would abstain from sex or avoid remarrying and therefore stop the spread of the disease.
Nonetheless, village group discussions and individual interviews also made it clear that many adults in Gwanda have, in fact, significantly changed their social and sexual behaviour. Most were said to have stopped indulging in indiscriminate sexual intercourse preferring to remain with their spouses. At the same time, the groups also reported that many families are additionally burdened with the responsibilities of fostering orphans of their deceased relatives and the only way of fulfilling this responsibility was to stay alive (i.e. by avoiding HIV-infection).
In general, the extended family system is still said to be strong. As in all societies in Uganda, however, this system is being undermined by social change. Associated increased individualism has had implications for the fostering of orphans in the AIDS-afflicted communities. In several AIDS-affected and afflicted households in Gwanda, the extended family system has been further over-burdened with the problem of large numbers of orphans and many surviving households have found it increasingly difficult to cope. This situation is being alleviated by some NGOs like World Vision and InterAid which are paying school fees for the orphans in addition to providing them with clothing, blankets and a few other basic commodities like agricultural implements, and water containers.
In Zambia, the social impact of the disease is also observable. On the one hand, in the case of divorce which seems to be a growing phenomenon in a number of the villages studied, a mother moves back to the village of her own mother, usually with most or all of her children. In the event of death of the mother, it is possible that the children will be subsequently split up and sent to different relatives.
Box 9: Self-help group 3. Abagalanyi (Those who love each other)
Gwanda community
This women's group was formed early in 1993 with an initial membership of 75 persons, although currently it has only 11 active members. The group's aim is to improve the standard of living of women in the community and to take care of orphaned children as well as the sick by giving them emotional support and providing them with the basic necessities.
The group undertakes communal farming and meets at least twice a week. Having secured a piece of land, members are growing tomatoes and potatoes which they hope to sell and thereby: generate sufficient income to enable them to expand their operations. The women also meet to discuss e problems encountered and to mane plans :for the week ahead
The group has plans for extending the farm and starting up handicraft production with the aim of making and selling mats and baskets. The group has also benefitted from training in bee keeping with World Vision International providing the members with beehives. In addition, the NGO has also provided the group with vegetables seeds as well as pesticides and fungicides. At present the group: faces a number of problems, the most crucial being a lack of agricultural tools. Another problem is in the marketing of produce. The women are worried about middlemen who usually travel to rural areas and exploit farmers by offering them abnormally low prices. Considering the perishability of the vegetables they produce, the women are certainly vulnerable to exploitation. This is particularly unfortunate given that :these women already require as much assistance as possible in order to be able to assist orphans and the sick.
In one village in Zambia, a woman farmer complained that her production had deteriorated because she had been nursing one of her daughters who eventually died from HIV/AIDS. Apart from the time spent in caring for her sick daughter, the emotional cost of seeing her children decline, having to care for them but being helpless to arrest the progress of the disease, must also be taken into account. Since 1990, of this particular woman's three daughters, two had died from HIV/AIDS, as did a daughter-in-law. Another farmer, a former council worker, from Teta in Zambia is another example of the emotional cost of the disease having been high. The farmer's daughter died in 1991 after he and his wife had nursed her for some time, and in 1993. just before the interview another daughter had committed suicide, inexplicably.
<section>7</section>
Chapter 4 The consequences of HIV/AIDS impact on small farmers
4.1 HIV/AIDS: a threat to food security?
4.2 The declining status of nutrition and health standards in epidemic-affected communities
4.3 HIV/AIDS: education and declining school attendance
4.4 The problem of orphans
4.5 HIV/AIDS and changes in the social system
4.6 A change in attitudes to social customs?
4.7 The growing reliance on income-generating activities
As discussed in the previous chapter, the impact of HIV/AIDS is being felt, be it directly or indirectly, on almost all aspects of the farming systems studied. In some cases there is a tangible though not necessarily quantifiable effect on farming systems, especially in Uganda, where the epidemic is seen at an advanced stage of its development, and thus its impact is more directly evident.
In both Tanzania and Zambia, the impact is less evident but the vulnerability of the farming systems and the trends in agricultural development generally, may be used to preview, and hopefully prevent, as serious a deterioration of the status quo because of the HIV/AIDS epidemic as might otherwise be the case.
In Chapter 3 consideration was given to the impact of the HIV/AIDS epidemic on different aspects of small farming systems in Eastern Africa, this chapter considers the consequences of the changes that are occurring in the rural communities studied.
The main consequences include: the threat to household (see box below) and community food security; decline in the nutritional and health status of smallholders and their families; decline in educational status as children are forced to leave school; and changes in the social system as households adapt to the impact of HIV/AIDS. These latter may involve the break-up of families, a growing incidence of female-headed households, and changes in attitudes to indiscriminate sex. The impact of HIV/AIDS is also likely to be most severe among already vulnerable groups such as the malnourished and the food insecure.
More positively, individuals and groups have begun to develop survival strategies in the light of the changes which are occurring as a result of the impact of HIV/AIDS on their lives. Despite what are, in some cases overwhelming mental and physical hardships, with spouses losing not only their partners but also one or more children and experiencing increasing difficulties maintaining and making a daily living, households have continued to function.
Box 10: The Zambian farmer who only just copes
In the village of Mpongwe, amongst the more productive farmers, those whose production is now being affected by illness, or is likely to be in: the near future one: of the farmers identified three ways in which HIV/AIDS had and was affecting his life. These were through; (i) the impact on his cattle, with draught oxen having died for lack of care; (ii) his six children from his first marriage had gone to live with their maternal grandmother on the death of their mother his wife; (iii) the shortage of labour meant that his maize crop which be said had declined sharply, was affecting his own staple food security.
In some of the case studies described in Chapter 3, farmers have expressed interest in supplementing their incomes through small income-earning activities either on or off-farm. Such activities are extremely diversified and include bee keeping, beer brewing, tailoring, pig keeping, etc. Smallholders have also shown a growing interest in receiving extension advice, skills training or education in areas such as basic literacy, numeracy and health.
4.1 HIV/AIDS: a threat to food security?
4.1.1 The situation in Zambia
4.1.2 The situation in Tanzania
4.1.3 The situation in Uganda
In considering the consequences of the general decline in the standard of living and in household productivity as a result of HIV/ AIDS, the question arises as to whether food security is at risk.
Food security is defined by FAO (1994) as "enough nutritious and safe food being available and accessible for a healthy and active life by all people at all times". At the household level it is defined as "the capacity of a household to procure a stable and sustainable basket of adequate food" (IFAD 1993). This food must be adequate in terms of quantity and quality to compose a diet which meets both the nutritional needs of the household members as well as being culturally acceptable. Stable access is assured through various mechanisms that enable the household to procure food supplies across seasonal and transitory shortages. Sustainable access requires that the means of food procurement in the long run are consistent with:
- sustainable resource use and management;
- maintenance of productive assets;
- self reliance and human dignity; and,
- overall livelihood needs (IFAD 1992).
The nature of food access depends on the particular conditions prevalent in a given farming system. Food may be derived from home production, through purchase, through gathering (e.g. fishing), or through barter arrangements, gifts or some other means of transfer.
4.1.1 The situation in Zambia
In early 1993, up to 2.6 million people (33 percent of Zambia's total population) were reported as being vulnerable to food insecurity. Of these, over one million were in the marginal rural areas (IFAD, 1993).
In the rural areas, food insecurity is due to low smallholder productivity associated with maize monocropping, as well as limited access to agricultural services such as input supplies and other resources, as well as past market distortions (and consequent crop mix distortions) associated with Government price subsidization policies for maize. In towns and cities, food insecurity and malnutrition are related to the deterioration of purchasing power as a result of the long term stagnation of the economy, the scarcity of income-earning activities, inflation and the effects of a severe structural adjustment package. Urban earnings are linked to rural food insecurity through remittances (see Chapter 3), which are particularly important in certain farming systems. Such systems are likely to be adversely affected by the HIV/AIDS epidemic in the urban areas as well.
In Zambia, the highest levels of malnutrition are in the agriculturally-marginal rural areas, the pert-urban localities and the shanty towns of major urban centres. In general, malnutrition appears to be more serious and widespread in the northern, north western, Luapula, western and eastern provinces. Zambia also has one of the highest levels (54%) of childhood growth stunting in Africa (International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD) /World Food Programme (WFP) 1993). Stunting is an indicator of long-term deprivation.
Analysis of labour and labour management in the Chipese area of Mpongwe, showed that the more food secure clusters had men and women (a husband and wife) involved in production, and the most efficient were those in which men organised timely ploughing arrangements, either through tractor or oxen hire, or through labour-pooling arrangements. This situation arises through the need to plant as large an area of maize as possible to ensure a surplus, and the fact that maize tends to be a crop controlled by men - they have greater access to credit and usually control the marketing arrangements.
In the area of Teta, however, the situation is different. The area planted to maize and other crops grown in ploughed fields is much smaller than in Mpongwe. It is therefore easier for women themselves to manage this operation, and to hire oxen to cultivate this smaller area.
Diversity in the production system gives women more independence. The cultivation of local maize and beans are largely women's activities; it is only with the advent of Irish potatoes, an expanding cash crop, that women have become involved with the techniques of wetland production. The construction of mounds and planting of sweet potatoes, beans, cassava and millet also tend to be activities controlled by women. As a result, a larger proportion of the production output, including some cash income, and the marketing of such output is controlled by women. Maize production itself is often split between men and women, with both husbands and wives tending their own fields. During a series of meetings with villagers, of the 25 women in the women's meeting, only three were not tending their own fields. Accordingly, it would appear that women are going some way towards ensuring their own staple food security.
The net result is that amongst the vulnerable group (see Chapter 2) from which farmers were interviewed in Teta, four of the nine were headed by women. These women were often involved in hiring oxen or piecework labour. With a range of crops to sell, and access to millet for beer brewing, it is possible for them to raise enough income to purchase such resources. Because of the quantity of millet that is grown, beer brewing amongst these more food secure farmers is a regular not an occasional income-earning activity.
It would also appear that livelihood security is better guaranteed because of the greater range of options in the system. The different production types and crops mean that generalised crop and income failure is unlikely - risk being spread more widely.
The resource poor producers (cluster type 4) in Teta were also mostly women. Several of them were divorced or widowed, or if married, receive less assistance from their husbands. Thus less labour was available. The households of these women producers are probably more food secure than their Mpongwe counterparts because of the diversity of staples, relish crops, and income sources available. During the drought, the women resorted to beer brewing and the selling of crops such as vegetables, beans, sweet and Irish potatoes, rather than undertaking piecework, as was the case with the women in Mpongwe. This meant that less labour was diverted from their own fields.
In this community, the poorest producers tend to be reliant primarily on citemene production (see Chapter 3) of millet for their staple food security; they grow little maize and do not use fertiliser. Consequently, although beer brewing is a survival strategy, there will be more conflict over the use of millet for food or beer. These households run out of staple food earlier than other households. They also tend to have fewer relish crops.
In Chipese district, it was estimated that by the time the HIV/AIDS epidemic reaches the stage of increased mortality, probably within two to three years, the impact on agricultural production and livelihood security would have increased substantially. It was also clear that as sickness and death due to HIV/AIDS rises, the effect will be to exacerbate the already significant vulnerability and food insecurity of large numbers of women and children. This is due to the fact that it is common amongst the matrilineal peoples (prevalent in many parts of rural Zambia) for the death of a parent, as with the already common event of divorce, to lead to the break up of the nuclear family itself. Death like divorce causes social dislocation. Women, with their children, move back to the villages of their own mothers, or other matrilineal kin, leading in these villages to an increasing number of single parent producers and a growing dependency ratio.
4.1.2 The situation in Tanzania
An estimated 90 percent of the population of Tanzania are reputedly dependent upon their own subsistence (FAO; 1992). Research in two areas - Mtwara and Morogoro - indicates that 74 percent and 60 percent, respectively of the households surveyed had insufficient food. In such circumstances, the impact of illness or death on the household labour economy and thus on nutrition may be very dramatic indeed. For example, Semali and Ainsworth (1993) report that in Kagera the restriction of normal activities due to illness or injury (not necessarily related to HIV/AIDS) was resulting in a very considerable loss of working time in agriculture in 1992.
However, in an examination of indicators of food and energy adequacy for Tanzania, it was found that those regions which are most exposed to the HIV/AIDS epidemic in the medium-term are not, with certain exceptions', the regions which also have a current energy deficit. This is illustrated in Table 3 below which compares exposure to the HIV/AIDS epidemic and food insecurity as measured by dependence on emergency food aid.
The point however is that even in relatively robust systems such as those of the Kagera and Mbeya regions in Tanzania (and similar systems in Uganda), ten years of HIV/AIDS exposure do, nevertheless, result in dramatic declines in the standard of living, particularly among poorer households, and in a marked decline in the energy balance as indicated by the decline in the production of matooke and the rise in the production of sweet potatoes, cassava and yams.
Table 3: Emergency food aid and epidemic exposure
Region Population N. in Target Group Target Group as % of population Target Group Rank Epidemic Impact Ranking
Arusha 1390000 81833 5.89 9 11
Coast 656000 83289 12.70 3 5
Dodoma 1272000 82508 6.49 6 12
Iringa 1243000 50000 4.02 11 2
Kagera 1363000 73600 5.40 10 1
Kilimanjaro 1140000 96903 8.50 4 9
Lindi 665000 131949 19.84 2 18
Mara 998000 378891 37.97 1 7
Mtwara 914000 76518 8.37 5 6
Morogoro 1257000 79785 6.35 7 4
Mwanza 1931000 30000 1.55 14 3
Singida 824000 20000 2.43 12 10
Tabora 1065000 64890 6.09 8 9
Tanga 1320000 31564 2.39 13 3
4.1.3 The situation in Uganda
A small-scale but detailed study of nutrition in rural Masaka carried out in 1993 (Seeley) showed very low levels of current nutrition and food security in households. According to the field work undertaken for the present study much the same situation appears to be true at present in Gwanda and in other similar communities in Uganda. Moreover, a community wealth evaluation estimated that about 45 percent of people in Gwanda are poor (according to the community' own standards). But only ten years ago Gwanda was considered to be a wealthy community, by local rural standards.
With the advent of the HIV/AIDS epidemic, the community has seen a measurable decrease in its own standard of living. In the Table 4 below which summarizes the coping responses of 14 households in Gwanda of which case study analyses were made, some 36 percent (of the 14 families surveyed) reported food shortages. A similar study carried out in the community of Nakyerira found that 40 percent of the ten households interviewed suffered food shortages. These figures may be compared with those for the third area studied in Uganda, the Ndaiga communities on which HIV/AIDS had had, (at the time of the study), little if any impact. In Ndaiga of the 16 households surveyed, only two (or 12 percent) had reported food shortages.
In Gwanda as noted in other communities the severity of epidemic impact is unequally experienced as between differently-resourced households. The richer the household, the longer it can maintain adequate food supplies; the poorer the initial endowment of a household, the more difficult this will be. Given that the community itself considered that at present 45 percent of households were poor in terms of its own standards of evaluation, then it must be concluded that for 45 percent of the people in the community, any further stresses, whether related to the epidemic or for some other reason, can only have dire results.
Table 4: Summary of coping responses in Gwanda
Household Experience Number Percentage
HIV/AIDS affected 8 57
Decline of cultivated area in the past ten years 7 50
Decreased range of crops 10 71
Labour shortage 12 86
Change in cultural practice 8 57
Food shortage 5 36
Land shortage 2 14
Decline in off-farm activity 4 28
Increase in off-farm activity 2 14
Note: these data were collected from a village transect and are not the result of a random sample. They are illustrative only. Total number of cases 14, percentages rounded up or down to nearest whole number.
4.2 The declining status of nutrition and health standards in epidemic-affected communities
In Chapter 3 it was observed that a recurring pattern in the communities studied is the change in the volume and kinds of crops produced in the farming systems. Partly as a result of this, and other factors, e.g. the process of impoverishment induced or exacerbated by HIV/AIDS affliction, it would appear that levels of nutrition are falling. The reliance on starchy staples like cassava and sweet potatoes, compared with other more nutritious traditional crops like matooke, and or protein from animal products, is partly to blame. In addition there is the problem of the lack of understanding of the nutritional value of other produce, fruits and vegetables which though they may be produced are not favoured in the diet (see Chapter 3).
Lower levels of nutrition result in the increased vulnerability of the individual to disease and thus to a decline in health. Increasing morbidity in turn has a negative affect on household and individual productivity, resulting in long hours and hard labour for the already weak, and creating additional burdens on able-bodied family members.
One of the exercises that was carried out during the visit of the survey team to the Chipese area of Zambia was a health time line. Some of the older men participated especially, in identifying the type and severity of diseases that had been experienced in different decades since the 1920s. What the exercise showed was that by the l940s, several of the early twentieth century diseases such as smallpox and leprosy had disappeared, whilst others such as venereal disease and pneumonia had become much less prevalent. The 1940s through to the 1970s were relatively free of major diseases or epidemics. In the 1980s, however, health trends took a significant turn for the worse again. Many diseases became more virulent and widespread than they had been for decades - sexually transmitted diseases, scabies, pneumonia and tuberculosis. Malaria became much worse and is now the most commonly registered illness for admission to both the Mpongwe and Ibenga hospitals. Cholera also reared its
head again in the late 1980s. And then there is AIDS.
During case study interviews, information was sought on major illnesses experienced within the community and deaths that had occurred within the last three years. Within most villages, illnesses such as malaria (fever), coughing and diarrhoea are common, the latter especially among children. Pneumonia is relatively common too, and with children malnutrition is an increasing problem. Older women and men suffer from backache, aggravated in some cases by the need to produce more food because of an accumulation of mouths to feed. Children who are ill during the weaning age of about 8 to 18 months can have a serious effect on women's agricultural production. In Kapenda village, a young woman reported having spent three weeks in hospital in January 1993 with a baby that had fever and diarrhoea. January is the peak weeding month. Consequently her 0.6 hectares of maize produced enough to eat as green maize only.
By contrast, another young woman also spent two-and-a-half months in hospital at the end of 1991 with a child suffering from diarrhoea and malnutrition. In 1993 the couple were still able to produce 40 bags of maize from 2 hectares. Her husband had assumed responsibility for staple food security and did the work when she was ill.
It appears clear from the general health status of this population that it is already profoundly vulnerable - especially the women and children. If the impact of the HIV/AIDS epidemic is considered in addition, the situation may have critical consequences.
4.3 HIV/AIDS: education and declining school attendance
One of the consequences of impoverishment and contracting household incomes in communities like Gwanda and Nakyerira in Uganda, is that with limited cash incomes, families can barely afford to send their children to school. On the one hand, extra hands may be required in the household to undertake farm or domestic chores. On the other hand, and judging from the case histories where several or all the children in a family were attending school, rather than helping with the farm work' education also appears to be a priority. In some families resources were provided by NGOs (see Chapter 3) to help with children's education. Certainly, if they are not provided with external assistance, families that are already at or close to subsistence level will have to forego educating their children simply to meet basic survival needs.
In Ndaiga and Nakyerimira it was estimated that 60 percent of all children of primary school-age children (6-14 years) were not attending schools. The reasons advanced for this phenomenon were lack of money to pay for their education.
It was also noted that female children were less likely to be in schools than were their male counterparts. Of all the children in school only about 10% were females. Some of the reasons given were the early marriage of girls and their leaving school because of pregnancy. This in turn has discouraged parents from paying for their female children.
4.4 The problem of orphans
The situation is still more serious with respect to orphans. With increasing numbers of children left orphaned by the HIV/AIDS-related deaths of their parents, the education of such children is a special problem. If orphans are taken over by other relatives, the cost of educating such children may well strain the resources of the receiving households. The children themselves may not have the time, let alone access to money, or even the intellectual wherewithal to consider education as a priority. Again, in areas with a high incidence of HIV/AIDS and large numbers of orphaned children, NGOs have so far been making efforts to fill the gap.
In the Mbeya region of Tanzania, the local hospital at Igogwe, which runs a home for orphans, reported that although attempts were made by relatives to care for orphans, they find it impossible to shoulder the burden of their own children and the orphans together. Most orphans are adversely affected in terms of their access to essential services, particularly education. They cannot pay school fees or buy uniforms and other school necessities such as exercise books and text books.
4.5 HIV/AIDS and changes in the social system
It is difficult to state absolutely that HIV/AIDS has been directly responsible for marked changes in the social organization of rural families. It is certain, though, that the epidemic impact has often exaggerated pre-existing problems. In Zambia, for example, where divorce was reported by focus group respondents to be a serious and growing phenomenon, it seems likely that the current economic circumstances have exacerbated the divorce rate, although there is no direct evidence for this. Previously marriages used to be arranged and a bride price was paid. These days almost no bride price is paid. Moreover, marriages frequently occur due to the pregnancy of the girl. Her parents may force the pair to marry but such a marriage may not last long.
In matrilineal social groups in Zambia, another practice which exacerbates the break up of marriages and has a negative impact on agricultural production is that of sons-in-law going to live in the village of their spouse's parents. The son-in-law has an inferior status and is rarely motivated to work particularly hard.
Rapid Rural Appraisal studies in the Central and Copperbelt provinces of Zambia have found that the most vulnerable and resource-poor farmers are always from indigenous matrilineal social groups. In this system, the increasing incidence of divorce results in social dislocation for both women and children. When a wife is forced to leave the house she goes back to her parents with her children. Fathers thereafter are likely to take only limited responsibility, if any, for their children.
In cases of divorce, which seems to be a growing phenomenon in the Zambian communities studied, a woman moves back to the village of her own mother, usually with most or all of her children. In the event of her death, it is possible the children will be subsequently split up (see Chapter 3). This is very common in the case of urban deaths. But in an area such as the Chipese community the net result will be an accumulation of children in the households where there are middle-aged or older women.
4.6 A change in attitudes to social customs?
During a focus group meeting at the village of Mpatisha in Zambia the women were asked about the responsibility of a husband for his children if his wife should die. Their first response was that if the wife of their son dies the children should go to relatives of the wife. 'Those children [of our sons] are not our relatives'. But asked a question which challenged the morality of this response and it provoked a very different reaction (see Box inset overleaf):
This exchange gives an insight into many of the now extremely negative 'customs' that are associated with matrilineal culture. The normative basis of the custom or tradition has disappeared, and now practice is driven only by expectation. The women showed through their general agreement with the remark that change was up to them and that if they do so others may follow their example -thus much of "tradition' is just example. Practices are followed because others do so, even if when challenged most will agree that the practice has no sound moral basis and has negative consequences.
The social problem is how to change undesirable 'customs', which have long evolved away from any ethical basis, and now merely undermine social solidarity and exacerbate the vulnerability and trauma experienced by women and children.
4.7 The growing reliance on income-generating activities
About 40 percent of farm households in Gwanda reported that they supplemented their incomes from off-farm activities. These range from petty trade, fishing, and beer brewing to small-scale handicraft production. For the majority of Gwanda households, off-farm income-earning activities do not feature in their livelihood strategy because they: do not have the small amounts of capital necessary to start this kind of work, they choose to limit their consumption, and they are able to sustain an adequate standard of living from their farms.
The case material for Gwanda suggests that there are two clear categories of household with major off-farm components to their livelihood strategy. The first category is composed of wealthier households which, even if they have been affected or afflicted by the epidemic, are able to maintain a high standard of living because they were well-off before they were affected by the epidemic and this has acted as a buffer to its impact. For these households, who are in the minority, farming was only one among a fairly large number of income-generating activities in which the household enterprise was involved.
By contrast, there is another category of households which have taken-up off-farm work as part of their coping response to the depredations of the epidemic. In such cases, which often seem to be female-headed households, these activities will be on a very small scale indeed, perhaps a little beer brewing, mat making or bark cloth production.
Whether or not the decision to enter into off-farm activity is taken may also have to do with the cultural expectations of a particular household. It may be no coincidence that the widow of a high salary earner for whom the epidemic has meant a dramatic drop in level and expectations of life should choose an off-farm activity as an effort to retain a lost standard of living. However, for those in the community who form the vast majority, the middle and the poor, there is perhaps no cultural expectation of anything much more than the difficulties that they currently face. Additionally, they may not have the social support networks which would provide access to the small amounts of capital required to start up an off-farm enterprise.
Box 11: Focus group meeting (Mpatisha, Zambia)
Question:"lf you have both a son and a daughter and they both marry and have children, who are the grandchildren, those from the daughter or from the son?"
Answer:"They are both our grandchildren. But it is a tradition we follow that only the children of our daughters are our grandchildren, but it is not a good tradition."
Question: "Can a chief change a tradition?"
Answer, first respondent: "We can't follow the chief unless we ourselves believe it. An individual we can copy, but not the chief."
Answer, second respondent:"lt is up to me to change. Now we have been discussing we can see that it is good that we keep the grandchildren of sons as well as daughters. We can change and others who are not here will stay the same. But they can see what we do."
In Nakyerira, as in Gwanda, farm production cannot provide for all the nutritional, social and economic needs of the majority of households. Even for those able to produce a surplus for sale, marketing remains a major bottleneck, and this is particularly the case in households where a person who has died as a result of HIV/AIDS or from another cause was instrumental in marketing farm produce.
Many of the young men and women, form part of the migrant, often semi-skilled, population seeking employment in Kampala, Mityana or elsewhere, sending remittances home. Most single women heads of households engage in making and selling local beer. In contrast to Gwanda, fewer women are involved in weaving mats and baskets or making other traditional handicrafts for sale. Apparently there is little local demand for these products. However, those who do undertake such activities were more likely to be in the middle income households.
Young unmarried adults often combine several occupations into a livelihood strategy because, as they say, "agriculture does not pay enough to sustain a person". Although the predominant occupation of young men seems to be cultivation of crops and raising of small stock, approximately 85 percent are also engaged in casual labour.
The main off-farm activity for the few adult male householders is trading in agricultural produce.
Except for the middle-aged single women heads of households who are often engaged in the brewing and sale of beer, women are not involved in many off-farm activities. However, some of the young single mothers seek employment from better-off families and perform such tasks as land preparation and weeding.
In contrast to the opportunities which appear to exist for supplementing incomes from activities other than those traditionally or normally relied upon, the situation in Ndaiga is also relevant. Here, although there is little HIV/AIDS impact on the communities, given the livelihood strategies characteristic of the area, there seem to be many reasons for the epidemic to spread in the next few years. In that case it is possible to speculate that the dominance of maize monocropping for the market, the presence of a relatively large landless population and the absence of off-farm income-earning opportunities and market isolation, would indicate that this farming system and its connected livelihood strategies would be less resilient than for example those in Gwanda.
<section>8</section>
Chapter 5 The estate sector
5.1 About the Nakambala Sugar Estate
5.2 Socio-economic conditions
5.3 The incidence of HIV/AIDS on NSE
5.4 HIV/AIDS-related morbidity and absenteeism at NSE
5.5 The spread of HIV/AIDS infection at NSE
5.6 Knowledge of HIV/AIDS at NSE
5.7 The social impact of HIV/AIDS at NSE
5.8 The economic impact of HIV/AIDS.
5.9 The impact of HIV/AIDS on the Kaleya Smallholder Company in Zambia
5.10 The impact of HIV/AIDS on the Tukuyu Tea Estates in Tanzania
In order to consider the ways in which HIV/AIDS affects not only the small farm sector but also the commercial sector, studies were carried out on several estates in Zambia and in Tanzania. In particular, a detailed analysis was made of the Nakambala Sugar Estate (NSE) in Zambia. This forms the basis of the present chapter.
The aims of the study of NSE were to determine the present position on the estate vis a vis HIV and to make projections for the future; to assess the knowledge and attitude towards HIV/AIDS among NSE employees as well as the social implications of the disease; and to consider the present economic impact in terms of costs caused by HIV/AIDS in affected departments and make projections for the near future.
5.1 About the Nakambala Sugar Estate
The Zambia Sugar Company is the sole producer of sugar in the country. The head office is in Lusaka while all the sugar cane is grown at NSE. The Estate is situated near Mazabuka, in Southern
Province where good soil and climatic conditions exist for growing sugar-cane under irrigated conditions. Rains falling between mid November and March result in an effective cultivation season between April and October. The Estate has experienced several periods of expansion and now has a nominal capacity of 140 000 tonnes of sugar per year with some 10 000 hectares under cane cultivation. In addition, 1785 hectares of sugar cane is provided by the Kaleya Smallholders Scheme, where 140 smallholders manage 560 ha and the remainder is run as an estate. Two neighbouring farmers own 450 ha of sugar cane which they deliver to Nakambala for processing.
Employment structure on the Nakambala Estate
Some 22 000 people live at Nakambala Estate (Census 1993). It is estimated that a further 10 000 people, who live outside Nakambala, derive their livelihoods from the sugar estate.
The Nakambala Sugar Estate provides permanent employment to 3 250 people. Seasonal employees bring the total to 8 100 during certain periods of peak operation. Fourteen expatriates also work at NSE mainly in senior management positions.
The labour force is strongly male-dominated; women are overrepresented among the seasonal workers and underrepresented among the unionised employees. Altogether women make up about 12 percent of the workforce, and are mostly in low paid positions.
At present the company is not able to provide housing for all employees. but the aim is eventually to house all permanent employees. There are five townships on the estate and a senior staff housing area. Nakambala provides utilities and community services such as water, refuse collection, electricity and community halls. There are fifteen churches dotted around the estate. The estate employs two doctors and operates one main clinic and several subsidiary ones in the townships. The clinics are inevitably one of the most heavily used facilities provided on the Estate, frequently seeing 300 patients per day.
HIV/AIDS care and education at Nakambala Estate
Medical staff at the estate currently carry out HIV/AIDS education at the clinics and also conduct seminars on AIDS for a limited number of more senior employees. Condoms are distributed free of charge at the clinic on demand. Two officers with clinical experience in the running of the Chest and Skin/STD clinics had also lately recruited. Pre-employment testing is not practiced by Zambia Sugar Company. HIV/AIDS is treated as any other life threatening illness. Employees continue to work as long as they are able to do so. After retirement on medical grounds or death they or their families receive the same benefits as any other employee.
5.2 Socio-economic conditions
Women are in an especially vulnerable position to contract the AIDS virus. At Nakambala as in the rest of Zambia, women have an inferior economic and social status to men. The majority are economically dependent on men. Some women at NSE have the possibility to cultivate vegetable gardens and thus earn a small cash income, but others in other townships have limited possibilities to generate income. Economic dependence may also determine with whom a woman has sex. The women at NSE reported that the first reason to have sex with a "boyfriend" is money. Single women are especially at risk, but married women often have to use sexual relations to supplement their incomes because men at NSE do not always share their earnings with their families. This limits the ability which women have to control their sexuality and to protect themselves. In interviews women said that they cannot determine the terms under which they have sex, including whether a condom is used and whether their
partner is sexually faithful. While infidelity is by no means exclusive to men, it is more acceptable for a man to have more than one regular partner. Therefore it happens that women who are infected are monogamous and have contracted HIV from their nonmonogamous partners
Migration is a factor which may often be associated with the spread of HIV. Although Nakambala Sugar Estate is a rural area, a lot of migration and movement takes place. People looking for work, such as cane cutters, are recruited seasonally from other parts of Zambia and many truck drivers pass Nakambala daily on their way along major communications routes. In any case, the tradition of labour migration which has become a pronounced feature of Zambian life in the last seventy years, with long separations and frequent breakdown in family patterns, contributed to a rise in prostitution and the incidence of STDs long before HIV appeared. Migrants who contract HIV may infect their spouses when returning home.
5.3 The incidence of HIV/AIDS on NSE
The Zambia Sugar Company has not yet developed a policy towards HIV/AIDS, but the management is very concerned about the development of the disease. However in view of the fact that the epidemic has spread rapidly in Zambia in the last decade, what was originally a more urban disease has now reached rural areas.
According to the medical records for 1991 and 1992, 75 percent of deaths in 1991 were attributed to HIV/AIDS as well as 70 percent of the medical retirements. In the medical report 1992/93 the causes of death are classified as tuberculosis/AIDS, gastroenteritis, pneumonia, malaria, malnutrition and others. In this classification only 45 % of deaths are attributed officially to TB/AIDS, but in reality it is suspected that many AIDS cases are hidden in other categories, such as "gastroenteritis" and "others". Therefore it is assumed that also in 1992193 probably as many as seventy-five percent of deaths were HIV/AIDS related.
As elsewhere, so also the Estate Sector, and as noted in Chapter 3, HIV/AIDS incidence has been age selective. Sixty-two percent of the deaths among company employees were in the age group 21 40 years in 1992-93. No employees died above the age of 50. This lends weight to the hypothesis that AIDS takes its toll from the younger age groups. The overall mortality rate among all company employees was 9 per I 000.
It was also observed that there was a marked decrease in AIDS-xrelated deaths between 1991 and 1992-93. While this may simply be attributable to the fact that the small numbers in total could be within the range of reporting and sample variation, another explanation is also possible. In Zambia the epidemic was initially more prevalent among the educated, well-off and mobile in urban areas. Most of these people are now relatively knowledgeable about the disease, thus they may well have adapted their behaviour accordingly. The basic knowledge about HIV/AIDS has only recently and or partially trickled down to the less educated or illiterate in remote areas. Most of those who die today were infected before 1987. It is possible that this particular group has already reached a peak of AIDS cases. In future, the death rate among staff may stagnate or decrease while the rate may increase among unionised and seasonal employees. But this is only a hypothesis which has not yet been
confirmed by any research in Zambia. What is known is, that the gap between company professionals and the poor with regard to seroprevalence is narrowing fast.
In 1992-93 the mortality rate among staff and unionised company employees was 14.9 per 1 000 much higher than the rate among seasonal workers which stood at 3.9 per 1 000. The usual yearly rate of adult mortality in sub-Saharan Africa is about 5 per 1000. This does not necessarily mean that seasonal workers are less affected by HIV. One of the reasons for the difference between the groups could be that the seasonal workers are characterized by a high turnover rate and that they are hired every year anew. It is less likely that a very sick person will apply given that most of the seasonal jobs are physically very demanding. The company does not monitor the deaths of seasonal workers who have stopped working for the company, therefore many cases of AIDS in this occupational group will go undetected.
From January 1993 until September 1993, 16 employees were given early retirement on medical grounds due to HIV-related symptoms. Projections for the future indicate that the number of AIDS deaths and medical releases due to HIV/AIDS could increase by 70 percent from 1992-93 to 1995-96'. Even after 1996, the number of people with AIDS will certainly increase, but the longer these data are projected into the future, the more imprecise any forecasts become. The annual adult mortality rate due to the epidemic could rise to 28.2 per 1 000 for permanent staff members.
5.4 HIV/AIDS-related morbidity and absenteeism at NSE
Morbidity due to AIDS has a strong impact on a company like the Zambia Sugar Company. Once an individual develops AIDS, the average survival time appears to be between six months and two years. In cases of prolonged illness, the salaries of the permanent employees are paid for the obligatory three months, after which a further three months are paid at a reduced level. As shown in Table 5, the person-hours lost due to tuberculosis/AIDS account for 50 percent of cases. If gastroenteritis is added to this total, because it is often associated with HIV, the figure rises to 60 percent. Experience at NSE indicates that AIDS patients are variously in and out of their work places for one year. When they return to work they often cannot perform their duties as well as before. On average a person with tuberculosis is absent from work for 60 days a year.
Table 5: Person-hours lost due to major illnesses in 1990, 1991 and 1992 at NSE
Disease Year 
Malaria 36,024 25,268 20,060
Accidents & Injuries 28,232 17,224 12,346
Gastroenteritis 12,576 10,792 12,176
TB/AIDS 102,591 71,507 61,713
TOTAL 179,423 124,691 107,295
Total all diseases 266,752 162,584 122,567
Source: Medical Department, Zambia Sugar Company
Since 1990 there has been a continuing decline in the incidence of major illnesses affecting the employees on the estate. There could be different reasons for this decline. One, the health status of the employees may have improved due to better medical care and an improved sanitary infrastructure. Two, it is also possible that the criteria used for including employees on the sick-list have become stricter. Any absence from work is recorded officially under the following categories: paid leave, unpaid leave, sickness and absenteeism. Healthy employees are absent from their workplace for various reasons, which could be HIV-related such as caring for sick relatives. Furthermore, employees can leave the workplace for some hours at the discretion of their supervisor for special occasions such as funerals, medical reasons and other urgent matters. Thus, different types of absence can be influenced by HIV/AIDS but the quantity is difficult to estimate.
The overall rate of work due to illness was about two percent. This is a very low figure and even lower than in industrialized countries. By contrast, among nurses in a University Teaching Hospital in Lusaka, the rate of sickness is usually assumed at 8 percent, while the absenteeism rate is 16 percent. In England, the sickness-absence rate was 4.7 percent in 1989-90 (Foster, 1993). As stated above, 50 to 60 percent of recorded sickness cases can be attributed to HIV/AIDS.
In studying the records for NSE, it appears that as recorded by the company, funerals have become a major reason for employee absences from work. There is a strong social obligation to attend the funerals of near and distant relatives, friends and neighbours. Compassionate leave has been abolished for unionised employees in order to harmonize the working conditions with staff and unionised labourers. Thus employees must use their annual leave if they have to attend a funeral, which takes place some distance away. There its anecdotal evidence that some employees spend all their annual leave attending funerals and even have to take additional unpaid leave to meet their social obligations in this respect. In the case of the death of a company employee, at least 80 colleagues attend the burial and some are occupied with the preparations for several days.
The increasing incidence of Tuberculosis
Tuberculosis is increasing at NSE and Pulmonary Tuberculosis is part of the clinical case definition of AIDS. Tuberculosis is especially serious for the company because patients are absent from work for a minimum of 60 days. In 1991, for example, 73 cases of tuberculosis were registered as compared with 106 cases in 1992 and 141 in 1993. It should be noted, however, that this rise can also be partly attributed to better diagnostic facilities. By far the largest number of cases were reported in the age group 25-34, some 52 percent of cases, and compared to 27.8 percent and 11.3 percent for the age groups 35-44 and 45-54, respectively. The clinical staff do not know who among these patients is HIV-positive, because they do not have any HIV testing facilities. Patients presenting HIV-associated chest problems end up receiving treatment for suspected tuberculosis when they fail to respond to the usual antibiotics. This means that half of the patients are not treated
appropriately due to the lack of testing facilities. However, currently available national data suggest that between 70 and 80 percent of tuberculosis patients are HIV positive. Although drugs against tuberculosis are distributed without cost at the NSE clinic, treatment for one patient costs US$ 175. Therefore the medical staff strongly expressed the need for HIV test kits.
Malnutrition
Malnutrition continued to be a problem; from July 1992 to March 1993, 19 children died of malnutrition at NSE. After pneumonia, it was the second highest cause of death among children. Malnutrition is considered more of a social than a medical problem. Social workers support women with malnourished children with High-Energy-Protein (HEPS) food. Presently they care for 68 severe and 194 non- severe malnourished children.
The social workers observe that a lot of malnourished children do not respond to HEPS, even after 4 weeks. Considering the high incidence of HIV at NSE it can be assumed that a number of these children are children of HIV positive mothers and themselves positive. Despite the efforts to combat malnutrition, these cases are likely to increase in the near future due to the epidemic.
5.5 The spread of HIV/AIDS infection at NSE
Polygamy is quite widespread in Zambia and is practiced by people living and working on Nakambala Estate. In addition, in a number of interviews, respondents reported high frequencies of change of sexual partners and multiple sexual partners. According to the Medical Department, the level of sexually transmitted diseases (STD) is high among the population of NSE. STDs are associated with the same behaviour that exposes individuals to potential HIV infection and greatly facilitates both the acquisition and transmission of the AIDS virus.
Some culturally enjoined sexual practices, in particular the tradition of "sexual cleansing" associated with the levirate may further contribute to the spread of HIV at NSE. But these traditions are starting to change. Group discussions with women in the townships showed that a lot of women would not agree any more to be sexually cleansed after the death of their husbands because of the existence of AIDS. Accordingly, other methods of cleansing, which do not involve sexual intercourse, are becoming more common.
5.6 Knowledge of HIV/AIDS at NSE
The level of knowledge among the population at NSE varies considerably. Everybody, who was interviewed at Nakambala had heard about HIV/AIDS, although people are differently informed. Generally men know more than women, because they have better access to information. One woman from a township asked: "Everybody speaks about AIDS, but what is it?". Women have heard about condoms, but some have never seen one. A survey which was conducted by the Medical Department at NSE on the subject of health issues showed the incomplete knowledge which respondents have about HIV/AIDS. Two hundred and sixty employees of different departments filled out questionnaires. Nearly all knew about HIV and that it is sexually transmitted. But 42 percent did not know that HIV also can be contracted through blood transfusion. The higher the level of education the greater was the understanding of the disease and the way it is transmitted.
Another finding of the survey was that willingness to use condoms is low. It should be a matter of concern that only 32 percent of the employees stated that they have ever used condoms, especially given that a lot of men are reputed to have extramarital affairs.
Witchcraft is still very strong in Zambia and is often given as the cause for sickness and death instead of AIDS. People indicated in interviews that they have a contradictory attitude towards witchcraft and AIDS. Some reported that they can identify a person with AIDS, but if a member of their own family or they themselves are concerned, they say it is witchcraft. AIDS cases which are attributed to witchcraft have already caused problems at NSE. The AIDS afflicted, or the relatives of people who have died of AIDS have reputedly accused colleagues of bewitching them for various reasons. This is a harmful phenomenon in any work environment, but it is even more so in one where places of work and residence are the same.
5.7 The social impact of HIV/AIDS at NSE
Although the company has to deal with the serious impact of the epidemic, HIV/AIDS-affected households carry the major burden.
These households have to care for the sick and face increasing medical expenses. They lose the income and entitlement to housing after six months after the employee's death. Seasonal labourers are in an even more vulnerable position than permanent employees, because they do not receive the full range of benefits. Although the estate is not concerned, because HIV-affected families leave the estate, the number of orphans in the villages around Nakambala is growing, with all the additional pressures that this places on relatives and the community at large.
5.8 The economic impact of HIV/AIDS.
5.8.1 Production loss
5.8.2 Costs caused by HIV/AIDS
5.8.3 Summary of the costs
5.8.4 Projections of the economic impact for the near future
The economic impact of HIV/AIDS is basically felt as a result of two factors; in the loss of production and by increasing costs.
5.8.1 Production loss
The production of sugar cane and sugar has increased continuously since the creation of NSE. In 1992/93, the sale of sugar reached its peak since the founding of NSE. It can be concluded that AIDS has not so far had a serious impact on production. The question arises however, how high can the number of AIDS cases rise without affecting production? What is the threshold?
In order to answer these questions, it is necessary to identify the most important and therefore vulnerable phase of the labour process of cane cultivating, harvesting, processing and selling, plus the support services to ensure smooth integration of these processes. According to senior management, the post of a farm officer is quite crucial for the development of the cane. Each farm officer is in charge of 200 ha of cane. Production levels depend very much on timely farming operations. Although some of the farm officers had developed AIDS in recent years, their absence was compensated for, and thus no serious impact on the cane yield occurred.
Table 6: Cost statement for the Nakambala Estate 1992-93
Description Labour Materials Total
(US $) % total (US $) % total
Agricultural costs 3143465 33.5 6229841 66.5 9373306
Cane purchase 0 0 6350007 100.0 6350007
Factory cost 932378 20.4 3636946 79.6 4569324
Business Dept. 151985 38.7 238262 61.3 390346
Purchase &Supplies 137556 50.4 134554 49.6 272110
Personnel Dept. 2111724 77.6 608481 22.4 2720206
Medical & Public Health 138091 49.5 140970 50.5 279061
Estate Services 321334 46.6 365642 53.4 686876
Total Dept. Costs 6936532 28.1 17704603 71.9 24641136
Depreciation 0 0 1252787 100.0 1252787
Insurance 0 0 364981 100.0 364981
Forward Crop 
Adjustment 0 0 (3736835) 100.0 (3736835)
Total Op. Costs 6936532 30.8 15585537 69.2 22522069
Refinery Cost 40370 40.8 57649 59.2 98018
Packing Cost 469107 20.3 1.840682 79.7 2309789
Total Nakambala 
Cost 7446008 29.8 17483867 70.2 24929875
Source: Business Department, Zambia Sugar Company
Overtime working is common at NSE to compensate for absences from the workplace. In some sections of the factory, overtime is not exceptional. Indeed employee complaints suggested that it appears to be all too common. According to interviews with management, the quality of work suffers under these circumstances. Unfortunately, it is not possible to quantify this possibly important factor.
5.8.2 Costs caused by HIV/AIDS
Material costs make up the major part of the costs while those caused by HIV/AIDS are mostly labour-related.
- Absenteeism and sickness
About 50 percent of the absenteeism at the company is due to sickness of which 2 percent can be attributed to HIV/AIDS. It is also assumed that one percent of the labour force is lost by leaving the workplace for some hours a day to attend burials, to go to the clinic and to attend to various other exigencies of daily life.
- Additional employment of expatriates
Zambia Sugar Company trains and promotes highly qualified Zambians to gradually replace expatriates. However, this process is now in danger due to the epidemic. In 1992-93, for example, one senior Zambian manager was supposed to substitute an expatriate. This person died of AIDS and the contract of the expatriate engineer had to be extended because there was no other Zambian who could have filled this position quickly. This is costing the company about US$ 60,000 per year.
- Medical care
It is difficult to assess how much of the medical budget goes towards caring for HIV/AlDS patients. According to the causes of sickness, 50 percent were HIV and AIDS related. Therefore it is assumed that 50 percent of the drugs are used for AIDS patients. Staff costs consume the major part of the medical budget. It is worth noting that the drugs for the treatment of tuberculosis, which are very costly, are presently free of charge. Otherwise, the cost of drugs for a single tuberculosis patient (September 1993) would have been US$ 175. In 1993, 141 tuberculosis patients were treated; it can be assumed that 80 percent of these were HIV positive. This means that a further US$19 740 in drug costs may be assumed, but the company does not have to pay for this. The company provides staff and, if necessary, the transport of the patients to the clinic.
The drug costs (without TB) for a single AIDS patient at NSE's clinic ranged between US$ 44 and US$ 83, which is comparatively low. Most of the opportunistic infections associated with HIV can be treated with cheap drugs during the early stages of the disease. Furthermore, it is estimated that 30 percent of the remaining medical budget is attributed to HIV/AIDS. Out of that, staff costs account for the major part. It is debateable whether without the epidemic the budget for the medical department would be lower. Instead it is likely that the medical service would have been improved. On the other hand, as noted above two clinical officers have recently been recruited both in relation to HIV/AIDS. Without the epidemic the recruitment of these officers would not have been so urgent.
- Funerals
When a death occurs on the estate, the company's employees and their dependents are entitled to a coffin, firewood, foodstuffs and transport to the burial site. In 1992/93, there were 232 deaths among company employees and their dependents. The number of deaths has risen to such an extent, that the vehicle, which was assigned to transport the coffin, is no longer sufficient and the department has recently applied recently for a second vehicle.
As noted above, 75 percent of deaths at NSE can be attributed to HIV/AIDS. It is not known how many dependent adults and children have died of AIDS. But, according to medical statistics AIDS cases among dependents were lower. It can be estimated that at least 60 percent of the budget for funerals may be counted as costs generated as a result of AIDS.
- Medical retirement
In cases of medical retirement, an employee is entitled to a grant which is dependent on his or her salary and according to the amount of time the person has worked in the company. In cases of death the family are the beneficiaries. In 1992-93, it appears that four staff members died due to HIV/AIDS and two retired under the early retirement package. Among unionised employees, 36 died and 22 retired on medical grounds due to HIV/AIDS. It can be argued that these are not additional costs because employees go on retirement anyway and this entitlement depends on the time served. But in 199293, these costs have been generated by HIV/AIDS, which would not have otherwise occurred and furthermore their effective working life and the availability of their experience to their employer was truncated by the disease.
- Repatriation
In cases of medical retirement, the staff members and unionised workers are entitled to be repatriated. In case of death, the family of the deceased is taken back to their home areas. Transport costs take by far the major part of the repatriation allocation. There is a common budget for repatriation and recruitment. In general, recruitment is cheaper than repatriation. It is estimated that about 30 percent of the budget for staff and unionised employees can be costs attributed to repatriation due to AIDS-related death or retirement.
- Training
Nakambala is the only sugar estate in Zambia and ZSC has to invest substantially in training given the specialized nature of the work. This applies especially to cane growing activities, but also to areas in the factory. Once a highly skilled person is lost, he or she cannot be simply replaced from the Zambian labour market, because an already trained successor cannot be found. Added to this, ZSC competes on the Zambian, and increasingly on the Southern African, labour market with the mining industry for a limited number of engineers. The training process can take as much as two years during which the trainees are often sent abroad on special, and costly courses.
5.8.3 Summary of the costs
Table 7 shows that the largest portion of costs are associated with sickness. Nearly 50 percent of these expenses arise from the benefits which the company offers its employees. Companies in Uganda noted that morbidity has a higher impact than mortality (Pangs, 1992). At Nakambala, the costs of sickness (lost working days plus medical expenses) are about as high as the costs in the case of death.
In 1992-93, costs attributable to HIV/AIDS represented 1.9 percent of the total costs of Nakambala Estate. This appears to be quite low. Sales for 1992-93 for ZSC as a whole were about US$ 50.0 million. Even if US$ 2.2 million in head office costs are added to the Nakambala costs, the profit margin remains wide enough to cover the additional expenses arising from HIV/AIDS. The costs caused by HIV/AIDS make up about 2 percent of the profit.
Table 7: Costs generated by HIV/AIDS at Nakambala in 1992/93
Description Costs (US$) Costs (%)
Lost workforce 148, 920 31.8
Extension of expatriate 
contracts 60,000 12.7
Medical Department 70,124 14.7
Funerals 24,314 5.1
Pension for deaths +medical retirements 75,184 15.9
Repatriation 59,448 12.5
Training 35,208 7.3
Total 473,198 100.0
Source: Haslwimmer, 1994
The following table provides an estimate of how the costs could be allocated between labour and materials.
Out of the total labour costs, 4.7 percent are due to HIV/AIDS, while only 0.7 percent of the total material costs can be attributed to the disease. This lends weight to the hypothesis that AIDS is predominantly a burden for the labour budget.
Table 8: Costs resulting from HIV/AIDS divided between labour and materials
Description Labour Materials
(%) (US $) (%) (US $)
Lost workforce 100 148920 0 0
Extension of 
expatriates 100 60000 0 0
Medical 
Department 50 35062 50 35062
Funerals 10 2431 90 21883
Pension for death+ medical 
retirement 100 75184 0 0
Repatriation 20 11890 80 47558
Training 40 14083 60 21124
Total 73.5 347570 26.5 125627
Source. Haslwimmer, 1994
<section>9</section>
5.8.4 Projections of the economic impact for the near future§
The projection in Table 9 is based on an assumed increase of AIDS deaths and sickness of 70 percent. The expenses due to the epidemic will not proportionally rise in all affected departments.
Table 9: Cost increase due to HIV/AIDS from 1992-93 to 1995-96
Description Costs 92-93 Increase Costs 95-96
(US $) (%) (US $)
Lost workforce 148920 70 253164
Extension of expatriates 60000 100 120000
Medical Department 70124 70 119210
Funerals 24314 70 41333
Pensions for death +early retirement 75184 0 75184
Repatriation 59448 70 101061
Training 35208 100 70416
Total 473198 780368
Source: Haslwimmer. 1994
The projected costs caused by HIV/AIDS could rise until 1995-96 to 3.1 percent of the total costs. But two variables could influence these costs more dramatically than is indicated in Table 9. These development of the Zambian and Southern African labour market and production losses.
At the lower end of the skills spectrum in Zambia, labour is abundant. HIV/AIDS will not reduce this labour force to such an extent that labourers at this level become scarce. On the skilled and professional level, the market is much thinner and is influenced by various factors. It is only since 1991 that the Zambian Sugar Company has offered competitive salaries compared with other employers in Zambia. In the past the company had found it difficult to attract highly qualified people, in particular engineers, who preferred to work in the Copperbelt. The Estate's rural setting also appears to be a disincentive in terms of attracting qualified people and attractive housing facilities are also lacking at NSE. Moreover, because Zambia's neighbours, particularly South Africa offer better salaries, many highly qualified Zambians prefer to work abroad. AIDS will contribute to the tightness of the labour market, especially as the disease has claimed a number of people among the
ranks of professionals.
It is also possible that professional salaries will increase. This also means that, for example, an extra 20 percent increase for the salaries of professionals could to be included in the cost estimates for 199596.
5.9 The impact of HIV/AIDS on the Kaleya Smallholder Company in Zambia
Kaleya Smallholders Company Limited is a smallholder settlement scheme established to develop 1 885 ha of sugar cane in the district of Mazabuka in Zambia. Two-thirds of the area is settled by 300 smallholders and one-third remains a nucleus estate. The target annual cane production is 200 000 tonnes - 15 % of the national output.
Currently 1 782 ha have been planted and 140 smallholders settled. The company supplies the smallholders with training and extension services, agricultural inputs and mechanical services, arranges cane harvesting and haulage and distributes irrigation water. The smallholders are responsible for 4 ha of sugar cane, with family members caring for the infield irrigation, weed control, fertilizer application and removal of diseased cane stalks. The cost of all direct service is charged to the smallholders. Kaleya pays the growers for standing cane, with the price related to Nakambala's production costs.
The cane is sold by Kaleya to the Zambia Sugar Company which processes the sugar cane. The terms of the sale are determined by a cane purchase agreement negotiated between Zambia Sugar Company and three outgrowers (Kaleya, and two private farms). Currently the Kaleya is controlled by the founder shareholders - the Commonwealth Development Corporation, Zambia Sugar Company, the Development Bank of Zambia and Barclays Bank of Zambia. Ultimately it is intended that all of the ordinary share capital of Kaleya will be purchased by the smallholders who will become the owners.
It appears that the smallholders are equally or worse affected by HIV/AIDS than the population of Mazabuka. The smallholders come from different parts of Zambia, many having previously lived on the Copperbelt, which is characterised by very high rates of seroprevalence. Being a smallholder in Kaleya is an attractive occupation which provides a relatively high income (in comparison to most of the rural population). Polygamy is widespread among the cane growers and marriages are reputedly very unstable. At the time of this study, 14 out of the 140 smallholders and their families were suspected of having died of AIDS.
Box 12: Case study 6
Eleanor is a 24-yeas old widow. She has three young children of her own and one son of her late husband. She and her husband came to Kaleya some years ago.
Her husband died in July 1993 aged 36, most probably from AIDS. While her husband was ill with AIDS Eleanor nursed him. As a result she did not have time to produce enough maize for her family's consumption. Added to this the yield of sugar cane was low last season, which Eleanor believes is due to the age of the cane and not because of a labour constraint. Next season her yield is likely to be even lower. Eleanor employed part-time workers to undertake irrigation works on her plot but because she does not know enough about irrigation in sugar cane, she could not control the work properly. Although she had asked the local extension service for advice, at the time of the interview nobody had been to visit her.
Eleanor believes, that she and her late husband's sixteen year-old son could manage the farm in the future. However, although she and the son are the official holders of the settlement, her in-laws have been pressing to gain control of the farm. Now she is afraid that she is bewitched.
The smallholders rely mostly on family members for their production activities, but they also hire labour. Labour, which is provided by family members, who fall sick and finally die of AIDS, cannot be as easily replaced as on an estate. As observed frequently in many of the small farming systems described earlier, care for patients at home, attendance at funerals and the loss of management skills, all contribute to the labour constraints of an AIDS-affected household. But all households are not equally vulnerable.
For example, one farmer who was interviewed, and is probably suffering from AIDS, has several grown-up children, who now do all the work in the fields. The death of the father would not necessarily have an effect on sugar cane production, because there is still enough labour force and the father's knowledge has already been passed on to his children. However, the death of the most experienced person in a household, especially in the production of sugar cane, can have serious consequences, especially where the remaining family members do not have the necessary farm management skills, as in the example below of case study 7.
Box 13: Case study 7
Justin is 22 years old and has three brothers aged 24, 20 and 16, and two younger sisters are at school in the Copperbelt. In 1986 his parents came from the Copperbelt as smallholders to Kaleya.
In 1989 Justin's father died of AIDS. Two brothers were forced to leave school to work on the family farm. With their help and the employment of part-time labourers sugar cane production could be maintained under the management of the mother. In 1990 Justin's mother also fell sick and returned to the Copperbelt with her youngest child. In 1991 both his mother and the child died and all the children left Kaleya for one month to attend the funeral in the copperbelt. During that time the neighbours assisted in caring for the farm, but they were unable to carry out the farm work as effectively as Justin's family. As a consequence, yields declined by 40 percent in 1991 and the household's income suffered accordingly.
Since then production has begun to increase once more but has not yet reached its previous level. It appears that once sugar cane yields drop significantly, it is very difficult to reach previous levels. In 1993 the household was are also able to produce enough bags of maize for themselves to eat.
The most vulnerable households are those with a high dependency ratio, since widows will frequently loose many of their possession when, by traditional custom, the husband's relatives arrive soon after the death to claim all the household possessions.
5.10 The impact of HIV/AIDS on the Tukuyu Tea Estates in Tanzania
The Tukuyu Tea Estates are located near the Ushirika minor settlement in Tanzania. Covering an area of 1 530 ha they consist of seven estates with two factories among them. The estates have a permanent staff of 1 200 and employ an additional 2 000 labourers during the peak tea picking season. Most of these casual labourers come from neighbouring villages.
Although there have only been two confirmed cases of AIDS to date, the general situation of the Tukuyu Estates renders them potentially vulnerable. HIV/AIDS can affect this estate as in the cases of those described above in Zambia since they depend on the availability of trained manpower. It takes a long time and significant resources to train an expert. Thus experienced workers are difficult to replace.
Since the Tukuyu Estates are located on the highway to Malawi and close to two settlements and the town of Tukuyu, there is a lot of contact with urban and more densely populated areas, one of which, Ushirika is considered to be a high-risk area. Whether by chance, or partially as a result of the preventive measures taken by Tukuyu Tea Estates to date, AIDS has had a minimal impact on the company.
The preventive measures that may be in part responsible include the supply of condoms to male workers (although such supplies are irregular) and the establishment of an AIDS education programme using television and videos. At the same time the company offers its employees free lunches, medical care and clinic facilities. Child nutritional status is reported to be good.
<section>a</section>
Chapter 6 Conclusions and Recommendations
6.1 General conclusions
6.2 The impact of HIV/AIDS on programmes and projects
6.3 General recommendations at the planning and policy level
6.4 Determining epidemic impact on labour availability
6.5 The use of vulnerability mapping
6.6 The targeting of assistance
6.7 Donor funding and the role of NGOs
6.8 Taking HIV/AIDS into consideration in project design
6.9 Specific recommendations at the micro level
6.10 Recommendations for specific target groups
6.11 Recommendations relevant to the Estate Sector
6.1 General conclusions
In the preceding chapters, the impact and consequences of the HIV/AIDS epidemic on small farmers in Eastern Africa, as well as on the estate sector in Zambia and to an extent in Tanzania, have been considered. It was found that some factors appear to be true for all the systems studied, notably that HIV/AIDS furthers the process of impoverishment. Linked to this is the impact which the epidemic has on labour availability. This impact can have grave consequences for farming systems, which are heavily reliant on human labour power, either seasonal or perennial. AIDS-related sickness and death reduce the number of hands available to do both household and farm work having profound effects on the domestic farm labour economy. This results in productivity declines with cash incomes likely to fall.
Obviously the extent to which the farming system is affected depends very much on the particular circumstances which pertain for each situation. Moreover, since farming systems are not static, and at the same time epidemic impact is not constant, with rapid increases in morbidity and mortality being most pronounced in the earlier stages of the epidemic, the consequences vary not only from one context to another, and from also one stage of the epidemic to another.
In Uganda, three different stages of the epidemic as it affects three different farming systems were observed (and supported by population data collected in the course of the study). These were pre-impact, early impact and full impact. Examples of each stage were seen in Rakai, North Mubende and South Iganga respectively. Broadly speaking, it seems that in Uganda, affected households follow a path of regressive decline in terms of the content of their production. This is most marked in the case of Gwanda, where, using comparative material from 1989 (Barnett and Blaikie, 1992), it was observed that there has been a marked shift to more basic and less varied food and other crop production. This change was more pronounced among the poorer households. The focus of these adjustments is in the domestic-farm labour economy, and has serious implications for the lives of women and children. In Uganda, the areas which are more vulnerable to the epidemic are often those which have
farming systems which are particularly susceptible to labour loss.
In Zambia, as far as can be ascertained on very limited disease incidence data, the farming systems which are most vulnerable to labour loss are not those which are most vulnerable to the epidemic. epidemic. At the same time, while it may be generally true that the most labour-vulnerable farming systems in Zambia are not immediately susceptible to the epidemic, this should not be taken as grounds for complacency in a country with high levels of seroprevalence and a tradition of large-scale internal and international labour migration. The case studies from Teta and
Chipese indicate that in these communities, the epidemic is already affecting quite large numbers of households. The effects of this differ between patrilineal and matrilineal peoples, the latter, as has been noted above, being much more immediately vulnerable to the effects of labour loss.
In Tanzania where oxen are quite widely used and where there are complex exchanges of labour for use of oxen, one adverse effect of HIV/AIDS may be to increase the depth of socio-economic differentiation between ox-owning and non-ox-owning households. However, a very positive aspect of this is that, in Tanzania, insofar as oxen increase productivity and thus earnings, rural youths appear less likely to leave farming in search of incomes and excitement elsewhere. This is in contrast to the situation in Uganda and is important in relation both to the spread of the epidemic and to labour availability as epidemic-related shortages may be less likely to be exacerbated by labour migration than for example in Uganda.
An important observation, in the light of the differences in the findings, is that it is important to have seroprevalence information from as many sites as possible given that rural data are vital for a deeper understanding of the problem and that currently their availability is very limited.
The recommendations will not exclusively concentrate on the agricultural sector, they also will include nutritional and health aspects, as the impact of HIV/AIDS has multi-sectoral dimensions and has to be tackled multi-sectoral.
6.2 The impact of HIV/AIDS on programmes and projects
Rising mortality and morbidity as a result of AIDS are likely to have an impact on project performance since health is a precondition for development. One of the most serious threats to any project is absenteeism on the part of both beneficiaries and project staff, which can be caused by mortality and morbidity, attendance to funerals and various other exigencies of daily life. Absenteeism from project activities may set back the progress of projects in countries severely affected by the disease. Discrimination at the workplace of HIV-positive staff may further interfere with the work performance of all staff.
The impact of AIDS can manifest itself in various ways. It may result in labour shortages forcing farm households to shift from cash to subsistence crops when food security is being threatened. Cash crops which require a long investment period may not be suitable for families afflicted by AIDS that are in need of quick returns to cover immediate medical, funeral or orphan-related expenses.
Livestock activities might be jeopardized by family members selling off their animals to finance medical care for AIDS patients. In addition, if the person in charge of the livestock dies, family members are often unable to manage the livestock due to the loss of skills and relevant experience.
The viability of agricultural credit schemes may be at risk as a result of HIV/AIDS for three reasons: a) increased mortality may raise the number of defaults; b) AIDS-affected families may be forced to liquidate their assets in order to repay the credit or else have their assets seized, thereby ending up worse off than before they incurred the credit; and c) AlDS-afflicted families may have to spend part or all of the credit to finance medical care for family members suffering from AIDS, rather than use the funds for investment.
Agricultural research priorities might shift in view of AIDS to focus on the special needs of farm household with fewer working adults. Projects supporting agricultural extension services need to ensure that forms of labour-substitution, technical advice and credit services are made available to AIDS-affected farm families. Such projects should review the impact of HIV/AIDS both in terms of increased mortality among agricultural extension staff, but also in terms of the reduction of the work time as a result of the increase in funeral attendance.
In countries or regions where AIDS is claiming the lives of skilled labour and the labour market is limited in this labour segment, consideration of the impact of AIDS may be critical to the success and sustainability of investment projects. Recruitment, personnel replacement, training strategies and employment benefits (medical, pension funds, etc) may have to be revised accordingly.
For any training activity, HIV/AIDS may have to be taken into account both in terms of replacement/re-training provisions and strategies, but also in terms of revising training curricula.
6.3 General recommendations at the planning and policy level
Given that a principal finding of this study is that the impact of HIV/AIDS is uneven between and within countries, it follows that policy responses must be developed in relation to the situation as it is observed in particular regions, districts and communities and thus that local involvement in policy and project development is essential.
Even in countries like Tanzania with high national rates of seroprevalence and cumulative AIDS cases, it is quite difficult to observe the impact of the epidemic in most rural communities. This is because the epidemic manifests quite marked regional and local variations and the impact may vary quite dramatically over small distances. This has implications for the method to be used in any future work on this problem and points once again to the necessity for community involvement in diagnosis and programming if resources are to be used most effectively.
In communities where the impact is just being felt it may be necessary to think in terms of rapid response so as to ensure that
- labour-economising strategies are immediately developed for the specific needs of this type of community through the extension services, research stations and NGOs. This will require considerable inter-agency coordination;
- extension messages contain explicit HIV/AIDS components which should include both general HIV/AIDS advice and education and also sensitization to the known impacts of HIV/AIDS on rural livelihoods and production.
However, in communities such as South Iganga in Uganda the main response should contain medium-term efforts to develop labour economising strategies which are suitable for the local production system plus the inclusion of HIV/AIDS education in the extension service message.
Although these specific points derive from the situation in Uganda, they may be applied to all three countries. Thus, a zoning approach may be adopted using the vulnerability mapping data (see below) from this report or from other sources in other countries. Such an approach would classify areas of each country by a particular type of programme which is relevant.
6.4 Determining epidemic impact on labour availability
The Uganda material, in particular, demonstrates very clearly the difficulty and importance of distinguishing epidemic impact on labour availability from other background effects such as local labour market operation. This observation should be brought to the attention of anybody dealing with responses at the local and district level. At the same time, the most important programme and policy responses will be those which enable people to cope with the results of labour loss.
A major result of HIV/AIDS impact is increased pressure on the household labour economy. The most important programme and policy responses will be those which enable people to cope with the results of labour loss. Recommendations include working with local people, to develop responses which facilitate labour economising responses in:
- production - for example by exploring novel inter-crops or the introduction of new varieties or technologies;
- marketing - for example by assisting women's mobility both spatial and social; and
- caring, for example by the development of and assistance to support groups among members of affected households.
This study reveals that members of communities which have been longer exposed to HIV/AIDS may be more open to innovations than they previously were. People are forced to react to the crisis which is caused by AIDS.
6.5 The use of vulnerability mapping
Earlier work in Uganda used available data to map the relative vulnerability to labour loss of different farming systems. This method has been shown to be as expected a broad but imprecise indicator in the case of Uganda. In the present study, a similar exercise was completed for Zambia, thus providing the basis for broad vulnerability mapping in that country. There were insufficient data to develop the basis for a vulnerability map of Tanzania, although existing reports may provide some guide to this problem and further analysis may be possible.
In general however, it is recommended that an HIV/AIDS farming system/rural livelihood vulnerability mapping system be developed for a country. This would serve three purposes. Firstly, it would enable broad identification of risk by administrative area, agro-ecological zone, farming systems and livelihood strategy. Secondly, it would provide a framework for the development of area-specific policies and thirdly it would facilitate the monitoring of impact and policy outcomes.
The process of vulnerability mapping as a means of understanding how farming and rural livelihood systems are affected by labour loss may also give rise to the development of an early warning system. This would consist of a hierarchy of information - broad classification as has been achieved in Uganda and Zambia, more detailed information from district-level agricultural and other administrative sources, and finally, limited examination of the nature of the impact in specific communities using RRA/PRA methods. The usefulness of such an approach was in part demonstrated in the case work for Tanzania, where, with the exception of Kagera region, the rural impact is so far slight but seroprevalence rates indicate that it will increase in the medium-term. Development of an early warning system should facilitate focused responses when the epidemic impact becomes manifest.
Once a hierarchy has been established three levels of responses could be used.
Level 1: The creation of a broad map of rural vulnerability to the impact of HIV/AIDS. Experience suggests that the information for this first stage of vulnerability mapping description and ranking of farming and rural livelihood systems in terms of their sensitivity to labour loss -may be obtained from country resources in departments of agriculture and from research stations as well as from other sources. This is then combined with seroprevalence and cumulative AIDS case data obtained from National AIDS Control Programme sentinel surveillance surveys.
Level 2: Limited verification of the broad vulnerability mapping through small-scale studies (e.g. RRA/PRA) in order to indicate whether the broad mapping is providing useful guidance, undertaking a detailed description of the situations in specific areas and identifying the types of local coping response and demands for assistance.
Level 3: Development of assistance programmes for areas which exhibit different levels of vulnerability and are at different stages of the epidemic impact.
Moreover, if this approach is to be successful, it will be desirable to develop adequate HIV/AIDS impact training programmes at all levels. These would include:
- general training in HIV/AIDS impact issues for politicians and departmental heads;
- specific training in HIV/AIDS impact issues for middle level administrators in all departments engaged with rural and agricultural development; and
- community-based participatory analysis of the situation and needs in specific communities.
6.6 The targeting of assistance
The main burden of the impact at the household level falls on the labour economy of the household. This has considerable implications for the targeting of assistance on women, children and in some cases widowers who are raising children. It is difficult to see how to target these groups, thus there are few response strategies which can be targeted specifically towards the HIV/AIDS-affected and or afflicted. The issue is poverty and the response has to be to deal with a likely increase in poverty rather than to assume that a high level of targeting is possible. Policy responses should integrate all aspects of poverty relief, the domestic and farm labour, the educational needs of orphans and other young people, food security and income generation.
Using existing coping strategies
Communities and households have developed their own coping mechanism. The reorganisation of cropping schedules, selection of cultivars, rearrangement of domestic/farm labour interfaces are all examples. Some of the accumulated experience of coping should be documented and members of "experienced" communities should be encouraged to share their experience with communities at the beginning of the coping process or which have not yet been affected. This sharing could be achieved both via the extension services, but also through the facilitation of direct contacts between members of different communities.
Cost recovery
Cost recovery of both school and medical costs have become more widespread in recent years as part of liberalisation programmes. These place additional burdens on all households and in particular on affected and afflicted households. Relief in these two areas could make an important contribution to both current and future welfare of rural households.
6.7 Donor funding and the role of NGOs
In Uganda where the long-term effects of an HIV/AIDS epidemic are observable, NGOs have been very active. The difficulty is in knowing how sustainable are their efforts. Accordingly, this is a question which donors should address very clearly when making funding decisions.
Funding decisions should also take into account two other considerations. Firstly, the social and economic impact of HIV/AIDS is, apart from its specifically medical aspects, to increase poverty. This means that specific HIV/AIDS targeting and project design is difficult in a context of general poverty. Policy responses should integrate all aspects of poverty relief, the domestic-farm labour interface, educational needs of orphans and other young people, food security and income generation.
Secondly, whether in some communities (for example Gwanda) efforts to find and fund sustainable projects may be in vain and the need for medium-term relief should be considered. There is a conventional belief that development projects and programmes are preferable to relief projects and programmes. The main rationale for this view is usually that the former are sustainable and longterm, the latter are emergency measures, short-term and unsustainable. While it is certainly the case that in general long-term sustainability should be a policy goal, there is a danger that the provision of long-term development projects and programmes, may be used as a way of avoiding the cost of long-term relief. However, long-term, sustainable development projects require certain macro-economic conditions and a degree of realism if they are to be truly sustainable and appropriate.
6.8 Taking HIV/AIDS into consideration in project design
In countries with pandemic proportions of HIV/AIDS its impact should be taken into account in all steps of a project cycle such as project identification and design, project appraisal, project implementation and monitoring & evaluation.
In the project identification phase, it is important to find out, to what extent HIV/AIDS is prevalent in a project area. Statistical data provide a first indication, but as experience shows, they often differ significantly from the real situation. Therefore the potential impact of AIDS should be included in Participatory Rural Appraisal and Rapid Rural Appraisal exercises. The identification of target groups should be taken serious to ensure that AIDS affected families are not excluded and that their special needs are addressed.
The implications of AIDS need to be considered in cost-benefit analyses on which labour shortages, reduced agricultural yields, absenteeism, etc have their effect. For the project implementation phase the reduced labour availability of both project staff and beneficiaries to participate in project activities should be reflected in the workplan.
The impact of the epidemic on projects needs to be closely monitored in order to make timely adjustments. Due to the special nature of HIV/AIDS the impact is expected to become more serious over the next years. Project strategies and interventions should be revised accordingly.
In view of the above observations, the need for inter-agency and inter-sectoral cooperation in strategy and project formulation is of great importance. This is of some significance for the role which all United Nations agencies will play in the years ahead (and not only in Africa) and may well prove to be a test of the effectiveness of some of those agencies. It also raises the important issue of the relation between United Nations agencies and NGOs, both local and international.
6.9 Specific recommendations at the micro level
6.9.1 Crop production activities
6.9.2 Livestock and small-stock raising
6.9.3 Income-generating activities
6.9.4 Health
6.9.5 Nutrition
In broad terms, for individual farming systems, the following basic types of activities are required:
- improving returns to labour;
- extending the planting period (minimum tillage, early maturing varieties, crops and methods for later planting);
- crop diversification and reducing external input requirements;
- improved livestock management techniques;
- small credit schemes.
6.9.1 Crop production activities
Specific activities or improvements aimed at improving yields, producing more relish crops and helping farmers to adapt to labour shortages might include for crop production, the following:
- advice on possible labour economising methods for cultivating staples in order to delay the effects of labour shortage, for example, how to deal with the weevil problem in bananas;
- advice on how yields of secondary staples, for example cassava and yams, now displacing bananas, may be increased without needing extra labour;
- advice on better storage of secondary staples resulting in an effective increase in production
- access to improved varieties of relish crops, specifically groundnuts, beans, cowpeas and bambara nuts;
- exploring other mixtures and intercrop possibilities;
- use of labour-saving implements e.g. reduced tillage implements for oxen such as rippers and ridgers;
- using minimum tillage and ground cover crops to reduce weeding for hand hoe cultivators;
- consideration of the weed control problem - is there a role for herbicides in some circumstances? Are there alternative mulching methods which do not require large amounts of labour?
- improvements in the marketing of relish crops
- access to small loans for other crops and staples (especially targeting women, see also below);
- promotion of research into indigenous relish crops, processing methods and seed storage;
- improving crop management for intercropping;
- tractor hire; or promotion of draught power; and
- promotion of alternative soil fertility strategies (as opposed to reliance on fertilisers) through the use of organic fertiliser, intercrops and crop rotation.
6.9.2 Livestock and small-stock raising
Specific activities or improvements aimed at livestock production are the following:
- promotion of breeds requiring limited attention;
- advice on feed and health care techniques for cattle, sheep, goats, pigs and poultry;
- in societies where cultural tradition permits, pig keeping may be encouraged as a labour economising replacement for cattle, having advantages both as a source of cash and protein which may be particularly beneficial for female- headed households;
- poultry keeping may be encouraged especially for orphans to raise some cash;
- promotion of non-traditional livestock activities, e.g. bee keeping (apiary);
- finally inheritance customs which may prevent widows from inheriting livestock should be discouraged.
6.9.3 Income-generating activities
Where appropriate, small especially home-based low labour income generating opportunities and petty trading activities may be considered. However, these may well mean that provision needs to be made to ensure access to credit by small farmers, either as individuals or groups. Such activities include sewing, tailoring, bee keeping, pig keeping and the production of handicrafts.
However, it is worth noting that local initiatives and ideas are only feasible in circumstances where there are markets for products. Accordingly, encouragement of any kind of income-generating activity should only be considered on the basis of the right conditions being present. These may include access to the inputs needed for the activity, storage and transport facilities if necessary and reasonable likelihood of the marketability of the product.
6.9.4 Health
The large numbers of AlDS-afflicted and affected families in areas of high seroprevalence means that the care of AIDS patients is an important, time-consuming and expensive part of the daily lives of such households. Many of those interviewed in the course of the field studies whose families had been affected by AIDS said that they preferred to have patients die at home.
In Zambia, for example, home-based care programmes will be essential in most rural areas, especially since several of the local hospitals examined, already had constant occupancy rates of over 100 percent. Thus it will not be possible to care for the bulk of HIV/AIDS patients in hospitals, and neither is it particularly desirable, as they are then separated from their kin.
Women in particular reported that they prefer those who are sick to be at home, as it disrupts their production activities less and removes the cost of transport to the hospital. However, caring for patients at home also involves material costs, notably for food and bedding. With regard to food, it was observed that patients often did not like and would not eat vegetables and thus became very hungry. They wanted meat, fish, and eggs. With respect to bedding, blankets are expensive and if they become soiled and torn are costly to replace.
Measures should therefore be taken regarding the home care of HIV/AIDS patients so as to:
- provide for the training of family members in the basic skills of handling and taking care of patients to avoid the risk of infection; and
- provide resources so that households can afford both food and medication, treatment and bedding for the sick.
In all farming systems, regardless of the stage of epidemic impact, AIDS prevention measures, most notably through health education' urgently need to be introduced (or strengthened as the case may be). Such measures include:
- promotion of social activities since many, particularly marginalized rural areas, offer virtually nothing in terms of activities apart from beer drinking and sex;
- door-to-door awareness-raising campaigns are preferable to rallies as a means of disseminating information;
- health education/AIDS teaching should be integrated into work with agricultural extension groups;
- schools should be supported to provide health and AIDS education. This is particularly relevant in areas where the HIV/AIDS epidemic is regarded as a kind of witchcraft or is generally considered to be a taboo subject. In a number of villages in Zambia, for example, people were more reluctant to discuss at any length symptoms of the living, however, knowing that to say someone has AIDS is to condemn that person. There was no occasion when someone said categorically that a living person had AIDS, but there were occasions when it was stated that someone had died of AIDS. One difficulty in dealing with AIDS in Zambia, in urban as well as rural areas, is that often it will be associated with witchcraft. This lack of understanding of what AIDS is simply hinders campaigns to arrest and mitigate its impact;
- support should be given to awareness-raising concerning the use of condoms. The wider distribution of condoms is also required e.g. from stores, depots, grocery stores etc.;
- pregnancies amongst HIV couples should be discouraged; and
- cultural tradition like sexual cleansing in Zambia, should be discouraged or at least men should be encouraged to use condoms.
6.9.5 Nutrition
Findings from the research in most of the farming systems studied cited the declining nutritional status among households affected and or afflicted by HIV/AIDS. Thus efforts should be made to improve the diets of households burdened by having to care for patients or having a high dependency ratio, because of children (and mothers) who have been relocated through divorce and death.
Greater encouragement should be given to:
- the production and use of groundnuts, soyabeans (soya flour) and mashed cowpeas;
- creating awareness of the need for a balanced diet (and therefore for diversified production);
- mothers continuing breastfeeding even when pregnant again;
- improving food preparation (many foods are frequently over cooked);
- involving men in nutrition programmes; and
- promoting child spacing programmes (i.e. to allow sufficient time for a baby to be adequately weaned and to grow before the next child is born).
6.10 Recommendations for specific target groups
Orphans
As noted in previous chapters, a direct effect of the HIV/AIDS epidemic has been to increase the number of orphaned children.
Accordingly, support to orphans and institutions or organizations concerned with the welfare of such children should be assisted or where necessary established. This includes assistance in the payment of school fees, skills training, etc..
Pastoralists
In Tanzania efforts to complete a study of pastoralists were unsuccessful. Little is known about the effect of the epidemic on such livelihood systems (see Chapter 3), these groups are often marginalised, and such a study should be given priority in future work on HIV/AIDS impact.
Women
In many instances women form the backbone of the farming systems. At the same time, their responsibility for the collection as well as the production of food, and their household duties render them particularly vulnerable to the effects of HIV/AIDS morbidity and mortality. Measures which might assist women and especially those who are or become (e.g. by reason of sickness or divorce) heads of households include the following:
- regarding both land and inheritance laws, such legislation should be reviewed so as to clearly stipulate land ownership rights for women. And although laws may not discriminate against women with regard to land rights, traditional or customary laws often do. In this regard, state laws should prevail over customary or religious laws;
- assistance and advice is generally required in the transport, storage (e.g. through the provision of milling facilities for grains in order to produce flour) and in the marketing of products;
- access by women to draught power, farm implements and other inputs;
- provision of adequate extension services especially to women in remote areas;
- encouragement of group formation among widows who currently and in the future will carry much of the burden of coping;
- encouragement of the use of bicycles by women to ease the burden and time required in undertaking a number of farm and household tasks especially for the collection of firewood, water and in the transport and marketing of produce.
6.11 Recommendations relevant to the Estate Sector
6.11.1 HIV/AIDS education and prevention
6.11.2 Improvement of the socio-economic environment
6.11.3 Recruitment policies
6.11.4 Training and staff development
6.11.5 Employment benefits
So far, the impact of HIV/AIDS on the estate examined in this study, the Nakambala Sugar Estate (NSE) has been noticeable and worrying, but not devastating. In general, there are two main responses for HIV/AIDS: HIV prevention and mitigation. In an environment with limited financial resources, these have to be cost-effective.
In the NSE example, medical staff had strongly expressed the need for HIV testing facilities in order to make better diagnosis and hence provide more appropriate treatment. The testing should obviously not be compulsory but be available for individuals wishing to know their status. In addition, the development of HIV infection could be monitored. However, it is absolutely necessary that results be kept confidential.
HIV testing should also be accompanied by counselling and a home-based care system. In the study of NSE, respondents frequently said that they could not endure an HIV positive result. Therefore, psychological support is essential. The opinion of women in the NSE townships, for example, was split between AIDS patients being cared for at home or in the hospitals. Some women expressed the fear that they do not know how to care for patient and therefore think that the care in hospitals is better. Others believe that the conditions in the hospitals are not favourable and prefer to look after patients themselves? especially if they are taught how to treat the patients. The establishment of a home based care system would be one way to mitigate the effect of HIV/AIDS on companies.
6.11.1 HIV/AIDS education and prevention
Companies should become more active in HIV prevention and education to limit the spread of HIV among the workforce. The present HIV education activities are not sufficient to reach all employees. The expense of such a programme is minimal compared with the cost of replacing someone who dies of the illness. In an awareness campaign, other STDs should also be included. High risk groups, such as cane cutters in the NSE example, should receive special attention. As alcohol abuse is often associated with unreasonable risky sexual behaviour, an HIV prevention programme could be combined with an anti-alcohol campaign.
6.11.2 Improvement of the socio-economic environment
Companies should contribute towards creating a socio-economic environment, which makes the spread of HIV more difficult. One way is to empower women by improving their economic status. In companies such as NSE, there are often plenty of positions, which could be occupied by women, ranging from the unskilled to the professional level.
6.11.3 Recruitment policies
Pre-employment testing is not recommended and would be discriminatory. In countries, such as Zambia, where there is a narrow skill base for professionals and high rates of infection, exclusion of HIV positive persons would be a self-defeating policy. An HIV positive person can be productive and beneficial for the company for a considerable number of years. Even if an employee is HIV negative at the time of starting work, there is no guarantee that the employee will not be infected afterwards. The situation is different with applicants who are already sick and stretch the company's budget on medical costs and other benefits right from the beginning of their assignment. Therefore a mandatory chest examination as part of routine medical evaluation for permanent employment is recommended as is the practice in other parts of the world.
6.11.4 Training and staff development
It is debatable whether employees should be screened prior to training, as training is an investment in persons, which will only be paid back over time. If the employee falls sick soon after completing the training, the investment will have been lost. This investment is also lost if the employees leave the company for other reasons. But such cases tend to be in the minority. Where there is a proven positive result, owing to the nature of the HIV/AIDS, it is not known whether the employee is able to work for the next 6 months or the next 10 years. Therefore a company could still realize a return on its investment because afflicted individuals may still have a fairly long work life. The longer the training takes, the less return could be expected. A cost-benefit analysis could compare the costs of the training with the likely return form the individual; such an analysis would also have to take into account the probability of death and disability occurring from other diseases
or circumstances (Pangs, l 992).
6.11.5 Employment benefits
Most of the costs which arise due to HIV/AIDS may be attributed to employment benefits. These costs are inevitable and the company has to live with them. But as it is expected that these costs will rise in the near future consideration should be given to whether any financial limit might be set. If this is the case? these limits should be negotiated with trade unions.
<section>b</section>
Annex
Annex - Map of Tanzania
Annex - Man of Uganda
Annex - Map of Zambia
Bibliography
Barnett, T. and Blaikie, P., AIDS in Africa: its present and future impact, Belhaven Press, London and Guilford Press. New York, 1 992.
Drinkwater, M.J., 'Knowledge, consciousness and prejudice: Developing a dialogue with farmer research groups', paper presented to the workshop on Beyond Farmer First, Institute of Development Studies, Brighton, U.K., 2729 October 1992.
Drinkwater, M., The Effects of HIV/AIDS on Agricultural Production Systems in Zambia, Vol. 1, Vol.2, Mpongwe Field Report and Vol.3, Teta Field Report, Ministry of Agriculture, Food and Fisheries and FAO, Zambia, September 1993.
FAO. Farming Systems Development: Guidelines for the Conduct of a Training Course in Farming Systems Development. Rome, 1 990.
Food Studies Group of the International Development Centre, Agricultural Diversification and Intensification Study, three volumes, FSG, International Development Centre, Oxford. U.K., 1 992.
Foster, Susan. Cost and burden of AIDS on the Zambian Health Care System: Policies to Mitigate the Impact on Health Services. USAID document (unpublished), September 1993.
Gillespie S. Potential impact of AIDS on Farming Systems: A Case Study from Ruanda, Land Use Policy, October 1989, pp. 301 312.
Government of Tanzania, Comprehensive Food Security Programme, Dares-Salaam, 1 992.
Government of Tanzania, Ministry of Health, National AIDS Control Programme, HIV/AIDS/STD Surveillance Report No. 7, Dar-es-Salaam, December 1 992.
Government of Uganda, HIV/AIDS Surveillance Report, Ministry of Health, AIDS Control Programme, Entebbe, Uganda, 1992.
Government of Uganda, HIV/AIDS Surveillance Report, AIDS Control Programme, Entebbe, Uganda, December 1992.
Government of Zambia, Ministry of Health/WHO, Zambia National AIDS Prevention and Control Programme, Annual Report, January 1993.
Haslwimmer, M., The Social and Economic Impact on Nakambala Sugar Estate, Zambia, January 1994.
Hunter, S., Bulirwa, E. and E. Kisseka. 'AIDS and Agricultural Production: Report of a Land Utilization Survey, Masaka and Rakai Districts of Uganda' Draft submitted in Land Use Policy, 1993.
IFAD, General identification Report: Volumes I to IV, Rome, 1993.
Kapinga, A., Kissawike, K., Ndelike, M. and Ngasonga, J., Report on the Study of Effects of HIV/AIDS on Agricultural Production Systems in Tanzania, Institute of Development Studies, Sokoine Agricultural University, Morogoro, Tanzania, October 1993.
Mitti, G.A., Zambia: The Major Farming Systems, a summary of information on the main agricultural zones and systems based on analysis of socio-economic studies and provincial reports, Adaptive Research Planning Team, Mount Makulu Central Research Station, Lusaka, Zambia, September 1993.
Panos Institute. The Hidden Cost of AIDS. London, 1992.
Semali, I and Ainsworth, M., "Health Status and the economic burden of poor health", In World Bank, Report of a workshop on the Economic Impact of Fatal Adult Illness in Sub-Saharan Africa held in Bukoba, Kagera region, Tanzania, September 16 - 20, 1992, The World Bank. Washington DC, July 1993.
Tibajuka, A. The Cost of Differential Gender Roles m African Agriculture: A Case Study of Smallholder Banana-Coffee Farms in the Kagera Region, Tanzania. Journal of Agricultural Economics, (1) 1994,pp.69-81.
Topouzis, D., The Implications of HI V/AIDS on Investment Centre Work, DDC, FAO. Rome, January 1994.
Tumushabe, J., Bantebya, G., and Ssebuliba, R., The Effects of HIV/AIDS on Agricultural Production and Rural Livelihood Systems in Eastern Africa: FAO Project RAF/92/TO/A/08/12, Uganda, October 1993.
WHO.The HIV/AIDS Pandemic: 1993 Overview. GPA, Geneva, 1 99 3.
World Bank, Report of a workshop on the Economic Impact of Fatal Adult Illness in Sub-Saharan Africa held in Bukoba, Kagera region, Tanzania, September 16- 20, 1992, Washington DC: The World Bank, July 1 993.
World Bank. World Development Report 1993: Investing in Health, Oxford University Press, 1993.
