<section>e</section>
Acknowledgment
Acknowledgment
I am grateful to Dr. T. E. Contado, Chief, ESHE, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome, Italy, and Chairman of my Advisory Committee, for his valuable guidance, constant encouragement, constructive criticism and untiring help in finalisation of this report.
I express my sincere gratitude to Dr. M. Randriamamonjy, Senior Officer, ESHW, and Dr. R. Adhikarya, Extension Education and Training Methodology Specialist, ESHE, FAO, Rome, for acting as members of the Advisory Committee and for providing useful suggestions for the design and analysis of the data of this research study.
I am grateful to the Director-General, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome, for offering me this André Mayer research fellowship, giving me the opportunity to undertake this research and study this important subject, to work with people from different countries, and to learn how to use the computer during the study period.
I gratefully acknowledge the constant help and encouragement rendered by Dr. Pote Boonruang, Head, Rural Studies Centre, Kasetsart University, Bangkok, Thailand, Dr. Earl E. Timothy, Head & Director, Department of Agricultural Extension, University of the West Indies, the Republic of Trinidad and Tobago; Dr. Carol E. Williams, Professor and Head, Department of Agricultural Extension Services, University of Ibadan, Nigeria, and Mr. Rajab Ali, Director, Department of Agricultural Extension, Ministry of Agriculture and Agrarian Reform, Syria, during the course of this investigation. I also acknowledge my indebtedness to Dr. Singthong, former Dean, K. U. Bangkok, Thailand, Dr. Sree Prasad, Professor, U. W. I, and Mrs. Meryl James Bryan, Director, Caribbean Net Work for Integrated Rural Development, Republic of Trinidad and Tobago; Dr. J. E. Olawoye, Assistant Professor, University of Ibadan, and Mrs. C. Nnonyely, Programme Leader Extension, VIA, Nigeria, Miss Rowyada Hasbani,
Chief, Rural Home Economics Division and Mrs. Bachira Taouakalna, Director of Women's Union, Syria, for their immense help, suggestions and encouragement during the course of this study.
I also express my gratitude to Mr. R. A. Maine, Fishery Industries Officer, Ms. Martina Haslwimmer, APO, AGSP, Mr Günter Hemrich, APO, ESHE, Mr. Stefan Schlingloff, APO, ESHA, and Mrs. R. Lobb Maltsoglou, Training Programmes Assistant, ESHE, FAO, for immense encouragement and inspiration during the course of study.
I honour the full co-operation, assistance and inspiration of Mr. Jean-Marc Meyour, Senior Officer, Fellowships Group, FAO, during the entire period of this investigation .
I would like to thank the Vice Chancellor of the Assam Agricultural University, Jorhat, Assam, India, for releasing me to take up the fellowship.
With deep sense of gratitude I must specially thank my husband, Dr. Bubul Das, for his understanding and my family members for their constant encouragement during the entire period of this investigation and preparation of this report.
Finally, I wish to thank all the people who have kindly responded to my queries. There are many officers both at FAO Headquarters and in different countries who have offered valuable suggestions. They are too numerous to list here, but will recognize their contributions to this study. Their help is very much appreciated.
Manju Dutta Das
An André Mayer Research Fellow
<title>Improving the relevance and effectiveness of agricultural extension activities for women farmers - An AndrÃ© Mayer research study</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
Preface
Since WCARRD, held in 1979, there has been greater emphasis on the reduction of poverty and improved nutrition and on increased self-reliance in rural areas, particularly at the household level. To achieve this, there have been efforts to improve the awareness of decision-makers and planners of the role played by women in agricultural production, marketing and rural development, and to better identify and respond to women's needs for training and access to inputs and services for food production and associated activities.
Mrs. Manju Dutta Das started working for the Assam Agricultural University, Jorhat, Assam, India as an Assistant Professor. Along with her colleagues and students she conducted a few short-term extension projects in areas such as kitchen gardening, fishery, poultry and duck rearing, sericulture, food processing, adult education, and energy conservation based on priority need areas of women farmers in the University adopted villages. However, the nature and extent of women farmer's participation in agricultural extension activities in different countries were not clear.
Because of her high qualifications and relevant experience, Mrs. Dutta Das was awarded an FAO André Mayer Research Fellowship by FAO and, for sixteen months starting from March 1993, explored some of the important factors for improving the relevance and effectiveness of agricultural extension activities in reaching the women farmers of Thai/and, Trinidad, Nigeria and Syria. Selection of these four countries was based on the knowledge that they have a long history of general agricultural extension services to farming communities.
In connection Wit/? this study, Mrs. Dutta Das had discussions with related informed persons at various levels - ministries, research institutes and universities - of these four countries. The administrators at different levels of the extension departments in the ministries of agriculture provided current information on the various problems and constraints of agricultural extension services in reaching women farmers.
The FAO library in Rome and in different related institutes of the study countries (IITA, NISER and University of lbadan, Nigeria, Department of Sociology and Department of Extension Education, Kasetsart University, Thailand, CARDI, CNIRD, University of West Indies and the Information and Training Division, Ministry of Agriculture, Trinidad, and ICARDA in Syria) were also consulted for the collection of secondary information.
Due to a limited time period in each country (two months in each) and language constraints in three of the countries (excluding Trinidad), Mrs. Das designed her research instrument very carefully for primary data collection. The study has had limitations. But efforts were made to include the main problems that might affect the agricultural extension system in reaching women farmers who really need urgent attention.
The findings of this study confirm that women farmers are not a homogeneous group. They represent different situations which need to be considered as a useful factor in planning extension strategies. The nature and extent of their involvement in agriculture no doubt varies greatly from region to region. But regardless of these variations, the most important activities mainly performed by women farmers are planting, transplanting, weeding, harvesting, storage and food processing. Apart from Syria, most of the women farmers of three of the study countries engaged in the marketing of their farm produce. Decision-making patterns in farm activities seem to be changing and women have increasingly become an important partner for their husbands, except in one country. Despite their valuable contribution in agricultural production, women do not have easy access to agricultural resources, such as the required amount of cultivable land, tit/e of land ownership, improved farm
implements, improved seeds, fertilizers, chemicals, marketing outlets and credit. It was also observed that real problems and needs for agricultural advice are not considered on a gender basis when planning and preparing extension packages in the agricultural services, and a comparatively lower percentage of women farmers in Thailand and Trinidad participated in the programs than in Nigeria and Syria. Lack of address of women farmers explicitly as an important clientele group in respective extension programmed activities, lack of women us contact framers, lack of appropriate technology suitable for women farmers, the required amount of demonstration materials and equipment for the extension service, lack of appropriate training of field extension agents in extension methodology to serve women farmers, poor monitoring and evaluation systems and inadequate extension/research linkages are the most important factors which need to be improved to make agricultural extension
activities effective in reaching women farmers.
Throughout the study, Mrs. Das met with her advisory committee which consisted of Dr. Marie Randriamamonjy, Senior Officer in the Women in Agricultural Production and Rural Development Service, Dr. Ronny Adhikarya, Agricultural Extension, Education and Training Methodology Specialist, and myself as Chairman, who were able to assist her with problems in dealings with such a complex subject.
T. E. Contado, Chairman
André Mayer Research Fellow Advisory Committee and Chief; Agricultural Education and Extension Service
<section>2</section>
I. Introduction
1. Statement of the problem
2. Need and justification for the study:
3. Objectives of the study:
I. Introduction
The crucial importance of women's contribution to food security in developing countries is widely recognized. In most developing countries, rural women are the mainstay of small-scale agriculture, the farm labour force and day-to-day family subsistence. Yet rural women are faced with a number of constraints. They have more difficulties than men in gaining access to land, credit and extension services. Development interventions to improve the economic roles of women have also so far had limited success. Up recently, the overriding concern of such interventions for rural women remained one of welfare and home economics programmes, mainly through women-specific projects or women's components in multi-purpose projects. In many cases, however, development projects have not taken adequate account of women's responsibilities, participation and priorities in their specific local conditions, constraining the achievement of the objectives of the programmes, or leading to negative
effects on women and families.
In recent years there has been an increasing recognition of the need to integrate women into mainstream development efforts. The economic rationale behind this approach is that the full use of productive potential of human resources (male and female) cannot be realized if women, who make substantial contributions to food output, do not have adequate access to resources, productivity enhancing inputs and services. This approach focuses on gender differences (gender = socially and culturally determined differences between men and women) primarily in division of labour in production, or income-earning activities, and access to and control over resources and assets. Gender analysis also involves the desegregation of women's roles and responsibilities by socioeconomic class, agro-ecological environment and farming system, culture and ethnic group and, for each of these categories, by age and marital status. This shift to a gender approach has been primarily due to the overriding
attention of governments to the need for socioeconomic policies to take into account the role of and the impact on women. Many governments are increasingly recognizing, for instance, that policies such as price incentives cannot be fully successful in stimulating agricultural production if the institutional arrangements prevent women producers from getting the benefits. The gender approach to integrate women into mainstream development has also been stimulated in part by the impetus created by and new directions given at the Nairobi World Conference (1985) to review and appraise the achievements of the United Nations Decade for Women.
Many studies show that in the efforts to generate household food supply and income, a substantial burden falls on women. Almost everywhere, women are responsible for processing, storing and preparing family food. Rural women also fetch water and firewood for the family. Above all, women are engaged as family labour in agriculture as well as wage labour and in other income-earning activities, and generate a substantial proportion and sometimes even all of the basic daily food for the family. They are usually responsible for small livestock, often for small ruminants and sometimes for large animals that are not on free range. In many countries women play an important role in fishing in shallow waters and in coastal lagoons.
It is also observed from many studies that, although there is a wide diversity in household production patterns, women in all regions play a predominant role in household food security through agricultural and food production. It is estimated that a significant proportion of women in developing countries spend up to two-thirds of their time in traditional agriculture and marketing. Their working hours tend to exceed those of men. Women in rural areas grow at least 50 % of the world's food. They work in all aspects of cultivation, including planting, thinning, weeding, applying fertilizer and harvesting. Women are also active in post-harvest activities and in livestock production.
In Africa, it is estimated that women represent from 30% to 80% of the agricultural labour depending on area and socio-economic class. In most parts of this region, women have been traditionally responsible for food crops and men for non-food cash crops. This division of labour between food crops and cash crops, however, is never clear cut. Often women help their men-folk in cash crop production.
The contribution of women to agricultural production and household food security in the Near East varies widely from country to country, but in many of the countries their contribution is substantial. Where permanent drought has forced men to migrate, women's participation in agricultural tasks that were traditionally done by men has increased. In some countries women perform laborious and repetitive tasks all the year round, whereas men work during ploughing and threshing periods only. In several other countries, irrigation, pest control and to a large extent fertilizer application are the exclusive tasks of men, while threshing and marketing are the exclusive tasks of women. In the region as a whole women are heavily involved in livestock, particularly small animal and dairy production (FAO, 1990).
In Asia, in nearly all rice-growing areas men traditionally perform such activities as preparation, ploughing, irrigation and leveling of the fields. However, sowing, transplanting and weeding are usually women's work. Harvesting and threshing and transporting of grain from fields to home is done by both men and women, while drying, cleaning and processing of the rice are done by women. A number of studies show that the contribution of women to agricultural production in terms of number of operations performed and number of hours worked is in most cases greater than that of men (FAO, 1990).
Women in Latin America also are heavily engaged in food production, but to a lesser degree than in Africa and Asia. Surveys in parts of Colombia and Peru show that female participation rates in agricultural field tasks range from 25% to 45%. Some studies show that, while in the more commercialized agricultural regions almost all households have at least one woman who participates in field work, female participation in the regions characterized by traditional agriculture is more in processing activities than in direct field work. Women in these regions have, however, a high participation rate in animal husbandry, which in some areas contributes as much as 30% of the household income (FAO, 1990).
In a paper prepared for the Seventh Session of the FAO Committee on Agriculture (COAG), Rome, Italy, 21-30 March 1983, it was shown that women made up an average of 42% of the agricultural labour force in 82 developing nations. In 24 of the countries surveyed, women made up over 50% of the agricultural work force and over 40% of the work force in 52 of the countries. Furthermore, the COAG (1983) paper also goes on to suggest that due to migration, the percentage of women involved in farming may even be increasing.
Women form a large segment of the agricultural work force. As such they deserve increased attention of agricultural extension services in every developing nation. There is a need for an action-oriented plan to reach the millions of women in agriculture who fill the bread baskets of the third world and contribute to their exports.
1. Statement of the problem
The 1983 COAG paper contains a great deal of data which clearly show that nearly half of the officially enumerated agricultural labour force in many developing countries are women. Studies also show that a significant proportion of women spend up to two-thirds of their time in traditional agriculture and in marketing. Their working hours tend to exceed those of men. In some countries women are the principal labour force on small farms and perform the major share of hoeing weeding transporting storing processing and marketing. Their share in cash crop farming is also significant. Yet agricultural extension networks often by-pass women producers. This means for women that they are disadvantaged and implies for governments that resources made available for extension work are not rationally used.
These facts were largely unrecognized by the international community prior to the World Conference on Agrarian Reform and Rural Development (WCARRD) held in 1979 which declared: "Rural development based on growth with equity will require full integration of women including equitable access to land water and other natural resources. inputs and services and equal opportunities to develop and employ their skills. There is also an urgent need to expand knowledge and statistical data on all aspects of women's roles in rural activities".
Following WCARRD there has been greater emphasis on the reduction of poverty and improved nutrition and on increased self-reliance in rural areas particularly at the household level. To this end there have been efforts to increase awareness among decision-makers and planners of the role played by women in agricultural production marketing and rural development and to better identity and respond to women's needs for training and access to inputs and services for food production and associated activities.
It is now fully recognised that agricultural extension services suffer from a number of weaknesses in their programmes for rural women. These include: (a) a focus on efficiency objectives and few 'progressive' farmers to the relative neglect of resource-poor term households women as heads of rural households and ladles households; (b) misperceptions and prejudices about women's actual and ideal roles with the result that they are often excluded from the target group of extension in areas in which they play major roles; (c) attempts by separate women's units staffed by people without agricultural backgrounds to implement technical agricultural projects; (d) a gender bias among extension workers; and (e) inappropriate extension methodology for reaching rural women (quoted from FAO 1987).
Historically scientific knowledge and technical skills of any given population or society spread significantly through formal and non-formal (including agricultural extension) education systems. However this does not consistently happen among rural women. In agricultural countries complex socio-economic socio-cultural and religious factors need to be analyzed and understood for developing effective extension and training programmes to reach women farmers. What is the actual situation and what are the problems and solutions related to improving the effectiveness of agricultural extension programmes for the benefit of women in agricultural countries? What strategies and lines of action can be recommended to governments and external development agencies so that present and future generations of rural women in agricultural countries apply scientific knowledge and use improved agricultural techniques and skills in their farm work? These are questions that need to be answered
through this proposed research.
2. Need and justification for the study:
There is some evidence to support the contention that small farmers in general, and women farmers in particular, are not being well served by the existing extension systems in developing countries . A recent FAO study of extension services in Asia and Africa concurs with this observation, concluding that: "in very few countries has an adequate organizational solution been found for advising rural women who not only work at home, but also in the fields" (von Blackenburg, 1984). The failure to reach women farmers is part of an overall problem related to a lack of support and resources. In looking at women farmers as a neglected segment of the farming community, the realities of life in many less developed nations must be realistically addressed. With some extension workers being assigned to work with as many as 1000 farm families, the need for policy review is obvious. Just as obvious is the need to remember that each country has its own specific problems. Generalizations
offer much food for thought, but little basis for action. Specific situations need to be reviewed and perspective action on a country-by-country basis needs to be taken. The important contribution made by women in agriculture justifies the necessity to make the system more equitable. The above background, therefore, provides the necessary basis and justification for this research study.
3. Objectives of the study:
The following are the specific objectives of the present study:
i) to develop a concrete understanding of women farmers as clientele of the agricultural extension system;
ii) to determine the capacity of the agricultural extension service to provide advisory services to women farmers;
iii) to make an analysis of the agricultural extension programmes and the extent of women farmers' participation;
iv) to determine the constraints of the agricultural extension services in reaching women farmers;
v) to make some suggestions to improve the relevance and effectiveness of agricultural extension activities in reaching women farmers.
<section>3</section>
II. Review of literature
1. Women's role and access to agricultural extension services in Sub-Saharan Africa
2. Women's role and access to agricultural extension services in Asia
3. Women's role and access to agricultural extension services in Latin America
4. Women's role and access to agricultural extension services in the Near East
II. Review of literature
Women's productive role in agriculture and their access to agricultural extension services in different regions of the developing world have been evident from various reports of international organizations and agencies, literature and research studies. An attempt is made in this section to critically discuss the reviews in order to highlight the research gaps. Hence, they are categorized into four groups in order to obtain a geographic overview of women farmers in farm activities.
1. Women's role and access to agricultural extension services in Sub-Saharan Africa
Technical Centre for Agriculture and Rural Cooperation (CTA, 1993) reported that women in Africa make up more than one-third of the work force. They account for 70% of agricultural workers, 80% of food producers, 100% of those who process basic foodstuffs and they undertake from 60% to 90% of the marketing.
Further, they come up against all sorts of difficulties in their attempts to be seen as agents for development in their own right. First and foremost, they have no land ownership rights. In some communities, they have only annual rights of use of individual fields given to them by the head of the household. Studies have shown that the majority of rural women obtained their farm land from their husbands or his family. Often this land is "given" to the women for a short period, perhaps just one growing season (Ishola, 1987; Aidoo, 1988; Eghugara, 1989; Olawoye 1989 and Modupe, 1990). In general, they cannot make any long-term improvements to the land, such as planting perennial fruit crops, arranging irrigation facilities, etc. In 84% of water and land conservation schemes through which land has been reclaimed, only six per cent of women have been able to acquire official ownership.
It was also stated that women do not usually attract the attention of credit brokers since the loans they request are often small and are costly to administer. Often credit systems use existing village cooperatives of which usually only the male heads of households are members, even though there is no formal bar to female membership. The final obstacle to obtaining credit for women is that illiterate women cannot complete the necessary bank loan forms. Although these days African primary schools have as many female pupils as male, the rate of illiteracy among women is still above 90% in 28 African countries, according to UNESCO figures (CTA, 1993).
All the project training tends to be oriented towards crops traditionally grown by men. Timetables take no account of women's chores such as looking after children, cooking, cutting wood and fetching water. In many countries cultural or religious factors play an important part in preventing women from receiving training. Trainers and agricultural extension agents are usually male and thus may not speak to, or get close to women. This is especially true in Muslim countries (CTA, 1993).
The international Labour organization (ILO) estimates that 78% of women in SSA and only 64% of men are economically active in agriculture (Buvinic and Lycette, 1988). Food production there has long been recognised as primarily a woman's activity, but women also participate increasingly in other agricultural activities such as processing, cash cropping, animal husbandry and marketing.
Women in West Africa play a pivotal role in agriculture, providing most farm labour and making the key decisions for many agricultural activities which can be documented from different studies conducted in various states of Nigeria (Gbolagade, 1987 and Folasade, 1991). Ohuegbe (1989) observed that women farmers contribute more to food production and family labour than men. It was estimated that over 95% of rural women are small-scale farmers who produce most of the food and bear the burden of day-to-day family subsistence. According to diagnostic surveys of the agricultural extension zones, women perform almost all the cultural operations in food production. Such operations as bush clearing and burning, ridge/mount making, planting, fertilization, weeding, harvesting, storage, processing and marketing are carried out by women. Women also have sole responsibility for cultivating compound farms (or gardens) where continuous cropping is done with household refuse.
Adekanye (1984) reported, from the time use study of men and women in rural areas, that women spent 30% of their time performing prescribed "prime" activities, such as child care and other housekeeping chores. Moreover, these women managed to spend almost an equal amount of time (about 8 hours compared to the men's 8.1 hours) on income-generating activities of farming, food processing and trading. Women's leisure time was an estimated 1.4 hours, or much less than half of the 3.4 hours which men devoted to leisure.
A time allocation study in one Gambian village reported that women performed 53% of the agricultural and 73% of domestic work, compared with 33% and 6% respectively for men (Baston 1987). Available data in Kenya indicate that women spend one-third of their working hours on food preparation and child care, which stretches their working day to 13-14 hours. Most of them are reported to spend 3 hours a day fetching water (World Bank, 1989a). Ishola (1987), Adewara (1988) ( I % in Bauci State) and Folasade (1991) identified a much lower percentage of women farmers than Oyo (24%), Kwara (23%) and Ondo (15.7%) as having membership in cooperative organizations.
Ishola (1987) further reported that knowledge about improved technologies was the main constraint in agricultural production, while lack of separate land and inadequate contact with extension agents were the main problems reported by Folasade, 1991.
Olawoye (1993) reported that lack of mobility, shortage of qualified female extension staff, lack of coordination between the Unified Extension System and Parallel Extension Services, inappropriate extension packages, lack of flexibility in extension strategies were the main constraints in extension services to women farmers.
Akinbode (1991) indicated that tasks that women performed on the family farm were different in some states from those they did on their personal farm. For instance, in Ogun, Gongola and Cross River states women performed production and marketing related roles both on family as well as on personal farms. On the other hand, the women in Kano and Niger States did not work on the family farm except for processing. More than 70% of the women farmers in Ogun Niger and Cross River State and 60% in Gongola State engaged actively in planting, weeding, harvesting, cleaning, application of fertilizers and transportation. He also reported that in Kano State very few Muslim purdah women (20%) engaged in production related roles. The study also revealed that the majority of women farmers of Ogun and Cross River States made their own decisions. In Gongola, Kano and Niger States, women farmers depended on their husbands. And a similar finding was also reported by Adeniji (1991) in Oyo
state. Furthermore, Akinbode (1991) indicated that the male agents reached more women farmers than their female counterparts. The proportion of contact of extension services with individual farmers was 61.5% in Ogun State, 45% in Gongola State, 23% in Cross River State, 79% in Kano State and Niger State. Attendance at training sessions and meetings was limited, except in Ogun State. It was also revealed that the extension agents required intensive and comprehensive training in fisheries, agro-forestry, and gender specific nonagricultural technologies.
Staudt (1978) revealed that female-managed farms are significantly less well served by extension services than are jointly-managed farms. Further he indicated that women's participation in farmer training was low due to lack of awareness of the availability of training and lack of transportation facilities to the training centre.
Chale (1991) identified some problems of women farmers in Nigeria in participating in agricultural development programmes. These were as follows: lack of demonstration equipment and teaching aids; insufficient and ineffective extension services to farm women; lack of training on gender specific tasks such as processing, preservation and storage; lack of basic infrastructure; inadequate training of extension agents; lack of appropriate technological and development information; inadequate use of existing women farmers' groups; inadequate coordination between national and international agencies; urban-directed flow of information; lack of access to credit; inadequate agricultural inputs; inadequate interaction between extensionists and technology generating centres; mobility problems and few women extensionists. Further, she revealed from her survey conducted in five pilot states of Nigeria that decision-making in agricultural activities in Niger state was fairly shared among
the family members while in Kano, Cross River and Gongola it was between husbands and wives. In Ogun state a large number of women farmers expressed their dominance in decision-making in most household and farm activities.
2. Women's role and access to agricultural extension services in Asia
In Asia, women provide much of the labour for the staple crop, rice. An in-depth study from Nepal (Acharya and Bennett, 1983) gives an unusually detailed picture of the labour contribution by sex for rice and other staples. It reports that women perform 66% of the labour involved in planting, 75% in weeding, and all of the cleaning and storage of rice. In the production of wheat, they contribute 66% of the work; for maize, 94%; for oil seeds, 85%; for millet, 94%. In addition, they make 42% of the agricultural production decisions and are most influential about seed selection and fertilizer use.
In Thailand, the number of women engaged in agriculture was 6.65 million. They are the major source of labour in subsistence agriculture (100%) and are engaged in various aspects of agricultural production, animal husbandry (50%), inland fisheries (90%) and food processing (100%) and 70% are in farm management (Anonymous, 1987). The majority of women are engaged in agricultural work on the family farm. Seven out of ten are unpaid family workers and less than 10% are employed in private enterprises (Anonymous, 1985). Women generally make decisions on household expenditure and savings and some make decisions regarding big investments, such as buying land. However, men not women decide on the purchase of agricultural inputs, such as seeds, fertilizers and pesticides (Sirisambhand and Gordon, 1987).
The fact that women play a crucial role in agricultural production and trade has been widely ignored by development planners. Women have been excluded from training programmes on modern methods of crop cultivation, food production, labour-saving technologies, livestock and poultry management, small-scale industries, marketing and services. Credit for technological improvements in agriculture is seldom made available to women. Membership in cooperatives through which agricultural loans are generally channelled is restricted to "heads of households" who are traditionally defined as male (Dulyapach, 1985).
It was noted that in Thailand "most technology transfer activities in agriculture (such as animal husbandry practices, seed selection, utilization of fertilizers and pesticides), do not differentiate between men and women in their target groups. However, it is interesting to note that few women participate in the training programmes. The government officers claim that women are not interested in new technology while according to non-governmental agencies, the number of women candidates always exceeds the capacity of their training budget". This was corroborated by women farmers at a workshop on: "Directions for strengthening the role of women farmers" (Anonymous, 1989). There, most of the women participants expressed an interest in receiving training in new technology that would improve their agricultural productivity and lessen the burden of carrying out their tasks. It should be noted also that there are cases where government officers go out of their way to encourage
women farmers to participate in agricultural activities. For example, in the dairy project in Surin Province, the majority of the group members are women. The provincial Animal Husbandry Development board recognised the pivotal role women could play in raising dairy cows, and supported them in this activity. Income from dairy cows has become the main source of family income. With the support of the Department of Cooperatives, a Dairy Cows Cooperative was set up to strengthen the members' knowledge of marketing strategies (Deelau, 1989).
Provision of credit to women farmers is still limited in Thailand. In general, because poor women do not have assets which they can put up as collateral for loans, they are denied access to credit (Anonymous, 1989). Television has superseded all other information channels in importance regarding agricultural information for Thai farmers across the country.
Thai women and men work side-by-side in nearly all agricultural activities, with the exception of some laborious work such as land preparation. The actual hours women put into crop activities are about 64% of those contributed by men. Furthermore, it was seen that meetings with agricultural extension officers for women are uncommon, as only 20% of women attend such meetings at an average rate of two to three times per year, as compared to 60% of men attending these meetings at the rate of about five times per year. Another interesting point is that formal sources of information are more accessible to men than to women, while women rely more on informal sources such as neighbors or their spouse. It was found that men took a more active part in farming decisions than women. With respect to household and social expenditure, women reported that they had more control than men (Shinawatra and Pitackwong, 1987). It was also reported by the Farming Research Institute (Anonymous,
1991) that farming decisions were mainly dominated by men, while women had a more decisive role in domestic tasks.
Throughout South-East Asia and China, women are also heavily involved in agriculture. Within the Indonesian nuclear family, women tend to play an important role in decision-making, but outside the household they are generally subordinate to men. They are responsible for providing family food, collecting water and fuel, generating household income (including unpaid labour on the family farm), providing labour in exchange for a share of the crop and generating an independent income from wage labour, handicrafts, agro-processing and marketing. Philippine women are noted for their many entrepreneurial activities, often in the informal sector and independent of their husbands (Saito and Spurting, 1992).
Studies in South Asia showed that women from large landholding families who supervise farm labour share their agricultural information with the women laborers, with beneficial results for both the landowners and the laborers. In these areas, landed women would make good contact farmers (Saito, 1992).
Data from commercial banks in Andhra Pradesh, India, showed that only 6% to 12% of the loans were given to women and, moreover, none of these were agricultural loans. A survey of households in Bangladesh found that women made up only 2.8% of the recipients of formal credit (Saito, 1992).
3. Women's role and access to agricultural extension services in Latin America
Estimates from Peru and Chile, showed rural women's contribution to the work in agriculture as 21 % and 10.4% respectively (Baeza, 1982 and Deere, 1982).
Rogers (1980) suggested that the primary impact of the Western influence on gender roles in a society is to transfer much or all of the non-farm subsistence work to women, followed later by a transfer of subsistence farming. Case studies indicated that in many cultures, men clear the land and do the initial ploughing, whereas women plant, weed and help with the harvest. An interesting version of this division of labour is seen in Jamaica where, on steep hillsides, men prepare the soil with a plough for both subsistence and commercial crops (Chancy and Lewis 1980). The tasks that women do also vary according to farm size (Deere, 1982), or when implements are involved. On larger farms where many modern inputs are used, female participation is limited, but on the smaller farms there is a higher level of sharing of tasks and decision-making between the sexes.
In general, as shown by field surveys in Trinidad and Tobago (Harry, 1980), women farmers perform the less strenuous tasks such as planting, cutting, weeding, fertilizing, moulding of soil around young plants and harvesting. Some of these tasks are gender-neutral or interchangeable, especially harvesting and fertilizing. Pest control is less likely to be undertaken by women because it is thought that the use of chemical sprays is dangerous to women, especially if they are pregnant or lactating. Of the 96 farmers in the Trinidad survey who used insecticides, weedkillers and fungicides, men performed the task on 77 farms, whereas it was jointly carried out on 10 farms. Only five females, all of whom owned their own farms, sprayed their own crops. On other female-operated farms, pest control was delegated to hired or family labour.
Decision-making on cultivation, selling and marketing of minor crops was the responsibility of both husband and wife in Trinidad and Tobago (Harry, 1980).
Chase (1988) reported that Jamaican women play an important role in food production as small producers and as agricultural labourers. In an agro-socio-economic survey conducted in six parishes in Jamaica, 45 % of agricultural producers were women. The Agricultural Census of Jamaica (1978) showed that, of the total of 182,169 farms island-wide having single holders, 19% were operated by women.
In general terms, female farming, especially in the smaller islands, is most common on subsistence holdings of less than five acres of land. The Agricultural Census for Saint Lucia (1987), for instance, reported that of a total of 11,504 farmers in the entire country, only 0.9% had holdings of more than five acres; 84% of the female farmers operated less than five acres of land; a further 11.4% were reported as being landless. In Jamaica, according to the Agricultural Census (1978-79) the land owned by women represented only 12% of the total cultivated land.
Chase (1988) further identified women as being involved in multiple roles: agriculture, child care, home maintenance within the farm household, etc., and because of stereotypic notions of these roles, they confront specific problems in becoming more efficient food producers.
Knudson and Yates (1981) in their survey on Saint Lucia found that women worked five to six hours a day on the farm, three to four hours on housework and two to five hours on child care. Occasionally, time was also spent on marketing farm produce. It is not surprising that 22% of the women in this survey felt that they had no leisure time at all.
Chase (1988) also discovered that limited capital (100%), inadequate markets (94%), unavailability of inputs (91 %), insufficient land (90%), unavailability of credit (83%) and lack of agricultural extension (82%) were the major constraints faced by the women of Saint Lucia in farming activities.
Lewis (1990) in his study on female participation rates in agricultural extension programmes revealed that 25% of women farmers attended extension meetings.
Rajak (1990) reported that nearly 15% of the women farmers of Trinidad received agricultural information from their spouse and only 0.4% from the extension workers. Furthermore, 67% of them made the farm decisions themselves.
4. Women's role and access to agricultural extension services in the Near East
Rural women in Syria do a great deal of agricultural work. They are more involved in lighter work that does not require great physical effort, but needs care and patience: planting, transplanting, weeding, thinning, threshing, harvesting and pulling out the roots. Such activities usually continue throughout the year and are often of a more tedious nature. Most of the work is done manually or with the use of hand tools. Poultry raising, care of livestock, milking and milk processing at the family level are also the responsibility of rural women. It was also noted that illiteracy among females engaged in agricultural work was more than 90% and they were mainly considered unskilled cheap labour. Available information has shown that the redistribution of land under the agrarian reform programme did not significantly increase the number or proportion of women landowners in the country. Membership in agricultural cooperatives is open to male and female farmers; nevertheless,
social cultural barriers still limit rural women's participation in cooperatives. It was reported that female membership is increasing, but at a very slow rate, i.e. 0.5% (FAO, 1983b).
In Syria, it was reported that lack of proper training of the extension worker in extension methodology and technical agriculture subjects, an insufficient number of female field extension agents, lack of incentives, lack of transportation and lack of inputs for extension work are the major reasons for the ineffectiveness of the extension programme to women farmers (Hassan, 1987).
In most of western Turkey, women are much involved in agriculture, particularly for the production of fruits and vegetables and the rearing of livestock. There are fewer taboos against men and women interacting than in parts of eastern Turkey, where women's roles reflect traditional Islamic norms. In eastern Turkey, women are still active in farming, but more in the seclusion of their homesteads (Saito and Spurling, 1992).
In Yemen, male emigration is particularly heavy, where an eighth of the population works in paid employment elsewhere. The women let's behind have had to assume the agricultural duties of the absent husbands and, as direct recipients of remittances, have greater decision- making power than would be expected in an Islamic country. About 80% of women live in rural areas and work all the year round. In contrast, men mostly work seasonally on heavy work, technical (pesticide spraying) work, marketing and delivery, and cash crops (Saito and Spurling, 1992).
<section>4</section>
III. Methodology
1. Population of the study
2. Sampling procedure of the study
2.1. Selection of study areas
2.2. Selection of respondents
2.3. Limitations of the study
3. Operational definition of variables studied
3.1 Dependent variables
3.1.1 Effectiveness of agricultural extension activities
3.1.2 Relevance of agricultural extension activities
3.2 Independent variables
3.2.1 Age of women farmers
3.2.2 Household head
3.2.3 Total number of children
3.2.4 Education
3.2.5 Size of land holding
3.2.6 Social participation in farmer organizations
3.2.7 Socio-economic status
3.2.8 Women farmers' involvement in farm and reproductive activities
3.2.9 Decision-making pattern of women farmers in farm and reproductive activities
3.2.10 Women farmers' need for agricultural advice
3.2.11 Attitude of extension personnel
4. Instruments for data collection
5. Pre-testing of the instruments
6. Procedures of data collection
7. Analysis of data
III. Methodology
1. Population of the study
The present study was carried out in four selected countries namely: Thailand, Trinidad, Nigeria and Syria (see Figure 1). Selection of these countries was based on the assumption that their agricultural extension systems provided more relatively satisfactory extension services to male farmers than those provided to women farmers.
2. Sampling procedure of the study
A multi-stage purposive-cum-stratified random sampling design was followed for selection of the study areas.
2.1. Selection of study areas
The study was confined to representative state(s) suggested by the research committee of each selected study country (see Figures 2 to 5). A separate list of number of districts/zones and number of villages from each selected extension area was collected from the study states for the selection of study areas for the study. Thus, two districts/zones which were sufficiently close to the study states to enable a series of visits to selected villages by the researcher over a limited period of time were chosen. From each district/zone, four extension areas and from each extension area eight villages were selected by using simple a random sampling technique (see Annexe 1).
2.2. Selection of respondents
From each village, 10% of women farmers were selected randomly from the lists provided by the extension service. Thus the total number of farm women selected from each state was eighty (80).
In addition to the above, field extension agents, technical officers/subject-matter specialists (SMS), administrators, supervisors, policymakers and planners were selected irrespective of gender. The main criterion for choice of these respondents was their knowledge of the operation of the agricultural extension service in their country.
FIG. 1. Map showing general location of study countries (*).
FIG. 2. Map of Thailand showing present study area (shaded).
FIG. 3. Map of Trinidad showing present study area (shaded).
FIG. 4. Map of Nigeria showing present study areas (shaded).
FIG. 5. Map of Syria showing present study areas (*).
Thus the total number of respondents interviewed in each study country is shown below in Table 1.
Table 1. Kind and number of respondents interviewed in the study areas in the four countries selected
Country
Women farmer
Extension agents
Technical officer/SMS
Administrators supervisors, policymakers, planners
Total no. of respondent
Thailand
Trinidad
Nigeria
Syria
Total
2.3. Limitations of the study
(i) focus on women farmers who were engaged in agricultural production related roles;
(ii) limited to sources of data on the subject;
(iii) limited to agricultural extension activities only, excluding the many other services provided to women farmers;
(iv) does not include home economics;
(v) limited by time, financial constraints and human resources;
(vi) limited to those countries where the agricultural extension system provided extension services to both men and women farmers.
3. Operational definition of variables studied
3.1 Dependent variables
3.1.1 Effectiveness of agricultural extension activities
Claar and Bentz (1984) stated that: "Effective extension work requires management and operational procedures that reinforce the organizational structure. These must contribute to a favourable work environment, and result in systematic and expeditious handling of the many administrative tasks of the organization. Inadequacies in any of these areas can seriously impair the performance of an extension service".
Mott (1972) defined 'effectiveness' as the ability of the organization to be mobilized to meet the demands in the areas of production, adaptability and flexibility.
According to Etzioni (1976), the actual effectiveness of a specific organization is determined by the degree to which it realises its goals.
In the light of the above definitions, the researcher in this study conceptualized the meaning of effectiveness as the ability of agricultural extension services to mobilize their capacity to meet the demands of the women farmers in the area of agricultural production.
An index was framed and used as a basis for the measurement of the strengths and weaknesses of agricultural extension services to meet these expressed needs of the women farmers. Thus, 26 items were listed as possible components of an effectiveness index intended to serve women farmers, based on the review of literature and discussions with experts in the field of agricultural extension services. The knowledgeable persons in the field of extension were used as judges. Thus, the total number of judges were 30. Each of the judges was asked to rate the importance of each item by using a five point scale: (i) most important; (ii) important; (iii) fairly important; (iv) less important; and (v) not at all important. After analyzing the responses of the 30 judges, the researcher selected as index items those rated "most important" by the majority of the judges. Thus, 11 items were finally selected and included in the effectiveness scale. These were as follows:
(i) extension approaches and methods used in the extension system to service women farmers;
(ii) extension activities planned and completed by the extension service in relation to women farmers;
(iii) women's participation in extension programmes;
(iv) research/extension linkages in relation to women farmers;
(v) monitoring and evaluation of agricultural extension programmes;
(vi) extension personnel differentiated by gender and position;
(vii) extension agent: farmer ratio;
(viii) training facilities for field extension agents;
(ix) office accommodation for field extension agents;
(x) transport facilities for the mobility of field extension agents;
(xi) allocation of financial resources to the extension service.
Furthermore, the researcher listed possible sub-items under each selected component to find out the level of capacity of the extension services to serve women farmers thoroughly in the four study countries.
The analysis of the data of various components of the effectiveness index of each study country was restricted to a descriptive and quantitative analysis because of limited sources of data.
3.1.2 Relevance of agricultural extension activities
The "relevance of agricultural extension activities" is defined as the relation between existing formulated agricultural extension topics in the extension service and women farmers' expressed problems in farm work and need areas for agricultural advice. In the present study, the relevance of agricultural extension activities was operationally understood as those activities that attracted and fulfilled the needs of women farmers as evidenced by their participation in those activities.
3.2 Independent variables
The major criterion for the selection of independent variables was evidence from past research, as well as from published literature related to the study countries.
3.2.1 Age of women farmers
Age of women farmers was operationally defined as the chronological age of the women respondents.
3.2.2 Household head
In the present study, household head referred to the member of the household who actually controlled the productive resources of the family such as land, inputs, etc., and provided the main economic support of the family. These persons were classified into three groups: women, men (husbands) and other family members.
3.2.3 Total number of children
This referred to the total number of children of the women farmers included in the study.
3.2.4 Education
Education referred to the level of formal education the women farmers of the study had reached. It was measured with a few modifications by the scale developed by Trivedi (1963). These were categorized into four groups: illiterate, informal education, primary level (primary completed/not completed) and secondary level (secondary completed/not completed).
3.2.5 Size of land holding
This referred to the number of acres of cultivated land possessed by the women farmers or their families. Rented or leased out area was also included in this concept.
3.2.6 Social participation in farmer organizations
Social participation in this study referred to the membership of women farmers in various formal organizations (for both men and women), either as a member or as an office bearer.
3.2.7 Socio-economic status
This referred to the position of the women farmers in society and was determined by various social and economic variables such as land, education, type of housing, occupation of head of the family, material possession, type and size of the family and the extent of social participation (Trivedi, 1963).
3.2.8 Women farmers' involvement in farm and reproductive activities
This referred to the actual role performed by women farmers in the eighteen and five major farm and reproductive activities respectively.
3.2.9 Decision-making pattern of women farmers in farm and reproductive activities
This referred to the pattern of women farmers' participation in making decisions in fifteen important farm matters including reproductive activities. Through the structured questionnaire, the decision-making pattern of women farmers was put into four categories, i.e. husband only, wife only, both (wife and husband), and family members (father, brother and children).
3.2.10 Women farmers' need for agricultural advice
The term "need" is usually defined as the gap between the current existing knowledge and the desired knowledge. "Need" in the present study was operationally defined as the gap between what a woman farmer perceived she already knew and what she wanted to know more about in respect of farm practices. The need of women farmers was measured with the help of a structured questionnaire consisting of fourteen selected agricultural topics: cultivation techniques; soil fertility; selection of good variety of seeds; selection and use of fertilizers; pest control; weed control; crop production/mixed cropping; harvesting techniques; storage of produced crop; care of livestock; care of poultry; marketing; credit advice and food processing.
3.2.11 Attitude of extension personnel
According to Thurstone (1946), attitude is "the degree of positive or negative affect associated with psychological objects like symbol, phrase, slogan, person, institution, ideal or ideas towards which people can differ in varying degrees".
The researcher operationally defined attitude in this study as the degree of positive or negative opinion of extension personnel towards women farmers as extension clientele.
4. Instruments for data collection
Four interview-cum-structured questionnaires were designed and used to collect information and data for this study. The first instrument was designed for women farmers as clientele of the agricultural extension system; the second instrument was designed for administrators of extension organizations in each of the countries selected and concerned the current capacity of the agricultural extension service to provide advisory services to women farmers; the third instrument was for field extension agents to judge their attitude towards women farmers as clientele of extension services, identification of type of agricultural extension topic and number of extension activities planned and implemented to deliver extension messages to women farmers, and type of training courses attended by them. It also covered the extension worker's perception of women's participation in extension activities and the identification of problems and constraints of the extension service in reaching women
farmers. The fourth instrument was designed to enable extension policymakers, planner, administrators, supervisors and technical officers or subject matter-specialists to judge their attitude towards women farmers as clientele of extension services, and to identify the problems and constraints that they perceived could affect agricultural extension in reaching women farmers.
5. Pre-testing of the instruments
The questionnaire prepared for interviewing women farmers was tested in the nearest village of the extension institution of each study country to which the writer was assigned for the research work. Thirty women farmers were selected for pre-testing in each study area. Necessary modifications were made before proceeding to the field survey.
6. Procedures of data collection
Prior to data collection in each study country, two female interpreters were selected together with X research helpers. They were trained to facilitate the collection of data from the women farmers and the extension personnel within the period planned.
The data were collected in four phases.
In the first phase, women farmers were interviewed, either in groups or individually, using the structured questionnaire.
In the second phase, field extension agents were interviewed in groups or individually in the district offices of selected study areas following the structured questionnaire.
In the third phase, data and/or information on how the agricultural extension systems actually influenced the operation of extension work for satisfying the problems and needs of women farmers were collected after reviewing the annual reports and discussions with the related extension administrators of the four study areas/countries.
In the fourth phase, information about problems perceived by the policymakers, planners, administrators, supervisors and technical officers or subject-matter-specialists as affecting agricultural extension services' ability to reach women farmers was collected.
7. Analysis of data
Data from questionnaires were coded. A wide variety of data was summarized and categorized in different ways for ease of presentation and comprehension.
The data pertaining to age, total number of children, size of landholding, socio-economic status, and attitude of extension personnel towards women farmer as clientele of extension were categorized as follows for interpretation in the present study:
(i) age of the women farmers: data collected pertaining to age revealed that this ranged between 15 and 60. For analysis, the women farmers were categorized into the following three groups:
Category
Score range (Years)
Younger
Middle
Older
(ii) total number of children: the information collected was categorized into the following three groups:
Category
Numbers
Small
Average
Large
above 6
(iii) Size of land holding: the data on land holding were first converted into standard acres based on a conversion formula provided by each government land reform act. Then the socio-economic status scale developed by Trivedi (1963) was used to categorize the size of land- holding as follows:
Size of land
Less than 3 acres
3 to 5 acres
Above 5 acres
(iii) socio-economic status (SES): to measure the socio-economic status of women farmers the scale developed by Trivedi (1963) was used with a few modifications to suit the rural situation of the countries selected (see Annexe-2). The total computed scores achieved by each woman farmer was categorized as shown below:
Category (SES)
Score Range
Low
Average
High
(iv) attitude of extension personnel: the tool for measurement of the attitude of extension personnel consisted of 10 statements (5 positive and 5 negative) and the responses were recorded on a five-point scale. The scoring procedure for positive statements was as follows:
Category
Score
Strongly Agree
Agree
Undecided
Disagree
Strongly Disagree
For negative statements, the scoring procedure was reversed. The scores obtained were categorized into the following three groups:
Category
Score range
Highly favourable
Favourable
Less favourable
Moreover the need, i.e. the difference between existing and desired knowledge, was measured for each item or activity. To assess the existing knowledge, respondents were asked to say whether they 'knew thoroughly', 'knew somewhat', or 'did not know at all'. For desired knowledge, they were asked to mention whether the knowledge was 'most needed', 'somewhat needed', or 'not needed'. These were scored as 2, 1, and 0 respectively (Kaur and Srivastava, 1988).
A further comparison was made of the various variables between the four study areas such as demographic, socio-economic conditions of women farmers, involvement of women farmers in farm and reproductive activities, their participation in making decisions on farm activities, their access to production resources, their gender preferences for extension agents, total female extension personnel, the budget allocation of the extension service and suggestions of extension personnel to improve the extension services.
The problems of women farmers in farm work, their preferential topics to be learned on agricultural extension, their problems in attending extension activities and problems and constraints in affecting extension services to women framers perceived by extension agents and extension personnel were ranked according to number of respondents.
The mean was used to analyze the number of extension activities completed by each extension agent in relation to women farmers, number of training courses attended by field extension agents in the four study areas and women farmers' participation in extension activities as perceived by field extension agents.
<section>5</section>
IV. Findings and discussion
1. Women farmers as clientele of agricultural extension systems
1.1 Demographic and socio-economic characteristics
1.1.1 Age of women farmers
1.1.2 Marital status of women farmers
1.1.3 Status of household head
1.1.4 Total number of children
1.1.5 Educational level of women farmers
1.1.6 Size of landholdings of women farmers
1.1.7 Social participation index
1.1.8 Socio-economic status index
1.2 Extent of women farmers' involvement in farm and reproductive activities
1.3 Participation of women farmers in making decisions on farm and reproductive activities
1.4 Average hours spent daily by women farmers on farm and reproductive activities
1.5 Women farmers' access to production resources
1.5.1 Sources of land
1.5.2 Sources of improved farm implements
1.5.3 Sources of laborer in farm activities
1.5.4 Sources of improved varieties of seeds
1.5.5 Sources of fertilizers
1.5.6 Sources of pesticides
1.5.7 Sources of credit
1.5.8 Sources of marketing outlets
1.6. Frequency of advice received by women farmers from extension agents during 1992
1.7 Present sources of agricultural advice for women farmers
1.8 Problems faced by women farmers in farm activities
1.9 Expressed need areas of women farmers for agricultural advice
1.10 Women farmers' gender preference of extension agents
2. Capacity of agricultural extension services in the four study countries to serve women farmers
2.1 Mandate of agricultural extension services
2.1.1 Need for women farmers to be recognized in agricultural extension policy objectives and guidelines for the operation of extension programmes
2.1.2 Specific clientele group in extension
2.2 Organizational structure pattern
2.3 Organizational provision to serve women farmers
2.4 Attitude of extension personnel towards women as farmers
2.5 Extension approaches and methods used in extension services
2.6 Extension activities planned and completed by extension services in 1992
2.7 Women's participation in extension programme development
2.8 Research-extension linkages
2.9 Monitoring and evaluation
2.10 Female extension personnel differentiated by gender and position
2.11 Ratio of subject-matter specialists (SMS) to field extension agents
2.12. Extension agent: Farmer ratio
2.13 Training facilities for field extension agents
2.14 Office facilities for field extension agents
2.15 Transport facilities for field extension agents
2.16 Financial resource's allocated to the agricultural extension service in 1992
3. Types of agricultural extension programme and the nature and extent of women farmers' participation
3.1 Types of agricultural extension topics included in extension programmes in 1992 to serve women farmers
3.2 Extent of women farmers' participation in extension programme activities
4. Problems faced by women farmers in attending extension programme activities
5. Problems and constraints of agricultural extension services in reaching women farmers, as perceived by extension personnel
5.1 Expressed by field extension agent
5 2. Expressed by extension personnel (policymakers, planners, extension administrators, supervisors and technical officers or subject-matter specialists)
6. Some suggestions of extension personnel by position and gender for improving the effectiveness of agricultural extension services to women farmers
IV. Findings and discussion
1. Women farmers as clientele of agricultural extension systems
The findings presented in this section identified various interrelated components, such as the demographic and socio-economic conditions of women farmers, their roles in farm and reproductive activities, their participation in decision-making on the farm and in reproductive activities, average hours spent in farm and reproductive activities, access to production resources utilized to carry out their farm activities, frequency of advice received from extension agents, their present sources of agricultural advice, their main problems in farm activities, areas of need for agricultural advice and their gender preferences for field extension staff. Together, these components provide the information that can lead to the effective design and implementation of agricultural extension programmes to maximize women farmers' participation.
1.1 Demographic and socio-economic characteristics
1.1.1 Age of women farmers
In all the study areas of the four selected countries that provided data, it appeared that the age of women farmers ranged from 15 to 60 years. Women farmers aged between 30 and 45 years were the majority in Trinidad (62.50%), followed by Nigeria (44.37%), Syria (31.25%) and Thailand (27.50%). Furthermore, it was found that nearly 40% of women farmers in Syria and Nigeria were in the younger age group, followed by Thailand (31.25%) and Trinidad (23.75%). It was also noted that less than one-third of women farmers in three of the study countries (except Thailand) were from the older age group.
Table 2. Age level of women farmers in the study areas in the four countries selected
Categories of age level
Thailand N=80 %
Trinidad N=80 %
Nigeria N=160 %
Syria N=160 %
Younger (15 - 30 years)
Middle (30 - 45 years)
Older (45 - 60 years)
N= Total number of respondents
As shown in Table 2, the majority of the respondents in the four study areas were between 15 and 45 years.
1.1.2 Marital status of women farmers
The respondents of the present study are presented in Table 3 according to marital status. This reveals that a large percentage of women farmers in the four study countries were married (91.88% in Syria, 85% in Nigeria, 78.75% in Thailand and 61.25% in Trinidad).
Table 3. Marital status of women farmers in the study areas of the four countries selected
Categories of marital status
Thailand %
Trinidad %
Nigeria %
Syria %
Married
Divorced/separated
Widowed
Unmarried mother
Furthermore, it was noted that the percentage of widows included in the study was computed as nearly 24% in Trinidad, followed by 16.25% in Thailand, 14.37% in Nigeria and only 7.5% in Syria. A negligible percentage of women farmers was in the divorced/separated category in all four study countries.
1.1.3 Status of household head
Several workshop/conference reports and studies suggested singling out female-headed households as a special category of extension clientele. The results of the present study (see Table 4) indicate that less than one-third (26.25%) of the total number of households studied in Trinidad were headed by women, followed by Thailand (21.25%), Nigeria (15%) and Syria (4.38%). The findings in Nigeria were supported by the survey of a World Bank-executed project on Women's Agricultural Productivity in Africa (WAPIA) in 1990.
Table 4. Household Head in the study areas of the four countries selected
Category of Household Head
Thailand %
Trinidad %
Nigeria %
Syria %
Women
Men (husband)
Male family members (father and brothers)
It is worth mentioning that, in married households in all the study countries, women farmers generally performed agricultural activities with their husbands. In addition, specifically in Nigeria, it was reported that women farmers controlled their own personal farm as well as contributing labour to their husband's and family farm. It was also expressed by most of the married women in the four study countries that, in general, their husbands, or the male family members, were always considered head of the household. Furthermore, it was shown in Syria that widows were guided either by the father or brothers of their husbands, whereas in the other three countries this category of women was, generally speaking, considered head of the household. In addition, unmarried mothers in Trinidad were found to live with their direct relatives (parents/brothers).
From the above findings presented in Tables 2, 3 and 4 it can be deduced that women farmers were not a homogeneous group in all four study areas. They represented different situations which should be considered as a useful factor when planning extension strategy.
1.1.4 Total number of children
As shown in Table 5, most of the women farmers in Nigeria (78.12%) and Syria (75%) appeared to have more than six children, while in Trinidad 92.50% and in Thailand 88.75% had between one and three children.
Table 5. Number of children of women farmers in the study areas of the four countries selected
Category of family size
Thailand %
Trinidad %
Nigeria %
Syria %
Small (1 to 3 children)
Average (4 to 6 children)
Large (more than 6 children)
From the findings shown above, it is assumed that the number of children in rural areas may have varied because of the socio-cultural and economic conditions of the individual country. Furthermore, the findings suggest that, if they had many children, women farmers could be compelled to engage more in reproductive activities which would mean that they would have less leisure time and this could affect women's participation in agricultural extension activities.
1.1.5 Educational level of women farmers
The highest percentage of illiterate women farmers was identified in Syria (62.50%) and in Nigeria (60%), while women farmers in Trinidad (95%) and Thailand (80%) had the minimum formal education at primary or secondary level (Table 6).
Table 6. Educational level of women farmers in the study areas of the four countries selected
Categories of educational level
Thailand %
Trinidad %
Nigeria %
Syria %
No education
Informal education
Primary level
Secondary level
The above findings show that in Syria and Nigeria most of the women farmers were illiterate, compared to the educational level in Thailand and Trinidad. This is in line with the findings reported by the Research and Planning Division (Anonymous, 1982), FAO (1983b.), Gill (1987) and the World Bank (1991a.). It is assumed that women's access to agricultural extension and their ability to comprehend and use technical information are lower when they lack the minimum formal education. Moreover, because of illiteracy, women farmers are less able to respond to written extension materials. They are also excluded from selection as contact farmers in the extension programme.
1.1.6 Size of landholdings of women farmers
The total size of available cultivated land in the four study countries is shown in Table 7. This indicates that the majority of women farmers in three of the countries (excluding Thailand) cultivated less than three acres of land. This is in agreement with the findings reported by the World Bank (1989b.). It also shows that none of the women farmers in the study areas in Nigeria had more than five acres of land for crop production.
Table 7. Total amount of land cultivated by women farmers in the study areas of the four countries selected
Categories of amount of land
Thailand %
Trinidad %
Nigeria %
Syria %
Less than 3 acres
3 - 5 acres
More than 5 acres
From the data shown in this Table, it is perceived that having less cultivated land can be a strong disincentive for women farmers to adopt improved methods/techniques of agricultural technologies, or investing their seasonal income in land for crop production. Moreover, given the existing farming technologies, most of the smallholders (less than 3 acres) were observed as being faced with a problem of available cash income to buy inputs and hire labour, as reported by several studies and reports, because smallholder technology is considered expensive and labour intensive. It is also felt that, because of acute seasonal labour shortages, more land, even if available, would not be a solution. The findings further suggest that less cultivated land and income could compel women farmers to seek cash income from outside work to support the family, which would tend to reduce the time available to work on their own farms. As a result, sometimes the smallholder's productivity was
lower and there was less interaction with extension agents. In addition, extension agents were sometimes reluctant to work with these categories of women farmers. Hence, smallholders, especially female ones, should gain access to more inputs and better cost-effective technology so that the returns to the land they had would be greater, i.e. their productivity would increase.
1.1.7 Social participation index
An international workshop organized by FAO (1987) suggested that the most suitable method to communicate with women farmers was through the organization of farmers' groups. Table 8 indicates the variety of formal group organizations existing in the four countries where women farmers were entitled to membership. It shows that a large percentage of women farmers in the study areas in Nigeria (85.62%) and Thailand (72.50%) were members of different farmers' organizations, followed by Trinidad (25%) and Syria (3.75%). It is clear from the respective study areas that increased membership was due to the existing extension strategy for reaching women farmers through the T & V system. The data revealed on this subject in Syria and Trinidad is supported by FAO (1983) and a survey report (Anonymous, 1982). This result might be due to the lack of awareness of women farmers of the importance and benefits of enrolment in farmers' groups/cooperatives, or to the prevailing socio-cultural
restrictions to membership in farmers' groups.
Table 8. Social participation of women farmers of the study areas in farmers' organizations in the four countries selected
Participation in farmers' organizations
Thailand %
Trinidad %
Nigeria %
Syria %
Women farmers' associations
Women farming groups
Farmers' cooperatives/ farmers' associations (men & women)
Credit society
Other social groups for women (better life, health, & religious groups, women's unions, etc.)
No involvement
1.1.8 Socio-economic status index
Table 9 reveals that the majority of women farmers in Thailand (51.25%) and Trinidad (47.50%) were from the middle socio-economic level, while in Nigeria 81.25% and in Syria 66.25% were from a low socio-economic level. Furthermore, it appears that only a low percentage of women farmers belonged to the high socio-economic level (18.75% in Trinidad and 13.75% in Thailand. This is consistent with Laxmi Devi's (1983) findings that the majority of women working in agriculture were of a lower socio-economic standing.
Table 9. Socio-economic status of women farmers in the study areas of the four countries selected .
Category of socio-economic status
Thailand %
Trinidad %
Nigeria %
Syria %
Low
Middle
High
From the above findings it can be seen that the women farmers of low socio-economic status would be compelled to work more hours in the fields as well as at home because of lack of labor saving farm implements. Moreover, due to the economic hardships of this group, they would be unlikely to buy recommended inputs for increasing agricultural productivity. As a result, they would be less interested in contacting extension agents for advice on improved and modern agricultural techniques.
1.2 Extent of women farmers' involvement in farm and reproductive activities
The data presented in Table 10 show the distribution of women farmers in the four study countries according to the major roles performed in farm as well as reproductive activities. It was found that more than 50% of the women farmers in all the study areas contributed labour regularly in areas such as transplanting, planting, weeding and harvesting, but most of them performed least for land preparation, application of pesticides and irrigation activities. This is in agreement with Henshall's (1984), FAO's (1983) and the World Bank's (1992) findings which state that women were more involved in lighter work that does not require great physical effort, but care and patience, such as planting, transplanting, weeding, thinning, threshing and harvesting.
Table 10: Involvement of women farmers in farm and reproductive activities of the study areas in four selected countries
Farm activities
Thailand %
Trinidad %
Nigeria %
Syria %
Seed bed preparation
Land clearing.
Land preparation
Transplanting
Planting
Application of fertilizers
Irrigation
Weeding
Application of pesticides
Harvesting
Transportation
Threshing/Winnowing
NA
Cleaning/bundling
Storing
Processing
Marketing
Care of livestock
Care of poultry
Reproductive activities
Cooking
Collecting fuel wood
NA
Collecting water
NA
Maintenance of house
Care of children
Note: NA = Not applicable
Furthermore, some variations are observed in the roles performed by women farmers in the areas such as transportation, marketing and storing in the study countries as seen in Table 10. It appears that marketing was done mainly by the women farmers in Nigeria (88.13%) and Trinidad (88.75%), whereas only 33.75% of the women farmers in Thailand and 5% in Syria undertook this task. It was also noted that, of the total, the majority of women farmers in Nigeria contributed more labour in transporting crops from the fields (73.13 %), storage of crops for family use (71.25%), processing (91.25%) and threshing (56.25%). In addition, it was found that more than 70% of women farmers in all the study areas prepared meals for their families. A large percentage of women farmers (over 60%) in Nigeria and Syria collected wood for fuel and water regularly for daily use, while in Thailand the percentage was low for fuel collecting but nearly 44% for water collection. More than 80% of women
farmers in Nigeria and Syria took care of their children, while in Trinidad the percentage was only 27.5% and in Thailand 45% (Table 10). It is interesting to note that in Trinidad the women farmers utilized an improved labour saving technique for the preparation of meals and water for their daily use.
From the above findings it can be seen that most of the women farmers in the study countries performed dual roles in their day-to-day life, which meant that they spent more time and effort than the men. Therefore, women farmers might not have the time to have regular contacts with extension agents or to attend extension activities. It is also felt that poor access of the women farmers to extension services could be due to lack of proper attention to their dual roles by the extension planners and implementers when planning programme activities for the farmers and/or targeting them.
1.3 Participation of women farmers in making decisions on farm and reproductive activities
The data given in Table 11 presents interesting findings in the four study countries. It shows that a large percentage of both men and women in married households in the study areas in Thailand, Trinidad and Nigeria made farm decisions on: selection of crop site (70%, 55% and 46.25% respectively) and the crops to be planted (42.5%, 51.25% and 55.62% respectively) as well as on the adoption of new varieties of seeds (55%, 48.75% and 44.87% respectively), while in Syria farm decisions were found to be taken mostly by the husbands.
It is interesting to note that most of the women farmers in all the study areas of Thailand, Trinidad, Nigeria and Syria influenced decisions on what should be kept for family use and storage (86.25%; 67.5%; 63.75% and 61.25% respectively) and meals for the family (73.75%, 76.5%, 74.5% and 61.25% respectively).
Furthermore, Table 11 indicates that more than 80% of women farmers in Thailand and Trinidad took major decisions on management of family income, followed by 65% in Nigeria and 56.25% in Syria. It is also worth pointing out that, in married households in all the study areas, decisions about when and how to use pesticides were taken mostly by the husbands.
Table 11. Participation of women farmers in decision-making on farm and reproductive activities of the study areas in the four countries selected
Decision-making areas
Thailand %
Trinidad %
Nigeria %
Syria %
Selection of crop site to be planted
B (70.00)
B (55.00)
B (46.25)
H (53.75)
Selection of type of crops to plant
B (42.50)
B (51.25)
B (55.62)
H (52.50)
Adoption of new variety of seeds
B (55.00)
B (48.75)
B (44.87)
H (53.75)
Buying inputs
B (70.00)
H (48.75)
H (40.63)
H (86.25)
When and how to use fertilizers
B (65.00)
H (46.25)
B (39.00)
H (73.75)
When and how to use pesticides
H (70.00)
H (46.25)
H (75.00)
H (76.25)
Selling crops and where to sell
B (82 50)
B (61.25)
W (63.75)
H (81.25)
Seeking loans for farm resources
B (45.00)
NR
NR
NR
What to keep for family use and storage
W (86.25)
W (67.50)
W (63.75)
W (61.25)
Hired labour
B (43.25)
B (63.25)
B (53.75)
H (63.75)
Buying and selling of livestock and poultry
W (52.50)
B (55.71)
W (41.79)
B (63.75)
Management of income
W (87.50)
W (81.25)
W (65.00)
H (56.25)
Maintenance of house
W (52.50)
W (76.50)
W (53.75)
H (63.75)
Education of the children
W (87.50)
B (63.25)
B (43.75)
Meals for the family
W (73.75)
W (76.50)
W (74-50)
W (61.25)
Note: W = women farmer; H = husband; B= both husband and wife; NR = no response
The findings presented in Table 11 indicate some diversity between the different areas in the four countries in respect of women farmers' involvement in decision-making on farm and home-related tasks. Nevertheless, they show that most of the women farmers in three of the study countries (excluding Syria) were more involved in decision-making on the farm as well as in the home. This is inconsistent with the findings of Harry (1980), Sirisambhand et al. ( 1987), Reddock et al. (1990), Huggins (1991) and Akinbode (1991). Moreover, from the literature reviewed, it is observed that, traditionally, women had no definite decision-making role in the majority of family affairs because of the dominance of male members in the joint family system. The situation now seems to have changed owing to the disintegration of this family system in the rural areas. It is felt, considering the data obtained, that women farmers' involvement in farming decisions might help in the adoption of
recommended packages of field crops received from the extension service. Moreover, this finding might have encouraged extension workers to include a higher percentage of women farmers in their regular extension activities along with other extension clients.
1.4 Average hours spent daily by women farmers on farm and reproductive activities
Average number of hours spent daily on farm and reproductive activities by women farmers in the four study countries are presented in Table 12. This indicates that women farmers in Nigeria spent an average of 7.86 hours daily on farm activities, followed by 7.50 hours in Trinidad, 6.25 hours in Thailand and 5.72 hours in Syria. When the time spent on farm activities was added to women's other responsibilities, women's working days became very long. As Table 12 shows, Nigerian women spent 6.40 hours daily on reproductive activities, resulting in a total of 14.26 hours' work for women. A similar picture emerges from the other three countries: 11.77 hours in Trinidad, 11.72 hours in Syria and 11.67 hours in Thailand. This is consistent with the findings of WAPIA (1990), World Bank (1989a.), Ashby (1985) and Bastone (1987).
It may be seen that most women farmers in the four countries were burdened with a double workload: farm as well as reproductive activities. On this subject, Saito and Spurling (1992) also stated that the dual domestic and production workload took up rural women's whole day. Women rarely had access to labour-saving, gender-specific technologies for farm and home activities. They failed to produce more and could not devote their valuable time to regular extension programme activities.
Table 12. Average number of hours spent daily on farm and reproductive activities by women farmers in the study areas of the four countries selected
Type of activities
Thailand (hours)
Trinidad (hours)
Nigeria (hours)
Syria (hours)
Farm
Reproductive
Total
1.5 Women farmers' access to production resources
Information on the access of women farmers to different production resources is presented in Tables 13 to 21 for interpretation in the present study. Better access to various production resources would encourage women to determine their ability to respond to new economic opportunities.
1.5.1 Sources of land
As shown in Table 13 the findings reflect a variety of sources of land cultivated by women farmers in the four study countries. It appears that only 22.5% of women farmers in Thailand were entitled to land ownership compared to 8.75% in Trinidad and 4.38% in Nigeria. It is also seen that the majority of women farmers in Syria (41.25%) cultivated their husband's land followed by 38.75% in Thailand 30% in Trinidad and 23% in Nigeria. It is interesting to note that 30.11 % of women farmers in Nigeria were provided with a small plot of land by their husbands as gifts for their own productive activity.
The data again show that women farmers in Thailand (28.75 %) Syria (22.50%) Trinidad (18.75%) and Nigeria (10.63%) rented land for their own cultivation. Furthermore it may be seen that in Syria 36.25% of women farmers used family land compared to 11.88% in Nigeria 10% in Thailand and 8.75% in Trinidad.
It appears from the results shown below that prevailing patterns of land ownership could be due to socio-cultural or land tenure practices in the different study countries. Recognizing male heads of households as title holders could increase the uncertainty regarding women's rights to have access to land. The lack of entitlement would discourage women's participation in agricultural support services particularly in extension and credit. In some countries land ownership was considered a requirement for the selection of contact farmers. Moreover title to land was the required collateral for obtaining credit from lending institutions. The uncertainty of women's access to land made it a problem for them to obtain the credit they might need to fully implement extension advice on the farm or to make the most productive use of their labour.
Table 13. Ownership of cultivated land of women farmers in the study areas in the four countries selected
Ownership of land
Thailand %
Trinidad %
Nigeria %
Syria %
Personally owned
Husband's land
Gift from husband
Family land
Government land
Communal land
Squatted land
Rented land
1.5.2 Sources of improved farm implements
Table 14 reveals that less than 50% of the total number of women farmers used modern farm tools and implements: 46.25% in Thailand, 43.75% in Trinidad, 37.5% in Syria and 15% in Nigeria. In Thailand and Trinidad, approximately 25% of women farmers utilized the tools of their husbands, followed by a negligible percentage (5 %) in Syria. Moreover, in Nigeria and Syria a small percentage of women farmers borrowed tools from the extension service.
Table 14. Sources of improved farm implements used by women farmers in the study areas of the four countries selected
Sources of Improved farm implements
Thailand %
Trinidad %
Nigeria %
Syria %
Personally owned
Husband
Borrowed from neighbours/relatives
Borrowed from farmers' cooperatives
Borrowed from government
Do not use
It may also be noted that in only one of the four study countries - Trinidad - did women farmers possess modern farm implements in their own name and that was a very negligible percentage (2.5%). It is worth mentioning here that women farmers in all the study countries reported utilizing traditional farm implements such as hoes, cutlasses, axes, knives, etc. This is supported by Akinbode's findings (1991).
From the data it may be assumed that women farmers were not able to utilize improved farm implements due to the lack of adequate income or the availability of suitable technologies appropriate to their needs. Since women farmers use traditional farm tools, in general they spend more time on the farm than men and this could discourage them from participating in extension activities.
1.5.3 Sources of laborer in farm activities
Table 15 shows that women farmers in the four study countries obtained help for farm activities from various sources. In Trinidad, 47.5 % of women farmers hired manpower, compared to 43.75% in Thailand, 32.5% in Nigeria and 14.63% in Syria, mainly for the preparation of land. In Trinidad 40% of women farmers received help predominantly from their husbands, compared to 33.12% in Syria, 26.25% in Thailand and 17.5% in Nigeria. It is also noted that 25.37% of women farmers in Syria shared or exchanged farm labour with their neighbors/community, followed by 25% in Nigeria and 17.5% in Thailand.
Table 15. Sources of manpower of women farmers for farm activities in the study areas in the four countries selected
Manpower in farm activities
Thailand %
Trinidad %
Nigeria %
Syria %
Relatives
Children
Husband
Hired labour
Neighbors/community
None
Table 15 further indicates that one-third of women farmers in Syria (26.88%) rely on their children for farm help, compared to 15.63% in Nigeria, 3.75% in Trinidad and 2.5% in Thailand. From this data it can be assumed that the lack of improved farm tools and implements necessary for their range of farming activities could have compelled women farmers to hire help from different sources. Moreover, with less farm labour available in the family, women farmers might have been forced to shift to less labour-intensive crops which could have a lower monetary value.
1.5.4 Sources of improved varieties of seeds
A wide variety of sources of improved seeds such as garden/farm shops, government seed farms, the extension office and middle-men were found in the four study countries and are presented in Table 16. It appears that the highest percentage of women farmers using improved varieties of seeds was found in Trinidad (77.5%), compared to Thailand (48.75%), Nigeria (23%) and Syria (15%). In Nigeria, it was reported that the women farmers obtained improved varieties of cuttings and seeds from the extension service (Agricultural Development Projects), whereas in Trinidad nearly 48% and in Syria 15% of women farmers bought improved seeds from government seed farms.
Table 16. Sources of improved varieties of seeds for women farmers in the study areas in the four countries selected
Sources of seeds
Thailand %
Trinidad %
Nigeria %
Syria %
Garden/farm shop
Government seed farm
Extension office (ADP)
Middle-man
Not used
No response
From the above findings, it can be presumed that women farmers might not be able to utilize improved varieties of seeds due to the high cost of inputs on the open market. This could discourage women farmers from adopting extension advice on the farm and having contacts with the extension service.
1.5.5 Sources of fertilizers
Table 17 shows the various sources of fertilizers of the majority of women farmers in the four selected countries.' In Trinidad approximately 88% of women farmers obtained fertilizers from the garden shop, followed by 41.25% in Thailand and only 7.5% in Syria. Furthermore, the data show that the husband was one of the major sources for more than 56% of women farmers in Syria, whereas 57.5% of women farmers in Nigeria obtained fertilizer from the open village market and in Thailand 50% from middle-men.
As shown in Table 17, it appears that the majority of women farmers in the four study countries used fertilizers on their farms. This could be due to an adequate supply being available in the market at a price comparatively lower than that of other inputs, or to less complicated techniques. It is worth mentioning here that most of the women farmers in Nigeria who were unable to utilize fertilizers indicated that it was due to their high cost on the open market, as well as their non-availability at the right time.
Table 17. Sources of fertilizers for women farmers of the study areas in the four countries selected
Sources of fertilizers
Thailand %
Trinidad %
Nigeria %
Syria %
Garden/farm shop
Open market
Government office
Middle-man
Husband
Cooperatives
Not used
1.5.6 Sources of pesticides
As shown in Table 18, there was only one source of chemicals in all the study countries. The highest percentage of application of chemicals by women farmers was identified in Trinidad as 47.5%, compared to 38.75% in Thailand, 6.25% in Syria and 5% in Nigeria. This is inconsistent with Harry's findings (1980).
Table 18. Sources of pesticides for women farmers in the study areas in the four countries selected
Sources of pesticides
Thailand %
Trinidad %
Nigeria %
Syria %
Garden/farm shop
Not using chemicals
From the above results, it can be presumed that little use of chemicals by women farmers in two of the four study countries might be due to high cost or lack of proper technical knowledge or skills in spraying chemicals, or higher risk in the cultivation of subsistence crops.
1.5.7 Sources of credit
Table 19 reveals that the majority of women farmers in Thailand - 61.25% - borrowed money from different sources for farm activities (30% from relatives, 22.5% from middle-men, 5% from farmers' groups and 3.75% from an agricultural bank), whereas in the other three study countries women had limited access to financial assistance.
Table 19. Sources of credit for women farmers in the study areas of the four countries selected
Sources of credit
Thailand %
Trinidad %
Nigeria %
Syria %
Farmers' groups
Women farmers' groups
Agricultural farmers' cooperatives
Agricultural banks
Middle-men
Relatives/neighbors
No borrowing
No response
As Table 19 shows, none of the women farmers in Nigeria and Syria received financial assistance from agricultural banks and a very negligible percentage of women farmers in Thailand (3.75%) and Trinidad (1.25%) obtained bank loans for buying farm inputs. This finding is similar to that of the World Bank (1989a.) and Dulyapach's (1985). The researcher assumed that limited access to credit could be due to lack of entitlement to land ownership, as required by lending institutions as collateral, or of membership in farmers' cooperatives. Moreover, women farmers might not be aware, or have little knowledge of the purpose, amount and complicated official procedure for obtaining loans or for repayment with interest. Further data suggest that the lack of adequate access to cash income discouraged women farmers from buying recommended inputs provided by the extension service. It could also discourage extension agents from targeting this group of farmers in their programmes.
1.5.8 Sources of marketing outlets
Table 20 shows the different markets where women farmers sold the crops they produced. It is interesting to note that there was no permanent marketing source for selling women farmers' produce in all the study countries. Available data indicates that in Trinidad about 89 % of women farmers marketed their crops in both wholesale and retail markets, whereas in Nigeria approximately 68% of women farmers sold their crops in the open village market. Moreover, nearly 50% of women farmers in Thailand and in Syria sold their crops through middle-men. It is assumed that the government of each country has not given any attention to food crops produced mainly by women farmers. Lack of membership in farmers' cooperatives could also affect the marketing of farm produce. As a result of there being few marketing incentives for women farmers from the government and other sources, extension agents could not easily motivate women farmers to invest their existing seasonal income in recommended
inputs for their farm work.
Table 20. Kind of market for women farmers of the study areas in the four countries selected for selling farm produce
Type of market
Thailand %
Trinidad %
Nigeria %
Syria %
Wholesale market
Both wholesale and retail market
Retail market (women direct)
Retail market (through family members)
Village open market
Middle-man
Not using any market
The above data presented in Tables 13 to 20 will help the extension planners and implementers to understand the various sources of production resources of women farmers, especially with respect to land, equipment, labour, fertilizers, pesticides, credit and marketing facilities. It could also help them to prepare extension packages best suited to farming women's resources, so that greater numbers of needy women farmers could participate in extension activities.
1.6. Frequency of advice received by women farmers from extension agents during 1992
Table 21 presents data from the four study areas concerning the frequency of advice received by women farmers from field extension staff. It indicates that a large percentage of women farmers in Nigeria were visited by extension agents over the last two months - 78.13%, 58.75% in Syria and 35% in Thailand. It also reveals that nearly 44% of women farmers in Trinidad had not been visited by extension agents at all. Similar data were reported in Trinidad by Rajak (1990) and the World Bank (1991b.).
Table 21. Women farmers in the study areas of the four countries selected visited by extension agents during 1992
Frequency of visits
Thailand %
Trinidad %
Nigeria %
Syria %
Less than a month ago
About a month ago
About two months ago
About six months ago
Six to twelve month ago
Not visited
The researcher assumes that, where a larger number of women farmers had been visited by extension agents, official working instructions had been given by the extension service to the field agents to target women in their regular extension programme, both separately and together with male contact farmers. Moreover, an existing extension strategy to work with female groups in Nigeria could have caused an increase in the number of women contacted regularly for agricultural advice. In contrast to this, the timing and channels of communication established for delivering extension messages might sometimes be suitable only for men, which would of course affect the number of women contacted by extension agents. Thus it could be deduced that extension agents were unable to communicate with women farmers effectively due to lack of adequate knowledge about their farming problems and needs and proper training on how to work with women farmers separately or in contact groups.
1.7 Present sources of agricultural advice for women farmers
It appears from Table 22 that women farmers in the selected study countries had various indirect channels of communication through which they received advice on agricultural matters. The majority of women farmers in Nigeria (58.12%) and Syria (41.25%) rated extension workers as their primary source, whereas a very negligible percentage of women farmers in Trinidad (8.75%) and in Thailand (6.25%) considered extension agents as a source of advice for solving farming problems. Similar findings were reported by Rajak (1990) in her survey in Trinidad. Further, it is interesting to note that, except for Trinidad (40%), only a very low percentage of women farmers in Thailand (13.75%), Nigeria (13.13%) and Syria (7.5%) received agricultural advice from their husbands. This finding does not agree with the statement of development planners that "information given to male farmers will be passed along to other farming members of the household" (Saito and Weidemann, 1990). On the other
hand, it is correlated with the findings of Fortmann (1978) and Spring (1985) who indicate that agricultural knowledge acquired by males often does not "trickle across" effectively to females in the family. It also revealed that 27.5% of women in Syria talked with their neighbors and friends about their farm problems, followed by 22.5% in Thailand, 16.25% in Nigeria and 12.5% in Trinidad. This finding is in line with the report of the World Bank (Saito and Spurling, 1992).
Table 22. Sources of agricultural advice for women farmers in the study areas of the four countries selected
Sources
Thailand %
Trinidad %
Nigeria %
Syria %
Extension workers
Husbands
Neighbors/friends
Relatives
Garden/farm shop
No advice received
From the above findings, it is considered that extension agents could lose the confidence of women farmers due to a lack of proper communication and an inability to deliver extension messages effectively.
1.8 Problems faced by women farmers in farm activities
Table 23 shows the main problems faced by women farmers in the four study countries in order of importance. They are recorded on a five-point scale, i.e. 'most important', 'important', 'quite important', 'less important' and 'not at all important' and are scored as 4, 3, 2, 1 and 0 respectively.
It is revealed that the high cost of farm inputs, excessive weeds and lack of storage facilities were ranked as some of the worst problems in all the study countries. Similar findings were reported by Hassan (1987) and Pemberton (1989). A lack of improved tools and implements was ranked as the greatest problem in Syria and the second major problem in Nigeria, whereas it was ranked seventh in Thailand and Trinidad. It is interesting to note that a smaller amount of cultivated land was ranked fifth by Nigeria and Trinidad, ninth by Syria and tenth by Thailand. In addition, crop infestation by pests and insects and lack of good market prices were considered some of the greatest problems by the women farmers of Nigeria, Thailand and Trinidad, while they were rated sixth and eighth respectively in Syria.
The information shown in Table 23 on agricultural problems as perceived by women farmers serves to illustrate extension areas which could form the basis for improving the relevance of extension programmes. Consideration of these prioritized problem areas in extension programming would improve women's access to extension services.
Table 23. Ranking of problems faced by women farmers in the study areas of the four countries selected
Problem areas
Thailand
Trinidad
Nigeria
Syria
Smaller amount of cultivated land
10th
5th
5th
9th
High cost of farm inputs (fertilizers/chemicals)
3rd
2nd
1st
2nd
Lack of improved varieties of seeds
8th
8th
7th
7th
Lack of improved tools and implements
7th
7th
2nd
1st
Shortage of labour
4th
4th
5th
6th
Lack of credit facilities
6th
9th
6th
4th
Crops infested by pests/insects
1st
3rd
2nd
6th
Lack of transportation
2nd
6th
3rd
3rd
Excessive weeds
3rd
1st
1st
3rd
Lack of water/irrigation
9th
10th
5th
5th
Lack of storage facilities
2nd
1st
3rd
3rd
Inadequate market prices
2nd
3rd
1st
8th
Lack of marketing facilities
5th
5th
4th
10th
1.9 Expressed need areas of women farmers for agricultural advice
Table 24 shows the ranking of each extension topic identified by women farmers in the study areas of the four countries selected. Weed control, crop storage and food processing were ranked as three of the most important extension topics by all the women farmers, while the item of cultivation techniques was considered to be less important.
Furthermore, the subject of selection and use of fertilizers was given second preference by the women farmers of Thailand, while it was ranked seventh in Trinidad and eighth in both Nigeria and Syria.
These findings could be useful for extension planners and implementers when setting up programmes targeting women farmers. They show that women farmers might participate more in extension programmes if they were more relevant to their priority areas for advice.
Table 24. Ranking of agricultural extension topics preferred by women farmers of the study areas in the four countries selected
Agricultural extension topics
Thailand
Trinidad
Nigeria
Syria
Cultivation techniques
9th
13th
12th
11th
Soil fertility
8th
12th
10th
10th
Selection of good varieties of seeds
3rd
3rd
5th
4th
Selection and use of fertilizers
2nd
7th
8th
8th
Pest control
10th
5th
3rd
9th
Weed control
1st
2nd
1st
2nd
Crop production/mixed cropping
7th
6th
6th
6th
Harvesting techniques
6th
4th
13th
5th
Crop storage
3rd
1st
1st
2nd
Care of livestock
11th
9th
9th
8th
Care of poultry
5th
8th
7th
7th
Marketing
4th
10th
11th
12th
Credit advice
12th
11th
4th
1st
Food processing
3rd
2nd
2nd
3rd
1.10 Women farmers' gender preference of extension agents
One of the major issues related to women's accessibility to extension advice is whether the extension agents who advise women farmers should be male or female. Responses on this issue collected from women farmers in the four study countries are summarized in Table 25.
Table 25. Gender preferences of women farmers of the study areas in the four countries selected
Gender preference
Thailand %
Trinidad %
Nigeria %
Syria %
Male extension worker
Female extension worker
No gender preference
As shown in Table 25, the gender of extension agents did not appear to be an important issue for about 68% of women farmers in Trinidad and nearly 49% in Thailand. On the other hand, it shows that many of the respondents in Syria (82.5%) and Nigeria (65.62%) preferred female extension workers. This could be because women farmers feel shy and hesitate to speak up in meetings in front of male extension agents because of their lower educational levels. Also, the women farmers expressed the opinion that male extension agents gave less attention to women's questions if meetings were held with mixed groups of farmers. The same type of findings were reported by Krogh (1988) and Evans (1989). However, it appears that the cultural milieu of the women farmers could be the determining factor influencing preferences for a female extension worker by the women farmers.
2. Capacity of agricultural extension services in the four study countries to serve women farmers
2.1 Mandate of agricultural extension services
2.1.1 Need for women farmers to be recognized in agricultural extension policy objectives and guidelines for the operation of extension programmes
As shown in Table 26, three of the four study countries (Thailand, Nigeria and Syria) have recognized women as fully-fledged farmers in the "Statement of National Agricultural Policy", as reported by administrators of the respective organizations, while in Trinidad women farmers were not mentioned in the agricultural policy.
It was also noted that none of the policies of agricultural extension in the four study countries clearly identified women farmers as a specific target clientele group, or provided a clear mandate for their agricultural extension service.
Furthermore, there were no apparent gender-sensitive operational guidelines in the selected study countries, except in Nigeria.
It is worth mentioning here that the policies of extension programmes in Thailand, Nigeria and Syria targeted small farmers for participation in the extension service. But from Table 26 it can be seen that women farmers were not included officially as a specific target group for participation in the objectives of agricultural extension policies despite several years of agricultural roles (FAO, 1993). Clear policy guidelines provided both the mandate and direction for organizing effective agricultural extension programmes for women farmers but, apart from this, agricultural extension continues to be heavily biased toward men (Spens, 1986). Furthermore, when countries do not have a clearly stated agricultural extension policy for women farmers, donors' recommended gender approaches may not be effectively applied for the achievement of countries' long-term agricultural development goals.
Table 26. Extension mandate of the four study countries selected in relation to women farmers in 1992
Mandates
Thailand
Trinidad
Nigeria
Syria
Address women farmers in agricultural policy
Clear
Not clear
Clear
Clear
Women farmers as clientele group in agricultural extension policy
Not clear
Not clear
Not clear
Not clear
Gender guidelines in the operation of agricultural extension programmes
Not clear
Not given
Clear
Not given
2.1.2 Specific clientele group in extension
Table 27 focuses on various extension clientele groups who are expected to be targeted by agricultural extension services in the four study countries. It is observed that two groups, namely small farmers and women farmers, were given special attention for participation in three of the study countries, with the exception of Trinidad. This is inconsistent with FAO's (1987 and 1990a.) findings which stated that these two disadvantaged groups frequently had little or no access to extension services and most agricultural extension was directed to men.
Hence the present findings suggest that specific and practical steps should be taken when planning extension programmes for women farmers, with the intention of improving their productivity and access to resources that will increase their income levels and quality of life. In line with this, the 1989 FAO survey data showed that about 5% of all agricultural extension resources worldwide were directed to female farmers. Furthermore, all groups of farmers, especially resource-poor women and young farmers, should be encouraged to form or to enroll in farmers' organizations that serve their specific needs. Such organizations should reflect the needs of these major target groups and the socio-cultural realities of the country concerned.
Table 27. Clientele groups specified by extension organizations in 1992 in the four study countries selected
Clientele group
Thailand
Trinidad
Nigeria
Syria
Farmer
Small Farmer
Housewife
Women farmer
Rural youth
Women
Young farmer
Others: bee-keepers, home gardeners
Note: _/ = group existed
2.2 Organizational structure pattern
As can be seen in Figures 6, 7, 8 and 9, the organizational structure pattern to serve women farmers at the grass-roots level was more or less the same in all the study countries.
The following salient characteristics were observed in the four different organizational structures:
1. All the study countries provided information on the availability of subject-matter specialists to link extension to the research system and to provide technical backstopping and in-service technical training to the field staff. In Thailand, Nigeria and Syria they were reported as being at the zonal and provincial levels. In Trinidad, they were at the central level. Furthermore, they represented the subject-matter areas of rice crops, horticultural crops, crop protection, crop production, animal husbandry and home economics.
2. It was also mentioned that the extension services of Thailand and Nigeria had clear lines of authority with provincial/zonal subject-matter specialists to train and supervise field extension agents.
Figure 6: Organizational Extension Structure Pattern in Thailand
Ministry of Agriculture & Cooperatives
Director General of Department of Agricultural Extension
Central administration :
Directors of Different Divisions(12)*
Directors
Regional agricultural Extension offices(6)
Provincial Administration:
Provincial Agricultural officer(73)
Deputy Administration
Deputy Technical
Business
Agricultural Administration
Planning
Subject matter specialist (including H.E)
District level
District Agricultural Extension officer and one Assistant Agricultural officer (759)
Sub District Level
Home Economics Extension officer
Sub District (Tambon)
Agil. Extension Agents
Village level
Contact group
Farmer's group
Youth group
Women group
(Male & Female)
(Note: * A division that has its operating units at the provincial level)
Figure 7: Organizational Extension Structure Pattern in Trinidad
Ministry of Agriculture, Land and Marine Resources
Central Administration
Chief Technical officer
Director of North Regional Division
Director of Extension Core Division
Director of South Regional Division
Deputy Director
Deputy Director (Specialist Services)
Deputy Director (Extension)
Deputy Director
Professional
Extension staff
Assigned to Region from
Core Extension Division
Extension unit
Extension unit
County level Extension :
Agricultural officer II
Agricultural Officer II
AO
AO
AO
AO
AO
AO
AO
AO
District level
A.A
A.A
A.A
A.A
A.A
A.A
A.A
A.A
AEA
AEA
AEA
AEA.
AEA
AEA
AEA
AEA
Farmers (male and female)
(Note; AO I = Agricultural officer I; AA = Agricultural Assistant I, II, III; AEA = Agricultural Extension Aide)
Figure 8: Organizational Extension Structure Pattern for Unified Agricultural Extension System, Nigeria
Federal Ministry of Agricultural and Natural Resources
Commissioner
Director General of Agriculture
Head Quarter Level
Programme manager of Agricultural Development Project (ADP)
Head of Extension
Head of technical services
Assistant head of Crops, Livestock ,WIA, Agro-forestry, or Fisheries etc. (Specialist services)
Zonal level
Zonal Manager
Zonal Extension officer
Subject matter Specialist
Extension Area Level
Area Extension Officers
Block level
Block extension Supervisor
*BEA(WIA)
Village level:
Village Extension Agent
(Male and female)
Male farmer
Female farmer
(Note: *BEA = Block extension agent responsible for female farmer)
Figure 9: Organizational Extension Structure Pattern in Syria
Ministry of Agriculture and Agrarian Reform
Director General of agriculture
Director of Department of Agricultural Extension
National level
Assistant Director of Different Technical Agricultural Extension Divisions(5)
Director of Agriculture
Provincial Level
Assistant Director of Agriculture
Chief, Division of Agricultural Extension
Experimental Division
Technical Division
Home economics Division
Information Division
Programme Division
District level
Chief of Extension circles
Village level
Chief of Extension Unit
Male Agricultural Engineers
Female Agricultural Engineers
Male Farmers
Female farmers
(Note: A division has its operating units at the provincial level)
3. Female extension staff (both in agriculture and home economics) were officially instructed to serve women farmers, particularly in three of the study countries with the exception of Trinidad. It was noted that female field extension staff in Thailand and Nigeria were reported at district level. In Syria, female field extension staff were reported at village level.
4. Two of the four study countries, namely Thailand and Nigeria, reported the existence of monitoring and evaluation units in agricultural extension systems to provide the basis for improving management, the system's performance on a continuing basis and to measure the specific extension impacts.
5. Home economics programmes such as nutrition, food processing, food preservation, cooking, child care, health care, etc., were also included as important extension programme activities for women farmers within the agricultural extension services of the ministries of agriculture in Thailand, Nigeria and Syria. It was observed by the researcher that in Thailand and Syria female field extension staff gave greater emphasis to home economics programmes than agriculture during the years 1992 and 1993.
6. In addition, data from three of the study countries (except Nigeria) showed the existence of other specialized sections within the extension service, such as publications, audio-visual, information and training. In Nigeria, educational extension materials were provided by research centres (e.g the National Agricultural Extension Research Liaison Services, Ahmadu Bello University, Zaria, Nigeria).
The above discussion implies that the organizational structure of the extension services in the four study countries was quite satisfactory to cope with women's needs for agricultural information.
2.3 Organizational provision to serve women farmers
A separate women's section has been set up in the extension services in Thailand, Nigeria, and Syria. Available data are presented as follows:
- In Thailand, women farmers' needs for extension services were met by the "Farm and Home Improvement Section (1976)" within the agricultural extension services of the Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives. The female field extension staff in this section were qualified in home economics subjects and therefore technically backstopped by the general agricultural field extension staff.
- Agricultural extension work with women farmers in Nigeria was undertaken mainly by the "Women in Agriculture Unit" (1988) which was attached to the Department of Agricultural Extension under Agricultural Development Projects (ADP) in each state and heavily supported by the World Bank. All female extension staff were seconded from the "home economics section'' of the Ministry of Agriculture to work with women farmers.
- In Syria, women's needs for agricultural advice were dealt with by the "Rural Home Economics Division" (1988), Department of Agricultural Extension within the Ministry of Agriculture and Agrarian Reform. The female field extension staff were technically qualified in agricultural subjects.
- In addition, all the study countries reported that women farmers had been targeted along with male farmers in all the general agricultural extension programme activities of the extension services within the Ministry of Agriculture. But only in a few states in Nigeria was the exact proportion of women as contact farmers compared to male clients of the extension service mentioned.
Above all it was observed from the study that there were both advantages and disadvantages in all these arrangements. In Thailand it was known that agricultural field extension staff were supposed to backstop the home economists, but that they did not perceive them as agricultural professionals. Therefore in reality, female extension staff did not receive genuine technical support from them in implementing the agricultural programme activities for women farmers. In Nigeria, the female extension staff were regularly supported by the general agricultural extension agents when conducting field activities for women farmers. Further, the home economics field extension staff of Nigeria and Thailand stated that they did not have enough confidence in themselves to transfer improved agricultural messages, due to lack of adequate practical training in agricultural subjects. It was also mentioned that fortnightly meetings (i.e. twice a month) with agricultural extension agents in
Thailand and Nigeria could not make them competent enough to communicate adequate technical agricultural messages to women farmers. Similar findings were also observed by FAO (1987) and De Lancey and Elwy (1989) who mentioned that home economics personnel often lacked the training either to identify agricultural production problems, or to give advice on agriculture and related areas. In addition, it is worth mentioning that, in Thailand, most of the home economics field extension staff expressed their unwillingness to have specific training in agricultural subjects to assist women farmers. In Syria, the female agricultural field extension staff were instructed to communicate messages on home economics subjects to women farmers along with agricultural extension programme activities, but they were not included in their agricultural training curriculum.
From the above discussion, it is clear that there is a need for improvement in the existing specific women extension sections to serve women farmers more effectively in agricultural programme activities.
2.4 Attitude of extension personnel towards women as farmers
The attitude of extension personnel towards women as farmers was measured with the help of an attitude index consisting of 10 statements (five positive and five negative). It appeared (see Table 28) that more than 70% of the respondents in the four study countries had a favourable attitude towards women's integration into agricultural work. This is inconsistent with FAO's findings (1987).
Table 28. Attitude of extension personnel in extension services towards women as farmers in the four study countries selected
Category of response (score range)
Thailand %
Trinidad %
Nigeria %
Syria %
Respondent by gender
M (%)
F (%)
Highly favourable
Favourable
Less favourable
No response
Note: M = Male and F = Female
Table 28 could also indicate that female officials were considered more positively than the male officials.
The above information could help policymakers, planners and extension agents to provide clear directives regarding women farmers' efforts to gain access to critical knowledge and inputs for the improvement of their productivity. It could also encourage more constructive extension planning for reaching women farmers. Moreover, it facilitates the discussion with policymakers and high-level officials on national policy statements on women farmers as a very important target group, with the same rights as male farmers, e.g. land ownership, access to inputs, credit, acquisition of knowledge and skills for agricultural production, marketing facilities, etc., in order to effectively improve the extension service for women farmers.
2.5 Extension approaches and methods used in extension services
For every extension programme there is a predominant "approach" in which there is a choice of "method", within which a number of different "activities" are selected (FAO, 1993). In the present study the term "approach" is used to mean the organizing framework for the delivery of extension services to women farmers. In an attempt to discover which were the predominant extension approaches and methods used by gender, each organization was requested to specify which of the three most common extension approaches (individual; T & V; and group) was being followed and which extension methods were used (individual, group and mass media methods). Each of these approaches and methods have implications for the participation of female farmers.
Respondents checked more than one response to this question which biased the interpretation of the data. Nevertheless, it was reported that the most predominant extension approach in relation to women being applied in Nigeria was the T & V system, as heavily supported by the World Bank. In Trinidad and Syria, the individual extension approach was reported as most predominant. In Thailand, the group approach was used by the extension service with women farmers.
Table 29. Extension approaches used in 1992 in relation to women farmers in the four study countries selected
Individual approach
T & V approach
Group approach
Study countries
Male
Female
Male
Female
Male
Female
Thailand
Trinidad
Nigeria
Syria
_l
Note: _/ = existing approach; * = identifies predominant approach used
From Table 29 it can be seen that a minimum of two types of extension approach was used with women farmers by all the study countries. In general, all the selected study countries seemed to favour contact with women farmers through the group approach. Furthermore, in Trinidad and Syria extension agents were not officially instructed to form or to identify existing women's groups for extension contact for delivering agricultural messages.
In addition to the above, Table 30 presents the data on extension methods used in extension programmes in relation to women farmers and the extent of emphasis derived from the data reported by the administrators of the four study countries. The information was collected on a three-point scale: high, moderate and low extent of emphasis.
Table 30 indicates that the group method was being used and was highly emphasized in Thailand and Nigeria when working with women farmers. In Trinidad and Syria, women farmers were mostly contacted through personal visits which were highly emphasized by the extension service. From the findings, it may be deduced that methods could have been selected bearing in mind the total coverage of farmers by an extension agent or the existing extension approach. In Syria and Trinidad, the extension agents stated that sometimes they contacted women farmers in groups informally so that they could deliver some extension messages altogether. In addition, three of the study countries, Syria, Thailand and Trinidad, indicated a certain amount of emphasis on the mass-media method.
Table 30. Extension methods used and the extent of emphasis in relation to women farmers in the four countries selected in 1992
Study countries
Individual
Group
Mass media
Male
Female
Male
Female
Male
Female
Thailand
High
Low
Low
High
Moderate
Moderate
Trinidad
High
High
Low
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Nigeria
High
Low
Low
High
Low
Low
Syria
High
High
Low
Moderate
Moderate
Moderate
In reviewing the above discussions, there seems to be a reasonable balance of effort to serve women farmers as part of a comprehensive extension strategy. It is clearly shown that more than one extension approach and method, suitable and appropriate for all conditions of target clientele group, were used. It can be assumed that where the extension agent: farmer ratio was high, extension would tend to use the group approach. Also, it may be realised from the study countries' data that working with women's groups not only had a positive effect on extension agents' contacts, but also reduced the high cost of personal contacts and the financial situation of the study countries.
2.6 Extension activities planned and completed by extension services in 1992
It should be mentioned that agricultural extension activities in Thailand and Trinidad were not planned by gender. So it is difficult to isolate the specific contributions of the extension service particularly to women farmers and to measure the impact directly. The researcher determined extension outputs by measuring the types of educational activities completed, either at the individual field extension agent level of analysis, or for the extension organization as a whole.
Table 31. Average number of extension activities completed by each extension agent in 1992 in relation to women farmers in the study areas of the four countries selected
Extension activities
Thailand (No.)
Trinidad (No.)
Nigeria (No.)
Syria (No.)
Individual farm/home visits
Farmers' groups educational meetings/classes
Method demonstration
Farmer field days
Note: ( - ) = No response
Tables 31 and 32 summarize the average number of extension activities completed in 1992 in the four study areas by extension agents and their respective extension organizations. As shown in Table 31, the average number of field extension agents in Syria, Trinidad and Nigeria (excluding Thailand) completed 55, 22 and 12 farm and home visits respectively in 1992. Further, it is indicated that 24, 22, 15 and 8 extension educational meetings were, on an average, completed by extension agents in Nigeria, Thailand, Syria and Trinidad respectively.
From the limited data available (Table 32), it appears that, in Nigeria and Syria, women farmers were targeted particularly in extension farmers' meetings and method demonstration. Furthermore, it is interesting to note that, in Thailand and Nigeria, the female field extension agents gave prior emphasis to the formation of women's groups as a channel for their extension contact, which was considered one of their extension activities for women farmers within the mainstream of agricultural extension programmes. However, there are a number of interesting country differences in terms of the relative proportion of individual, group, and mass media outputs completed (Table 31 and Table 32). These differences are reflected in the predominant extension approach or strategy being pursued by different countries to reach farmers, women farmers in particular. Overall there was an impressive range of educational activities undertaken to reach farmers, both male and female, in 1992 in the
four study countries.
2.7 Women's participation in extension programme development
Each extension organization was asked to indicate the level of women's participation in extension programme development on a four-point scale (0 = not involved to 4 = very involved). None of the respondents provided direct answers to the questions asked. Participation of women farmers in extension programme development was not a routine practice in all the four study countries. On the other hand, there was no formal representative of women farmers to provide feedback at the administrative level of operation in the four study countries.
It is indicated that none of the study countries has made a systematic effort to include women clients in extension planning and gender-specific agricultural programme development. This seems to be inconsistent with the suggestions made by many scholars, development practitioners and technical assistance and donor agencies, such as FAO and IFAD which called for a more participatory approach to extension. Hence, the finding suggests that, since the extension system in all the study countries was too top-down in focus, they needed a more systematic assessment of clients' needs and client participation in programme formulation to keep their programmes relevant to the needs of all women farmers.
2.8 Research-extension linkages
A major issue in the agricultural development field today concerns the strengthening of linkages between research and extension. There should be particular concern about gender-specific technology transfer. Administrators of the extension services in the countries concerned were asked to assess the strength of the extension/research linkage on gender specific problems using a five point scale (0 = no linkage; 1 = very weak; 2 = weak; 3 = when the need arises; 4 = strong and 5 = very strong).
Table 32. Number of extension activities and educational materials completed in 1992 in relation to women farmers by the extension services of the four study countries selected
EXTENSION ACTIVITIES
Thailand
Trinidad
Nigeria*
Syria
Individual activities
Farm visits
Not given
Not given
55494 (F)
Home visits
Not given
Not given
965(W)
Group activities
Farmers' educational meetings
Not given
106(W)
499(W)
Establish demonstration plots
Not given
Not given
503(W)
Method demonstration
Not given
Not given
106(W)
297(W)
Formation of women's groups
Farmer field days
Not given
36(W) 3128(F)
149(F)
Mass media activities
Extension leaflets
Not given
Newsletters
NU
Extension manuals
Not given
Extension posters
Extension bulletins
Not given
Slides
NU
NU
Film projections
NU
512(F)
TV advertisements
NU
NU
30(F)
Theatres
NU
NU
NU
64(F)
Educational video programmes
NU
Radio broadcast
5(W)
126(F)
Note: * = Data presented from study States. NU = Not used in extension programme activities (-) = no response; F = For both male and female farmer; W = Women farmer; ** = Total prints of educational materials
The respondents of two of the four study countries (Thailand and Nigeria) rated research extension linkages as "when the need arises", while in Trinidad and Syria it was rated as very weak.
2.9 Monitoring and evaluation
Because of the importance of monitoring and evaluation of the extension system in order to discover its success in reaching women farmers, each extension service administrator was requested to assess the strength of operation by using a five-point scale (0 = no response; 1 = very weak; 2 = weak; 3 = moderately strong; 4 = strong and 5 = very strong).
Two of the extension services - in Thailand and Nigeria - reported their mode of operating the monitoring and evaluation system as 'weak', while in Syria and Trinidad it was rated as 'very weak'. In this context, it should be mentioned that two of the study countries
(Nigeria and Syria) recorded a number of women farmers as being reached by agricultural extension activities by monthly or quarterly reports, meetings, discussions and visits, due to a clear directive from the service, whereas in Thailand and Trinidad less attention was given by the extension service to recording sex desegregated data.
The poor monitoring and evaluation system of extension activities in the study areas could be due to scarce resources (funds, inadequate extension personnel, transportation, etc.) of the national governments, inadequate training of extension personnel in the methods and skills of monitoring and evaluation of programme activities and the lack of clear directives from the extension service. It could be suggested that the lack of proper monitoring and evaluation could affect policy-makers and economic planners when considering extension objectives to target women farmers and an increase in funds for gender-specific programmes.
2.10 Female extension personnel differentiated by gender and position
A genera] overview of groups of extension personnel, including administrative and supervisory staff, technical and subject-matter specialists and field extension staff by gender and position in the study areas in the four countries selected during 1992 is presented in Table 33. It reveals that, in Thailand, 13% of the administrators in the extension service were female, while in Syria and Nigeria only 1%.
Among the technical and subject-matter specialists, there were a few more women than administrators, ranging from 40% in Thailand and Syria to 29% in Trinidad and 13% in Nigeria.
Furthermore, 31% of the field agricultural extension agents in Trinidad were female, 28% in Thailand, 14% in Syria and only 0.62% in Nigeria.
The number of home economics agents was not available in Trinidad or Syria. However, in Nigeria and Thailand 21% and 15% female field extension agents respectively were home economists.
Table 33. Extension staff distributed by gender in 1992 in the four countries selected
Administrators/ Supervisors
Technical or Subject- matter Specialist
Field extension staff
Total
Male (%)
Female (%)
Total
Male (%)
Female (%)
Total
Agriculture
Home economics
Animal husb.
Female extension staff
Male (%)
Female (%)
Male (%)
Female (%)
Male (%)
Female (%)
No.
Thailand
Trinidad
Nigeria
Syria
* reported at central level
In addition, in 1992 in the study areas of Thailand and Trinidad it was estimated that about 43 % and 31 % of field extension staff were female, irrespective of subject-matter area. This seems to be satisfactory compared to 22% and 14% in Nigeria and Syria respectively. It is interesting to note that, of the total number of female extension agents in Nigeria, 97% were home economists, followed by 35% in Thailand.
From the above discussion, it can be suggested that, in the long-term, more female agricultural staff should be recruited to assist women farmers effectively with agricultural problems considering the situation of the extension areas. But in the short-term, it is suggested that female home economics extension agents who are already working with women farmers be redeployed within the service to help solve the problems. They should be provided with in-service training, particularly in agricultural subjects, to fill the gaps in their knowledge.
As shown in Table 33, in all the study countries the majority of field agricultural extension agents were male (86% in Syria, 78% in Nigeria, 69% in Trinidad and 57% in Thailand). But the percentage of women field extension workers in this study is higher than the figures reported for the 1989 Global Consultation on Agricultural Extension. The researcher assumes that the gender of extension agents might not be considered a major issue for reaching women farmers in all the countries selected, which is explored in Tables 21 and 25. But in Syria, most of the women farmers were visited by female extension agents only due to socio-cultural factors of the interaction between non-related men and women. Hence, in the immediate future an important measure could be to train more male extension agents to work with women farmers.
2.11 Ratio of subject-matter specialists (SMS) to field extension agents
Table 33 further presents the ratio of subject-matter specialist to field extension agent. There are major country differences in the number of subject-matter specialists available in the extension service to support field extension staff. Based on other research (Swanson et al., 1990) it appears that a functionally effective SMS to field extension agent ratio would be approximately 1 to 4-5, or about 20% SMSs with at least an M.Sc. degree, or equivalent training, and extensive field experience. It was observed that in Thailand and Trinidad there was, in general, a good SMS: field extension agent ratio (1:8), compared to the other two study countries, Nigeria (1:27) and Syria (1:68), which seems quite high.
Furthermore, it was found that 86% and 20% of subject-matter specialists in Trinidad and Thailand respectively had a Masters degree in the specialised agricultural subject. It was also reported that, in Nigeria, 75% of these SMSs had had training at the Higher National Degree (HND) level, rather than a university degree or equivalent training, to enable them to work effectively with research. In Syria 100% of SMSs were observed as being qualified in agricultural subjects at graduate level. None of the SMSs was reported as being qualified as gender-specific subject-matter specialists.
This information identified a serious bottleneck in providing adequate technical backstopping and training to field extension agents. And this indirectly affected the four study countries in the strengthening of their overall extension systems to carry out technology transfer activities for women farmers. Furthermore, it was reported by the extension service (ADP) of Nigeria that they were unable to train an adequate number of extension staff in technical subject areas due to shortage of funds. However, they were regularly trained in the Monthly Technical Review Meetings (MRTM) in each ADP by the technical research staff of the study state to make them competent enough to transfer technological information to the field staff.
From the above discussion, it could be suggested that the existing subject-matter specialists, in order to identify and address the technical and educational needs of low-resource, poor women farmers, could be appointed at district level to serve the immediate needs and problems of the farmers through field extension agents.
2.12. Extension agent: Farmer ratio
One of the primary indicators used to measure the intensity of extension coverage in a country is the extension agent to farmer ratio. Normally the farm household is used as the denominator in computing this ratio because the household is viewed both as the focal point for extension contact and the unit for decision making. However, in the present study it is observed that family structure and decision making in the four study countries were not uniform across different cultures and societies.
The accurate calculation of coverage of farmers on a gender basis by an extension agent could not be obtained from the extension services in the four study countries. However, in order to have an insight into the existing patterns of the ratio extension agent: women farmers in the four countries, the available data were summarised as shown in Table 34.
Table 34. Ratio of extension agent to farmer in the four countries selected (1992)
Country
Thailand
Trinidad
Nigeria
Syria
Thailand
1 EA: 1000 farm families
1 EA: all farmers of extension area
1 EA (WIA): 6-8 women's groups & 1 EA: 30% F
1 FEA: women of one village
Note: WA = Women in Agriculture; EA = Extension agents; F= Female farmer; and
FEA = Female extension agents
Table 34 points out that the ratio of extension agent to farmers differed from country to country. It appears that only in Nigeria could the recommended average ratio of one female extension agent (WIA) to 6-8 women's groups be found and in general in the extension service there was one agricultural extension agent: 30% of women farmers. It was reported in Syria that one female extension agent was responsible for all the needy women farmers in the nearest village of the extension units in order to solve transportation problems. In two other study areas, findings reflected a confusion among the extension agents concerning coverage of target groups.
It is assumed that lack of clear extension objectives, strategy and other related factors such as transportation, population density, could have affected the identification of the exact coverage of women farmers by extension services.
2.13 Training facilities for field extension agents
Regular training is fundamental for effective extension. Available studies reveal that most of the field extension agents in developing countries have minimal formal training in agriculture. Table 35 presents the reported average percentage of extension training courses attended by field extension agents on three different extension subjects in the four study countries. The data show that, in general, a large proportion of training courses attended by extension agents were connected with improving agricultural technology. As shown in Table 35, this was highly emphasized in Nigeria and Thailand. Courses attended by field extension workers in extension methodology constituted only 6% in Syria, 18% in Thailand and 20% in Nigeria. Furthermore, courses which were gender specific were reported to be only 10% in Thailand, 18% in Syria, but as much as 30% in Nigeria. It may be noted that, in Trinidad, the extension agents interviewed did not report the proportion of training courses
they attended on extension methodology and gender-specific messages.
Table 35. Reported average percentage of training courses attended by field extension agents in the study areas of the four countries selected (1992)
Trading subjects
Thailand %
Trinidad %
Nigeria %
Syria %
Extension methodology for women farmers
Gender specific extension messages
Improved agriculture technology
Others
2.14 Office facilities for field extension agents
It was observed that office accommodation was available for field extension agents in Nigeria and Syria at block level, whereas in Thailand and Trinidad the extension agents' office was at the district level, resulting in high cost of transportation to the farmers for the extension agents.
2.15 Transport facilities for field extension agents
With respect to transportation, the situation in three of the four study countries (except for Syria) was quite favourable, as reported by country administrators. In Thailand and Nigeria, most of the male field extension staff were provided with motorbikes by the government for extension work, whereas in Trinidad all the extension officers, including field extension staff received loans from the government as a down payment towards the purchase of a motor vehicle. These officers also received a monthly vehicle upkeep and travel allowance compared to other extension staff. On the other hand, female field extension staff in Thailand, Nigeria and Syria had mobility problems with regard to visiting women farmers in the villages regularly. It was also expressed by most of the female extension staff in Syria that they preferred not to use motorcycles for socio-cultural reasons.
2.16 Financial resource's allocated to the agricultural extension service in 1992
Performance of an extension system can be measured by the percentage of financial resources allocated to extension programmes for the target group. To identify this issue, each extension organization was surveyed to determine how it allocated its financial resources.
In the study area of Thailand, it was observed that there was a separate budget allocation (30%) specifically for extension programme activities for women farmers. But it was reported that this budget was utilized mainly for home economics programmer, such as cooking, food preservation, handicrafts, etc., for women farmers.
Table 36. Extension budget allocation by function in the four countries selected (1992)
Budget allocation by function
Thailand %
Trinidad %
Nigeria %
* Syria
Salaries
Programmes
Repairs and maintenance (building construction, buying equipment, repair of vehicles, etc.)
Subsidies
Other (printing and publication, mass media, etc.)
Note: (-) = Data not received; (*) = Given data could not be presented for comparison
It appears (see Table 36) that, given the general nature of the data provided by each study country, there was no way to differentiate between the types of financial allocation. However, the results provided a variety of data within the three study countries. It was observed that Nigeria allocated as much as 15% of the total budget for programme activities, whereas the percentage was much lower in Thailand and Trinidad. It further appears that the highest percentage of the extension budget in Thailand, Nigeria and Trinidad was allocated for the salaries of the extension staff.
3. Types of agricultural extension programme and the nature and extent of women farmers' participation
3.1 Types of agricultural extension topics included in extension programmes in 1992 to serve women farmers
It was reported in all the study areas that extension services gave highest priority to implementing extension programme activities on food/cereal crops, followed by horticultural and cash crops.
As shown in Table 37, the number of topics related to various technical messages on agricultural subjects covered by extension services differed in the four study countries. There were very few agricultural extension topics directed at women farmers. This is consistent with the findings of Airmy ( 1990); Bryson (1980); Feldman (1981); Ashby (1985) and Jackson (1985).
In Thailand, 10 topics were included in regular extension programmes for farmers in 1992, compared to eight in the other three study countries (Trinidad, Nigeria and Syria). Of the total extension topics studied, six were physically identified in the different study countries to be for women farmers: techniques of harvest, storage of harvested crops, care of poultry, formation of women groups/cooperatives, food processing and home economics. It was further revealed that two of the four study countries (Nigeria and Syria) selected the topic on storage of harvested crop totally for women farmers. Food processing was included in programme activities in three of the four study countries (except Trinidad) exclusively for women farmers. It is worth mentioning that, in Syria, extension messages on home economics matters (such as handicrafts, family planning, child development, cooking, etc.) were also included within the mainstream agricultural extension programmes, though there
was no-one who was technically qualified in these subjects. On the other hand, in Nigeria home economics programmes like health care, child development, nutrition, home management, handicrafts, etc., were not included in the mainstream agricultural programme areas.
From Table 37, it appears that the topics on weed control and selection of a good variety of seeds, which were identified by several reports as being problematical for women farmers in farm activities, were not included in any of the areas studied, even though in the present study weed control was ranked by women farmers as being one of the greatest problems for which advice was required from the extension service.
Table 37. Agricultural extension topics planned/implemented and gender of target clientele in the study areas as identified by field extension agents in 1992 in the four countries selected
Agricultural Extension topics
Thailand
Trinidad
Nigeria
|Syria
1. Cultivation technique
Farmer *
Farmer
Farmer
2. Fertilizer application
Farmer
Farmer
Farmer
3. Selection of good variety of seeds
4. Crop protection
Farmer
Farmer
Farmer
Farmer
5. Weed control
6. Irrigation and water management
Farmer
7. Crop production/mixed cropping
Farmer
Farmer
8. Harvesting techniques
Women
9. Storage of harvested crop
Women
Women
10. Care of livestock
Farmer
Farmer
Farmer
11. Care of poultry
Farmer
Women
12. Marketing
Farmer
Farmer
13. Formation of women group/ cooperatives
Women
Women
14. Credit advice
Farmer
15. Food processing
Women
Farmer
Women
Women
16. Home economics
Women
Women
17 Youth programme/4 H-club
Youth
Youth
Note. (-) - Topics are not included in extension programmes (*) = Gender not specified
Note: (-) = Topics are not included m extension programmes (*) = Gender not specified
3.2 Extent of women farmers' participation in extension programme activities
The extension programme activities that reach women farmers could not be directly estimated due to the lack of available information recorded by gender in the study countries.
Table 38: Average percentage of women farmer's participation in six different extension activities of the study areas in four selected countries in 1992
S1. No
Name of the study areas
% of women contact farmers
% of women members in farmers group (both male and female )
% of women visited by field
% of women at farmer's classes /meetings
% of women at method demonstration
% of women at field days
Thailand (Nonthaburi)
Trinidad (St. Patrick & St. George)
NU
Nigeria (Enugu & Kaduna)
8250(nos) *
Syria (Homs & Deir Ez Zor)
NU
Note: NU = Not used in extension programme activities; (-) = Data not given; (*) = members in women's group
Parentheses represents selected study areas
Table 38 presents the average percentage of women farmers' participation in six extension programme activities, as perceived and reported by field extension agents in the four study countries.
The total number of memberships in women farmers' groups, which were used as an important channel for extension communication, were 8,250 in the study areas in Nigeria and 14% in Thailand. Table 38 further shows that, on average, 80% of women farmers in the study areas of Nigeria had participated in farmers' classes/meetings, in method demonstration and field days, whereas in Thailand it was 40%. In the study areas of Trinidad, the percentage of women farmers' participating in farmers' classes/meetings and method demonstration was 25% in each category. Similarly in Syria it was 39% and 28% respectively. It is interesting to note that, in one of the study areas of Nigeria, 30% of the contact farmers in extension programme activities were women. Also, 47%, 32% and 30% of women farmers in Syria, Nigeria and Trinidad respectively were visited by field extension agents.
4. Problems faced by women farmers in attending extension programme activities
It appears from Table 39 that lack of time and lack of incentives were considered to be some of the greatest problems by women farmers in the four study countries selected. This is in agreement with the findings of the World Bank project on Women's Agricultural Productivity in Africa (WAPIA) in 1990 that women farmers in Nigeria and Kenya were unable to attend training due to lack of time. Lack of awareness of the extension programme was ranked as the least important problem in all the study countries.
Table 39. Problems in attending extension programme activities ranked in order of importance in 1992 by women farmers in the study areas of the four countries selected
Problem areas
Thailand
Trinidad
Nigeria
Syria
Lack of time
3rd
3rd
2nd
2nd
Lack of time and suitable venue for extension training classes/meetings
1st
2nd
4th
5th
Lack of awareness of the extension programme
5th
6th
6th
6th
Lack of incentives
2nd
1st
1st
3rd
Lack of interest in training methods (lectures)
4th
4th
3rd
4th
Due to having young children
5th
5th
5th
1st
It is also noted that lack of time and suitable venue for the extension training/meetings was ranked as the most important problem in Thailand and second in Trinidad, but only fourth and fifth in Nigeria and Syria respectively. The researcher assumes that in Thailand and Trinidad most of the extension agents did not take women's dual roles as farmer and reproductive agent into consideration, resulting in fewer visits by extension agents compared to other study countries.
5. Problems and constraints of agricultural extension services in reaching women farmers, as perceived by extension personnel
Field extension staff, policymakers, administrators, supervisors and technical officers, or subject-matter specialists of extension organizations in the four study countries were requested to rate the degree of severity of the problems that could affect agricultural extension work with particular reference to reaching women farmers on a five-point scale (very important, fairly important, important, less important and not at all important).
Tables 40 and 41 present the ranking of the eleven possible problems that could affect agricultural extension in reaching women farmers, as perceived by field extension agents and extension officials in the four study countries.
5.1 Expressed by field extension agent
As shown in Table 40, lack of technology suitable for women farmers, lack of training in extension methods and lack of demonstration materials were consistently ranked as three of the greatest problems in Thailand, Trinidad, Nigeria and Syria. While the transportation problem was ranked as first in Syria, the respondents of Nigeria, Trinidad and Thailand ranked transportation as 5th, 6th and 7th respectively.
5 2. Expressed by extension personnel (policymakers, planners, extension administrators, supervisors and technical officers or subject-matter specialists)
As shown in Table 41, lack of technology suitable for women farmers and lack of demonstration materials were ranked as the greatest problems in all four study countries. While lack of adequate transportation was ranked first and second in Syria and Nigeria respectively, the respondents of Thailand and Trinidad reported this as the sixth problem. In Thailand and Trinidad, lack of understanding of the problems and needs of women farmers was ranked third and first respectively.
Table 40. Problems affecting agricultural extension services to women farmers in the study areas of the four countries selected, as ranked by field extension agents in order of importance (1992)
Problem areas
Thailand
Trinidad
Nigeria
Syria
Lack of technology suitable for women farmers
1st
1st
3rd
2nd
Lack of practical agricultural training in improved technology
6th
3rd
6th
4th
Lack of training in extension methods and communication skills to work with women farmer
2nd
2nd
4th
3rd
Lack of adequate transportation to reach women farmers efficiently
7th
6th
5th
1st
Lack of essential teaching and communication equipment
8th
5th
2nd
7th
Lack of demonstration materials
3rd
2nd
1st
3rd
Lack of knowledge in understanding problems and needs of women farmers
4th
3rd
6th
3rd
Too many changes in the policy objectives
4th
4th
Too much official work in addition to field work
3rd
8th
9th
7th
Coverage of too many target groups by one agent
5th
7th
7th
6th
Lack of provision for women farmers' participation in extension programmes
3rd
4th
5th
3rd
Lack of subject-matter specialists to serve women's specific problems
4th
3rd
8th
5th
Note: (-) = No response
Table 41. Problems ranked by extension personnel in order of importance as affecting agricultural extension services to women farmers in the study areas of the four countries selected (1992)
Problem areas
Thailand
Trinidad
Nigeria
Syria
Lack of technology suitable for women farmers
1st
2nd
3rd
2nd
Lack of linkages between extension services and research
7th
4th
8th
6th
Lack of practical agricultural training on improved technology
4th
2nd
5th
5th
Lack of training in extension methods and communication skills to work with women farmer
2nd
3rd
6th
7th
Lack of adequate transportation to reach women farmers easily
6th
6th
2nd
1st
Lack of demonstration materials
3rd
2nd
1st
3rd
Lack of essential teaching and communication equipment
8th
7th
4th
8th
Extension agents assigned many other official jobs in addition to field work
5th
8th
11th
9th
Lack of provision for women farmers' participation m extension programmes
4th
3rd
10th
4th
Lack of subject-matter specialists to assist with women's specific problems
9th
5th
9th
3rd
Lack of understanding of the problems and needs of women farmers
3rd
1st
7th
4th
Tables 40 and 41 indicate that the lack of technology suitable for women farmers and lack of demonstration materials were ranked first, second or third problem in reaching women farmers by extension services, as perceived by both groups of respondents in Thailand, Trinidad, Nigeria and Syria. This is in line with the statement made by Saito and Spurling (1992). On the other hand, extension agents being assigned many other tasks was considered a lesser problem in Trinidad, Nigeria and Syria.
From the above findings it can be assumed that current agricultural research and extension tends to ignore women's activities. They try to solve technical problems without considering the social consequences. The findings suggest that research centres should develop suitable technology for women farmers and these should be available to extension staff for communicating messages to women farmers effectively.
6. Some suggestions of extension personnel by position and gender for improving the effectiveness of agricultural extension services to women farmers
The views of extension personnel were also sought on ways to improve the effectiveness of agricultural extension services to women farmers. More than three-quarters of the total number of respondents suggested increasing gender-specific research work (91%), inclusion of women farmers in all stages of programme planning (88%), increasing the number of women contact groups (86%), need for more monitoring and evaluation (82%), specification of women farmers as target clientele (81%), improving delivery techniques to overcome women's constraints of time, mobility and illiteracy (80%), training of extension agents to work with women's groups (79%), adequate budget for demonstration materials and equipment (77%) and guidance and training of male extension agents to understand women's activities (76%). These findings are in line with those areas suggested by Saito and Spurling (1992).
Table 42. Some suggestions by extension officials by gender in the four study countries selected for improving agricultural extension services to women farmers (%)
No.
Suggestions
Total number of extension officials as respondents by position
Total number of extension personnel as respondents N = 140
Total number of respondents by gender
Administrators/supervisors/ planners/policymakers N= 58
SMS/technical officers N = 40
Extension agents N = 42
Male N = 99
Female N = 41
Women farmers must be explicitly specified as target clientele group in policy statement of agricultural extension
Need for separate extension services for women farmers
Increase in number of female extension agents
Appoint female agents as subject-matter specialists in relation to women farmers
Using female agents as supervisors in women ' s extension programmes
Male ensign agents should be guided and trained to understand women's production activities and their specific problems and needs
Increase in number of women contact farmers
Increase in number of women contact groups
Deliver messages through mass media, viz. radio, video cassettes, to overcome women farmer's constraints of time, mobility and illitercy
Specify number or percentage of target clientele by gender in formal extension training
Women farmers should be included in all stages of programme planning
Increase research work to produce technologies that would improve the farming operations normally done by women
Need for monitoring and evaluation of implementing of planned extension activities for women farmers
Increased separate budget allocation for execution of projects for women
Improve the content of extension messages which are appropriate for women farmers
Train extension agents on how to work with women farmers in groups
Provide adequate transport facilities for female extension agents
Adequate budget for demonstration materials/equipment for implementation of gender-specific projects
(Figures m parenthesis represent percentage value)
<section>6</section>
V. Summary and conclusions
V. Summary and conclusions
Agricultural development is a complex process and a challenging one as well. For purposes of this study four major sub-systems of the agricultural development process have been recognized, namely, research, extension, support, and client, which are supposed to work in harmony to bring about stable and sustained growth in agriculture. So far as the client system is concerned, it encompasses both men and women as equal partners. Unquestionably, women play a significant and crucial role throughout the Third World. In addition to farm work, in which they are actively involved with men, the burden of almost all the household chores falls on them. But despite the global consensus as to their vital role both on the farm and in the household, their importance in and contribution to agriculture are not adequately reflected in the available statistics which perhaps obscure more than they reveal. Moreover, it is found that agricultural extension networks do not provide them with
satisfactory services and hence there is an urgent need for a better understanding in this regard for developing effective extension and training programmes to reach women farmers.
The present investigation was undertaken to study selected factors affecting the operation of the agricultural extension services in developing countries in reaching women farmers effectively, and to suggest measures to improve the existing services so that present and future generations of women farmers in agricultural countries apply scientific knowledge and use improved agricultural techniques and skills in their farm work, which should lead to an increase in productivity and income.
The study was conducted in selected state(s) of four study countries (Thailand, Trinidad, Nigeria and Syria). A multi-stage purposive-cum-stratified random sampling design was followed. Respondents were selected from four different categories of extension services. Altogether, 480 women farmers, 58 administrators, 40 technical officers/subject-matter specialists and 42 extension agents were included as "sample of respondents" in the present study. Four research schedules were used separately for the collection of various data, according to the objectives of the study.
The salient findings of the study were summarised as follows:
A. General characteristics of women farmers as clientele of extension services
* The age distribution of the majority (more than 55 %) of the women farmers included in the study fell between two categories, i.e. 15 to 30 and 30 to 45 years.
* In respect of marital status of women farmers, it was revealed that the largest group of women farmers was married and estimated to be more than 60% of the total in the four study countries selected. Nearly 24% of the total number of women farmers in Trinidad were widowed, followed by Thailand - 16%, Nigeria - 14% and in Syria nearly 8%.
* In terms of head of the household, only 26% of the women farmers in Trinidad were considered as household head, followed by about 21 % in Thailand, 15% in Nigeria and a little more than 4% in Syria.
* Approximately 78 % and 75 % of women farmers in Nigeria and Syria respectively had more than 6 children, while in Trinidad and Thailand nearly 93 % and 89 % of women farmers had between 1 and 3 children.
* In Syria nearly 63% of the women farmers were illiterate, followed by 60% in Nigeria, 20% in Thailand and 5% in Trinidad.
* The majority of the women farmers (more than 69%) in three of the study countries, i.e. Trinidad, Nigeria and Syria, cultivated less than three acres of land, whereas in Thailand more than 46% women farmers had between three and five acres of cultivable land.
* Approximately 86% of women farmers in Nigeria were members of different farmers' organizations (formal), as compared to nearly 73% in Thailand, 25% in Trinidad and only about 4% in Syria.
* About 51% and 48% of the women farmers in Thailand and Trinidad respectively were from the middle socio-economic group, while in Nigeria and Syria just over 81 % and 66% respectively were from the low socio-economic group.
* The majority of women farmers in all the study areas in the countries selected were found to contribute to the labour force regularly for such activities as transplanting, planting, weeding and harvesting. Land preparation, application of pesticides and irrigation were performed less by women farmers, as identified in all the study countries. However, marketing was carried out by more than 88% of the women farmers both in Trinidad and Nigeria, as compared to only about 34% in Thailand and 5% in Syria. Moreover, as compared to the other three countries, the majority of the women farmers in Nigeria were involved in processing (91.25%), transportation of crops from field (73.13%), storage of crops for family use (71.25%) and threshing/winnowing (56.25%). Most of the women farmers in all the study areas prepared meals for their families and dealt with house maintenance. More than 60% of women farmers in Nigeria and Syria collected wood for fuel and water for daily use and
took care of their children.
* In Thailand, Trinidad and Nigeria both women and their husbands took part in making decisions about farm activities, such as selection of crop site (70%, 55% and nearly 46% respectively), crops to be planted (about 43%, 51 % and 56% respectively) and adoption of new varieties of seeds (55%, 49% and 45% respectively). On the other hand, in Syria decisions on farm activities were controlled mainly by the husbands. Most of the women farmers (more than 60%) in all the study countries dominated the decision-making process on what to keep for family use and storage and cooking meals for the family. The majority of the women farmers (more than 65%) in Thailand, Trinidad and Nigeria also played an important role in decision-making on management of their family income, followed by Syria (about 56%).
* Women farmers in all the study countries were saddled with a double workload: farm as well as home activities. In Nigeria, women farmers spent a total of 14.26 hours daily on farm as well as reproductive activities, followed by 11.77 hours in Trinidad, 11.74 hours in Syria and 11.67 hours in Thailand.
* About 23 % of women farmers in Thailand had land ownership entitlements compared to 8.75% in Trinidad and 4.38% in Nigeria. 41.25% of women farmers in Syria cultivated their husband's land followed by 38.75% in Thailand 30% in Trinidad and 23% in Nigeria. It is worth mentioning that about 30% of women farmers in Nigeria obtained land as a gift from their husbands.
* Most of the women farmers in Nigeria (85%) did not use modern tools and farm implements followed by Syria (62.50%) Trinidad (56.25%) and Thailand (53.75%).
* In terms of sources of labour 47.5 % of women farmers in Trinidad hired manpower compared to 43.75% in Thailand 32.5% in Nigeria and 14.63% in Syria mainly for land preparation.
* The highest percentage of women farmers using improved varieties of seeds was in Trinidad (77.5 %) compared to 48.75 % in Thailand 23 % in Nigeria and 15 % in Syria. Only women farmers in Nigeria (23%) obtained improved seeds through the extension service.
* A large percentage of women farmers in Thailand (nearly 98%) used fertilizers followed by Trinidad (nearly 88%) and the middle-man and garden/farm shop were the main sources for them. But about 64% and 58% of women farmers in Syria and Nigeria respectively obtained fertilizers from the open market and through their husbands.
* The highest percentage of application of chemicals by women farmers was identified in Trinidad (47.5%) compared to Thailand (38.75%) Syria (6.25%) and Nigeria (5%).
* Women farmers of three of the study countries (11.88% in Nigeria 3.75% in Syria and 1.25 % in Trinidad) had limited access to sources of finance. On the other hand women farmers in Thailand (61.25%) borrowed money from different sources (mainly from relatives and middlemen) for farm activities. It is interesting to note that a very negligible percentage of women farmers in Thailand (3.75 %) and Trinidad (1.25 %) received loans from agricultural banks.
* Middle-men were the main means of selling farm produce for the majority of women farmers in Thailand (46.25%) and Syria (45%) whereas in Nigeria 68.26% of the women farmers marketed their crops in the village market and in Trinidad 47.5% in both the wholesale and retail markets.
* The majority of women farmers in Nigeria - 78.13 % Syria - 58.75 % and Thailand 35 % were visited by extension agents regularly i.e. between one and two months whereas in Trinidad intervals between visits to women farmers by extension agents seemed to be irregular.
* Field extension agents were rated as the primary source of agricultural advice by the majority of women farmers in Nigeria (58.12%) and Syria (41.25%) whereas 40% of women farmers in Trinidad took advice from their husbands and about 33% of women farmers in Thailand took advice from relatives.
* High cost of farm inputs, excess of weeds and lack of storage facilities were ranked as three of the greatest problems faced by the majority of women farmers in farm activities in all the study areas in the four countries selected.
* In terms of need areas for agricultural advice from the extension service, weed control, storage of produced crops and food processing were ranked as three of the most important extension areas by women farmers in the study areas of the four countries selected.
* The majority of the respondents of Syria (82.5%), Nigeria (65.62%) and Thailand (41.25%) expressed a preference for female extension agents. On the other hand, the opinion of women farmers in Trinidad (nearly 68%) in this regard was rather gender-neutral.
B. Capacity of Agricultural Extension Services to serve Women Farmers
* Three of the four study countries (Thailand, Nigeria and Syria) have recognised women as fully fledged farmers in the statement of National Agricultural Policy. None of the objectives of National Agricultural Extension Policy in the four study countries clearly identified women farmers as a specific extension clientele group. Moreover, three of the study countries - with the exception of Nigeria - did not provide clear operational guidelines in relation to women farmers for the development and execution of extension programme activities for women farmers.
* Two groups - i.e. small farmers and women farmers - were specified as extension target groups in three of the study countries (excluding Trinidad), though it was not explicitly mentioned in the respective extension policy.
* All the study countries provided information about the availability of subject-matter specialists in the areas of crop production, crop protection and animal husbandry. In Thailand, Nigeria and Syria they were reported at zonal and provincial levels, whereas, in Trinidad they were at central level. Female extension agents of three of the study countries (except Trinidad) were officially instructed to specifically serve women farmers. Further, there was a monitoring and evaluation unit in the extension organizations of two of the study countries, Thailand and Nigeria. Besides these data, three of the study countries (Thailand, Trinidad and Syria) mentioned the existence of other specialized sections such as publications, audio-visual, information and training within the extension services.
* There was a specific women's section within the extension organizations of Thailand, Nigeria and Syria. The appointed female extension agents of the women sections in Thailand and Nigeria were mainly qualified in home economics, whereas in Syria they were qualified in agricultural subjects.
* More than 70% of the extension personnel in four study countries indicated a highly favourable attitude towards women as farmers and food producers.
* The primary extension approach identified in Thailand was the group approach, whereas in Nigeria it was the T & V extension system. In Trinidad and Syria, the individual extension approach was reported as the most predominant. In terms of extension methods employed by extension systems, the group method was mainly used in Thailand and Nigeria. On the other hand in Trinidad and Syria, high emphasis was given to individual visits.
* The average field extension agent of Syria, Trinidad and Nigeria completed 55, 22 and 12 farm and home visits respectively in 1992, while 24, 22, 15 and 8 extension educational meetings were completed by the average number of extension agents of Nigeria, Thailand, Syria and Trinidad respectively. In addition, the extension organizations of two of the study countries (Thailand and Trinidad) produced a large number of extension publications in 1992, irrespective of gender. It is worth mentioning here that only in Nigeria and Syria group extension activities, such as extension classes, demonstration, were organized to deliver technical agricultural messages specifically to women farmers. On the other hand, in Thailand and Trinidad extension programmes were mainly planned and implemented for both men and women.
* None of the study countries included women farmers in extension planning and programme development.
* In terms of research-extension linkages, administrators of two of the study countries (Thailand and Nigeria) ranked their relationship with research as "when need arises", while in Trinidad and Syria it was ranked as very weak.
* The mode of operation of the monitoring and evaluation system in Thailand and Nigeria was rated as "weak", whereas in Trinidad and Syria it was reported as "very weak".
* The proportion of female extension agents irrespective of subject areas in 1992 were estimated to be 43% in Thailand, 31 % in Trinidad, 22% in Nigeria and 14% in Syria. It is interesting to note that, of the total number of female extension agents in Nigeria, 97% were qualified in home economics, while in Thailand the percentage was 35.
* In Thailand and Trinidad there was an overall good SMS to field agent ratio (1:8 in each) compared to the other two study countries, Nigeria (1:27) and Syria (1:68). Subject-matter specialists in all the study countries were not adequately trained in gender-specific areas. This indicates a serious institutional constraint to the flow of technology between research and extension.
* Extension coverage, i.e. extension agent to farmer ratio, was found to be different in the four study countries. The information collected in this regard from two of the study countries (Thailand and Trinidad) did not show extension coverage on a gender basis (male and female). However, in Nigeria and Syria the extension agent to women farmer ratio was fairly clear.
* The extension agents of Thailand and Nigeria were reported as being regularly trained in fortnightly meetings compared to the other two countries (Trinidad and Syria) where there was no regular training. A low percentage of extension agents in three of the study countries trained in extension methodologies to communicate with women farmers (20% in Nigeria, 18% in Thailand and 6% in Syria) and in gender-specific areas (30% in Nigeria, 18% in Syria, and 10% in Thailand). None of the extension agents in Trinidad had training in extension methodology and gender-specific subjects.
* Office accommodation for extension agents were identified at block level in Nigeria and Syria while in Thailand and Trinidad it was at district level.
* With respect to transportation, the situation in three of the four study countries (excluding Syria) in general was quite good, as reported by country administrators. But the study found that, compared to male agents, female agents in Thailand, Nigeria and Syria had mobility problems in their extension service.
* Only in Thailand the extension system allocated a separate budget specifically for women farmers. But it was reported that this was used mainly for home economics programmes. The highest percentage of the total budget of the extension service in three of the study countries was allocated to salaries (85% in Trinidad, 84% in Thailand and 75% in Nigeria). In Syria, the given data in this regard was not clear for interpretation.
* Of the agricultural extension messages found in the present study, six were identified as being for women farmers: techniques of harvesting crops (Syria), storage of harvested crops (Nigeria and Syria), care of poultry (Syria), formation of women's groups (Thailand and Nigeria), food processing (Thailand, Nigeria and Syria) and home economics (Thailand and Syria). In Trinidad, existing extension programmes were formulated without considering gender.
* On average, 80% of women farmers in the study areas of Nigeria participated in farmers' classes/meetings, method demonstration and field days, followed by 40% in Thailand, whereas in Trinidad the percentage of women farmers' participating in farmer's classes and method demonstration was 25% in each category. Similarly, 39% and 28% of women farmers in Syria participated in farmers' classes and method demonstration respectively. It was also noted that, only in the study areas of Nigeria, 30% of the women farmers were reported as being contact farmers.
* Low participation of women farmers in extension activities was due to lack of time and proper incentives, as identified by the women farmers in all four study countries.
* Lack of appropriate technology suitable for women farmers and lack of demonstration materials were consistently ranked as two of the greatest problems in reaching women farmers, as perceived by field extension agents and extension personnel in all four study countries.
* More than three-quarters of the total number of respondents of all the study countries suggested that more attention should be given to the following areas in order to reach women farmers effectively: increasing gender-specific research work (91%), inclusion of women farmers in all stages of extension programme planning and development (88%), increasing the number of women contact groups (86%), need for more monitoring and evaluation in extension programmes (82%), targeting women farmers as an important clientele group in extension (81%), improving delivering techniques to overcome women's constraints of time, mobility and illiteracy (80%), training extension agents to work with women's groups (79%), providing adequate budget for demonstration materials and equipment (77%) and guidance and training of male extension agents to understand women's production activities and specific problems and needs (76%).
Conclusions:
The findings presented in this study show that women farmers are not a homogeneous group. They represent different socio-economic situations with different needs for extension contact and the use of extension methods. It is also confirmed that the nature and extent of their involvement in agriculture certainly varies greatly from region to region. But, regardless of these variations, there is hardly any activity in agricultural production, except land preparation, in which women are not actively involved. The findings also indicate that decision-making patterns in farm work seem to be changing and women have increasingly become important members of the family as decision-makers, both on the farm as well as at home. Despite their importance in agricultural production, women face severe handicaps. Women's access to agricultural inputs has not improved proportionately. This results in a considerable loss in agricultural productivity and output. The findings of the study show
that women farmers have more contacts with the extension service than was previously reported. Though their production problems may be known to the extension sub-system, they are not known to the research subsystem, due to the poor functional linkage between research and extension. Very little research is being carried out to improve the productivity of women farmers. Therefore, agricultural extension has little or not improved technology to extend to women farmers who grow the traditional food crops. In other cases, technology is available, but women are unable to obtain the credit to purchase the inputs needed to utilize the new technology. Furthermore, male extension agents of some countries do not consider the dual role of women farmers, scheduling meetings and demonstrations at times and places which are inconvenient or inaccessible to women farmers. The findings also show the level of recognition of women farmers by extension personnel as food and agricultural
producers influencing extension programming which in turn affects the women's activities, resources socio-cultural constraints and participation in extension activities. Hence the lack of clear extension objectives that specifically target women farmers and the lack of gender-specific operational guidelines reduce extension effectiveness in reaching women farmers. Besides, there are extension constraints such as inadequate gender-specific training facilities for extension agents and lack of proper allocation of extension budget for programme activities which are specifically aimed at reaching more women farmers more efficiently, which also affects extension effectiveness. It was also discovered that monitoring and evaluation on a gender-disaggregated basis at regular intervals helps to make extension programming more effective in reaching women farmers.
Recommendations:
- The findings suggest that the role of women farmers in food and agricultural production should be clearly identified, taking into consideration the different categories of socio-economic groups of women farmers. Their production problems and needs should be used as the basis for extension planning. The findings also suggest that women farmers should be given every opportunity to participate in the planning of their extension programme and the establishment of its objectives.
- The extension service should be more gender-sensitive when organizing extension activities, so that women farmers have full and appropriate access to extension meetings, demonstrations, field days and other activities. A proportion of women farmer participants should be targeted in each extension activity that can specially benefit them.
- In some places/countries where there is no cultural restriction of joint men-women participation in extension activities, extension workers should strongly motivate women farmers to attend gender-neutral extension activities.
- In countries where there is a T & V system, women farmers in each village should be selected to act as contact farmers. They should be motivated by extension agents to deliver the extension messages to other women farmers as soon as possible. The fortnightly meetings should be organized in such a way that women can attend these meetings regularly. Extension agents, when scheduling the time and place of meetings, should always take care that the visits do not conflict with women's other roles in their household.
- It is further recommended that existing women's groups in the village be organized and strengthened to increase women's access to extension, credit, inputs and even marketing services. Extension workers should collect all the necessary information related to marketing and the various sources of inputs and credit and make them easily available to women farmers, and they should train them how to obtain access to these services. Extension workers should also encourage those women farmers who are not members of village farmers' groups to take up membership. Moreover, in this case, extension worker should be trained not only in extension methods when working with women farmers, but also in the techniques of group formation and how to develop leadership ability in the women farmers so that they can operate their own groups and encourage active participation of women farmers in the different extension programme activities. Such training of extension agents should emphasize
how to work well with women farmers in groups.
- There is a need to specifically identify women as an integral part of the agricultural extension policy and develop gender-specific operational guidelines which will direct the extension activities of women farmers.
- Finally, based on the findings of the study, it is recommended that regular monitoring and evaluation of extension programmes on a gender-disaggregated basis be supported and practiced by every agricultural extension service.
<section>7</section>
Bibliography
Bibliography
Acharya, M. and Bennett, L. 1983. Women and the subsistence sector: Economic Participation and Household Decision Making In Nepal". World Bank working paper No. 526.
Adekanye, T. 1984. Women's role in Development: The Nigerian situation. Paper presented at the Workshop on Women in Development, organized by the Nigerian Institute of Social and Economic Research (NISER), Ibadan, and the Friedrich-Ebert Foundation of West Germany, 10-11 December.
Adeniji, M.A. 1991. The role of rural women in household food security and nutrition in Ifedapo Local Government Area of Oyo State. Unpublished Master's Thesis, Department of Agricultural Extension, University of Ibadan.
Adewara, S.E. 1988. Women in agricultural co-operatives: a comparative analysis of Bauchi and Kwara State of Nigeria. Unpublished Master's Thesis, Department of Agricultural Economics, University of Ibadan.
Aidoo, A.A. 1988. Women and Food Security: The opportunity for African Development. Vol. 2, No. 3: pp. 56-61.
Airmy, J., Sulaiman, H., Mohamad, M., Masu, J., Yatim, M., and Juhari, R. 1990. Case study on the integration of productive and reproductive roles of women in rural and agricultural development in Jelebu Negeri Sembilan. FAO, Rome.
Akinbode, I.A. 1991. Women's Participation in Agriculture in Nigeria: a case study of Ogun, Gangola, Cross River, Kano and Niger States. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations/Federal Department of Agriculture, Nigeria.
Anonymous, 1982. Report on Sample Survey of Rural Women in Agriculture. Research and Planning Divisions, Ministry of Labour, Social Security and Cooperatives, Trinidad, July, p. 8.
Anonymous, 1985. Report of the Labor Force Survey. Whole Kingdom, Bangkok, Government of Thailand, August. National Statistical Office, Round 3.
Anonymous, 1987. Report of the Department of Agriculture, Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives, Bangkok, Government of Thailand.
Anonymous, 1989. Integration of Rural Women's Concerns into Mainstream Agriculture and Rural Development Activities in Thailand. A country paper prepared for the Regional Workshop on Planning and Implementation Aspects of Programmes and Projects Assisting Women Farmers in ASEAN Countries, Chomtien, Thailand, 6-10 August.
Anonymous, 1991. Final report on Women's Role in Integrated Farming System Research in Supahan Buri Province. Farming System Research Institute, Department of Agriculture, Kasetsart University and Office of Agricultural Economics, Thailand, June.
Ashby, J.A. 1985. Women and Agricultural Technology in Latin America and the Caribbean. Background document prepared for the CGTAR Intercentre Seminar on Women and Agricultural Technology, Bellagio, Italy, 25-29 March.
Axinn, N. 1990. Agricultural Extension for Women Farmers in South Asia. Background paper prepared for PHRWD, World Bank.
Balakrishnan, R. 1992. Reorientation of Home Economics for Rural Development in Developing Countries: a technology transfer training approach. FAO/ESHW, Rome.
Bastone, S.M. 1987. The Impact of Agricultural Development from an Intrahousehold Perspective. Unpublished Master's Thesis, University of Wisconsin, Madison.
Bhatnagar, O.P. 1981. Research Methods and Measurements in Behavioural Sciences. New Delhi: Agricole Publishing Academy, p. 30.
Bryson, J.C. 1980. The Development Implications of female involvement in Agriculture: the case of Cameroon. Master's dissertation, University of Manchester.
Buvinic, M., and Lycette, M. 1988. Women, poverty and development in the third world. Strengthening the poor: What have we learned? by John P. Lewis and contributors. US Third World Policy Perspectives, No. 10. Overseas Development Council, Washington, D.C., April.
Chale, F. 1990. Terminal report 1: Strengthening Agricultural Extension - a study of problems and constraints in extension strategies and methods for reaching rural women. FAO of the United Nations, Rome.
Chaney, E.M., and Lewis, M. W. 1980. Women, migration and the decline of smallholder agriculture. Washington, D.C: Office of Women in Development, US Agency for International Development, p. 27.
Chase, V. 1988. The economic and social context (Chapter II) of Caribbean Women in Agriculture. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Regional Office for Latin America and the Caribbean, Santiago, Chile.
Chase, V. 1988. The case of the Mabouya Valley in Saint Lucia, Empirical testimony. Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Regional Office for Latin America and the Caribbean, Santiago, Chile.
Claar, J.B., and Bentz, R.P. 1984. Organizational Design and Extension Administration. Agricultural Extension - a reference manual - second edition, FAO, Rome, pp. 161-183.
Contado, T.E. 1990. Agricultural Extension Approaches: What FAO's Case Studies Reveal. In Report of the Global Consultation on Agricultural Extension, FAO, Rome, p. 77.
CTA, 1993. A woman's rightful place? SPORE (bi-monthly bulletin), Technical Centre for Agricultural and Rural Co-operation (CTA), Netherlands, No. 44, April.
Deelau, S. 1989. Women Farmers and Dairy cow-raising in Surin Province. Presented at the Workshop on Directions for Strengthening the Role of Women Farmers, Sukhothaithammathirat Open University, Nonthaburi, Thailand, 9-11 July.
Deere, C.D. 1982. The division of labor by sex in agriculture: a Peruvian case study. Econ. Dev. Cult., Change 30, pp. 795-812.
Deere, C.D., and Leon, de M. 1982. Women in Andean Agriculture. In Women, work and development. Geneva, ILO.
de Faria Saviano, 1983. quoted from Margarita, M.E., Status of rural women and related policy guidelines, Rural women in Latin America, FAO, Rome, p. 220.
De Lancey, V., and Elwy, E. 1989. Rural women and the changing socio-economic conditions in the Near East. FAO, Rome (unpublished).
Dixon, Ruth B. 1982. Women in Agriculture: Counting the Labour Force in Developing Countries, Population and Development Review, September.
Dulyapach, P. 1985. Thai women in Agriculture and Rural Development. FAO Regional Office for Asia and the Pacific, Bangkok, Thailand, p. 55.
Egbugara, C.A. 1989. An analysis of the roles of rural women in production and processing of selected food crops in Etiti Local Government, Area of Imo State. An unpublished Ph.D. Thesis, Department of Agricultural Extension, University of Ibadan.
Etzioni, A. 1976. Modern organizations. New Delhi: Prentice Hall of India, Pvt. Ltd., p.8.
Evans, J. 1989. Phalombe Rural Development Project. Study funded by British Government Overseas Development Association, Blantyre, Malawi, February.
FAO, 1983a. Committee on Agriculture, Follow-up to WCARRD: The Role of Women in Agricultural Production, Seventh Session, Rome, 21-30 March.
FAO, 1983b. Review of Rural Development Policies, Strategies and Programmes. Report of the WCAARD Follow-up Mission, No. 2, 15-25 April.
FAO, 1987. Effectiveness of agricultural extension services in reaching rural women in Africa. Paper presented at a workshop in Harare, Zimbabwe, Report, Vol. 2. 5-9 October.
FAO, 1989. Quoted from FAO, 1993, Agricultural extension and farm women in the 1980s. Rome.
FAO, 1990a. Report of the Global Consultation on Agricultural Extension, Rome.
FAO, 1990b. Women in Agricultural Development: Gender Issues in Rural Food Security in Developing Countries. Committee on World Food Security, Fifteenth Session, Rome, 26-30 March.
FAO, 1993. Agricultural extension and farm women in the 1980s. Rome.
Feldman, R. 1981. Employment problems of Rural Women in Kenya. Unpublished paper presented for ILO.
Feldstein, H., Flora, C.B., and Poats, S.V., 1989. Gender Variables in Agricultural Research. Manuscript report 225c, prepared for the Women In Development Unit, International Development Research Centre, Ottawa, Canada, pp. 13-18, June.
Feldstein, H., Rocheleau, D.E., and Buck, L.E. 1989. Agroforestry Extension and Research: a Case Study from Siaya District, Kenya. In Working Together: Gender Analysis in Agriculture. Hilary Sims Feldstein and Susan V. Poats (Eds.). West Hartford, Connecticut: Kumarian Press.
Folasade, K.F. 1991. The Roles of Women in Food Production in Oyo LGA of Ondo State. An unpublished B.Sc. Thesis, Department of Agricultural Extension and Rural Sociology, Obafemi Awolowo University, Le-Ife.
Fortmann, L. 1978. Women and Tanzanian Agricultural Development. Economic Research Bureau Paper No. 77.4. Dar-es-Salaam, Economic Research Bureau.
Fortmann, L. 1981. The Plight of the Invisible Farmer: the Effect of National Agricultural Policy and Women in Africa. In Dauber and Cain.
Gbolagade, A.R. 1987. An assessment of the roles of women in rural development: a case study of Iseyin LGA of Oyo State. An unpublished B.Sc. Thesis, Department of Agricultural Extension, University of Ibadan.
Gill, D.S. 1987. Effectiveness of Agricultural Extension Services in Reaching Rural Women: a synthesis of studies from five African countries. Prepared for FAO, Rome, September.
Harry, I.S. 1980. Women in Agriculture in Trinidad and Tobago. An unpublished Master's Thesis, University of Calgary, Alberta, Canada.
Hassan, N.A. 1987. Strengthening the Agricultural Extension System. Expert's Terminal Report, project of Syrian Arab Republic, Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
Henshall, J.D. 1984. Gender versus Ethnic Pluralism in Caribbean Agriculture. In Clarke, C., Ley, D., and Peach, C. (Eds.). Geography and Ethnic Pluralism, George Allen and Unwin, London.
Huggins, G. 1991. Rural Women in Development in the Caribbean. Document prepared for FAO - RLAC Sub-regional Workshops on the Execution of the FAO Plan of Action for the Integration of Women in Development.
Ishola, S.A., and Margaret, A. 1987. The role of women in rural development and implications for extension work in Ayepe and Alabata, Oyo State, Nigeria. An unpublished Master's Thesis, University of Ibadan.
Jackson, C. 1985. The Kano River Irrigation Project. West Hartford, Conn: Kumarian Press.
Kaur, R. and Shrivastava, P.L. 1988. Identification of felt needs of rural women in selected home-making practices. Journal of Research, Punjab Agricultural University, Ludhiana. Vol. 25 (2): pp. 229-234.
Knudson, B. and Yates, B.A. 1981. The economic role of women in small-scale agriculture in the Eastern Caribbean - Saint Lucia. Bridgetown, Barbados, Women and Development Unit, University of the West Indies.
Krogh, E. 1988. Zimbabwe Forestry Project II - Involvement of Women in Rural Afforestation. World Bank, Washington, D.C.
Laxmi Devi, A. 1987. Rural Women - management in farm and home. Northern Book Centre, New Delhi.
Lewis, C. 1990. An Apparent Need for Greater Recognition and Involvement of Women in Agriculture in Trinidad - An Extension Approach; Alternative Strategies for Agricultural Development - An Analysis of Women and Gender Issues. Women and Development Unit, UWI, Barbados.
Mahapatra, K. 1987. Role of Women in Agricultural Extension Programme, India: A Review. Quoted from Axinn 1990.
Modupe, A. 1990. Women participation in agriculture and rural development: A survey of rural women in Ogun State, Nigeria. Unpublished B.Sc. Thesis, Department of Agricultural Extension and Rural Sociology, Ogun State University, AgoIwoye.
Mott, P.E. 1972. The characteristics of effective organizations. New York: Harper and Row.
Ohuegbe, C. 1989. Women in Agriculture Programme in Imo State. Paper presented to a World Bank Workshop on Agricultural Extension, Ibadan, Nigeria.
Olawoye, J.E. 1988. Factors affecting the role of Rural Women in Agricultural Production: a survey of Rural Women in Oyo State. Nigeria, African Notes, Special, No. 3.
Olawoye, J.E. 1989. Difficulties for Rural African Women to secure Access to Resources for Agricultural Production: two case studies from Oyo State, Nigeria. Rural Development in Nigeria, Vol. 3, No. 2; pp. 77-81.
Olaweye, J.E. 1993. Gender priorities and Issues in Agricultural Extension Delivery. Paper presented at the National Conference of the Society for Agricultural Extension of Nigeria, 24 to 26 February.
Pemberton, C.A. 1989. Factors affecting the allocation of time to farming: the Case of Women Farmers in South-west Nigeria. International Institute for Tropical Agriculture, Ibadan, Nigeria.
Rajak, T.A. 1990. A sample survey of the Organization and Management of Agricultural Services for Small Farmers in Trinidad and Tobago. University of the West Indies and Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations.
Reddock, R., Gemma Sirju-Charran, G., and Douglas, D. 1990. Policies for Women in the Rural Sector, Republic of Trinidad and Tobago, Executive Summary. Inter-American Institute for Cooperation on Agriculture.
Rogers, B. 1980. The domestication of women. New York: St. Martin's press.
Safilios-Rothschild, D. 1985. The Policy Implications of the Roles of Women in Agriculture in Zambia. Population Council, New York, in collaboration with the Government of Zambia.
Saito, K.A. 1992. Raising the productivity of women farmers in Sub-Saharan Africa. Overview Report, PHRWD, 15 September.
Saito, K.A. and Spurling, D. 1992. Developing Agricultural Extension for women farmers. World Bank discussion paper No. 156, The World Bank, Washington, D.C.
Saito, K.A. and Weidemann, C.J. 1990. Agricultural Extension for Women Farmers in Africa. World Bank discussion paper No. 103. The World Bank, Washington, D.C.
Shinawatra, B., Tongsiri, B., and Pitackwong, J. 1987. Differential Roles of Men and Women in the Farming Systems of Amphoe Phroa, Changwat Chiang Mail Chiang Mai University, Thailand.
Sirisambhand, N., and Gordon, A. 1987. Rural Women and Changes in Work Patterns: the Impact of a Reservoir and Transportation Networks on Three villages. In Women Farmers and Rural Change in Asia: towards equal access and participation. Asian Pacific Development Centre, p. 352.
Spens, T. 1986. Studies on agricultural extension involving women, including a suggested framework for the analysis of gender issues in agricultural extension programmes. UNIFEM Occasional Paper No. 3.
Spring, A. 1985. The Women in Agricultural Development Projects in Malawi: Making Genderfree Development Work. In Rita S. Gallin and Anita Spring (Eds.). Women Creating Wealth: Transforming Economic Development. Association for Women in Development, Washington, D.C., pp. 71-75.
Staudt, K. 1978. Agricultural Productivity Gaps: A Case Study of Male Preference in Government Policy Implementation. USAID/WID, Washington, D.C.
Swanson, B.E., ed. 1984. Agricultural Extension: a reference manual, second edition. FAO, Rome.
Thurstone, L.L. 1976. Attitudes scale, In Measurement of Extension Research: Instrument Developed at IARI, 1963-72, Division of Agricultural Extension, IARI, New Delhi, p. 49 (mimeographed).
Todaro, M.P. 1985. Economic Development in the third world. Third edition. Longman, New York & London. p. 574.
Trivedi, G. 1963. Measurement and Analysis of Socio-Economic Status of Rural Families, Ph.D. Thesis, Indian Agricultural Research Institute, New Delhi.
von Blanckenburg, P. 1984. Agricultural Extension Systems in some Asian and African Countries. Rome: FAO, Economic and Social Development Paper, No. 46.
Weidemann, C.J. 1987. Agricultural Extension For Women Farmers in Kaduna State, Nigeria: A report to the World Bank. Washington, D.C. April.
World Bank, 1989a. Kenya: The Role of Women in Economic Development. World Bank Country Study. Washington, D.C.
World Bank, 1989b. Sub-Saharan Agriculture: From Crisis to Sustainable Growth.
World Bank, 1991a. World Development Indicators 1991.
World Bank, 1991b. Gender and Poverty in India. World Bank Report No. 8072-IN.
World Bank, 1992. Raising the productivity of Women Farmers in Sub-Saharan Africa: an overview report, Vol. 1. PHRWD, World Bank, 15 September.
<section>8</section>
Annexes
Annexe 1: Selected study areas of four study countries at different extension level
Annexe 2: Socio-economic status scale: (1963)
Annexes
Annexe 1: Selected study areas of four study countries at different extension level
Level of Extension Division
Thailand
Trinidad
Nigeria
Syria
(I) Regions
Central
North and South
North and South east
North and Central
(II) State
Kaduna and Enugu
Province
Nonthaburi
Homs and Deir ez-zor
County
St. George West and St. Patrick East
(III) Zone
Benin Gwari and Enugu
District
Bangmai and Bang Bua Thong
Maracus, Aranguez, Santacruz, Deigo martin, Penal, San Francique, Morne Diable, Pluck road
Alrastan, Talkalak, Khoraita & Mouhassa
(IV) Sub district
Banglane, Bangmacnang Lumpoe and Bang Bua Thong
Extension unit
Zaafaran, Ghanto, Alhwash, Alhosson, Tabia, Ayash and Almasrab
Extension pockets
Blocks
Kujama, Kajuru, Sabantasha, Goningora, Awgu I, Enugu, Ezeago, and Nkano I
(V) Cells
Villages
Annexe 2: Socio-economic status scale: (1963)
Items
1. Land
No land
Upto 1 acre
Upto 5 acres
Upto 10 acres
Upto 15 acres
2. Education
Illiterate
Can read and write
Can read and write
Not completed primary
Primary Completed
Not completed secondary
Secondary Completed
3. Type of Housing
Kacha
Mixed
Pucca
4. Occupation of the head of the family
Wage labour
Trade/Business
Cultivation
Service
5. Material possession
Cycle
Radio
T.V
Improved tools/
Implements
Motor cycle
Tractor/ motor car
6. Family
Type: Single
Joint
Size: Upto 5
Above 5
7. Social participation
No membership
Members in one organisation
Members in more than one organisation
Office bearers
President/ Secretary
