<section>e</section>
Introduction
Introduction
1. The Seventh Session of the Working Party on Women and the Agricultural Family in Rural Development was held in Athens, Greece from 18 to 21 October 1994 at the kind invitation of the Government of the Hellenic Republic.
2. The Session was attended by delegations from twelve countries of the European Region and Observers from intergovernmental and non-governmental organizations. The list of participants and officers of the Session is attached in Annex I.
Opening of the Session
3. The Opening Ceremony was held in conjunction with the Joint Meeting of the Eightieth Session of the FAO/ECA Executive Committee and of the Bureau of the UN/ECE Committee on Agriculture.
4. The FAO Regional Representative for Europe, Mr. M. Zjalic, welcomed the participants on behalf of the Director-General of FAO and conveyed his best wishes for the success of both meetings. He thanked the Host Government for its invitation, for the excellent facilities provided and its strong and continuous support to FAO. He stated that the Seventh Session of the Working Party will review activities and programmes aimed at improving the social and economic position of women in rural areas and their more active, responsible and creative role in rural development. It will at the same time, produce proposal, ideas, recommendations and requests through which FAO can assist in the promotion of the social well being as well as the rights and equality of rural women.
5. The Minister for Agriculture, H.E. George Moraitis, on behalf of his Government, warmly welcomed the participants to the Session. He referred to the significant changes made in the agricultural structure and in particular to the new opportunities accruing from these changes and their implications for rural women. He stressed the important role of the family in development, noting that the family is the cornerstone of society. As 1994 is proclaimed the International Year of the Family, it is necessary to create an awareness of the key role of the family and its contribution to society. He also stated that sound family policy should be the base for general equality and family welfare. The full text of the Minister's statement is provided in Annex II.
6. The Chairperson of the Working Party, Dr. G. Pichler, in her opening address welcomed the participants to the Seventh Session. She expressed her gratitude to the Greek Government for their kind invitation and to the Regional Representative for Europe for the constant support of REUR to the activities of the Working Party.
7. She underlined the importance of holding the two meetings at the same time thus affording an opportunity for an exchange of ideas and information.
8. She referred to the significant role of rural women in coping with the difficulties pertaining to rural areas and to society and outlined the contribution of rural women to family and enterprise development and their potential as managers and entrepreneurs. She stressed the importance of the development of pluriactivity in order to secure the income of rural people and how this Session could contribute to this development.
9. The Chairman of the ECA Executive Committee, Prof. S. Kyritsis thanked the Minister for his interesting statement and welcomed the delegates and the guests to the Opening Ceremony.
Summary of Recommendations from the Session
10. The main recommendations from the Seventh Session were:
- The Working Party on Women should continue to initiate activities to empower rural women to become active in the socio-economic development of the country and in activities to stimulate rural development. Specific attention should be given to:
(1) development of effective mechanisms (policies and training) for addressing critical issues concerning rural women;
(2) development of effective mechanisms (market and non-market) to cope with high level of unemployment in rural areas;
(3) development of effective mechanisms (training and technical) to support community leaders and facilitators of change in rural areas;
(4) development of special assistance to rural women in Eastern European, countries by facilitating partnership and networks with Western European countries, and by providing training programmes, workshops and dissemination of relevant information.
- That the next session of the Working Party focuses either on environment or on mechanisms to mobilize rural youth.
- That the theme of the Eighth International Summer School should be decided by the Board.
- That a workshop on the findings from the project" Analysis of the Socio-Economic Status of Rural Women in Central and Eastern Europe" should be organized.
- That the European Community and national governments establish effective policies to address the urgent needs of rural women.
- That FAO Secretariat should obtain verification of the results of the project "Analysis of the Socio-Economic Status of Rural Women in Central and Eastern European Countries" from the respective governments.
- That the governments of Eastern Europe transform the recommendations of the 7th Session which emerged from the Analysis of the Socio-Economic Status of Rural Women in Central and Eastern European Countries into national plans of action to address the problems identified and priority needs of rural women.
- That the governments of Eastern European countries develop effective strategies to change the behaviour and attitude of rural women by combining a bottom up with top down approach to rural development.
- That the FAO Secretariat should start the administrative procedures to change the title of the Working Party into "Working Party on Women and the Family in Rural Development".
Closing of the Session
11. In closing the Session, the Chairperson extended warm thanks and words of appreciation on behalf of the Session to the Host Government and to the local authorities for their excellent facilities and organization which had contributed to the success of the meeting.
Adoption of the Agenda
12. The Chairperson introduced the items and gave reasons for the proposed changes introduced in the provisional agenda and timetable. The amended Agenda was adopted by the Session (Annex III).
<title>Working party on women and the agricultural family in rural development. </title>
<section>1</section>
The session contents
The session contents
13. The core theme of the Session was: "THE FAMILY AS THE BASIC SOCIOECONOMIC UNIT IN RURAL DEVELOPMENT - FUTURE FOCUS".
14. The theme was developed through four topic areas:
1) The Family in Sustainable Development
- one presentation, plenary discussion and workshop exercise;
2) Nutrition as a Factor in Family Well Being
- two presentations and plenary discussion;
3) Women and Youth in Rural Development
- two presentations and plenary discussion;
4) Research on Rural Women and Youth
- two presentations and plenary discussion.
<section>2</section>
Summary of reports, topics and discussions
Reports
Topics
Summary of reports, topics and discussions
Reports
Activities of the Working Party Women
15. The Chairperson reviewed the relevant activities of the Working Party in the biennium 1992-94, i.e. (Annex IV)
- Fifth International Rural Development Summer School, 1992;
- Sixth Session of the Working Party on Women and the Agricultural Family in Rural Development, 1992;
- International Workshop on "Rural/Agri Tourism Development in Europe", 1992;
- Meeting of the Technical Project Team in relation to the development of the project "The Socio-Economic Situation and Status of Rural Women in Selected Central and Eastern Countries", 1993;
- Third Session of the Board of the Working Party, 1993;
- Sixth International Rural Development Summer School, 1993;
- Workshop on the Project "The Socio-Economic Situation and Status of Rural Women in Selected Central and Eastern Countries", 1994;
- Seventh International Rural Development Summer School, 1994;
- Future activities of the Working Party.
Consultative Meeting on Emerging Issues Concerning the Status of Rural Women in Europe
16. The Rural Development Officer from REUR, Dr. Tea Petrin, reported on the above-mentioned Consultative Meeting, which was held in Herrsching, Germany, on 7 September 1994. Twenty-three Representatives from sixteen European countries attended the Meeting.
17. The objective of the Meeting was to identify emerging issues concerning the status of rural women in the European region and suggest recommendations on required mechanisms and policies to address these issues.
18. The result of the Meeting was the Statement on Emerging Issues Concerning Rural Women in the European Region in relation to political, economic and social issues. The critical areas of concerns and recommendations on the mechanisms and/or policies identified at the Meeting and expressed in the Statement will be presented at the UN/ECE High-Level Regional Preparatory Meeting for the Fourth World Conference on Women in Vienna, 17-21 October 1994 by Ms. Sirpa Polo of the Finnish Crafts and Arts Organization, Helsinki, Finland, appointed Representative of the Group.
19. The findings of the Consultative Meeting are included in the FAO/REUR Report of Activities in support of rural women in Europe in preparation for the Fourth World Conference on Women. The Report of Activities will be distributed at the UN/ECE High-Level Regional Preparatory Meeting. The draft Resolution on Rural Women in Development was prepared on the basis of the findings of the Consultative Meeting and will be presented at the UN/ECE High-Level Meeting in Vienna.
International Year of the Family
20. Mrs. M.J. Mermillod, Senior Home Economics Officer, Women in Agricultural Production and Rural Development Service (ESHW, FAO) introduced the objectives of the International Year of the Family proclaimed by the UN General Assembly for the year 1994. FAO has been associated with the various events and in particular with the inter-agencies meetings - the regional preparatory meetings and the World Non-Governmental Organizations Forum held in Malta in December 1993. Reference was made to the "Declaration of Valletta" adopted at the preparatory meeting for Europe and North America and to the "Statement" adopted by the International NGOs.
21. The importance of families in sustainable development was stressed but the process of development itself tends to change the nature of the family. Constraints have increased in many countries particularly where programmes of structural adjustment have been introduced and in the countries with economies in transition.
22. The prospects for rural families should be considered within the context of changes in the role of agriculture in the specific European countries. Major changes are resulting from the privatization in Eastern and Central Europe and concomitant expansion of markets which require increasing competencies and entrepreneurial capacity of agricultural producers.
23. The traditional gender-based division of productive and reproductive functions in the family does not reflect the current realities. A partnership between men and women on the basis of equal rights and responsibilities is the challenge for the modern family. Basic to this challenge is gender equality in the household, equal sharing of family responsibilities between men and women as well as participation of women in employment.
24. Family issues are thus intimately connected with those concerning gender equality and the situation of women. The IYF should be seen as the beginning of a long term process of addressing social and economic issues from the family supportive perspective.
25. The Report on support activities for the International Year of the Family was presented by Ms. L. Rossini van Hissenhoven of the International Council of Women (ICW). She stated that ICW has been seriously involved in the International Year of the Family. In October 1994 (Amsterdam), ICW organized jointly with the Free University of Amsterdam, a Seminar on "The Violence in the Family".
26. The Standing Committees of ICW work very closely in formulating Resolutions and Plans of Action. For instance in Paris, June 1994 the Standing Committee on "Child and the Family" worked on:
· Protection and development of children.
· Children living in particularly difficult conditions: children's weddings, children's works, children's abuse, children in the streets.
· International Year of the Family: education to the family life, share of the responsibilities between men and women.
· New reproduction technologies: ethics questions related to new technologies, commercial substitution of maternity, etc.
· The right of keeping children.
27. The Social Welfare Committee has adopted the Plan of Action 1994-1997 by promotion of:
· Sharing the responsibilities concerning the family.
· Working for better understanding of the real causes of the violence in the domestic family and the sexual harassment and studying the ways to alleviate those problems.
· Improving the economic conditions of the women (is she: single, married, old, young) in relation to her role in society.
· Working on programmes in favour of people not normally provided for in society
(unsheltered, free prisoners, those prostituted of necessity, and the mentally handicapped).
· Promoting actions from Governments or Authorities in defence of Women and
Children (as well as migrant people) concerning employment.
28. These plans of Action as well as these of the others Standing Committees are circulated among the 80 National Councils affiliated all over the world.
Topics
TOPIC 1
THE FAMILY IN SUSTAINABLE DEVELOPMENT
29. One paper was presented on the topic "The Family in Sustainable Development in Rural Areas" by Prof. Ulrich Nitsch (Sweden). The paper was based on a recent sociological survey which was conducted at the Swedish University of Agricultural Science. Results indicated that a considerable portion of the farming families see their household incomes decreasing and feel insecure about their possibilities to stay on the farm in the future.
30. It indicated that even if the economic conditions in farming are improved the social and cultural conditions will continue to deteriorate unless actions are taken. Today farmers spend most of their working time alone and they have increasing difficulties in finding a spouse to join the farmwork. A young professional woman cannot be expected to leave her work and social network in an urban area to move to the isolation and strange rural culture on a depopulated country-side.
31. The idea of the family farm with one person working full-time at the farm does not seem to have a future in Sweden. Part-time farming, where both spouses meet work-mates and earn additional income outside the farm, seems to be the most feasible solution. To remain sustainable it requires the support of local work opportunities and social services. The participation of the farmers and other rural people in this development process is a necessary precondition. The survival of rural communities depends on the establishment of a diversified rural economy in control of the rural people.
32. During the discussion following the presentation, Mr. C. Huillet, the Representative of OECD, underlined that in discussing issues of sustainable development in rural areas attention should be particularly given to what we mean about rural development.
33. The concept of rural development should be seen as a whole. It encompasses all human' and material resources. No aspect of land use, level of economic development or sector is excluded; every opportunity to enhance the quality of life is to be seized; cultural and environmental assets are to be safeguarded while used to best advantage. Rural development is a territorial and multisectorial issue. In other word as it has been said by OECD Minister of Agriculture in 1992 and later, economic and social problems of rural areas had to be tackled as a whole. A policy addressing agriculture alone would no longer do. The central challenge for rural development is to foster an improved national balance of economic opportunities and social conditions, utilizing an appropriate mix of market and non-market mechanisms to improve national economic performance, while safeguarding and developing important aspects of the rural heritage.
^1 not only the farmers who, for example in Sweden, represent less than 3% of the total population
Group Workshops and Discussion on Topic 1
34. The topic was discussed in three group workshops from the priority family needs viewpoint in relation to:
a. families in general;
b. women in particular;
c. youth in particular.
Each group had to indicate the steps to provide for these needs.
35. The summary of the results from the three group workshops were:
PROBLEMS
(a) Families
- Lack of income possibilities
- Infrastructure (schools, shops, etc.)
- Disintegration of the family
- Child care
- Isolation
- Lack for homes for elderly and handicapped people
- Different needs (different generations)
- Lack of job opportunities
- Lack of common leisure time
- Social stigma of families (agricultural families with many children)
- The approach to rural issues is still too often restricted to agriculture
- Traditional gender role
- Lack of training
- Farmers unmarried
(b) Rural Women
- Getting a job according to the qualification
- Low status (social) of farm wives
- Economical dependence (for farm wives)
- Lack of leisure - free time for farm wives
- Traditional gender role
- Inter - generational conflict
- Infrastructure
- Social control (family, society, etc.)
- Isolation
- Income disparities between rural and urban woman
(c) Youth
- Lack of job opportunities
- Lack of social activities
- Social control
- Lack of entrepreneurial education
- Low local identity
- Infrastructure (clubs, communication, etc.)
- Dominating urban culture
- Traditional gender role
SOLUTIONS
- Creation of entrepreneurial culture in rural areas
- Improvement of infrastructure
- Encouragement of cooperative movements and self-help
- Mobilization of local people and groups
- Education and information on the gender role
- Identification of different types of rural areas economic and social assets
- Development of good indicators allowing for statistical comparison
- Development of training: open-mindedness; leadership; creative thinking; entrepreneurship; re-qualification;
- Make possible and foster dialogue with local partners, network and partnership development
- Development of centers acting and forums
- Support of leadership emergence at local levels
- Quantification of women's work (economic data)
- Coordination of actions to avoid duplications and competition.
36. In the Plenary Session the discussion highlighted the following points as being of importance for a future focus in development i.e. empowering people to:
· Build human capacity in rural areas
· Promote creativity and innovativeness at all levels
· Mobilize local people and resources
· Enable leadership
· Enable self initiative and self help
· Build opportunities for equality
· Delimit the boundaries and expand horizons
· Develop entrepreneurial culture
· Provide training which will influence desired change
· Change the unfavourable demographic situation
TOPIC 2
NUTRITION AS A FACTOR IN FAMILY WELL BEING
37. Prof. Antony Kafatos (Greece) submitted a paper on this topic, "Nutrition and Health as Contributing Factors for Improved Prosperity of the Greek Family", which discussed nutrition as a key factor for the health of the individual and society. He noted that the interdependence of mind and body of the ancient Greeks was an integral part of their lives. The rapid socio-economic changes occurring in Greece over the last thirty years brought about "Westernized" life-style with accompanying diary consumption habits and their apparent attitudes.
38. Unhealthy dietary habits, lack of physical activity, smoking and alcohol consumption are characterizing modern life -styles and health related attitudes. More precisely, high levels of cholesterol (TC), LDL-cholesterol and triglycerides, high LDL/HDL cholesterol and TC/HDL, low levels of HDL-cholesterol, lack of physical activity, high blood pressure, smoking, high consumption of saturated fats and obesity are strongly related to the development of chronic disease and especially coronary heart disease. Studies have shown that if risk factors for CHD exist at an early age, they persist into adulthood.
39. Inspite of the alarming facts presented, there is no national policy in nutrition. Only isolated, scattered and inadequately funded efforts towards prevention have been taking place the last decade. The only physical fitness programmes conducted on a national basis are those during primary and secondary education. Physical education, approximately two-three hours of instruction per week, is part of the curriculum of all primary and secondary schools. However, the particular educational programme focuses exclusively on physical fitness (gymnastics and sports), while no emphasis is given to the nutritional component.
40. In order to stem the tide of chronic disease risk factors, health education programmes have been initiated and expanded in Crete. Positive preliminary results have been seen already. The health of the individual serves the health of the family and the society as a whole. We all have a vested interest in improving family nutrition and helping to prevent chronic diseases. A healthy and happy home environment is the greatest legacy we can offer to our children and our future.
41. The second paper in this section - "Implementation of FAO International Conference on Nutrition" - was presented by Dr. Azizan Ghazali, Chief, Nutrition Programmes Service (ESN, FAO). The paper discussed the FAO approach to raising nutritional status and improving living standards of all population groups. From FAO Food Balance Sheets, it appears that in Europe calories available for consumption are high and still increasing. In many of these countries with food availability and variety, most dietary deficiency diseases have been virtually eliminated and are being replaced by lifestyle and diet related diseases due to imbalances in dietary intake. Despite this development, hunger and undernutrition still exist in some countries, especially those moving from centrally planned to market economies. The challenge for Europe as a whole is therefore to ensure the equitable distribution and consumption of the right quantity and quality of safe wholesome food to promote health
and prevent diet-related diseases. Action is needed to harmonize food and agricultural policies with health and individual nutritional needs.
42. By adopting the World Declaration and Plan of Action of Nutrition, the policy guidelines and action areas under the nine themes spelled out and developing Plans of Action for Nutrition within this framework, governments can meet the challenge. Many have started, and some with FAO collaboration, in addressing country specific areas of nutrition related concerns. For example, several projects are on-going to strengthen food safety and quality control system.
43. Women play a key role in the socio-economic development of rural areas and in many societies they are also the main producers of food. As women are the main providers of meals as well as care and nutrition information in the household they have a fundamental role in assuring improved nutritional status for all. Consequently we need to strengthen their role in the management of household resources for the achievement of household food security and improved nutrition. They need support to balance their reproductive, nurturing, educational and economic roles which are so important to the health and nutritional wellbeing of the household and of the entire community.
44. FAO stands ready to assist countries, particularly the food and agriculture sector, in developing ICN follow-up activities including strengthening the role of women in rural development.
45. Following the presentation, the Plenary discussion related to the merits and demerits of fast foods in the diet; the effects of undesirable combinations of foods in the diet. The importance of education/training as well as an awareness and balanced knowledge on good and proper eating habits was highlighted.
TOPIC 3
WOMEN AND YOUTH IN RURAL DEVELOPMENT
46. Two papers were presented on this topic. The first paper, "A Focus on Youth in Rural Development - Future Possibilities and Options" presented by Ms. Oddny Kjelsen, (Norway) outlined the situation in Norway and how an innovative programme addressed potential growth problems of unemployment and depopulation of rural areas.
47. In Norway the depopulation trend threatens the vialiability of rural communities as the population density in Norway is only 13 persons per Km2. The primary sector underpins the existence of many rural communities, so it is necessary to secure a high level of activity in agriculture. In addition new jobs will have to be created in order to substitute those which are being lost in the primary sector.
48. Allocations for rural development are growing every year, through establishment grants, financial support for young farmers and campaigns to enable girls to take over farms, but still more needs to be done.
49. A new trend in the 1990's show that young people aged 16-24 leave the rural areas. They go to urban centers to have an education, and they never return home. These facts have made the Norwegian Government concentrate on the question: How to develop an entrepreneurial spirit in young people in order to make use of local resources and create new jobs? Therefore schools must educate creators of jobs.
50. The scheme "Dynamic Local Schools" (DLS) was designed for this purpose. The scheme consists of three components:
- Pupil Enterprises (primary and secondary level);
- Tertiary level courses in "the world of work and entrepreneurship" for teachers and other key persons;
- The building of networks.
51. It is important that the pupils themselves establish and run the enterprise. The teacher gives guidance and advice. The pupils learn to assess local resources, evaluate demands in the market and create the right products and services. They are trained to be competent to create a job to ensure future employment.
52. The project DLS has been very well received and now there are local subprojects in all Norwegian Counties. It is felt that this approach is the right way towards the restructuring challenges of the future.
53. Discussions following the presentation on how this innovative system of Dynamic Local Schools is integrated into the classical school system and on the importance of avoiding a prescriptive approach in order to preserve the innovativeness of development. There was also further clarification on constraints and problems encountered in setting up the process.
54. Another programme from France which promotes entrepreneurship was outlined. This training programme provides for young people from 14 years to adult stage, and is recognised by the Ministry of Agriculture as an important development for rural areas.
55. The second paper "Women's Situation in the European Labour Market and the NOW Initiative" was presented by Prof. Peter Diplas (Greece). The paper outlined the socioeconomic position of women in the Community and then Community Initiative promote female employment, with special reference to the situation in Greece.
56. It is argued in the paper that inspite of the progress achieved in the area of equality between men and women, the right to work under equal conditions is still a long way off. Several studies show that the increased participation by women in the labour market has coincided with negative structural developments. An upturn in economic growth has led to a relative reduction in the unemployment rate for men. The figure for women, however, has not gone down but has in fact increased in certain Member States.
57. The gap has reached a stage where women's unemployment (12%) is almost double the rate for men (7%). An even greater cause for concern is the growing increase in the number of women in the ranks of the long-term unemployment; they now make up 55 % of the total.
58. Agricultural jobs account for nearly one third of working women and 21 % of working men in Greece, and for 21% of working women and 16% of working men in Portugal. In Spain and Italy the concentration of employment in agriculture is lower (10% of women and 13% of men for Spain, 9% for both sexes in Italy). In Ireland agriculture accounts for a larger share of male employment (21 %) but for women the share is similar to that for other Northern countries (5%). Agriculture is a mixed occupational area in Greece and Portugal where women hold 44% and 50% respectively of the jobs, while in Italy and in Spain women hold 35% and 27% respectively of the jobs and in Ireland only 10%.
59. In December 1990 the Commission launched a Community Initiative which was exclusively concerned with women and would reinforce efforts made in recent years to promote female employment at both national and Community level.
60. Since the end of 1991, the NOW Initiative in the E.U. and of course in Greece has received considerable publicity. In Greece this programme enables the bridging of the gap in women's vocational training, helping them to improve their access to the labour market by developing partnerships on a national level and also on a European scale.
61. In Greece in the first, second and third round of NOW Programme more than 150 projects were finally selected among nearly 500 proposals submitted by 280 organizations. These projects constitute along with their European partners, a network of more than 350 organisations in the KU. Overall in the 12 E.U. countries more than 900 transnational projects were selected making a European Network of more than 2 000 partners.
62. Several NOW projects are being carried out in a rural environment aiming at setting up enterprises or cooperatives in the agri-tourism sector, based on local resources.
63. Following this presentation, the Plenary discussion further elaborated the problems encountered in establishing the programmes at the operation level. These related to transnational coordination, interagency coordination and delays in funding. Inequality of the status of women was also briefly discussed.
64. A brief introduction to a "Fair Play" project which is being developed by the Central Organisation for Women on Rural Areas in the Netherlands was outlined. This project aims at improving the legal, fiscal and social position of farm women. It promotes training and information for women particularly in relation to the decision making process.
TOPIC 4
RESEARCH ON RURAL WOMEN AND YOUTH
65. The first paper on this topic "Research Programme on Rural Women and Youth was presented by Prof. Juan Manuel García Bartolomé (Spain). The paper outlined the methodology of a study on the socio professional status of women in Spanish agriculture. The study was initiated by the Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food as one of the activities within the Work Plan for Equal Opportunities for Women (1989/90). The methodology was based on the integrated use of qualitative and quantitative research techniques. More specifically, the qualitative stage comprised of 14 group discussions, 36 in-depth interviews and six meeting with experts in different agrarian environments. The quantitative stage comprised of four samples: the central sample was 6203 women on the farm household. The research was divided into 16 agricultural environments which reflect the differences in the women's role in different agrarian systems.
66. The central focus of the questionnaire was:
- Vocational and training background.
- Type of agricultural work carried out by women.
- Women's perception of the present and future farm situation and agricultural environments.
- Evaluation of institutional policies to promote rural women socio-professionally.
67. The second paper on the preliminary results of the "Socio-Economic Situation and Status of Rural Women in Selected Central and Eastern European Countries" was presented by Mrs. Pirjo Siiskonen (Finland).
68. The important highlights of the research are the following:
The biggest problems of rural women mentioned by the focal points in the participating countries were: unemployment (especially in the transition phase), declining incomes and other economical problems of rural women (especially in Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Slovak Republic, Hungary and Bulgaria) due to the big social and political change, low level of education (especially Slovak Republic, Slovenia, Croatia), heavy workload both in paid labour and at home, lack of free time, social problems like growing use of alcohol (especially by men), low level and distant or diminishing social services, lack of household services and equipment, social isolation, lack of social activities in villages, low social status of rural women, the tradition that women are outsiders in public life, traditional division of labour and lack of self-confidence (especially Hungary and Bulgaria).
69. The priority needs mentioned by the focal points were: paid labour, economical independence, education and training in entrepreneurship, knowledge in home economics and the role of the mother, revival of social and cultural services and activities, better infrastructure, better social security system, increase in participation on public life, development and training programmes for rural women and families, training in adaptation to changing social circumstances, better cooperation inside the families and women's involvement in rural development projects at the local level.
70. Formally men and women are equal in most of the research countries. In practice, however, women are less educated, paid less and they suffer from unemployment as well as from the traditional division of labour in the society, on the farm, in cooperatives, and inside the family. Women are not economically equal or independent and they have no real role in political or public life. Also social activities inside villages ought to be activated.
71. In addition to women, men as well as families suffer from lack of knowledge in home economics, family-life and entrepreneurial abilities. Special development projects - including education, training and extension in rural entrepreneurship, home economics, in social and in political activities - for both rural women and men and for the whole family are urgently needed.
Baltic/Nordic Seminar for Women
72. Ms K. Lindberg (Sweden), informed the Session about the Baltic/Nordic Seminar for Women. The Swedish National Board of Agriculture in cooperation with the Women's Power Group was commissioned by the Ministry of Agriculture to carry out a seminar and study tour in Sweden for women in different positions in the Baltic and Nordic countries. The purpose was to initiate an exchange of experiences and information between these countries.
73. The seminar and study tour took place from 27 May to 3 June 1994 and the participants came from Estonia, Latvia, Lithuania, Iceland, Norway, Finland and Sweden. The theme was "Rural Women in Rural Development". This involved an exchange of experiences and discussions on cooperation to improve the situation of rural women. It focuses on training, networking, democracy and agriculture as a base for life in rural areas.
74. Discussions towards further collaboration between the participating countries were an important element during the week. The themes of the different workshops were:
* What are the resources for improving living conditions for women in rural areas?
* What organisations and authorities can assist women in this development?
* Within which fields and within which activities is it possible for women to develop?
75. The final discussions focused on proposals for future cooperation between the Nordic and Baltic countries from the point of view of rural women, and ascertained what the respective participants could do in their countries and at their levels.
Among the proposals brought forward were:
- Building exchange programmes for information and improvement of the situation of rural women;
- Arranging joint exhibitions and fairs;
- Including other women's organisations and key persons in the work which was started through this seminar and study tour;
- Setting up annual seminars and a working group for the next years' seminar to be held in Lithuania;
- Initiating joint efforts to raise means for starting projects within suggested areas;
- Publishing a newsletter.
76. The participants of the Seminar and Study Tour have formed a network which will enable them to develop ideas and exchange contacts as well as cooperation and networking on various levels.
<section>3</section>
Study tour
Study tour
77. A field trip to the Agricultural Training Centre of Kege (Nea Kios) and to the village of Kiveri to visit the Foodtechnology workshops and agrotourism enterprises provided the participants with practical examples of rural development.
<section>4</section>
Discussion on the recommendations of the project "The socioeconomic status of rural women in central and Eastern European Countries" and from the project on rural women and youth in Spain
Discussion on the recommendations of the project "The socioeconomic status of rural women in central and Eastern European Countries" and from the project on rural women and youth in Spain
78. The Recommendations from the participants for addressing the particular needs and problems of European rural women were:
· development of mechanisms such as workshops, seminars and community policies to foster the participation of women in agricultural families, their access to land and political participations on local levels;
· strengthening the importance of the community approach in coping with the critical issues concerning rural women;
· establishment of European Community and national policies to address the urgent needs of rural women;
· creation of environment for coping with unemployment in rural areas;
· improving women's awareness of their rights through gender sensitive education;
· providing technical support to existing extension services and retraining of extension workers in order to be able to act as agents of change in rural areas, as community leaders and/or facilitators;
· creation of opportunities for rural women by developing local groups and the approach to rural development based on people's participation;
· development of international and regional solidarity with rural areas in Eastern Europe.
79. The Recommendations specifically for the Working Party, in view of its immediate assistance to rural women in Eastern Europe, were:
· to facilitate the development of an effective legal environment in Eastern European countries from the business, social and political viewpoints;
· to facilitate the development of effective strategies for changing the behavior and attitudes of Eastern European women by combining bottom up with top down approach to rural development, by creating political and legal frameworks and cultures conducive to business;
· to facilitate the establishment of partnership (bilateral cooperation) and networks with Western European countries in order to assist East European countries in their efforts to develop training programmes and seminars conducive to rural development based on the mobilization of local resources and entrepreneurship;
· to assist dissemination of the results from research to rural women through a workshop;
· to obtain and disseminate information on the current international and national assistance to rural women in East European countries;
· to urge international organizations, inter-governmental and non-governmental organizations to support activities aiming at improving the socio-economic status of rural women at the grass root levels.
80. The Regional Representative for Europe, Mr. Zjalic, recommended obtaining verification of the results of the project "Analysis of the Socio-Economic Status of Rural Women in Selected Central and Eastern European Countries" from the respective governments. He also recommended transforming the recommendations from the 7th Session into the national plans of actions for addressing the problems identified and priority needs of rural women in Eastern Europe.
<section>5</section>
Future focus of the activities of the working party
Future focus of the activities of the working party
81. The future focus of the Working Party is based on the recommendations from the research projects on Rural Women in Selected Central and Eastern European Countries and Rural Women and Youth in Spain, as well as from the Statement on Emerging Issues Concerning Rural Women in the European Region (Consultative Meeting in Herrsching).
82. The following future activities were suggested:
· Informal Meeting of the Board of the Working Party (January 95), to develop a plan of action based on the Recommendations from the 7th Session of the Working Party;
· ECA/ECE Symposium on Rural Tourism, Galilee (Israel), 2-7 April 1995; it was recommended that participants wishing to receive further information on the Symposium should contact directly Mr. A. Shinar, Director, Technical Assistance and Foreign Relations Department, Ministry of Agriculture, P.O. Box 7011 Hakirya, 61070 Tel-Aviv (Israel);
· Workshop on the findings from the project "Analysis of the Socio-Economic Status of Rural Women in Central and Eastern Europe", Estonia, May 1995; it was recommended that the Workshop should be attended by the participants from countries included in the research (Eastern European Countries, Austria, Ireland and Finland), responsible individuals and rural women;
· 8th International Summer School, September 1995 (Sweden, to be confirmed at a later stage); it was suggested that the Summer School focuses either on environment and women's role as producers and consumers or on the division of labour on the farm and in the household; furthermore, it was recommended that the final theme should be decided by the Board. International Summer School had been received at the meeting;
· 8th Session of the Working Party on Women, 1996; it was suggested that the theme of the 8th Session should focus either on environment or on mechanisms to mobilize rural youth.
<section>6</section>
Date and place of the eighth session
Date and place of the eighth session
83. The Chairperson invited the participants to make proposals for the next session. An informal invitation was received from the Delegate of Netherlands, to be confirmed at a later stage.
<section>7</section>
Election of the board
Election of the board
84. The Chairperson of the Working Party illustrated the rules of procedure for the Election of the Board. She also stressed that the election should assure representation from North, Middle and South European countries.
85. Ms Jela Tvrdonova (Slovakia) and Ms Maureen Lally (Ireland) were unanimously elected as Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson, respectively. The Session elected as new Members, Ms Brigitte Roggendorf (Germany), Ms Eleni Tokkari (Greece), a former coopted Member, and Ms Guri Aarnes (Norway).
86. Mr. Zjalic, FAO Regional Representative for Europe, thanked Dr. G. Pichler (Austria) and Mrs P. Siiskonen (Finland), respectively outgoing Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson of the Board, for their dedicated contribution to the work of the Working Party and expressed his and the Session best wishes for the successful work of the newly-elected members of the Board.
87. Dr. Pichler, the outgoing Chairperson, very warmly thanked the Board for all the work achieved during her mandate, and thanked the Regional Office for Europe and the Secretariat for their continuous support. She offered her most sincere congratulations to the new elected Members.
<section>8</section>
Adoption of the report
Adoption of the report
88. The draft report was adopted by the Session. The Regional Office for Europe and the Secretariat of the Working Party were given the responsibility for finalizing the report and implementing the decisions adopted.
<section>9</section>
Other business
Other business
Discussion on the Report of the Consultative Meeting on Emerging Issues Concerning the Status of Rural Women in Europe (Herrsching, Germany, 7 October 1994)
89. The Chairperson of the Working Party, Dr. G. Pichler, illustrated the Report already presented by Dr. Tea Petrin. She underlined that the Statement on Emerging Issues Concerning Rural Women in the European Region represents the original thoughts of the participants who attended the Herrsching Meeting. She reviewed the most important recommendations in relation to the political, economic and social issues identified as critical by the Group in order to draw attention to those issues that might be relevant to the future activities of the Working Party. She underlined that the presentation of the critical issues and the recommendations to address them had been done by the Group in a very illustrative and useful way. The Statement was adopted by the 7th Session of the Working Party and the Chairperson invited the participants to make use of the findings summarized in the Statement prepared by the Group (ANNEX V).
Change in the Title of the Working Party
90. The delegates of the 7th Session agreed that the title of the Working Party should be "Working Party on Women and the Family in Rural Development" as already suggested at the 6th Session. It was recommended that FAO Secretariat should take the necessary steps for action as soon as possible.
<title>Working party on women and the agricultural family in rural development. </title>
Annex I. List of participants
Annex I. List of participants
LIST OF PARTICIPANTS AND OFFICERS
LISTE DES PARTICIPANTS ET MEMBRES DU BUREAU
AUSTRIA - AUTRICHE
Ms. Gertraud PICHLER
Chairperson of the Working Party on Women
Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
Stubenring 1
A-1010 Vienna
Tel: 4311/71100-6814; fax: 4311/71100-6695
BELGIUM - BELGIQUE
Paul DEPAUW
Conseiller agricole
Ambassade de Belgique
3, Sekeri Str.
10671 Athènes
Tel: 3011/3605307; fax: 30/113604289
FINLAND - FINLANDE
Ms. Pirjo SIISKONEN
Director
Mikkeli Institute for Rural Research and Training
Helsinki University
Lonnrotinkatu 3
50100 Mikkeli
Tel: 35815512023301; fax: 358155/2023300
GERMANY - ALLEMAGNE
Ms. Brigitte ROGGENDORF
Head of Division
Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Forestry
Rochusstrasse 1
53107 Bonn
Tel: 49/2281529-3887; fax: 4912281529-4393
Klaus GRIMMEL
First Secretary
Agricultural Counsellor
Embassy of Germany
Karaoli Dimitriou 3
Kolonali
Athens
GREECE - GRECE
Ms. Efthalia MALLINAKI
Home Economist
Ministry of Agriculture
Direction of Agriculture
Chania, Crete
Tel: 30/821/89322; fax: 30/821/57160
Ms. Ioanna EFSTATIOU
Economist
Directorate of Agricultural Policy and Documentation
Ministry of Agriculture
Athens
Tel: 30/1/5291461; fax: 30/1/5248584
Mrs. Eleni TOKKARI
Home Economics Department
Ministry of Agriculture
Acharnon Str. 5
10176 Athens
Tel: 30/1/5247811; fax: 30/1/5246004
IRELAND - IRLANDE
Ms. Agnes GANNON
Consultant in Rural Development
20, Glenbrook Park
Rathfarnham
Dublin 14
Tel/fax: 353/1/4933293
NETHERLANDS - PAYS BAS
Ms. Agnes VAN HEEL
Central Organization for Rural Women
Nicolaaswy 134 B
35 DIVL Utrecht
Tel: 31/30/731627
Ms. Toos LODDER
Central Organization for Rural Women
Visschersplein 160 D4
3511 LX Utrecht
Tel: 31/30/731627
NORWAY - NORVEGE
Ms. Guri Drottning AARNES
Senior Executive Officer
Department of Rural Development
The Government Bank of Agriculture
Post box 8183, Dep.
0034 Oslo
Tel: 47/22/414950; fax: 47/22/333936
Ms. Ingunn SOERNES
Senior Executive Officer
Department of Agriculture
Ministry of Agriculture
Post Box 8007, Dep
0030 Oslo
Tel: 471221349220; fax: 47/22/349556
SLOVAK REPUBLIC - SLOVAQUIE
Ms. Jela TVRDONOVA
Rural Development Dpt.
Agroinstitut
Akademicka 4
94901 Nitra
Tel: 42/87/534851; fax: 42/87/32973
SPAIN - ESPAGNE
Martin SEGOVIA MANSO
Jefe
Sección economía y bienestar familiar
Ministerio de agriculture, pesca y alimentación
Corazón de Maria, 8
28002 Madrid
Tel: 34/1/3473696; fax: 34/1/4156268
SWEDEN - SUEDE
Ms. Kristina LINDBERG
Agronomist, ALA Group
Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences
Box 7013
75007 Uppsala
Tel: 46/18/671788
fax: 46/18/671980
SWITZERLAND - SUISSE
Mrs. Eva WYSS
Scientific collaborator
Atelier für Natur - und Umweltfragen, UNA
Mühlenplatz 3
3011 Berne
Tel: 41/31/3122937; fax: 41/31/3122969
REPRESENTATIVES OF THE UNITED NATIONS AND SPECIALIZED AGENCIES
REPRESENTANTS DES NATIONS UNIES ET DES INSTITUTIONS SPECIALISEES
ECONOMIC COMMISSION FOR EUROPE
COMMISSION ECONOMIQUE POUR L'EUROPE
René PLANTIER
FAO/ECE Agriculture and Timber Division (JEUR)
Palais des Nations
CH. 1211 Geneva 10
Switzerland
Tel: 41/22/9172878; fax: 41/22/9170041
OBSERVERS FROM INTER-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS
OBSERVATEURS DES ORGANISATIONS INTER GOUVERNEMENTALES
ORGANISATION FOR ECONOMIC COOPERATION AND DEVELOPMENT
ORGANISATION DE COOPERATION ET DE DEVELOPPEMENT ECONOMIQUES
Christian HUILLET
Acting Head
OECD Rural Development Programme
2, rue André-Pascal
75775 Paris Cedex 16
France
Tel: 33/1/45241663; fax: 33/1/45241668
OBSERVERS FROM NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS
OBSERVATEURS DES ORGANISATIONS NON GOUVERNEMENTALES
INTERNATIONAL ALLIANCE OF WOMEN
ALLIANCE INTERNATIONALE DES FEMMES
Mrs. Terpsi LAMBRINOPOULOU
Member of the Board of IAW
26-28, Parthenon st.
Athens 11742
Greece
Tel: 30/1/9218942; fax: 30/1/3622454
Mrs. Helen CHRISSINA
Journalist
122, Vassilissis Sofias
11526 Athens
Greece
Tel: 30/1/7793057; fax: 30/1/3622454
INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL OF WOMEN
CONSEIL INTERNATIONAL DES FEMMES
Mrs. Lydie ROSSINI VAN HISSENHOVEN
ICW Executive Committee Member
Permanent Representative to FAO
Via Tailandia 26
00144 Rome
Italy
Tel: 39/6/5923993
INTERNATIONAL UNION OF FAMILY ORGANISATIONS
UNION INTERNATIONALE DES ORGANISATIONS FAMILIALES
Mme. Marie-Thérèse PIGE
Responsable Formation à l'Union Nationale des MFR
36, Allée Vivaldi
75012 Paris
France
Tel: 33/1/40011212; fax: 33/1/40049356
FAO OFFICERS
FONCTIONNAIRES DE LA FAO
Mr. Milan ZJALIC
Regional Representative for Europe
Regional Office for Europe (REUR)
Tel: 39/6/52253728; fax: 39/6/52255634
Mrs. Tea PETRIN
Rural Development Officer
Regional Office for Europe (REUR)
Tel: 39/6/52254208; fax: 39/6/52255634
Ms. Azizan GHAZALI
Chief
Nutrition Programmes Service
Food Policy and Nutrition Division (ESN)
Tel: 39/6/52252173; fax: 39/6/52254593
Mme Marie-Jane MERMILLOD
Senior Home Economics Officer
Women in Agricultural Production and Rural Development Service
Human Resources, Institutions and Agrarian Reform Division (ESH)
Tel: 39/6/52254062; fax: 39/6/52253152
RESOURCE PERSONS
CONSULTANTS
Juan Manuel GARCIA BARTOLOME
Jefe
Area de estudios
Ministerio de agriculture, pesca y alimentación
Paseo Infanta Isabel 1
Madrid
Spain
Tel: 34/1/3475534; fax: 34/1/3475715
Peter DIPLAS
Ministry of Labour
40, Piraeus St.
P.C. 10182 Athens
Greece
Tel: 30/1/524032; fax: 30/1/5230906
Antony KAFATOS
Faculty of Medicine
University of Crete
14, Meandrov st.
Iraklion
Greece
Tel: 30/81/313656; fax: 30/81/313656
Mrs. Oddny KJELSEN
Department of Agriculture
Royal Norwegian Ministry of Agriculture
Postbox 8007 Dep.
N-0030 Oslo
Norway
Tel: 471221349235; fax: 47/22/349556
Ulrich NITSCH
Professor
Swedish University of Agricultural Sciences
Box 7013
S-75007 Uppsala
Sweden
Tel: 46/18/672612; fax: 46/18/673502
<title>Working party on women and the agricultural family in rural development. </title>
<section>1</section>
Annex II. Statement by His Excellency George Moraitis minister for agriculture
Annex II. Statement by His Excellency George Moraitis minister for agriculture
Ladies and Gentlemen,
It is a great pleasure for me to open your sessions.
FAO is the only International Organization of the United Nations specialized in food and agriculture which has significantly contributed to promoting agricultural development and smoothing over the serious problems of the rural sector at large. I think that FAO's significant contribution as well as its catalytic role in achieving development targets of agriculture will help substantially in the future so that new challenges can be faced to our benefit at the beginning of the current decade.
It is generally known that significant changes have taken place in the world's agricultural situation. Prospects have been opened due to recent evolutions such as the successful completion of the Uruguay Round. On the other hand, the radical socio-economic political changes in the countries of Central and Eastern Europe, the reforms and the enlargement of the European Union, as well as future prospects cause economic insecurity. At the same time, we should admit that these challenges require a spirit of reciprocal cooperation.
However, it should be noted that the benefit resulting from these new opportunities depends, to a high degree, on the capability of our economies to be adjusted to a climate of increasing competitiveness.
Undoubtedly, European agriculture has to face serious problems. I believe that all of us are aware that cooperation is necessary for agricultural and economic development so that imbalances can be eliminated not only in the primary sector but also between the primary sector and the other sectors of economy.
On the occasion of the 7th Session of the FAO Working Party on Women and the Agricultural Family in Rural Development, I would like to point out the significant role of the family in the development process. We should keep in mind that all our efforts made towards facing current difficulties should focus on the family which is the fundamental unit of our societies.
199* was proclaimed the International Year of the Family with the aim of creating greater awareness of the family among governments and the public. Sound family policies should be based on gender equality and family welfare.
We are on the threshold of an effort towards opening new prospects for European agriculture. There is the social infrastructure, secularization of European society at a satisfactory level, as well as many ideas and new concepts. These are only rough ideas which should be put into practice by taking the appropriate measures so that new sectors can be developed and new opportunities for employment can be offered to the rural population. In Greece farm women and the agricultural family play an important role in rural development because in our country agricultural families run our farm holdings and therefore we are promoting and supporting them.
However, we should not miss the opportunity of mentioning that there are two serious problems concerning the agricultural family and the future development of the agricultural sector. On the one hand, there are gender discriminations concerning farm women's situation in agricultural employment and on the other hand there is the ageing of the entire population and narrow prospects of youth employment in the agricultural sector. As regards the first problem, worthy of mention is the Greek farm woman's specific contribution, both to the survival of the farm holding and the national economy. Her share in rural activities is about 45 %. However, we should admit that Greek farm women continue to lag behing other European farm women in spite of the legislative measures taken to safeguard equal gender opportunities, by prohibiting explicit gender discriminations.
Actually most farm women come under the category of dependent family members and the tasks are distinguished into male and female ones resulting in payment unequalities.
Our planet's people have changed, the standards of living have also changed and both sexes have developed their activities within a new socio-economic framework. Therefore, both men's and women's role should be adjusted to reality.
In this context, I believe that the improvement of the farm woman's educational background and vocational training is necessary so that gender discrimination can be eliminated, which enabling the farm woman to improve her status in society.
We would also like to examine another problem of equal importance not only for Greek agriculture but also for other European countries, and this refers to the distortion in the farmers' age pyramid.
The average age of Greek farmers is about 55 years while the succession rate tends to zero in the agricultural sector. Farmers' ageing and youth's unwillingness to farm may have unfavourable consequences in the near future, especially during a period in which the agricultural sector faces very serious problems.
Undoubtedly, differentiation of natural, social and economic conditions from one European region to another, resulted in a crisis for the agricultural sector and the demographic evolution varies from one country to another.
Therefore, solutions should be found or adjusted to the local conditions mainly aiming at minimizing regional inequalities. These solutions should encourage youth to practice farming by ensuring them not only a satisfactory income but also satisfactory standards of living in the countryside. Young people should be properly trained to practice farming in a spirit of innovation and respect for the environment.
Before finishing my speech, I would like to focus on the World Food Day, the anniversary of which was celebrated the day before yesterday, on 16th October 1994.
This date coincides, as you know, with the day of FAO's foundation.
This year's subject of the World Food Day is "Water - Source of Life". It constitutes a significant message for the present generation and for future ones. Undoubtedly, mere is an imperative need for the rational management of water resources, more specifically in me southern countries where water resources are rare.
Shortage of water and its irrational use seriously threaten all sectors of human activities and will affect development procedure in the future.
Let the 1994 World Food Day be the starting point for an integrated approach to water shortage and pollution problems, with a view towards economic development and welfare.
<section>2</section>
Annex III. Agenda
Annex III. Agenda
1. Opening of the Session
2. Adoption of the Agenda and Timetable
3. Report of the Activities of the Working Party on Women
4. Report of the Consultative Meeting on Emerging Issues
Concerning the Status of Rural Women in Europe
5. International Year of the Family
6. The Family in Sustainable Development
7. Nutrition as a Factor in Family Well-being
8. Women and Youth in Rural Development
9. Research on Rural Women and Youth
10. Discussion on the Recommendations of the Project "The Socio-Economic Status of Rural Women in Central and Eastern European Countries" and of the Project on Rural Women and Youth in Spain
10. Future Focus of the Activities of the Working Party
11. Date and Place of the Eighth Session
12. Election of the Board
13. Other Business
14. Closing of the Session.
<section>3</section>
Annex IV. Report on the activities of the working party and future focus 1990-1994
Annex IV. Report on the activities of the working party and future focus 1990-1994
by
Dr. Gertraud Pichler
Chairperson of the Working Party
Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry, Austria
INTRODUCTION
The FAO Working Party on Women and the Agricultural Family in Rural Development is emphasizing its programme on the direct response expressing the needs of the individual countries in Europe, either at its Sessions or at the International Summer Schools or Workshops organized by the Working Party.
Rural Development has to be seen as the process:
- which provides for sustainable, economic and social progress for community members through
- their active participation in exploring and developing local and outside resources in order to capitalize on opportunities for their self - development and hence their social, economic and cultural wellbeing.
The programme of the Working Party focuses on economic development of rural communities through wealth creation and employment. It encompasses extension service and training and a global management approach to rural development through:
* Competitive agriculture and diversification;
* Entrepreneurship culture for the development of small business and pluriactivities such as Agri-Tourism, Rural-Tourism, Handicraft businesses;
* Community Building and Leadership Development and Training;
* Village Revitalization;
* Project Development.
The overall objective of the programme is to help all Member Countries who ask for FAO support, particularly those most affected by the changes in agricultural policy and those in transition to a free market economy.
Affected by those changes are rural families and especially women and young people. The specific activities of the Working Party within the REUR-Rural Development Programmes focus on the socio-economic aspects with particular emphasis on the integration of Women in Rural Development, family well-being and improving the quality of life.
The following activities of the Working Party on Women and the Agricultural Family in Rural Development contributed to this development.
PLAN OF ACTION BETWEEN 1990 AND 1994
1. 5th SESSION OF THE WORKING PARTY ON WOMEN AND THE AGRICULTURAL FAMILY IN RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(Prague, 2-5 October 1990)
Theme: "Socio-Economic Factors in Rural Development - Implication for Women"
Participants:
Delegates from 16 Member Countries as well as observers from intergovernmental and non governmental organizations attended the Session.
It clearly emerged from this Session that women and families can play an important role in entrepreneurial development because the family represents a natural unit for group entrepreneurship. Trends towards a service-oriented economy have now opened up new opportunities for women in employment, such factors have been taken into consideration in the development of REUR projects.
The main recommendations were:
* Extension Service should expand beyond the agricultural sector to support the economic development of the community;
* Women should be trained in entrepreneurship and in project development;
* An European Rural Tourism Network should be established;
* Future international workshops (Summer Schools) should focus on:
- Training in Entrepreneurship
- Training in Leadership and Community Building
- Future activities of the Working Party should look at women's involvement in community and regional development.
2. 2nd SESSION OF THE BOARD OF THE WORKING PARTY (Budapest, Hungary, 11-12 April 1991)
The Board discussed the modalities of the implementation of the programme of activities approved by the Fifth session of the Working Party and agreed that the Fourth International Summer School would be held in Finland in September 1991, with issues relating to rural development through entrepreneurship and village renewal as the main subjects. The Board also agreed that the main theme for the Sixth session of the Working Party would be "Partnership and Networking in Rural Development", and discussed the possibilities of establishing a rural/agri tourism network. It agreed that a meeting of resource persons from appropriate national institutions involved in agri tourism should be held in the near future to provide focus for future development and define the scope for further action to be undertaken by the Working Party.
3. 4th INTERNATIONAL RURAL DEVELOPMENT SUMMER SCHOOL (Mikkeli, Finland, 16-20 September 1991)
Theme: "Rural Development through Entrepreneurship and Village Renewal"
Participants:
35 participants from thirteen European countries.
Purpose and Objectives:
* To develop rural areas through Entrepreneurship by understanding the total process involved i.e.
- A management approach
- Entrepreneurial culture
- Start-up procedure
- Institution building
* To define the role of the trainer/facilitator in the entrepreneurial development process
* To develop techniques for village renewal by understanding
- changes in rural areas
- environment and countryside
- structure of population and housing areas
- social relationship and local culture
* To develop village renewal activities through research, advice and training
The 4th International Rural Development Summer School was very successful and well appreciated by the participants. An excellent Study Tour was provided by the Mikkeli Institute, University of Helsinki.
4. 5th INTERNATIONAL RURAL DEVELOPMENT SUMMER SCHOOL (Svarstad, Norway, 15-19 June 1992)
Theme: "Peoples' Participation in the Development of Rural Areas through Community Building"
Participants:
29 participants from 12 European countries.
Purpose and Objectives:
The overall objective was:
* To provide the participants with tools to develop meaningful action in order to bring about the desired change with rural communities and in rural areas.
The training objectives was:
* To enable participants to improve their management abilities, problem-solving skills and human relations skills in order to develop:
- individuals, groups
- leadership capacity
- entrepreneurial potential
- rural communities and rural areas
5. 6th SESSION OF THE WORKING PARTY ON WOMEN AND THE AGRICULTURAL FAMILY IN RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(Innsbruck, Austria, 13-16 October 1992)
Theme: "The Role of Partnership and Networking in Rural Development- How can Women be involved".
Participants:
The Session was attended by delegates from 15 Member Countries as well as observers from two non-European Member Countries (Iran and USA) and from non-governmental organizations. The Session was also attended by a representative from the UN Economic Commission for Europe.
The theme was developed through three main topics:
(1) Partnership Networking and Institution Building as Factors for Rural Development
(2) Project Development and Management Process in Rural Areas
(3) Rural Development through the Creative Thinking Process
Lectures, workshops and plenary discussion dealed with the content.
The main lines of this Session were as follows:
· It was considered that a new approach based on local citizen-driven comprehensive planning programme should be applied.
· Communities should make a realistic evaluation of their situations and goals and define actions that can be taken locally to address the disparity between the two.
· A variety of partnerships should be established to support local and regional development.
· The Session highlighted the role of women as partners and decision makers in community development programmes and emphasized the needs for further adjustments in training and education activities for women and rural families.
· More attention should be paid to management training and development training and development of entrepreneurial skills.
· More specific networks and subject-specific working groups within the overall rural development should be provided such as "Rural Farm Tourism Networking".
It was recommended that
· The Working Party establish a special working group to "Analyse the Socio-Economic Situation of Rural Women in Economies in Transition".
· A strong recommendation was made that governments and policy makers give priority attention to the role of young people, women and the family in future rural development policies and programmes.
· At the Session it was also recommended that the title of the Working Party be changed to "Working Party on Women and the Family in Rural Development".
6. INTERNATIONAL WORKSHOP ON "RURAL/AGRI TOURISM DEVELOPMENT IN EUROPE"
(Rinn/Innsbruck, Austria, 2-4 December 1992)
Participants:
36 participants from 18 European countries, as well as observers from non-governmental organizations.
Purpose and Objectives:
To promote the development of Rural/Agri Tourism in context with:
· sustainable agriculture and rural development
· its contribution to economies in transition
· providing quality products for the customer
· providing FAO with relevant facts on these issues
· developing a Networking System for Rural/Agri Tourism
The Workshop was a big success, providing important inputs, exchange of experiences and developing future aspects. The participants expressed their wishes for the continuation of such Workshops on Rural Tourism Development in Europe.
The delegate from Israel announced that such a Workshop would be organized in Israel in 1994 or 1995.
7. PROJECT OF THE FAO WORKING PARTY
Title of the Project:
"THE SOCIO-ECONOMIC SITUATION AND STATUS OF RURAL WOMEN IN SELECTED CENTRAL AND EASTERN EUROPEAN COUNTRIES."
Meeting of the Technical Project Team (Vienna, 8-9 March 1993)
The Project Team developed the outline of the project to the theme "Analysis of the Socio-Economic Situation and Status of Rural Women in selected Central and Eastern European Countries."
Purpose of the Project:
To provide a basis for the development of regional programmes in order to improve the social and economic wellbeing of rural women and families, ensure that women are accorded equal rights and opportunities and ensure the utilisation of their potential contribution in society. This purpose is in line with the FAO's Plan of Action for the Integration of Women in Development.
The overall/strategic objective of the project was defined as:
To provide gender analysed baseline data for agricultural development policies and programme formulation at national levels which would:
· guide project development
· support rural community initiatives and NGO's
· enable the full participation of women in the social and economic development process
· enable access by women to Institutional Structures Policy, formulation and development facilities, education and training and employment opportunities.
The operational objective for the situational analysis was determined as follows:
· To obtain and analyse the appropriate data on the social and economic situation of rural women and families in the selected countries and to present country profiles to the next Working Party Session
· To provide motivation for policy makers at national, regional and local levels in order to ensure the improvement of the socio-economic situation of women through their involvement in action oriented projects
At the 3rd Meeting of the Board of the Working Party (Madrid, June 1993) it was agreed to invite 12 countries from Central and Eastern Europe, to participate in this project
· The research and processing of the relevant data were entrusted to the Mikkeli Research and Training Institute of the Helsinki University
· In January 1994 a Workshop for the focal points was organized in Nitra, Slovak Republic
· In February 1994 the final questionnaire was sent out to governments and focal points of the selected countries
· A progress report will be given at the 7th Session of the Working Party, October 1994, Athens, Greece.
8. 3rd SESSION OF THE BOARD OF THE WORKING PARTY
(Madrid, Spain, 28-30 June 1993)
The Meeting dealt with the medium-term plan of the Working Party. Some important activities had been agreed and the content of the activities finalized:
· Project on "The Socio-Economic Situation and Status on Rural Women in Selected Central and Eastern European Countries"
· 6th International Rural Development Summer School "Management and Implementation of Rural Development Projects", 6-10 September 1993, Slovenia
· 7th Session of the Working Party, October 1994, Greece, "The Family as the Basic Socio-Economic Unit in Rural Development - Future Focus", 18-21 October 1994, Athens, Greece
9. 6th INTERNATIONAL RURAL DEVELOPMENT SUMMER SCHOOL
(Bled, Slovenia, 6-10 September 1993)
Theme: "Management and Implementation of Rural Development Projects"
Participants:
26 participants from 18 European countries attended the Summer School
Overall Objective:
Participants should develop and manage meaningful projects and train others in the skills of project management.
This technology was introduced with the Methodology of GMA. With the support of NOV'NA Studio for Rural Development, Slovenia, it was again a successful workshop. Participants could also learn from the experiences of other countries (country reports) as well as through the study tour. This International Summer School was opened by the Minister for Agriculture and Forestry of Slovenia.
10. WORKSHOP ON THE PROJECT "THE SOCIO-ECONOMIC SITUATION AND STATUS OF RURAL WOMEN IN SELECTED CENTRAL AND EASTERN EUROPEAN COUNTRIES "
(Nitra, Slovakia, 17-19 January 1994)
Purpose:
Training for project participants (focal points) on the collection and documentation of the relevant socio-economic information on the status of rural women in the participating countries.
Objective:
· To understand the purpose of the analyses task
· To learn the process of information collection and documentation
Participants:
Delegations (focal-points from 9 Central and Eastern European countries)
During this workshop the questionnaire as the basic instrument for collecting relevant data had been finalized.
11 Eastern and Central European countries will be involved in this project. The questionnaire should be completed by May 1994.
At the 7th Session of the Working Party in Greece, the broad outcome of the research project will presented by Dr. Pirjo Siiskonen, Mikkeli Institute, Finland. The final document of the Research Project shall be completed by 1995.
11. 7th INTERNATIONAL RURAL DEVELOPMENT SUMMER SCHOOL
(Herrsching, Germany, 8-14 September 1994)
Theme: "TRAINING OF RURAL WOMEN IN ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND SMALL BUSINESS DEVELOPMENT"
Participants:
Extension agents/trainers/leaders involved in projects relating to Rural Women in Development
Objective:
The purpose of the Workshop is to enable participants to provide training/advice and facilitation in entrepreneurship and in small business initiation and advancement for rural women.
The content of the Summer School related to:
· Entrepreneurship as an Economic Force in Rural Development
· Understanding the Process of Entrepreneurial Development
· Entrepreneurial Group Development - Opportunities for Women
· Developing of Small Business through Entrepreneurial Projects - Opportunities for Women
· Development of Creativity - a Key Entrepreneurial Element
The theoretical inputs will be supported by a practical related study tour in Bavaria (Bayern).
12. 7th SESSION OF THE WORKING PARTY ON WOMEN AND THE AGRICULTURAL FAMILY IN RURAL DEVELOPMENT
(Athens, Greece, 18-21 October 1994)
Theme: "THE FAMILY AS THE BASIC SOCIO-ECONOMIC UNIT IN RURAL DEVELOPMENT- FUTURE FOCUS"
The main theme will be developed through the following main topics:
(1) The Family as the Basic Socio-Economic Unit in Rural Development - Future Requirements and Trends
(2) The Family in Sustainable Development in Rural Areas - Possibilities of Improving their Socio and Economic Situations
(3) New Opportunities for Women (NOW EC Programmes)
(4) A Focus on Youth in Rural Development - Future possibilities and options
(5) Research Programme on Rural Women and Youth
(6) Nutrition as a factor in Family well being
FUTURE ACTIVITIES OF THE WORKING PARTY ON WOMEN AND THE AGRICULTURAL FAMILY IN RURAL DEVELOPMENT
Continuation and Finalization of the FAO Project "The Socio-Economic Situation and Status of Rural Women in Selected Central and Eastern European Countries".
2. 1995, April, Israel
Joint FAO/ECA - UN/ECE Symposium on Rural Tourism
FAO Workshop - Analysis of the findings and results of the project "The Socio-Economic Situation and Status of Rural Women in Selected Central and Eastern European Countries." Development of relevant projects and training aspects.
<section>4</section>
Annex V. Statement on emerging issues concerning rural women in the European region
Annex V. Statement on emerging issues concerning rural women in the European region
CONSULTATIVE MEETING
HERRSCHING (GERMANY), 7 SEPTEMBER 1994
Critical areas of concern
Recommendations on the and/or policies
Classification mechanisms
Political Issues
1. Women's participation in decision making at the local level as a pre-requisite for general acceptance of women's role in the political process and a consequent increase in women's involvement also at higher levels.
1. Youth programmes in schools.
2. Gender issues introduced in teacher training.
3. Political training for women
4. Personal training in:
Both sexes (some gender specific)
- leadership
- public speaking
- decision-making
- work through NGOs
- self-assertion courses.
5. Encourage women to set up or participate in organizations with governmental support where necessary.
6. Introduction of new information technologies.
7. Introduction of extension services at the local level.
8. Compensation for lost income due to political representation (also for child care).
9. Local mobilization of rural women to take part in the political process through the promotion of small interactive women's groups.
II. Propagation of a more holistic way of thinking on gender issues within political systems.
1. Practical research into the present situation with regard to gender issues.
2. Analysis of research results.
3. Synthesis of new policies and activity programmes (based on 1 and 2) to bring about the desired change, for example affirmative action towards creating necessary conditions.
4. The introduction of legislation at the national level to secure equal representation of both genders in all official political bodies (or at least a minimum of 40%).
5. The active dissemination to appropriate organizations and agencies by the UN of information on the general situation of rural women on a worldwide basis, with special reference to legal rights, achievements and problems. The development of the necessary information channels.
III. Women and men with the same level of education and work responsibility do not receive the same wages.
1. Legislation to raise status and wage levels in woman-dominated professions.
Economic Issues
1. Lack of access to land ownership among rural women. With consequent difficulties with regard to economic independence.
1. National legislation which gives rural women equal rights with men regarding access to land ownership.
2. Empowerment of rural women in the commercial sphere through the establishment of national programmes which facilitate and promote basic education and training schemes for these women.
Women-specific with men's component
II. Inequality of opportunity and social independence for rural women, especially with reference employment and access to entrepreneurship.
1. Governmental facilitation and promotion of economic independence for rural to women through:
a) necessary legislation
b) the support and development of social structures which can result in the creation of new job opportunities
Community oriented women-specific
c) the support and development of training schemes, basic education and seed capital for the start-up of small businesses among rural women
d) introduction of new information technologies
Social Issues
I. Poor access to higher education and vocational training among rural women.
1. The establishment of local training institutions and training programmes accessible to rural women on an equal basis with men.
2. The establishment of local advisory and training programmes directed at rural women to increase the level of awareness concerning less traditional career and business opportunities.
Women in the rural area
II. Access to basic health care for rural women.
1. The establishment of primary medical care centres in rural areas.
2. The establishment of a social security system giving rural women access to primary health care at a low cost.
Women-specific
3. The establishment of programmes and systems directed at rural women to influence them to use primary health care facilities.
III. Violence committed against rural women especially in war affected areas.
1. Establishment of shelters in rural areas with a possibility for overnight accommodation.
2. Establishment of local care groups in rural areas.
3. The introduction of stronger legislation against all forms of sexual violence against women and children (forced prostitution, forced sex, etc.).
Female specific and both sexes
IV. Lack of awareness and insight among rural women concerning their possibilities and potential with regard to their role and position in society.
1. Empowerment of rural women in the social sphere through the establishment of national programmes which facilitate and promote basic education and training schemes for these women.
Women-specific
V. Lack of financial compensation to rural women for work caring for family members at home and work on the farm.
1. The establishment of pension schemes for rural women which give them equal rights with men.
Women-specific
2. The establishment of financial compensation for rural women who care for family members.
VI. Loneliness and isolation among rural women, especially young women with small children.
1. The establishment of local social centres in rural areas where women can meet one another and share information.
Women-specific
VII. Rural women's vulnerability in relation to various forms of business transactions involving the purchase and sale of humans, especially small children.
1. Tougher legislation at national level to outlaw all forms of trafficking with human beings.
Women-specific
Previous sessions of the Working Party on Women and the Agricultural Family in Rural Development are as follows:
First session
Brest, France, 13-17 September 1982
Second session
Sofia, Bulgaria, 1-5 October 1984
Third session
Santa Coloma de Farners, Spain, 6-10 October 1986
Fourth session
Rome, Italy, 1 1-14 October 1988
Fifth session
Prague, Czechoslovakia, 2-5 October 1990
Sixth session
Innsbruck, Austria, 13-16 October 1992
W/V4859E/2/9.95/50
