<title>ESTUDIO MONOGRAFICO DE EXPLOTACION FORESTAL 3. Use of construction crane for wood extraction on mountainous terrain</title>
<section>1</section>
FOREWORD
This study is one in a series of case studies being un-dertaken by the FAO Forest Harvesting and Transport Branch as part of its efforts to promote environmentally sound and sustainable forest practices in both natural and plantation forests. The main objective of these case studies is to document successful operations which have the potential to improve forest utilization, reduce wood waste in the forests, and minimize environmental impacts associated with harvesting operations.
This report documents a study on the use of construction crane for wood extraction in mountainous terrain in Austria, providing information on the advantages and limitations of this type of low impact harvesting system.
The aim of this study is to draw attention to forest harvesting specialists in countries where an abundance of building cranes exist which could be favourably employed for forest operations in areas with good road development standards and where special silvicultural prescriptions have to be applied such as those safeguarding advanced forest regeneration and extracting single tree stems in selective cuts from old growth forests. The study proposed that extracting tree length stems or whole trees proved technically feasible with little or no damage to the younger trees of the remaining stand as well as to the soil.
The use of building cranes in wood harvesting in hilly to steep terrain offers a further means of extracting wood in an environmentally sound manner in order to promote sustainable forest practice and management.
The study also provides indicative figures on productivity and costs, along with suggestions for possible use in combination with wood processors.
On the back cover page of this publication is a list of case studies which have been published to date in the series of FAO Forest Harvesting Case Studies.
We would like to thank the staff of the Department of Forest Engineering of the University of Agriculture, Vienna, for their research in this innovative type of forest operation which could be applied in numerous countries with underutilized machinery in the building industry; such machinery could be put to good use in forest operations.
Rudolf Heinrich
Chief
FAO Forest Harvesting and Transport Branch
<section>2</section>
SYMBOLS, ABBREVIATIONS AND EXCHANGE RATE
Symbols
cm = centimetre
h = hour
ha = hectare
kg = kilogram
km = kilometre
kN = kilonewton
kW = kilowatt
l = litre
m = metre
m^3 = cubic metre
min = minute
mm = millimetre
t = metric ton
Abbreviations
DBH = diameter at breast height
Exchange rate applied (as of March 1994)
US$ 1 = AS 12.00 (Austrian schilling)
APPENDIX 1. Slides 34
APPENDIX 2. Glossary 38
<section>3</section>
1. INTRODUCTION
Austria is a mountainous country rich in forests: 46% of the land area is covered with forests dominated by coniferous trees; only 36% are broad-leafed and mixed forests. The annual increment in timber is estimated by the forest inventory at about 19 million m^3, while the annual harvesting is only approximately 12 million m^3 due to the absence of thinning in forest properties which are not managed by expert forest staffs. Another reason for the deficiency is the increase in production forests under irregular management and in protection forests which are sometimes badly opened up by forest roads, so that harvesting cannot be executed at reasonable costs.
According to the size of forest enterprises one can find different harvesting systems in Austria. On the one hand, especially in farmer-owned forest areas, trees are felled and cross-cut by chain-saws and transported by agricultural tractors more or less well adapted for wood extraction; on the other hand, highly and fully mechanized harvesting systems are also used.
Since air pollution and other man-made impacts affect the forest ecosystems - in addition to damages caused by abiotic and biotic factors - changes in silviculture and harvesting techniques became obligatory.
The purpose of this case study is to assess the productivity and costs of a wood harvesting system appropriate to silvicultural systems that provide natural regeneration.
The study was carried out by the Department of Forest Engineering whose head is Univ. Prof. Dipl.-Ing. Anton Trzesniowski, University of Agriculture - Vienna, Austria. The field work was carried out by a team consisting of Dr. Norbert Winkler and Dipl.-Ing. Karl Stampfer in cooperation with Dipl.-Ing. Christoph Habsburg - Lothringen on his private forest enterprise. Dr. Norbert Winkler prepared the report.
<section>4</section>
2. LOCATION OF THE CASE STUDY
The study was carried out in a private forest enterprise in Carinthia, the southernmost federal state of Austria. The forest estate amounts to approximately 2 500 ha; the stands - between 400 m and 1 450 m in altitude - are stocking on different types of soil developed from granitic rock. The harvesting operations observed were regeneration fellings, chosen to stimulate existing natural regeneration, which were part of planned harvest cuts.
Forest accessibility is provided by approximately 55 m of road per ha with a formation width of 6 m, carriageway width of 4 m, and types of construction corresponding to the usual forest road standard in Austria. Considering the utilization of forest roads by construction cranes it should be mentioned that the axle loads and gross vehicle weights of cranes appropriate for logging operations should not be higher than those of loaded timber trucks. The bearing capacities of forest roads might be exceeded by the high axle loads of such vehicles during wet seasons, and therefore this has to be considered when planning logging and hauling operations.
The two study areas where regeneration felling took place were located between 470 m and 480 m in altitude and the terrain varied from 15% on the one area to between 20% and 30% slope gradients on the other. But it is important to emphasize that flat terrain is not a precondition for the use of construction cranes. Just the opposite is true: their use will be recommended for harvest cut areas where natural regeneration has to be preserved; the slope gradient or rocks and other obstacles require that felled trees or logs be transport "lifted" to the forest road where they will be handled by the wood processor or manually delimbed and bucked by means of chain-saws.
In this enterprise, articulated four-wheeled skidders were usually used for logging up to a slope gradient of about 20% uphill and 40% downhill. Above these slope gradients cable systems were used.
When the construction crane was first set up, in study area A, only assortments were transported according to the weight and height of the trees; otherwise the permissible load weight would have been exceeded and the young trees forming the natural regeneration - with an average age of 15 years and 4 to 10 m in height - might have been badly damaged because of the limited hook height of the crane (see Photo 1).
Photo 1. Stand before harvesting.
At the second study area, B, the natural regeneration was much smaller (about 2 m) so whole trees could be transported by the crane, except that there was the danger of exceeding the permissible load weight which would have caused delays during the logging phase; this would have made it necessary to cross-cut the trees once. In this case the fellers cross-cut the trees at a height of about 12 to 16 m depending on the lowest branches so that no delimbing with the chain-saw was necessary at the felling site.
Table 1 gives the stand characteristics for the study areas before harvesting.
Table 1. Stand characteristics of the study areas.
Average
Study
area
Stand
(age, years)
Volume
m^3/ha
Trees/ha
Volume m3
DBH cm
Height m
A
Picea abies (105)
+ some Pinus silvestris
B
Picea abies (75)
+ some Abies alba
(Values per hectare apply to full stocking.)
Table 2 shows the different conditions for logging at both study areas.
Table 2. Logging conditions.
Study
Set-
Load volume [m^3]
Length of load [m]
Logging distance [m]
Number
area
up No.
mean (min/max)
mean (min/max)
mean (min/max)
of loads
A
B
Total
At study area A only assortments, mainly long logs, were extracted; at study area B trees, tree tops and long logs were transported by the construction crane.
<section>5</section>
3. EQUIPMENT
The equipment for the harvesting system, described in the following pages, consists of chain-saws for felling, a construction crane for logging and a wood processor for processing, which includes delimbing and bucking the trees and their piling.
3.1. Construction crane
The construction crane FAUN RTF 40-3 was used for logging during this study because of its weight, lifting capacity, high manoeuvrability and suitable dimensions (see Photo 2). This construction crane is also suitable for the worker because it meets ergonomic principles and requirements. Its design and safety features assure convenient and safe operation, which are prerequisites for the operator's sustained performance.
Photo 2. The FAUN RTF 40-3 is a 3 axle all-terrain crane with a telescoping boom.
The FAUN RTF 40-3 is a 3 axle all-terrain crane with a telescoping boom. Due to its width, turning radius and high manoeuvrability this crane can certainly be used, during dry seasons or when the ground is frozen, on all forest roads meeting the usual standards (see Photo 3). Problems concerning the road-bearing capacities might occur during wet seasons, but as mentioned above, this is not a specific problem for the crane vehicle.
Photo 3. Usual forest road standard (formation width of 6 m, carriageway width of 4 m).
Once the driver has reached the area where the crane is to be set up, he must manoeuvre the vehicle so that it stands at a right angle to the road center line; this will provide maximum machine stability during the supported operation. The front of the vehicle should be pointing opposite to the work area since over-front lifting might damage the driver's cab if the lifted load begins to swing.
When the vehicle is in the correct position, the outriggers must be extended so as to support the operation, thereby providing maximum lifting capacities. The outriggers must be set up on firm level ground; square-sawn timber between outriggers and ground provides a level surface and helps to distribute the pressure evenly so that ground damage or shearing failure might not occur (see Photo 4).
Photo 4. Extended outriggers for supported operation.
If the carriageway width is not adequate (distance between 1st and 3rd axle = 4.15m) the outriggers next to the driver's cab must be set up on forest ground which might have to be prepared so as to be level (about 1 square meter for each outrigger).
After joining the hoisting equipment to the hook-block of the stabilized machine the telescoping boom will be extended (maximum boom length 30 m and maximum radius of action 28 m (see Figure 1).
Figure 1. Radius from center of rotation and hook height above ground.
Specifications given by the manufacturer of the all-terrain crane FAUN RTF 40-3 with optional all-wheel drive:
width of vehicle
2.50 m
width of vehicle with extended outriggers
6.28 m
length of vehicle
8.45 m
length of vehicle with lowered boom
11.21 m
height of vehicle with lowered boom
3.35 m
distance between 1st and 2nd axle
1.70 m
distance between 1st and 3rd axle
4.15 m
Axle loads with complete counterweight (metric tons):
1st axle
10.65 t
3rd axle
11.50 t
2nd axle
10.65 t
Gross vehicle weight
32.80 t
Max. speed
70 km/h
Gradability
Hoisting rope (diam-eter)
16 mm
Ultimate strength
170 kN
Max. rope pulling power
45 kN
Hoisting rope (length) 160 m
Main hoisting line speed (4th layer)
0 - 60 m/min
High speed
0 - 120 m/min
Auxiliary hoisting line speed
Hook-block
Hoisting equipment
0 - 80 m/min
75 kg
~ 13 kg
Different steering possibilities assure high manoeuvrability and permit different turning radii of the vehicle (see Figure 2).
Figure 2. Steering possibilities (schematic); turning radius for vehicle (A) 10.6 m; (B) 8.6 m; (C) cannot be turned because all wheels point in one direction.
Some examples of lifting capacities of the telescoping boom (with complete counterweight of 6.6 t, slewing range of 360_, with outriggers), stated by the manufacturer, are given in Table 3. This shows that the lifting capacity depends on the telescoping condition, which is determined by the immediate boom length, so in case a log or tree exceeds the permissible weight it can first be pulled with "raised head" and then with decreasing distance the whole tree can be lifted since lifting capacity is therefore increased.
Table 3. Lifting capacities (85%) for the FAUN RTF 40-3 in metric tons.
Radius
Boom lengths
(m)
9.30 m
16.20 m
23.10 m
28.60 m
30.00 m
telesc. 1
telesc. 2
telesc. 3
telescoping conditions (%)
"Lifting capacities of 85%" means that these lifting capacities do not exceed 85% of the tipping load,
but it must be mentioned that wind and dynamic interferences decrease the lifting capacities.
The hoisting equipment used consisted of two 6 m long ropes with log tongs of different sizes on the one end and were connected with a loop on the other end to a 6 m long synthetic sling which was joined to the hook-block. The hook-block hangs on a rope about 5 m from the top of the boom, thereby increasing the effective radius of action to approximate-ly 45 m, depending on the slope of the terrain.
If the trees are felled to point toward the location where the construction crane is set up, the distance which the crane can cover consists of the extraction distance plus the length of the felled trees, so in our first case, study area A, where the sites for setting up the crane were on the forest road, the extraction distance amounted to 70 m. Provided the terrain is accessible as in study area B, the crane can be situated a whole boom length from the road so that the extraction distance increases to about 90 - 100 m (see Photo 5).
Photo 5. The construction crane can be set up at the felling site, provided the terrain is accessible and the ground is frozen.
The extraction distance mentioned above is limited by the weight of the hook-block and hoisting equipment, which cannot be manoeuvred easily by one assistant alone, and, considering labour costs, a second worker employed to pull out this equipment cannot be recommended in a country like Austria where labour costs are high.
The alternative to using a lighter hook-block is limited because the block needs a minimum weight so that the rope can be extracted. The only way was to reduce the weight of the hoisting equipment by the use of a synthetic sling and two ropes instead of iron chains which were used when the first attempts at logging with construction cranes took place, but not dealt with in this study. It should be noted that a heavier than necessary hook-block should not be used. This would diminish the optimum load weight since lifting capacity = actual load + hook-block + hoisting equipment.
A significant advantage of the FAUN RTF 40-3 and other comparable types of construction cranes is the fully automatic overload protection device. In case the tension exceeds the permissible boom tension, all functions will be shut off automatically so that the safety hazard is reduced to a minimum. The boom has to be retracted thereafter or aligned once more in order to decrease the boom stress.
3.2. Wood processor
During previous operations of a construction crane which was used in combination with a wood processor, the crane processor STEYR KP 40 was mounted on a wheeled excavator.
The STEYR KP 40 is a one-grip crane processor which can be mounted on different carrier vehicles such as trucks, skidders or excavators. The manufacturer recommends the use of a carrier vehicle with 88- to 100-kW engine power (see Figure 3).
agricultural
tractor forwarder
skidder excavator
Figure 3. One-grip crane processor mounted on different carrier vehicles.
In contrast to smaller processors for thinning operations the STEYR KP 40 is a machine designed for continuous operation and can be used in combination with other machines. The optimal range of use which provides acceptable production is between 14 and 35 cm DBH but the stability of the used structural members should make permanent operation feasible with trees up to a 40 cm butt-diameter without risk of premature abrasion.
Specifications given by the manufacturer of the STEYR KP 40 :
Weight
810 kg
Maximum delimbing diameter
40 cm
Maximum bucking diameter
35 cm
Log feed rate
90 m/min
Log measuring accuracy
Required pump capacity
- Constant delivery
160 l/min 200 bar
- Load sensing
75 l/min 140 bar
Recommended crane
- Lifting capacity
1300 kg 6.5 m
- Engine power
88 - 100 kW
The STEYR KP 40 consits of two units: the processing head, which is suspended, rotating and swivelling, from a hydraulic loading crane; and the controller.
The processing head includes a circular saw with a stated maximum cutting depth of 35 cm; grip-arms; delimbing knives and a drive track. The operator positions the process-ing head over the felled tree which will be encircled and tightly held against the drive-track by the grip-arms. The drive-track - consisting of segments with teeth - moves the tree towards the circular saw; however, just before reaching the saw, the tree passes the delimbing knives which cut the limbs. The tree can also be moved in reverse, when a large limb fails to be cut off the first time, therefore necessitating a second attempt (see Photo 6).
All functions are hydraulically driven and electrically controlled. Log lengths are measured with a light barrier and an encoding mechanism built into the drive-track. This continuous diameter measurement during the processing of the tree allows the operator to cut the tree into the desired length according to diameter criteria so that the resulting assortments will provide lengths which will bring the highest market value.
A volume measurement separated into assortments, by mid-diameter and length, opens up new ways of production planning and control.
Although the STEYR KP 40 has a maximum design capacity for trees up to a 40 cm butt-diameter, the processing of trees up to 60 cm in butt-diameter was also reported. However, trees in diameter classes over 40 cm might cause difficulties for the STEYR KP 40 in hoisting and gripping during the processing operation because of their weight. These trees are processed by running the processor over them to a point where they can be lifted. But this method has a high potential for machine damage and renders it difficult to guide the tree in a desired direction toward the outfeed pile.
Photo 6. One-grip crane processor STEYR KP 40 mounted on a skidder.
The original drive-tracks which had seven 20-mm-long teeth per segment initially often had problems with traction and had "spinouts" when the processor encountered obstacles such as a large limb or a severe crook, but these difficulties were eliminated by using, in-stead, similiar drive-tracks with five 35-mm-long teeth per segment. The drive teeth leave two rows of marks on each log but this does not lead to decreased log-quality, either when caused by drive teeth or by the delimbing equipment.
The controller consists of three modules which are all mounted in the cab of the carrier vehicle: the control unit, the display unit and the computer. The control unit enables the operator to select log lengths from the computer memory, oil the drive track, shut off the computer and engage the saw manually. The display unit shows log lengths while they are processed.
The third module, the computer, can be programmed to measure and automati-cally cut seven different log lengths, but if desired by the operator the computer can be overridden and the processing functions, as mentioned above, can be controlled manually.
The processor is set up on the forest road next to the piled trees logged by the construction crane (see Photo 7). If the bearing capacity and the width of the road are sufficient for the construction crane, then it would also be sufficient for the carrier vehicle, where the one-grip processor is mounted.
At previously described combined operations of construction crane and processor, the STEYR KP 40 one-grip processor mounted on a wheeled excavator was hired by the forest enterprise.
One of the advantages of setting up the processor on the forest road is that a high cost all-terrain carrier is not needed. Sometimes the one-grip processor is mounted on second-hand carrier vehicles, so the costs of processor operation can be decreased. By way of contrast, two-grip processors are usually mounted on all-terrain carriers which require higher investment, thereby resulting in higher production costs per unit.
Photo 7. Piled trees logged by the construction crane. A sufficient supply of trees for processing has to be assured in order to fully utilize the wood processor.
<section>6</section>
4. HARVESTING SYSTEM
The harvesting system applied when a construction crane operation is used in combination with a wood processor is a highly mechanized timber harvesting system. The work phases are as follows:
· Felling
· Logging
· Processing (delimbing, cross-cutting, storage)
The harvesting method of this particular harvesting system (felling by means of chain-saws, logging by construction crane and processing by wood processor) is the whole-tree method.
Emphasis was given to the construction crane operation because the use of construction cranes for logging was previously not known and therefore data such as productivity rates were unavailable.
The felling phase was not included in these studies because it had already been done when the logging and processing phases started. In order to perform all work phases simultaneously a high range of planning and organization is required; furthermore felling might be disrupted by the logging operations and vice versa. But the felling operation must be carried out very carefully if natural regeneration is to be preserved. Directional felling cannot be done in a hurry and might be hindered by the assistant hooking the assortments. In the second case when the logging process is disrupted by felling trees, the logging operation might result in higher costs, and logging with cranes becomes unprofitable.
Another reason why the felling process was not observed is that the fellers worked on a private contract basis which means their performance per hour is of no importance to the enterprise because they are paid a certain amount per unit - in this case cubic metre of timber - after finishing the job.
After the felling phase, logging by the construction crane begins. At study area A the all-terrain crane was set up at two locations on the forest road; at study area B the crane was set up, as mentioned above, about one boom length from the road, into the felling site.
One assistant hooks the trees or assortments with log tongs and after their transport to the forest road by the crane a second assistant unhooks the load. All trees or assortments are piled on the forest road or next to it, so a wood processor or a timber truck with a loading crane can pick them up.
If the whole-tree method is applied, a processor is usually used after the logging phase is done by the construction crane. There are different types of processors available but so far only one-grip processors were used in combination with a construction crane for logging.
The major advantage of the one-grip crane processor is that after lifting the trees further processing is done by the same unit which has a rotating unit suspended from a hydraulic loading crane. This rotating and swivelling unit permits the operator to pick up the trees from almost any position, to process them in any position and to place them around the machine so that different assortments can be stored in separate piles (see Photo 8). Another advantage of one-grip processors compared with two-grip processors is that handling the trees is much easier and consequently there is less mental strain on the operator.
On the other hand, a disadvantage of one-grip processors is their net weight which requires both a higher weight of the carrier vehicle and higher stability of the crane. Despite the disadvantages of two-grip processors, compared to one-grip processors, their use is conceivable because of reasonable costs.
Photo 8. Site after processing operation. The different assortments and the debris are piled separately.
<section>7</section>
5. STUDY METHODOLOGY
In logging by construction crane, time studies have been carried out by observing the crane operator and the assistant hooking the load. The study methodology used was the progress-time method where time and work phases are recorded at the end of each work situation. The duration of each phase is obtained by subtracting it from the total of the recorded times. According to the chronological and complete registration of the time needed by the work phases the sequence of operations can be made evident for further analysis; this is a great advantage compared to the zero-point stopwatch and multi-moment method. However, a disadvantage sometimes in using the progress-time method is that only one person or machine can be observed.
The equipment used to carry out the time studies was a LATSCHBACHER EG 20 computer. This hand-held computer has buttons representing the different work phases previously fed into the computer. The person responsible for the time study has to select the correct button and to press it at the end of each work phase. The moment the button is pressed the last work phase is defined and recorded together with the appropriate time involved. Subtraction, in order to get the work phase duration, is done automatically by the computer. In addition, information such as load size, method of transportation (vertical, horizontal or rehooking), type of load (long log, tree top, tree) and logging distance are recorded with the hand-held computer.
To assess the performance of logging by the construction crane it would be sufficient to observe the crane driver. However, in order to improve the sequence of operations, the work of the assistant hooking the load has to be studied, as well, particularly if the observer next to the crane is not able to see neither the trees or assortments nor the assistant at the felling site due to the height of young trees forming the natural regeneration; therefore the observer is not able to classify the causes of delays and interruptions. The recorded data are transmitted by connecting the hand-held computer to a personal computer whereby the data could be prepared to run different statistical procedures thereafter.
Production figures in logging are based on the measurement of the mid-diameter and the length of transported assortments or trees immediately after their logging by construction crane. Consequently, every calculated load volume should be related to the corresponding cycle time in order to assess logging performance.
The site characteristics are based on the measurements of the last forest taxation.
<section>8</section>
6. PRODUCTION
6.1. Felling operation
As explained above, the felling phase was not included in these time studies because felling had already been completed before logging by construction crane began.
But according to the stand characteristics, given in Table 1, the following productivity rate could be estimated:
Team: Chain-saw operator
· Estimated production at study area A: 3.6 m^3/h
· Estimated production at study area B: 3.5 m^3/h
These production figures for felling have to be considered as standards and are calculated according to value tables of coniferous timber felling by means of chain-saws. These tables should enable the forester to predict felling productivity under particular site and stand conditions in order to make arrangements with the fellers.
Stated productivity rate for study area A includes felling, delimbing and cutting the trees into assortments, mainly long logs. At study area B the trees were felled and in case the feller estimated that the weight of a tree would exceed the permissible load weight of the crane the tree was cross-cut once. For this reason the productivity rates, stated above, are quite similar although the mean tree volume at study area B amounted to roughly half the tree volume at study area A.
6.2. Logging operation
The production during the crane operation was recorded for the three installations (2 settings on study area A and 1 setting on study area B) totalling 178.12 m^3 of timber. The crew was the same during the whole logging operation.
Team: Crane operator and two assistants
· Production: 178.12 m^3 : 14.29 h = 12.46 m^3/h
The time distribution between the different work phases of the crane operator based on the studies at the three construction crane settings was as follows:
Work phases Total
Crane movement unloaded 18.60 % 17.86 %
Lowering the hoisting equipment 12.08 % 11.59 %
Hooking the load 7.91 % 7.59 %
Crane movement loaded 56.41 % 54.15 %
Unhooking the load 4.73 % 4.54 %
Cross-cutting 0.27 % 0.26 %
Total work phases 100.00 % 95.99 %
Delays
Sequence of operation delays 44.14 % 1.77 %
Personal delays 34.52 % 1.38 %
Delays due to getting new order 9.13 % 0.37 %
Equipment delays 12.21 % 0.49 %
Total delays 100.00 % 4.01 %
Grand total 100.00 %
Equipment delays
There were no major delays resulting from a defect of the construction crane or the hoisting equipment. But three short delays between five and ten min occurred because the rope jerked out of the pulley attached to the end of the boom. This happened when the boom was not aligned to the load. The adjustment to the load is not only important in preventing delays but it also is a very important safety measure in the operation because lateral pulling of the load might cause the crane vehicle to be overturned.
The following work phases were not included in the calculation of the productivity rate:
· Setting up the construction crane
The average time consumption for setting up the construction crane was 27.8 min with a range from 11.2 to 44.2 min. The longest time involved for setting up was that which was necessary to discuss the job order and operation method, in general, prior to setting up the crane.
· Dismantling The average time consumption for the three dismantling operations was 14.98 min with a range from 12.8 to 18.7 min.
6.3. Processing operation
The production data for the processing operation have been obtained from other time studies of wood processor operations where the one-grip crane processor STEYR KP 40 was mounted on a skidder. All settings where time studies were carried out were on the road so that conditions for comparisons are given. According to the results of these studies, productivity depends on the diameter of the trees and the required assortments which call for different amounts of cross-cuts.
Figure 4 shows the performance of the STEYR KP 40 which can be expected according to the mid-diameter.
Production [m^3/h]
- - -- Assortment method - short --- Assortment method - long
Figure 4. Performance of the STEYR KP 40 wood processor (FPP 1991).
FPP (Kooperationsabkommen Forst - Platte - Papier) (1991): HARVESTER / PROZESSOREN,
Maschinen in der Durchforstung, Einsatzmöglichkeiten - Verfahren, Leistung - Kosten; Wien; p. 32
<section>9</section>
7. COSTS
7.1. Felling costs
As mentioned previously, felling had been done by private contractors before the other phases of the harvesting study began. The contractors were paid US$ 6.67/m^3 of produced assortments or felled trees, respectively, on study areas A and B, based on the estimated production which was quite similar for both study areas. The payment includes the costs for the chain-saws owned by the contractors.
· Costs of produced assortments at study area A: US$ 6.67/m^3
· Costs of felled trees at study area B: US$ 6.67/m^3
7.2. Logging costs
The construction crane and the crane operator were hired by the forest enterprise from a private company for a rental fee of US$ 87.50 per hour. A lower rental cost might be possible if a company with an underutilized fleet could be found but this benefit might be consumed by travel expenses to and from a distant operation area. The two assistants were paid US$ 8.33 per hour on a private contract basis.
Operating (area A + area B) 14.5 h
Setting up (three times) 1.5 h
Dismantling (three times) 1 h
Others (rest periods of the operator) 2 h
Journey to and from the operation area 2 h
Total construction crane hours: 21 h
· Equipment costs (construction crane):
US$ 87.50 * 21 h = US$ 1 837.50 US$ 1 837.50 : 178.12 m^3 = US$ 10.31/ m^3
· Labour costs (two assistants):
US$ 8.33 * 2 * 19 h = US$ 316.54 US$ 316.54 : 178.12 m^3 = US$ 1.77/m^3
· Costs for construction crane (including operator): US$ 10.31/m^3.
· Costs for two assistants: US$ 1.77/m^3.
· Total logging costs: US$ 12.08 /m^3.
7.3. Processing costs
The wood processor and the operator are hired by the forest enterprise from a private company such as for the construction crane. The rental cost usually depends on the mean tree diameter and would come to US$ 7.50/m^3.
Costs for the wood processor (including operator): US$ 7.50/m^3.
7.4. Costs per cubic metre
The costs of the whole-tree method amounts to: US$ 26.25/m^3 (see Table 4).
Table 4. Costs of the whole-tree method per cubic metre.
Work phase
Costs
US$/h
Unit cost
US$/m^3
Felling operation
Logging operation
Construction crane (including operator)
Labour costs for two assistants
Processing operation
Total harvesting operation
<title>ESTUDIO MONOGRAFICO DE EXPLOTACION FORESTAL 3. Use of construction crane for wood extraction on mountainous terrain</title>
8. STATISTICAL ANALYSIS
The average production might be indicative of what could be expected for the logging operation by construction crane but it is worth examining the different study areas and settings. The equation to calculate productivity is: Productivity = volume : cycle time.
The productivity on study area A amounted to 11.15 m^3 per hour and increased to 15.49 m^3 per hour on study area B although the load volume was only about two-thirds of area A and the assortments were about one-quarter longer than at area A (for details see Table 2). Comparing the number of loads - 75 loads in 9.96 hours on study area A and 69 loads in 4.33 hours on study area B - seem to necessitate further statistical analysis.
The analysis of the cycle time variance was a result of assuming that there is a significant difference at the 0.05 level for the mean cycle time. The next step was to question which input has the greatest influence on the cycle time.
With this in mind a multiple regression was computed. The stepwise method was used with cycle time as dependent variable and length of load, load volume, load size and logging distance as independent variables.
The influence of the other recorded information - such as the method of transport and type of load - can only be shown by an analysis of variance, but their contribution of explanation to the proportion of the variation in the dependent variable, explained by a regression model, cannot be quantified because values of a nominal scale cannot be run by regression procedures.
In accordance with this regression procedure the highest degree of explanation for the cycle time is given by the load volume entered first in the equation followed by the logging distance. All other independent variables were not entered into the equation because they did not meet the entry criterion.
Dependent variable
Independent variables Multiple R R Square
cycle time
load volume
logging distance 0.68255 0.46587
The R square coefficient, sometimes called the coefficient of determination, is a used measure of appropriate fit of a particular regression model. If all the observations fall on the regression line, R square is 1, and, in case there is no linear relationship between dependent and independent variables, R square is 0.
The multiple linear regression, as extension of bivariate regression by incorporating multiple independent variables, provides the following equation for the dependent variable cycle time:
cycle time = - 3.59901 + 3.30175 * (load volume) + 0.18187 * (logging dis-tance).
Assuming the load volume and logging distance as main influences to the cycle time, the attempt was made to find the optimal load volumes and logging distances which provide the highest logging performances. With this in mind the independent variables were subdivided into groups and the hypotheses that several group means are equal were examined by the statistical procedure of analysis of variance.
This statistical procedure indicates if the group means are probably unequal, but it does not pinpoint where the differences are. The Scheffe method, one of many available multiple comparison tests, was used for determining which group means are different from each other because its application is recommended to groups of unequal sample sizes. According to the range of volume per load (see Table 2) and number per formed group the following classification was chosen:
formed
volume per
mean cycle
standard
groups
load (m^3)
time
deviation
group 1
group 2
> 1.5 and < 2.5
group 3
The Scheffe test showed that groups 2 and 3 are significantly different from group 1 at the 0.05 significance level. This means that if the volume per load is greater than 1.5 m^3 there is a significant increase in the mean cycle time. Despite the higher cycle time there will not be a decrease in the productivity of the construction crane because the higher cycle time will then be compensated by the higher load volume.
The following grouping was chosen for the logging distances:
formed
logging
mean cycle
standard
groups
distance (m)
time
deviation
group 1
group 2
> 25 and < 35
group 3
The Scheffe procedure revealed that the cycle time of group three is significantly different at the 0.05 level from the other two groups which suggests the most suitable logging distances. This means that if the logging distance exceeds 35 m there is a significant increase in the mean cycle time and consequently a decrease in the logging performance.
The Scheffe test for groups formed by the length of assortments did not show any significant difference in the cycle time between the groups, which might be caused by superimpos-ing effect of load volume. This effect might also cause no significant difference in the cycle time between groups formed by the type of load.
Different methods of transportation occurred only on study area B. The three formed groups were "load transported horizontal", "load transported vertical" and "load rehooked from vertical to horizontal". The cycle time of the third variant was significantly different at the 0.05 level and was two times higher than variant 1 and three times higher than variant 2 which suggests the sequence of operation.
Another reason for the higher logging performance on study area B became obvious but this influence could not be evaluated, either by an analysis of variance or by a regression procedure. This influence is the crane operator's view of the felling site. It is much easier for the crane driver to operate the crane by sight than only by radio contact, as on study area A, where the height of the young trees forming the natural regeneration reduced the view for the crane operator.
Figure 5 shows the correlation between cycle time and load volume and Figure 6 between cycle time and logging distance. The low degree of explanation by only one independent variable demonstrates, therefore, the large variety of influences responsible for cycle time and logging performance.
Correlation 0.59835 S.E. of Est 3.11384 Sig. 0.0000
R Squared 0.35802 Intercept 1.44459 Slope 3.64540
Figure 5. Correlation between cycle time and load volume.
Correlation 0.42495 S.E. of Est 3.51793 Sig. 0.0000
R Squared 0.18059 Intercept -1.02058 Slope 0.23194
Figure 6. Correlation between cycle time and logging distance.
<title>ESTUDIO MONOGRAFICO DE EXPLOTACION FORESTAL 3. Use of construction crane for wood extraction on mountainous terrain</title>
<section>1</section>
9. DISCUSSION
9.1. Felling
Felling was done by fellers working on a private contract basis, which means they get paid an agreed fee per m^3 of timber produced; the paid amount is in accordance with the contract negotiated between the enterprise and the fellers. This might result in lower costs for the forest enterprise but requires a high degree of supervision by the forest staff.
Working on a private contract basis induces fellers to produce the largest number of units in the shortest possible time and with a minimum of delays. One cause of delays might be the observance of felling instructions; therefore supervision has to concentrate on direction felling in order to avoid damaging the natural regeneration and to facilitate extraction of felled trees lying in the logging direction.
9.2. Logging
9.2.1. Setting up the crane
In order to decrease the time needed to set up the construction crane the assistant who is responsible for unhooking the load might assist the crane driver in preparing the vehicle for supported operation; for example, adjusting the square-sawn timber between outriggers and ground or joining the hoisting equipment to the hook-block so that the crane operator can concentrate on the crane operation.
At the same time, the second assistant who will be hooking the load should go to the felling area so as to plan the work in the best possible way, especially if the height of the natural regeneration necessitates the operation to be directed by radio communication.
The locations for setting up the crane are more or less predetermined by its effective radius of action and the space left should be used to provide the crane operator with the best possible view. As mentioned above, its influence on the logging performance cannot be verified by statistical analyses but being able to view the felling site was valued highest by the crane operator when asked to rate the major influences on the logging performance.
9.2.2. Logging operation
According to the operator's opinion, logging done by the crane is quite different from the usual crane operations at building sites where construction cranes are usually used.
The mental strain is much greater during logging operations because of the high number of crane and boom movements per unit of time. For example, a swinging boom caused by lifting a tangled tree makes the driver apprehensive of overturning the vehicle and increases his mental strain as well. Apart from other factors the driver's previous experience with logging operations has an influence on the logging performance because crane operators often have difficulties when they are logging trees for the first time.
9.2.3. Hooking - unhooking
The assistant hooking the load has to direct the operator by radio so that the boom is aligned to the felled trees that are to be logged in order to avoid lateral pulling of the load which would otherwise delay alignment and consequently decrease the performance. Furthermore, the assistant has to arrange the order of trees or assortments for logging so that rehooking can be avoided, particular-ly when trees are tangled. Using a synthetic sling instead of an iron chain facilitates the work done by only one worker, therefore reducing labour costs.
The second assistant unhooking the load has longer waiting periods compared to the assistant at the felling area so the two assistants should alternate with each other in order to avoid fatigue.
Helmet and protective gloves are absolutely necessary for both assistants because they handle the metal log tongs and are also exposed to the risk of falling limbs from the lifted load.
9.2.4. Load size
Differences in logging performance based on the number of assortments per load could not be examined because after some crane movements with two logs per load the operator decided to transport only one log or tree (see Photo 9).
This decision was reached for various reasons: It was impossible to align the boom to more than one tree and at the same time avoid lateral pulling. Also, during touch down of the load with logs of different lengths, the crane driver was unable to place the logs in the desired direction because the longer log touched down first, causing the load to swing; this swinging motion exposed to danger the second assistant at the landing site.
Photo 9. Transport of only one log or tree enables the crane driver to position the load exactly in the desired direction.
9.2.5. Method of transport
Transporting the trees or long logs horizontally - with log tongs fixed on both ends - could be useful in preserving the natural regeneration from damage but it requires that trees lie in the optimal radius; otherwise the log has to be transported in a vertical position, first with "raised head" and rehooked afterwards. Rehooking has to be avoided whenever possible in order to prevent increase in cycle time and consequently additional logging costs.
9.2.6. Length of assortments
The statistical analysis did not demonstrate that the length of assortments had any significant influence on the cycle time. However, it should be kept in mind that in relation to the height of the natural regeneration the technically possible maximum transportable length should not be completely made use of so as to assure the best possible preservation of the remaining young trees.
9.2.7. Logging distances
The statistical analysis showed that the cycle time was more than doubled when logging distances over 35 m were involved. This distance, measured from the vehicle to the load, corresponds with boom length plus the hoisting equipment length. Above this distance the assistant at the felling site had to pull out the hoisting equipment thereby causing a substantial increase in cycle time.
9.2.8. Load volume
Statistical analysis of the cycle time showed that both groups with a load volume of more than 1.5 m^3 differ significantly from group 1 with the highest number of loads. The cycle time for group 2 (1.5 - 2.5 m^3) is almost twice the amount and group 3 (more than 2.5 m^3) is more than twice when compared to the cycle time for group 1.
In relation to the logging performance the higher volume per load compensates the higher cycle time according to the equation for calculating productivity so that the analysis of variance with the same group classification, as mentioned above, showed no significant difference between the groups for the variable productivity.
9.3. Processing
As a result of setting up the wood processor on a forest road the operator has to careful-ly place produced assortments and debris so as to leave a clear work space. When logged trees are piled too high due to a small landing space, instead of a low pile on an adequate landing, the result is that the tops and branches become more tangled and extra time is there-fore needed to select the least tangled trees. This requires a skilled operator familiar with these working conditions, which should be taken into account when the machine is hired.
9.4. Interrelations
Since the felling operation is very different from the operations of both the construction crane and the wood processor, the work phases cannot be done simultaneously. If the felling operation were done simultaneously with the construction crane and wood processor, the felling not only would be hazardous to the workers but would require four fellers to obtain the required number of trees and logs to permit the simultaneous operations of the construction crane and wood processor at full capacity. Apart from the different time elements involved, the logging might be interrupted by felling trees and vice versa, resulting in extra costs due to delays.
Directional felling and the best possible preservation of the natural regeneration cannot be expected if the fellers are pressed for time; the advantage of this way of logging therefore is defeated.
The productivity rate of the logging phase on study area B shows that it is appropriate to use the construction crane in combination with the processor. Because of the high costs for hired machines their combined operation has to be planned very well.
Therefore it might be useful to start with the logging operation one day earlier in order to have a buffer of trees ready for processing should there be delays in the logging operation due to minor machine repairs or in case the STEYR KP 40 is capable of processing more trees than the FAUN RTF 40-3 is capable of logging. Only when the supply of trees is assured can the combined operations of logging and processing be performed at reasonable costs.
The continuous operation of the wood processor without interference from finished assortments or debris should be made possible by hauling, which begins after completion of processing so that the wood processor can remain fixed at one site during the entire operation; hence time consuming changes of location can be minimized.
9.5. Environmental impacts
Today's goal in forest regeneration is to obtain recruitments coming from autochthonous stands. These recruitments should provide stable stands that are best suited for both natural and today's man-made impacts to the forest ecosystem and should be able to ensure all functions requested by the community. New silvicultural and harvesting techniques have to be found so that the timber yield expected by the owner of a forest estate - along with the protection function, welfare function and recreation function requested by various groups in the community - can all be fulfilled at the same time. Clear felling systems that may cause erosion and landslides due to inadequate soil protection during their regeneration phase will be replaced more and more by small-scale treatment and selection of individual or groups of trees to be harvested.
However, group felling and other small-scale harvesting cuts require a high forest road density due to their proportionally small harvesting volume per area so that otherwise useful logging and processing equipment become unprofitable; this is because installation time is excessive in proportion to time of operation. The construction crane with comparatively short time needed for setting up can be an alternative method in certain situations so as to ensure the advantages of cable logging - in particular the "lifted load" avoids excessive damage to young trees of the natural regeneration; furthermore it avoids soil compaction and wounding of the ground, which may frequently be the initial stage of soil erosion. These advantages are not lost during the processing phase because the wood processor is also set up on the forest road. Logging by construction crane might be an alternative, as well, if the terrain is inaccessible because of wet soil, slope gradient or obstacles,
such as boulders, covering the ground.
Small gaps occurring in the natural regeneration - either spontaneous or the result of damages from incorrect or faulty directional felling or logging operations - should be restocked with desired tree species.
<section>2</section>
10. CONCLUSIONS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The first attempt to use a construction crane for logging was made after a windthrow when the tangled trees were lying in all directions. Because of the great hazard to fellers in salvage cutting and the necessity to disentangle the trees, it was decided to cross-cut the trees only once next to the root collars so that the overturned rootstock could fall back to its natural ground position (so as to help prevent soil erosion) and thereafter to extract the trees with a construction crane and to process them by means of a wood processor on the forest road. (see Photo 10).
Photo 10. Logging by construction crane after a windthrow where trees were lying tangled and in all directions.
Long-term planning of logging combined with processing operations is necessary to fully utilize the equipment. Apart from internal considerations, external factors should also be taken into account. These would include fully utilizing rented equipment and preplan-ning several crane operations so as to reduce transfers to and from the various operation areas, which otherwise would involve additional logging and operational costs.
Since in Austria the road network was started at a time when the clear felling system was in use and is nearly completed today in most forest enterprises, it must be considered in predetermin-ing the suitable logging system. Due to the comparatively small radius of the construction crane its use seems to be rather limited at first consideration, but there are likely to be more areas suitable than one would think for the above mentioned logging equipment.
Also, in long-term planning for logging operations, maps - such as those used for forest manage-ment regulation and show-ing suitable logging systems for all areas of the forest estate - should be made available. Hence, after the regulation of the areas where felling is to be done, the operation of machines or machine combinations can be arranged according to proposals contained in the map regarding time and terms of operation.
The operational planning for a construction crane operation should include:
· choice between the use of modified full-length method or whole-tree method;
· location of harvesting areas for the next construction crane operation;
· processing;
· optimal number of workers;
· locating sites, including preparations for setting up;
· hauling.
This operational plan has to be prepared before felling so that clear instructions can be given to the fellers.
The decision concerning the use of the modified full-length method or whole-tree method predetermines all other subjects.
Harvesting areas suited for logging by construction crane and for the harvesting system chosen need to be selected in sufficient numbers in order to utilize hired machines for several days. In this case, as stated above, the costs involved in transfers to and from the operation area can be distributed over a higher volume of logged timber, which would subsequently decrease the total production costs per unit.
According to the harvesting system chosen and the tree diameters at specific harvesting areas, the equipment needed for cross-cutting the long logs or for further processing, has to be selected. If the modified full-length method is applied, cross-cutting at the landing will be done by a feller equipped with a heavier chain-saw suited for large trees.
When the whole-tree method is used, a wood processor should be selected so that the maximum capacity for which it was designed corresponds to the tree diameters at the harvesting areas. A sufficient supply of trees for processing has to be assured so as to fully utilize the hired processor.
The optimal number of workers depends on the harvesting system chosen but the minimum as well as the usually optimal number is two: one assistant at the final cutting area and a second assistant at the landing site. A second assistant at the felling site to help pull out the equipment may be useful in extending the radius of crane action, but this can be recommended only for developing countries with comparatively low labour costs. A second assistant at the landing site is usually not required, even if the modified full-length method is used and if the long logs have to be cross-cut twice or several times, provided that the load size is one piece. Moreover, safety hazards will also be reduced if only one assistant is present at the landing site.
The locations for setting up the crane are predetermined by the radius of action but other criteria - such as the best possible field of vision for the crane driver and adequate road widths - should be taken into account when locations are selected. Due to the high rental fees per hour for the construction crane, the locations for the crane operation have to be well prepared so as to avoid an increase in logging costs.
Since the construction crane and wood processor are set up at the forest road, the outfeed piles will be placed on and next to the road so that hauling can be carried out simultan-eously; this will enable the machines to leave the operation site after completing the job. This is of utmost importance in order to avoid additional costs due to waiting periods for the machines, especially if the settings are located on a dead-end road or in case the vehicles need to go a long roundabout way in order to leave the operation site.
Despite high rental fees which might consequently increase logging costs dramatically if serious delays occur, the use of construction cranes for logging can be recommended for small-scale use under the following preconditions and situations:
· high density of road network due to the comparatively small radius of action;
· preservation of natural regeneration;
· "relatively"small amount of timber volume per harvesting area which favours logging equipment with short installation time;
· inaccessible terrain due to slope gradient, moisture of soil or obstacles;
· salvage cutting at windthrow areas;
· planning and supervision of construction crane and wood processor operation by the forest staff have to be assured.
Finally, it is recommended that all equipment used should be fully utilized not only in terms of adequate supply of trees but also in the employment of skilled operators familiar with particular operating conditions in forest areas. Further time studies should be undertaken to assess logging perfor-mances of construction cranes in various areas in order to optimize construction crane operation according to specific site conditions.
APPENDIX 1. SLIDE SET - to accompany the FAO Forest Harvesting Case Study,
USE OF CONSTRUCTION CRANE FOR WOOD EXTRACTION IN
MOUNTAINOUS TERRAIN
This slide set is a complement to the report on the case study carried out in a private forest enterprise in the Republic of Austria in Decem-ber 1993 by the Department of Forest Engineering, University of Agriculture - Vienna, Austria.
The purpose of the study was to assess the productivity and costs of a wood harvesting system appropriate to silvicultural systems with natural regeneration.
1. Forests of Austria
Austria is a mountainous country rich in forests: 46% of the land area is covered with forests dominated by coniferous trees; only 36% are broadleafed and mixed forests. The annual increment in timber estimated by the forest inventory is about 19 million m^3, but the annual harvesting is only approximately 12 million m^3 of timber.
2. Location of the case study
The case study was carried out at two harvesting areas with a 105-year-old and a 75-year-old stands of Spruce and Picea abies, respectively, amply supplied with natural regeneration in the understory. The areas were located between 470 and 480 m in altitude in Carinthia, the southernmost federal state of Austria. The average volume of the trees logged by means of construction crane was 1.24 m^3.
3. Forest roads
Forest accessibility is provided by approximately 55 m of road per ha with a formation width of 6 m, carriageway width of 4 m and types of construction corresponding to the usual forest road standard in Austria. Construction cranes like the FAUN RTF 40-3 can certainly be used on these forest roads during dry seasons or when the ground is frozen. Problems concerning the road-bearing capacities might arise during wet seasons.
4. Felling
The trees have to be felled so that they point toward the location where the construc-tion crane is set up. In this case the distance from which the crane operates would be the extraction distance plus the length of the felled trees. The felling operation must be carried out very carefully so that natural regeneration is preserved. Felling has to be finished before the logging phase starts in order to avoid interference in the logging operation.
5. Setting up at the forest road
Once the driver has reached the place where the crane is to be set up, he must manoeuvre the vehicle so that it stands at a right angle to the road's center line; this will provide maximum machine stability during the operation. The front of the vehicle should be pointing opposite the work area since over-front lifting might damage the driver's cab.
6. Setting up at the final cut area
Provided the terrain is accessible and the ground is frozen, the construction crane can be set up on the felling site, about one boom length from the road thereby extending the radius of crane action.
7. Supported operation
Once the vehicle is in the correct position, the outriggers must be extended and set up on firm level ground so as to stabilize the operation, hence providing maximum lifting capacity.
8. Outriggers
The ground may need to be prepared so as to be level in case the outriggers have to be set up on forest ground. Square-sawn timber between outriggers and ground create a level surface and help to distribute the pressure evenly.
9. Extraction distance
The optimum extraction distances are within the radius of boom length plus the hoisting equipment's length.
10. Hooking
The assistant at the felling site is hooking the trees or assortments with log tongs. The tree diameters determine the proper size of the log tongs.
11. Unhooking
The log tongs can easily be removed by the assistant at the landing. Protective gloves and helmet are absolutely necessary for the assistant in handling the metal log tongs and as a safety measure against the danger of falling limbs from the lifted load.
12. Driver's cab
The construction crane is suitable for the operator because it meets ergonomic principles and requirements. Its design and safety features assure convenient and safe operation which are prerequisites for the operator's sustained performance.
13. Dismantling
The average time required for the dismantling operation is 15 minutes, which is about half the time needed for setting up the crane.
14. Telescoping boom
After joining the hoisting equipment to the hook block of the stabilized crane the telescoping boom can be extended (maximum boom length 30 m, radius 28 m).
15. Manoeuvrability
Different steering possibilities provide high manoeuvrability and small turning radius of the 3 axle all-terrain crane FAUN RTF 40-3.
16. Final cut area
The assistant who will be hooking the load has to arrange the trees or assortments for logging; in order to avoid lateral pulling he also has to direct the operator by radio so that the boom is aligned to the felled trees which have to get logged.
17. Load size
It is not advisable to transport more than one tree or assortment simultaneously. One reason is the impos-sibility to align the boom to more than one tree at the same time and avoid lateral pulling. Another reason is the difficulty during touch down of a load consisting of logs with different lengths.
18. Landing area
The crane driver is able to place the tree or assortment exactly in the desired direction.
19. Lifting the load
Lifting the load is the critical phase of the logging operation. A swinging boom caused by lifting a tangled tree makes the driver apprehensive of overturning the vehicle and increases his mental strain as well.
20. Load transported: vertical
To transport the trees or long logs in a vertical position means with "raised head".
21. Load transported: horizontal
The log tongs are fixed at both ends. This could be useful in preserving natural regenera-tion from damage but it requires that the trees lie in the optimal radius; otherwise the trees have to be transported in a vertical position first and rehooked afterwards.
22. Hoisting equipment
The hoisting equipment used consists of two 6 m long ropes with log tongs of different sizes on the one end and are connected with a loop on the other end to a 6 m long synthetic sling which is joined to the hook block. The hook block hangs from a rope about 5 m from the top of the boom; this increases the effective radius of action to 45 m, depending on the slope of the terrain.
23. Length of assortments
In relation to the height of the natural regeneration, maximum transportable length should not always be completely made use of so as to assure the best possible preservation of the young trees.
24. Load volume
A significant advantage of the FAUN RTF 40-3 and other comparable types of construction cranes is that they have a fully automatic overload protection device so that the safety hazards are reduced to a minimum.
25. Infeed pile
When the whole-tree method is used a wood processor should be selected according to its maximum design capacity and the tree diameters at the harvesting areas. A sufficient supply of trees for processing has to be assured so as to fully utilize the wood processor.
26. Wood processor
The one-grip crane processor STEYR KP 40 is a machine designed for continuous operation with trees up to 40 cm butt-diameter and can be used in combinaiton with other machines.
27. Carrier vehicles
The one-grip crane processor can be mounted on different carrier vehicles such as trucks, skidders or excavators. Here it is mounted on a wheeled excavator.
28. Site after operation
When setting up the wood processor on a forest road, the operator has to carefully pile the produced assortments and debris so as to keep a clear work space for the machine.
<section>3</section>
APPENDIX 1.
Glossary
assortment method: The trees are cut to assortments of up to approximately 4 m in length in the stands and transported, usually by hand, to the skidding corridor or the haul road.
final cut: Removal of aged trees in different silvicultural systems (clearcut, shelterwood, selective cutting).
final cut area: Area, where final cut takes place.
full-length method: Delimbing and trimming take place in the stand, whereas bucking and final limbing are carried out only after skidding. Skidding itself can be either by the interrupted or by the continuous transport method.
harvesting method: The harvesting method is named according to the form in which the timber gets logged; e.g. whole-tree method, full-length method, assortment method.
harvesting system: The harvesting system is named according to its stage of mechanization; i.e. partially-, highly-, or fully-mechanized timber harvesting.
hauling: Transport of timber done by means of trucks on roads.
hoisting equipment: All kinds of equipment used to join the load to the hook (here: two ropes with log tongs at their ends and connected to a synthetic sling).
hook-block: Block with integrated hook.
logging: Transport of timber from the stand to the landing done by means of skidders or yarders.
modified full-length method: Delimbing and trimming take place in the stand; only bucking is carried out after skidding. Skidding itself can be either by the interrupted or by the continuous transport method.
processing: Delimbing, cross-cutting (= bucking) and storage are carried out by processors after skidding.
whole-tree method: Felling and trimming are done in the stand. Skidding is to the skidding corridor or the forest road, where processors are used for mechanical conversion.
FAO Forest Harvesting Case Studies
These publications are available in English from the FAO Forest Harvesting and Transport Branch, Viale delle Terme di Caracal-la, 00100 Rome, Italy.
Intermediate Technology in Forest Harvesting: Agricultural Tractor with Winch. Written by P. Alhojärvi. FOPH Publication 1988.01. 45 p. Produced under FAO/Finland Funds-in- Trust project GCP/INT/427/FIN. Country: Tanzania. Includes a set of colour slides. Language: English.
Intermediate Technology in Forest Harvesting: Agricultural Tractor and Forest Trailer with Mechanical Crane. Written by R. Jakobsson. FOPH Publication 1988.02. 40 p. Produced under FAO/Sweden Funds-in-Trust project GCP/INT/343/ SWE. Country: Ethiopia. Includes a set of colour slides. Language: English.
Plastic Log Chute in Steep Terrain Thinning Operations. Written by K. Leppänen. FOPH Publication 1989.05. 30 p. Produced with the cooperation of the Korean Forest Research Institute and the Korea-Germany Forest Management Project. Country: Republic of Korea. Includes a set of colour slides. Language: English.
Integrated Small-Scale Forest Harvesting and Wood Processing Operations. Written by O. Eeronheimo. FOPH Publication 1990.03. 27 p. Produced with the cooperation of the Forestry Commission of Zimbabwe. Country: Zimbabwe. Includes a set of colour slides. Language: English.
Forest Harvesting with Small-Scale Mobile Cable System. Written by O. Eeronheimo. FOPH Publication 1991.02. 16 p. Produced with the cooperation of the Korean Forest Research Institute. Country: Republic of Korea. Language: English.
Reduction of Wood Waste by Small Scale Log Production and Conversion in Tropical High Forest. Written by Risto Kilkki. FOPH Publication 1992.05. 33 p. Country: Papua New Guinea. Language: English.
Cosecha de Hongos en la VII Región de Chile. Written by Juan E. Donoso and Risto Kilkki. FOPH Publication 1992.10. 37 p. Country: Chile. Language: Spanish.
Uso de Bueyes en Operaciones de Aprovechamiento Forestal en Areas Rurales de Costa Rica. Written by William Cordero. FOPH Publication 1994.05. 44 p. Country: Costa Rica. Language: Spanish.
Use of Construction Crane for Wood Extraction in Mountainous Terrain. Written by Norbert Winkler. FOPH Publication 1994.06. 38 p. Country: Austria. Includes a set of colour slides. Language: English.
FOREST
HARVESTING
CASE-STUDY
Use of construction
crane for wood extraction
in mountainous terrain
<section>4</section>
SUMMARY
The case study was carried out in the Republic of Austria at two harvesting areas with 105-year-old and 75-year-old stands of spruce and Picea abies, respectively, amply supplied with natural regeneration in the understorey. The volume harvested on both areas amounted to approximately 178 m^3 with an average tree size of about 2 m^3 at the one area and 1 m^3 at the other.
Two harvesting methods were observed: the modified full-length method and the whole-tree method. Modified full-length method means that delimbing and topping of the trees take place at the felling site and that bucking (or cross-cutting) is carried out after transfer to the forest road. With the whole-tree method, felling and trimming are done in the stand. Skidding is to the skidding corridor or the forest road, where processors are used for mechanical conversion.
The trees or assortments were logged by a construction crane and were piled on the forest road thereafter. If the whole-tree method is applied a wood processor will usually be used for further processing. The team for logging by construction crane consists of the crane operator and two assistants. The crew increases by an operator if a wood processor is used simultaneous-ly.
Time studies were carried out only for the logging phase to assess logging performances which can be expected under particular conditions. The stated productivity rate for the wood processor has been obtained from previous time studies carried out under comparable conditions.
The average productivity rate of the logging operation, excluding setting up and vehicle moves between the locations for setting up, amounted to about 12.5 m^3 per hour with average load volume of 1.2 m^3 and average logging distance of 30 m.
The cost of the logging operation was US$ 8.48/m^3 and increased to US$ 11.11/m^3 if time involved in setting up the crane and lunch-breaks were also considered.
At study area B where the whole-tree method was applied, the production increased to 15.5 m^3 per hour, which corresponded quite well with the production given for the wood processor of about 15 to 17 m^3 per hour according to the average size of assortments. The wood processor usually operates simultaneously with the construction crane so that its performance is limited by the logging operation of the crane.
By using highly mechanized timber harvesting, the felling was carried out by chain-saws. Since the performance rate of felling is very different from that of the logging and processing machines, felling has to be completed by the time the other phases begin in order to permit the use of logging and processing equipment to almost full capacity.
However, due to high rental costs of machines the simultaneous operation of logging and processing requires more planning and supervision in order to avoid longer waiting periods between phases.
A construction crane combined with a wood processor is recommended especially for use in small-scale operations in order to prevent logging damage to the natural regeneration and also for salvage cutting operations after windthrow.
Further time studies should be undertaken in order to find the most suitable types of construction cranes for logging and to optimize operating conditions and the sequence of operations in general.
