<title>FAO Training Series. Construction and maintenance of artisanal fishing harbours and village landings</title>
<section>1</section>
CHAPTER 1
WHAT CONSTITUTES AN IDEAL SITE?
An ideal site should basically offer the following:
1) Total or partial protection from prevailing sea storms;
2) Water depth in the range 1.50 to 3.0 metres within easy access from the shoreline;
3) Good access from the land side for either pedestrian or car traffic.
Preferably, the site should also offer the following:
4) A small tide-level variation;
5) Good beaching facilities in the vicinity(sandy beach);
6) Absence of seaweed.
However, as often happens, this ideal site, say a protected sandy inlet, does not always coincide with the wishes of the local fishermen because the would-be shelter does
not lie within a reasonable walking distance from the village. In such cases, the best use has to be made of the locally existing environmental conditions. When examining a site, however, the first three conditions will usually decide the eventual cost of the shelter. If the site is not protected against the prevailing storm directions, then more money goes into protecting the shelter by building a bigger and stronger breakwater; on the other hand, if the site is fairly well protected, a finger-jetty landing may be more suitable. If the water is too deep, then all the structures will have to be bigger and hence more costly, whilst if the area is too shallow, routine dredging will be needed to keep the shelter open for passage.
Needless to say, the area must also be accessible from the shore side. Sometimes a footpath may suffice, but more usually some sort of road access is necessary for light trucks in both wet and dry seasons.
v5270e01.jpg (47910 byte)
Figure 1. Open beach landing jetty
The optimum structure on a beach is the open or piled jetty; a solid structure would seriously compromise the adjacent beach, including natural vegetation.
v5270e02.jpg (51338 byte)
Figure 2. Make the best use of naturally occurring coastal features
A natural rock outcrop along the coastline offers a good solid base for a small landing without compromising the beach.
TYPICAL SITUATIONS
The scenario for typical situations is vast given that no two locations are identical. The following are just a few simplified examples which should be used only as a guide to selecting an appropriate site for a landing quay or jetty.
OPEN BEACH :
The long open beach (one kilometre and over) facing the ocean is typical of many fishing communities (Figure1). This scenario provides the easiest choice of site since the only suitable landing is a beach landing, or, if the incident waves are not too large - as in the presence of offshore shoals - a simple jetty on piles placed anywhere along the beach closest to the village.
The most important thing to observe is the area where the incoming waves break. The jetty should terminate beyond this region to avoid waves breaking against the jetty and damaging any boats tied up to it. If the waves are big, say over 2 metres high, the jetty has to be very strong to resist the wave action. No attempt should be made at building anything solid on a sandy beach
(such as a breakwater) as this interferes with the free movement of sand and may even lead to the beach disappearing over a few years. If a breakwater is deemed necessary, then expert advice should be sought prior to construction.
SANDY BAYS:
Figure 2 shows a small sandy bay flanked by two headlands. These heads of rock provide both a good foundation on which to build a small quay and a shelter against a prevailing wave direction. Two quays, one on either side of the head, would provide an all weather facility, with either the north side or the south side in use depending on the prevailing wave conditions. Any solid structure sticking out on to the sandy beach should be avoided.
REEFS:
Offshore reefs are a very common feature along some coastlines and on coral islands. As a general rule, a stone breakwater should not be built on the reef but behind it; big incoming waves may wash the breakwater off the reef, Figures 3a & 3b. Besides demolishing the breakwater, the waves also dump the stones over a wide area turning them into a hazard to navigation.
v5270e03.jpg (33307 byte)
Figure 3. Use of natural reefs
v5270e04.jpg (24737 byte)
Figure 4 . Optimum sites for a landing place on a meandering river
A stone breakwater should be built inshore of the reef, as shown in Figure 3d where the reef itself acts as a protection to the breakwater. If the area inshore of the reef does not allow a safety margin of say 30 to 50 metres, then a concrete wall anchored to the reef could be considered, Figure 3c. However, if the reef consists of living coral, then every attempt should be made to preserve it in its natural state as the living coral is a primary source of the material (sand) that makes up the very coastline behind it and an alternative site should be found elsewhere along the coastline. A dead coral reef is of little use as a protection because wave action will eventually break it down into sand and expose the whole coastline to wave attack.
Live coral, on the other hand, constantly re-builds itself.
RIVER BANKS:
Figure 4 shows the proper site for a landing on a meandering (curving) river. Rivers in general carry along tons of silt and sand in suspension (the murkiness seen especially during floods) which they deposit in places where the water flow slows down. When a river flows around a bend, the water on the inside of
the curve flows much slower than the water on the outside of the curve; this phenomenon causes the silt to fall out of suspension and deposit itself on the inner reaches of the curve in the river. On the opposite side, however, the high velocity of the flow ensures that the bank is always under erosion and free from silty deposits. Although the stronger current at the outer bank makes it more difficult to navigate, the lower maintenance costs in dredging may mean the difference between a serviceable landing, open all the year round, and one that has to be dredged permanently at great cost.
RIVER MOUTHS:
River mouths in general offer good protection against bad weather. However, river mouths also tend to shift position, especially in low lying areas where monsoons are active. In such cases, special care should be exercised when deciding on the type of structure and its position in relation to the existing coastline. Any kind of vegetation present along the proposed coastline (especially mangroves) should be preserved as this is the only natural means of controlling the shape of the coastline.
<section>2</section>
CHAPTER 2
WHAT IS A SITE SURVEY?
A site survey is an exercise in "FREEZING" the landscape in the form of a map, much like a camera does with a photograph. Unlike a photograph however, the survey provides much more data than would be seen by the naked eye.
WHY IS A SITE SURVEY NECESSARY?
In the past, many artisanal shelters were built at convenient locations with no particular attention being paid to such environmental factors as wave heights, uncharted reefs, currents, seaweeds, sand drift, etc.
However, many of the then minor problems arising from these factors have now developed into major problems, with some shelters, for example, fouling up with seaweed (shelter mouth facing the wrong direction) or silting up (shelter placed directly on a beach) or just being inaccessible in rough weather (reefs too close to entrance channel) and so on.
Therefore a good site survey is a must if the shelter or landing is to be functional and free of maintenance headaches under general operating conditions.
WHAT DOES THE SITE SURVEY CONSIST OF?
A good site survey should produce the following items:
a) TOPOGRAPHICAL MAP - a map showing all the relevant land details in the vicinity of the proposed shelter, like the village, pathways, roads, wells, electricity supply, beach, rocky outcrops, vegetation, etc;
b) CONTOUR MAP - a map showing the sea bottom depths in and around the proposed shelter, either in grid form or contours;
c) TIDE SURVEY - a table showing the maximum and the minimum tide levels at the proposed location;
d) TIDAL STREAM SURVEY - a map showing presence, location, direction and strength of tidal streams;
e) WAVE HEIGHT SURVEY - a table showing direction, frequency and intensity or heights of waves for the area proposed.
WHAT KIND OF INSTRUMENTS ARE REQUIRED FOR A SURVEY?
Several kinds of instruments are required for a proper survey. These instruments have been divided into two groups, Group A and Group B.
The instruments in Group A are very expensive and should be hired or borrowed from the local Public Works office or contractor, preferably with an operator or surveyor from the same office as it is not the intention here to teach the basics of surveying.
The items in Group B are relatively cheap and some may even be assembled on site from inexpensive materials.
Prices of the items vary considerably depending on the country of origin, brand name, etc.
v5270e05.jpg (29761 byte)
Figure 5. Theodolite (Group A)
The theodolite is the basic instrument for setting out lines and angles over wide distances. The original theodolite was a purely optical instrument; nowadays, however, most theodolites come with an electronic distance-measuring attachment. For the present purposes, the purely optical instrument will suffice.
v5270e06.jpg (30873 byte)
Figure 6. Level (Group A)
The level is the surveyor's second most important instrument. It is used to measure the difference in level of two different points placed far apart.
v5270e07.jpg (12149 byte)
Figure 7. Tripod (Group A)
The tripod is used solely for setting up the theodolite or the level. One tripod is usually used for both items.
When borrowing a theodolite or level from an office, make sure that the tripod anchor bolt fits both instruments as some brands are not interchangeable, i.e, it may fit the theodolite but not the level. In this case a separate tripod is required for each instrument.
v5270e08.jpg (18929 byte)
Figure 8. Staff (Group A)
The staff is to be used exclusively with the level. If the level is new, the accompanying staff will be numbered the right way up; if the level is old (20 years and over) the staff may be numbered upside down. Again, new staffs are made of metal and old ones of timber. Check graduations on staff; they should be in metres.
v5270e09.jpg (20957 byte)
Figure 9. Echosounder (Group A)
The echosounder in question is not the type of echosounder used on fishing boats to locate fish.
This echosounder is a precision instrument and is used solely for the accurate measurement of the water depth.
The Hydrographic Office, the Public Works Department, or the Port Authorities usually own this type of echosounder which they use to monitor the silting up of approach channels to major ports. A portable instrument of this kind should come with a pair of special battery cables, a separate transducer head, one or two rolls of thermal paper and a spare stylus. A fully charged 12 Volt car battery is required to operate it.
v5270e10.jpg (11364 byte)
Figure 10. Optical square (Group B)
The optical square is the first of a number of items which may be purchased by the community.
It is used for giving right-angle offsets to a straight line drawn on the ground.
v5270e11.jpg (12934 byte)
Figure 11. Measuring tape (Group B)
A fibre or plastic tape measure should also be purchased. Typically, these come in 20, 30, 50 or 100 metre lengths and here prices vary considerably. A steel tape, although more precise, requires more maintenance and is much more expensive. For normal setting- out work, however, a plastic tape is sufficient.
v5270e12.jpg (38251 byte)
Figure 12. Compass (Group B)
A small hand-held oil-encased compass should be purchased as well. The compass is required for taking bearings or headings from permanent structure (a hill, point of an island, etc.) when observing natural phenomena, like wind, waves and currents.
v5270e13.jpg (21374 byte)
Figure 13. Ranging rods (Group B)
Ranging rods are simply coloured poles used in tracing out lines on the ground.
They should either be purchased outright or made from pieces of straight pipe, roughly 1.50 metres long, with red and white bands (150 millimetres wide) painted as shown above.
v5270e14.jpg (19552 byte)
Figure 14. Float line (Group B)
A float line consists of a 6 millimetre diameter polypropylene rope with small red coloured cork floats at 5.0 metre intervals and different coloured floats every 10, 20 or 50 metre intervals. It is used to measure distance at sea from a fixed point on the shore line. Ideally, the float line should be about 200 metres long and either stored on a revolving drum or in a round fishing basket.
v5270e15.jpg (18772 byte)
Figure 15. Sounding chain (or lead line)(Group B)
A sounding chain (or lead line) is a normal light chain with a 1 kilogram weight attached to the end. The chain should be graduated at 100 millimetre intervals. A sounding chain is used to measure the depth of water.
It is very easy to assemble from normal metal chain, plastic tags and some wire. The weight should ideally be a lead weight.
v5270e16.jpg (28264 byte)
Figure 16. Other items (Group B)
These are the general items required to complete the list.
The pegs are needed for laying important marks on the ground
Red or white paint may be needed to paint marks in places where the pegs cannot be used, like, for example, on a stone wall or on a tree. The floats and sinkers are required for marking points out at sea.
v5270e17.jpg (23330 byte)
Figure 17. The survey boat (Group B)
Last but not least is the boat itself, required for taking depth readings out in the open sea. The boat should preferably be a timber boat and slightly heavy to counteract light cross-winds. Fibreglass boats tend to be carried off-course very easily.
When using a hand held chain then a pair of oars are necessary. Three people should man the vessel: (1) the pilot, (2) the chain man, and (3) the assistant who records the readings on paper.
GETTING STARTED
As already pointed out, this booklet assumes that if a theodolite, a level or an echosounder have been borrowed or hired from an office, then someone from that office has been made available to operate the instrument.
A - TOPOGRAPHIC MAP
As it is not the intention here to teach basic surveying, the topographic survey will not be discussed.
B - CONTOUR OR GRID MAP
A contour map is a plan of the depth of the sea-bed. Each contour of equal depth is indicated by a line on which the depth, in metres, is clearly marked.
The survey carried out to obtain the contour map is called the HYDROGRAPHIC SURVEY.
In a hydrographic survey, the actual measurement of the depth is the easy part. The main problem is knowing how far the boat is from the coastline when the depth is recorded.
Boat A in Figure 18 for example, has no point of reference in relation to the coast. Boat B on the other hand, is using a calibrated float line (Figure 14) to obtain a "FIX" or position with respect to the coastline, in this case 20 metres away on the straight line between the peg and the buoy.
SETTING UP THE FLOAT LINE:
The float line should be set up or floated out between two points: the driven peg on the coastline and the floating buoy offshore as shown in Figure 18. The peg driven into the ground is simple to set out and should tie into the topographical map of the shore around the proposed shelter.
Two simple methods for setting out the position of the buoy to which the float line must be attached are the Ray method and the Parallel line method.
THE RAY METHOD
The ray method is considered to be the simplest and is ideally suited for confined work, like, for example, when working off a
v5270e18.jpg (34373 byte)
Figure 18. Using a float line to "fix" the position of each sounding (boat B).
solitary offshore rock or a headland. The instruments required are a theodolite together with about 20 buoys.
This method involves setting up the theodolite on a vantage point which may be easily tied in to the topographic survey. At equal angular intervals, say 5 or 10 degrees, a buoy should be dropped in place roughly 200 metres from the theodolite, thus producing a fan in plan form. One end of the float line should then be anchored to the peg under the theodolite and the other to one buoy at a time around the fan. Knowing the position of the peg on the ground and the angle with respect to a fixed mark or benchmark (this benchmark may be any solid construction like an electricity pole, a big tree, the corner of a building, etc.) of each buoy, the depth readings may be plotted on paper in the right place in the form of a fan.
THE PARALLEL LINE METHOD
The parallel line method, though much more accurate, requires considerably more groundwork.
The instruments required are an optical square, 2 ranging rods, about 10 pegs and
buoys, and a 100-metre measuring tape.
This method consists in setting out a straight base line along the beach, say 100 metres long or more, with a ranging rod placed at either end. At every five or 10 metres from one end (5 metres for irregular terrain and 10 metres for flat beach), a steel peg should be driven into the ground and by means of the optical square, a buoy should be dropped offshore at right angles to each peg. Again, one end of the float line should be anchored to one peg and the other to its corresponding buoy offshore. As before, by tying in the base line to the topographic survey, the depth readings may be plotted on paper in the right place.
It is always a good practice to extend the survey a few metres, say 50 to 100, on either side of the proposed shelter or landing.
DEPTH RECORDING
The actual depth of the water may be read by simply lowering the sounding chain in Figure 15 every five or ten metres and the person using the chain calls out the readings to another person in the boat who records the figures on paper in the correct order. This type of recording yields a grid with spot levels only, as shown in Figure 21.
v5270e19.jpg (42396 byte)
Figure 19. The ray method of plotting soundings
If a hydrographic echo-sounder is available with an experienced operator, the actual soundings are recorded on a special paper roll by the instrument itself. In this case, only the operator need accompany the boat pilot on the survey vessel up and down the graduated float lines. A continuous bottom profile, is obtained on a continuous strip chart.
This strip chart could be read to the nearest 5 millimetres.
SOME IMPORTANT TIPS
The sounding chain must reach the bottom in a vertical line; when using a sounding chain the vessel must be still when the actual reading takes place. If the area is subject to strong tidal streams, the weight of the sinker should be increased by attaching further weights to the chain. If a hydrographic echosounder is being used, inbound runs are preferred to outbound runs, Figure 20. By starting an inbound run, say 50 metres away from the float, the vessel's skipper will be in a better position to place the boat parallel to the floating line. In both cases, stormy or windy days should be avoided as should the flood and ebb periods in strong tidal areas. The sea should be perfectly calm.
In rocky areas, before removing the float lines, a swimmer wearing a pair of goggles could then swim up and down the surveyed line looking for submerged rock outcrops or wrecks. He should point these out by placing small floats near them and measure the depth of water over the obstacle. These floats should then by plotted on the survey map by taking a series of fixes from the base line with the theodolite.
CONTOUR MAP OR GRID MAP
A detailed grid map, as shown in Figure 21 is usually sufficient for normal day-to-day coastal work. At local village level no attempt should be made to convert the grid map thus obtained into a contour map;
v5270e20.jpg (44179 byte)
Figure 20. The parallel line method of plotting soundings
v5270e21.jpg (16754 byte)
Figure 21. Soundings plotted using the parallel line method (the "+" sign indicates a rocky outcrop sticking out above mean sea level or m.s.l.)
this should be left to a professional surveyor at the Public Works office. If a hydrographic echosounder was used for the survey, then the same operator is the best person to interpret the strip chart and produce the contour map.
C - TIDE SURVEY
The reader may need the help of an experienced surveyor or extension worker to fully understand the following series of surveys.
It is most important that 'tides' should not be confused with 'tidal streams,' although loose terminology has undoubtedly come to use the word 'tide' for both. A tide is a periodic vertical movement in the level of the sea, whereas a tidal stream, even though resulting from a tide, is a periodic horizontal movement.
Tides affect the depth of water at a place; tidal streams affect navigation courses.As mentioned above, a tide is a periodic vertical movement in the level of the sea. In consequence of the solar cycle, at times of new and full moon, at a place the highest HIGH WATERS and lowest LOW WATERS of a tide cycle - SPRING TIDES - will be experienced and 7¼ days after these, with the first and last quarters of the moon, the lowest HIGH WATERS and the highest LOW WATERS - NEAP
TIDES - will occur. There are thus two separate tide cycles: Height fluctuations from SPRINGS to NEAPS twice each in a lunar month (29 days) and height oscillations of each tide from high water to low water twice each in each lunar day.
This is the basic description of the phenomenon of the tides. There are of course, other factors to be considered. The fact that the orbits of the Earth and the moon are ellipses and not circles must also be taken into account, for these conditions have a corresponding seasonal (equinox) effect upon the height of the tide wave (astronomical tide). Likewise, wind and barometric pressure exercise an uncertain influence on the tide wave: a wind blowing on shore usually tends to raise the height of a tide, a wind blowing off shore tends to lower it; a wind which blows in the same direction as the advancing tide wave crest tends to hasten the time of HIGH WATER at a place and vice versa. The tidal range can be as little as a hundred millimetres to a few metres. In most countries, tide tables are available from the Hydrographic Office or Harbour Office.
Tides are important factors in safe navigation and the navigator, whether he be a fisherman or a ferry captain, constantly asks himself "How much is the depth of water under my boat?".
To ensure safe navigation in and out of man-made ports, all depth soundings are referred to CHART DATUM or LOW WATER SPRING LEVEL and all land heights are referred to HIGH WATER SPRING LEVEL.
To record a tide table for a particular area or coastal village, all that is required is a simple tide gauge installed in a relatively calm place. A tide gauge may be easily made from a piece of steel or plastic tube or timber with a length of plastic tape measure tied to its side - a tailor's plastic tape is ideal, Figure 22.
In a sandy location, the upright pipe or timber should be driven inside an oil drum filled with concrete or stone and the whole buried in a suitably calm place where the tape can be easily read. In a rocky location, the pole or pipe should be concreted inside a hole in the rock. To install the tide board, a surveyor equipped with a level and staff should be called in. By recording the level of the sea a few days before and after a new moon, the low water
spring level may be deduced - the lowest point reached by the water level - and the tide board installed accordingly. By placing the zero mark of the tape at this level the full tidal range may be recorded. Once the tide board has been installed, the level of the sea surface should then be noted, say every hour, for a period of two months and recorded in a table together with the time, date and weather conditions.
E - TIDAL STREAM SURVEY
The tidal phenomenon described above gives rise to tidal streams - periodic horizontal movements of the water. In open ocean this horizontal movement is either non-existent or negligible, but in inshore and coastal waters where there is any appreciable vertical movement a horizontal movement also can be expected.
v5270e22.jpg (22363 byte) v5270e23.jpg (39787 byte)
Figure 22. Tides and methods of measuring tidal variations
v5270e24.jpg (31709 byte)
Figure 23. The influence of land form on the set and drift of a coastal tidal stream
The cause of tidal streams is primarily a change in water levels. The average velocity of tidal streams depends upon the average height of the advancing tide wave: in deep ocean where this height is small the stream rate is either very feeble or negligible; where the height is large the velocity will be correspondingly great. As a tidal stream encounters any obstruction to its to-and-fro movement, its direction and velocity are affected. Thus the tidal stream meeting a headland is deflected around it, and usually immediately off the headland its velocity is locally increased, Figure 23: round the headland its direction is deflected into the bay beyond, causing an indraught of indefinite direction and velocity. In the bay itself the spreading out of the effect of the stream, combined with the fact that the real strength runs from headland to headland leaving comparatively unmoved water in between, causes a diminished velocity.
In the absence of tides, feeble sea currents may be experienced during strong sea storms. These currents, though not very great when compared to tidal streams, should be observed closely because they usually carry weeds uprooted from offshore areas.
In the absence of seaweed or flotsam, currents in general make navigation more difficult but not impossible. In the presence of seaweed or flotsam (including timber and vegetation carried down by rivers), however, navigation may be hindered due to propellers fouling up in weeds. Flotsam, or floating debris, may also prove troublesome if it piles up inside a harbour by a prevailing tidal stream or sea current.
Using a simple can-float with a counterweight hanging about a metre below water level, Figure 24, the strength of a current may be measured by timing it to travel a known distance along the coast, or across a bay. When measuring currents at sea, the following points should be observed:
a) The general direction and duration of the storm or incoming waves, if the currents are storm generated;
b) If seaweed appears, after how many hours of storm does it make its first appearance;
v5270e25.jpg (12007 byte)
Figure 24. Simple can float
c) If flotsam or driftwood appear, where does it land. In many instances, one particular spot or bay may accumulate more debris than adjacent ones, in which case it should be discarded as a potential harbour site.
D - WAVE HEIGHT SURVEY
The precise nature of the types of waves incident on a particular stretch of coastline may be investigated by three different methods:
1) On-the-spot measurement by special electronic equipment - the wave rider buoy which may be hired for a set time from private companies or government laboratories together with an operator;
2) Prediction by statistical methods on a computer - statistical hindcast models which may be performed on a computer if wind data is available for the area;
3) On-the-spot observation by simple optical instruments - the theodolite.
Methods 1 and 2 give very accurate results but are very expensive; they are usually
reserved for big projects where precise wave data is of the utmost importance. Method 3 is not very accurate but is relatively cheaper and lies more within the scope of this booklet.This method differs from Method 1 in one respect only - the observer.
In Method 1 the observer is an electronic instrument capable of recording continuously on a 24-hour basis far out at sea where the waves are not yet influenced by the coastline. In method 3, however, the observer is a normal surveyor with a theodolite placed at a secure vantage point observing waves close to the shoreline. As a result, the wave heights thus recorded will be distorted and suitable only for minor projects.
SETTING UP A WAVE OBSERVATION POINT
The equipment needed consists of two large fluorescent plastic buoys, say 500 millimetres in diameter, a large stone or concrete sinker, a length of 10 millimetre nylon rope, a theodolite, a compass and a watch with a second hand or digital readout.
At a vantage point, which should be just high enough above sea level to be safe and dry during a storm, a stone pillar should be erected with an anchor screw concreted in at the top so that every time the theodolite is set up it faces the same way in exactly the same position, Figure 25.
The two fluorescent plastic buoys should then be moored a known distance (say 100 metres) offshore as shown in the figure. The white buoy keeps the mooring line taut whilst the red buoy floats freely on the incoming waves.
To calibrate the station, the theodolite should be pointed at the buoy on a very calm day. A witness mark should then be placed on something robust (a wall, for example, is preferable to a tree) in such a manner that the observer can repoint the eyepiece at the buoy in its rest position (even if the buoy is actually bouncing up and down with the waves during a storm) at a later date.
In this way the theodolite is not tied up completely with wave height observations but can be used for other work as well in between storms, Figure26.
v5270e26.jpg (24928 byte)
Figure 25. Observation
Pillar in stone and concrete
v5270e27.jpg (28585 byte)
Figure 26. Set up for a wave observation station
v5270e28.jpg (12274 byte)
Figure 27a. View through eye-piece
Figure 27 shows the view through the eyepiece of the theodolite with the base of the buoy just above the central hairline in perfectly calm conditions.
During a storm, the buoy will float up and down with the passage of the waves. By following the base of the buoy with the same centreline hairlines, the theodolite is made to traverse a small angle, Z, as shown in Figure 28. Using basic surveying principles, the distance A and angle Z may be used to calculate the height H of a wave, which as a rule of thumb, is twice the height of the displacement above calm water level. Again, it must be emphasised that this calculation is only very approximate and suitable for minor projects only. During wave height observations, the following additional information should also be recorded:
a) direction of both the incoming waves and wind using the hand-held compass;
b) the time difference between each successive wave peak, also known as wave period using the second hand on a watch;
c) the exact position of the buoy with respect to the coastline;
v5270e29.jpg (15156 byte)
Figure 27b. View through eye-piece during the passage of incoming waves
v5270e30.jpg (28460 byte)
Figure 28. Observing incoming waves during a storm
d) time of the year when each storm was recorded.
As mentioned earlier, various setbacks make this method suitable only for small projects where the anticipated financial outlay is very limited. These setbacks may be summarised as follows:
1) The human observer can only see waves during daylight hours, effectively reducing observation time by at least 12 hours;
2) In very bad weather, strong winds and rain usually reduce visibility to only a few metres making it difficult to keep the buoy under observation continuously;
3) The presence of swell or long period waves is very difficult to detect, especially during a local storm, due to the very long time (period) between peaks, 15 seconds or more.
Having completed the site survey, all the data collected should then be put on a drawing with the help of a surveyor.
Chapter 9 describes some of the ideal scales for the layout drawings and some of the more common drawing conventions used.
Ideally, the layout of the site should include the hydrographic survey (in grid or contour form) and the area where the fishing shelter will be situated.
All forms of access, together with landmarks, should also be plotted on the layout as should nearby utilities, like fresh water wells, water pipes and electricity, if available.
The tide, tidal streams and wave data should be drawn up in table form. Before embarking on the construction phase, however, it would be a good idea to show the drawing to an Engineer from the Public Works office for comments and suggestions.
<section>3</section>
CHAPTER 3
WHAT CONSTITUTES A GOOD FISHING SHELTER?
A good coastal fishing shelter normally consists of a breakwater to protect the moored fishing vessels in rough weather, a quay to moor the boats alongside and discharge the catch, a slipway to scrub paint and service the fishing vessels, various shore facilities and occasionally areas of land reclaimed from the sea to provide space for the activities associated with the fishing effort. In some cases, like for example inside a river mouth or an open beach landing, the breakwater is not needed.
A more detailed description of each component now follows:
v5270e31.jpg (47239 byte)
Figure 29. Complete fishing harbour layout
The following are typical fishing harbour installations:
1] Rubble breakwater, if necessary;
2] Fish handling basin for offloading;
3] Boat servicing basin for maintenance;
4] Quay wall with a min depth of 2,0 m;
5] Slipway with a simple winch;
6] Artisanal refuelling point;
7] Waste oil & slops disposal/separation;
8] Used car tyres recycled as fenders;
9] Tie-up area for boats waiting for spare parts;
10] Toilets and washrooms;
11] Landing/village sewage disposal;
12] Fish hall for sorting, packing/selling and icing fish including ice store or small ice plant;
13] Elevated fresh water supply tanks;
14] Fishermen's net store, engine spares hawker stalls & recreation;
15] Flat area set aside for net repair;
16] Parking area set aside for fishmongers if landing is close to a big market;
17] Aids to navigation
BREAKWATERS
The aim of building a breakwater is to establish an area of calm sea where boats may be safely moored during rough weather. It is hence important for the local community that such a breakwater withstand the pounding of waves generally associated with the area. Failure to do so under normal conditions (that is not counting freak or rare storms) may lead to considerable damage to the fishing fleet. To avoid this happening, great care should be taken when attempting to construct a breakwater at artisanal level with little or no direct help or supervision from the Public Works Department. In fact, on rocky coastlines, breakwaters in depths exceeding three metres should not be attempted without technical assistance due to the complex nature of deeper water waves. On sandy coastlines, on the other hand, expert advice should always be sought, irrespective of water depths.
WHAT DOES A BREAKWATER CONSIST OF?
The typical breakwater consists of a mound of coarse stone, also known as a core, covered or protected by blankets or layers of heavier stones, Figure 30.
THE CORE
The core typically consists of quarry waste without the fine particles (dust and sand) dumped in a heap out into the sea by a dump truck. To facilitate dumping by truck, the core should be ideally four to five metres wide at the top and approximately half a metre above mean sea level, or, in the presence of a large tidal range, above high water spring level, Figures 31a to 31c. The top of the core should be kept level and uniform by a bulldozer to enable the dump trucks to travel the entire length of the breakwater. When tipped into the water, the core rubble comes to rest at a slope of approximately 1 on 1, that is it drops down 1 metre in level for every metre forward. Given the small weight of the rubble in the core, all construction work associated with breakwaters should be postponed to calm seasons.
Chapter 4 describes in detail the type of rock that is suitable for a rubble breakwater.
v5270e32.jpg (32372 byte)
Figure 30. Typical cross-section of a rubble mound breakwater
v5270e33.jpg (35416 byte)
THE FIRST UNDERLAYER
: The first underlayer of stone that protects the core rubble from being washed away usually consists of single pieces of stone whose weight varies between a minimum of half a ton (500 kilograms) to a maximum of one ton (1,000 Kilograms), Figures 32a to 32c.
These are usually laid in a minimum of two layers at a slope which is generally shallower than that of the core; 2.5/1 on the outer slope and 1.5/1 on the inner slope. A slope of 2.5/1 means that the level drops 1 metre for every 2.5 metres forward. The first layer of stone may be placed by a hydraulic excavator as shown in Figure 32b and 32c. A normal crane may also be used if space for the outrigger pads is available; rubber-tyred cranes should never be used on an uneven core without the pads in the extended position.
Figure 32b and 32c shows the excavator placing the heavier stone as quickly as is possible without leaving too much core rubble exposed to wave action. If a storm strikes the site with too much core exposed, there is a grave danger of the core being washed away and spread all over the intended port area.
Figure 32a shows the setup for a given stone profile, in this case a slope of 2.5/1: the distance H is the height of the top of the new sloping layer above the sea bed. A wooden pole should be conveniently placed at the tip of the underlying core and cemented into place with mortar. At a distance equal to 2.5 x H, a heavy stone sinker with a marker buoy should be placed on the sea bed. A brightly coloured nylon string should then be strung from the sinker to the required height on the pole. This procedure should be repeated every 5.0 metres to help the crane or excavator operator with the placing of the top-most layer. A swimmer wearing goggles could ensure that each separate rock is placed within the profile.
THE MAIN ARMOUR LAYER
The main armour layer, as its name implies, is the primary defence of the breakwater against wave attack. Any defects in the quality of the rock (Chapter 4), grading (size too small) or placing (slope uneven or too steep) will seriously put the whole breakwater at risk. Hence great care must be taken when choosing and placing the stone for the main armour.
v5270e34.jpg (58120 byte)
Figure 33 shows main armour stone being placed by a crawler crane or tracked crane which is by far the best equipment for placing large stones. The large stones should be lifted singly using a sling or grab and placed in the water with the aid of a diver or a boat with the crew equipped with a tube fitted with a glass end. The armour layer should be placed stone by stone in a sequence which ensures interlocking; in the figure, for example, stone 2 is held in place between stones 1 and 3 whereas stone 4 is jammed between stones 3 and 5.
This ensures that the wave cannot pull one stone out and cause the upper stones to topple down the slope, breach the armour layer and expose the smaller rubble underneath. To ensure the proper placement of the stones, the swimmer or boatman should direct the crane operator each time a stone is placed until the stone layer breaks the surface. As with the first underlayer, two layers of armour stones are required to complete the main armour layer. Slope profiles should be set up at regular 5 metre intervals using the same procedure as described in Figure 32.
Figures 34a and 34b show how the nearly complete breakwater is closed off layer by layer.
It shows the excavator backtracking to the root of the breakwater closing the top layers simultaneously. The end or head of the breakwater is the most delicate part of the breakwater and requires extra care. The outer slope of 2.5/1 should be increased to 3/1 to improve the stability.
OTHER TYPES OF BREAKWATER
The type of breakwater just described is known as a rubble breakwater because it consists of rubble placed in a special manner. This type of breakwater adapts itself very well to most conditions, especially a varying seabed depth; it can also sustain some damage from storms without completely breaking up.
A rubble breakwater, however, is not always suitable, see Figure 35a. In this case, a rocky reef (not coral) already exists and the ideal solution would be to raise the level high enough to prevent the breaking waves from spilling over the reef and onto the boats moored behind. As mentioned earlier an anchored solid breakwater should be constructed on the rocky outcrop. If the reef consists of living coral, then the breakwater should be built inshore if space exists, away from the coral.
v5270e35.jpg (37325 byte)
Figure 33. Placing the main armour layer
v5270e36.jpg (28626 byte)
Figure 34a. A hydraulic excavator placing the rubble on the crown
v5270e37.jpg (34498 byte)
Figure 34b. The same machine back tracking and closing the crown at the same time
v5270e38.jpg (17771 byte)
Figure 35a. Improving a lagoon basin
v5270e39.jpg (21656 byte)
Figure 35b. Building a higher wall with jute bags filled with concrete and capped
Figure 35c. Building a higher wall in reinforced concrete anchored to the rocky reef
Figure 35b shows a recess cut into the reef and a solid wall built up from jute bags filled with concrete and placed in position. When the concrete has set, say 24 hours later, an in situ capping should be poured all round the bags to form a smooth finished wall. Alternatively, a solid reinforced concrete wall should be built as shown in Figure 35c. In this case it is assumed that a compressor and air-drill are available on site for drilling anchor holes into the reef, say at half-metre intervals. The reinforcement should then be cast into the drilled holes using a very dry mortar mix.
QUAYS AND JETTIES
Inside a fishing harbour,a quay generally lies parallel to the shoreline with boats moored along the sea side only whereas a jetty generally sticks out into the harbour waters and allows boats to be moored on either side. A stand alone jetty in fairly protected waters may constitute the entire landing facility.
QUAYS:
Quays may either be of solid construction or on piles. A typical cross-section of a solid quay, suitable for areas where the sea bed is rocky or sandy, is shown in Figure 36. An alternative artisanal cross-section is shown in Figure 39.
In areas where the sea-bed is very soft, like river banks or mangrove areas, then a piled quay is more suitable. A typical cross-section for a piled quay is shown in Figure 40. In the presence of large tidal variations on the other hand, the usual approach is to have a floating landing. A floating landing is also suitable on lakes, where the difference between high water and low water, from year to year, may be a few metres. Figures 44 to 46 show typical details of floating structures. A more detailed description of each type now follows. The reader is referred to Chapter 4 which gives a description of the type and quality of the materials that should be employed in construction works in a marine environment.
The reader is also referred to Chapter 6 which gives a general description of the types of fittings and their anchorage requirements. Before embarking on a project, a careful study should also be made of the type of plant available as this will influence the final cost of the structure.
Figure 36 shows the typical cross-section of a solid quay built from concrete blocks laid on a screeded bed of stone chippings or aggregate. Depending on the size of the crane available, the concrete blocks are cast on the ground and 28 days later (standard curing period) lifted and placed in the water in a straight line to form the quay wall. Each pillar of concrete blocks should not touch neighbouring pillars so as to be free to settle independently into the screeded stone bed. To prevent the propellers of fishing vessels scouring the screeded stone bed, a concrete filled jute bag should be placed at the toe of the quay all along the quay wall. A diver is usually employed to carry out these operations.
Each pillar of blocks should break the surface approximately 500 mm above mean sea level, where a capping block is then cast joining 5 pillars together. The capping block should contain all the holes and recesses for the quay fittings, such as fenders, bollards and mooring rings.
The area behind the quay wall should then be filled in with small rubble. No dust, silt, clay or mud should be dumped behind the block wall as this will leak out from the gaps between the block pillars and lead to settlement of the paving.
v5270e40.jpg (30712 byte)
Figure 36. Typical cross-section of blockwork quay
v5270e41.jpg (25377 byte)
Figure 36a. Blockwork quay
v5270e42.jpg (38649 byte)
Figure 37. Typical block dimensions and lifting methods
v5270e43.jpg (41980 byte)
Figure 38. Preparing a screed foundation for a blockwork quay
Figure 39 shows the cross section of an alternative quay which does not require the services of a crane.
Instead of uniform blocks of concrete, use is made of jute bags filled with wet concrete, and placed under water by a diver. Strictly speaking, the screeded stone bed is not required in this case; however, a layer of coarse aggregate is recommended anyway as this increases the stability of the foundation layer against scour by propellers. Unlike the previous type of quay wall however, it does not have to be screeded perfectly level. Obstacles, like uneven sea bed or large boulders, may be included in the foundation if absolutely necessary; otherwise they should either be removed or the quay wall diverted away from them.
The jute bags, once filled with concrete and stitched shut, should be placed in the pattern shown to ensure a solid construction. Care should be taken not to overfill the bags; when laid flat and squeezed lightly, they should present a horizontal flat side on which to place the next layer of bags.
v5270e44.jpg (45045 byte)
Figure 39. Typical details of a shallow quay in jute bags
(A) Correctly filled jute bag
(B) Incorrectly filled jute bag
Figure 40 shows a piled quay suitable for a mud or clay shoreline. This kind of structure is fragile compared to the solid quay and should only be built in very calm areas.
Timber piles, 100 to 150 mm in diameter, should be driven into the mud using a pile driver similar to that shown in Figure 41.
The piles should be driven on a standard 1000 to 1500 mm grid depending on the size of the piles and timber beams available.
If a width larger than 1500 mm is required, then a similar construction should be built in front of the first one instead of increasing the distance between the piles.
Once the piles have been driven into the ground, the shore side should be filled in with coarse quarry material as shown in the cross-section to increase the stability of the quay and prevent rotting flotsam from being trapped between the quay and the shore.
All the timber used in this type of structure should be treated against borers as described in Chapter 4.
All metal fittings should be galvanised steel (coated in zinc) or brass. Only countersunk screws and bolts are suitable.
Nails should not be used in any part of the deck.
v5270e45.jpg (37221 byte)
Figure 40. Piled jetty
v5270e46.jpg (26971 byte)
Figure 41. Simple piling rig for soft clay ground
Figure 42 shows two typical concrete finger jetties suitable for areas of relative calm, like sheltered tidal beaches or inside existing harbours.
In general, if the concrete is made properly, the structure will outlast a similar one built in timber.
Figure 42a shows a jetty suitable for areas with large tidal variations where simple mass concrete (no reinforcement) pylons may be cast on a gravel bed at low tide. Precast reinforced concrete or plain timber decking is then anchored across the pylons to form the jetty.
If a piling rig is available, precast reinforced 300 x 300 mm square piles may be driven into the sea bed and beams cast across the pile heads, Figure 42b. As before, precast reinforced concrete or plain timber decking may then be anchored across the beams. The reader is referred to Chapter 4 for the manufacture of durable marine concrete. Coral aggregate (stone and sand) is not suitable for steel reinforced sections. All the steel reinforcement used inside concrete sections (piles, beams or slabs) should have a minimum cover of concrete of 50 mm. All exposed fittings should be galvanised.
Figure 42. Two types of finger jetty
v5270e47.jpg (44895 byte)
Figure 43 shows typical land reclamation details. Figure 43a shows how land can be reclaimed by tipper trucks using quarry waste and Figure 43b shows reclamation by dredger, see Chapter 5.
When reclaiming land from the sea using dredged or mined sand, great care should be taken to avoid polluting the sea with suspended dust. Because the fill material also contains very fine dust, reclamation projects usually give rise to light-obstructing plumes of suspended sediment around the construction area which are harmful to certain forms of marine life (coral) which need bright sunlight to survive. Reclaimed material has to be protected from leaching away into the sea by the use of geotextile filters Figure 43c of adequate porosity. Each patch of geotextile filter laid should either be stitched or overlap the previous patch by at least 300 mm. In both cases, the geotextile filter has to be anchored to the side of the reclaimed bank using weights ( not pegs) which may then be incorporated into the rubble retaining bank consisting of carefully placed stones weighing not less than 500 Kg.
Punctured filter should be patched prior to placing under water.
v5270e48.jpg (35291 byte)
Figure 43. Land reclamation details
v5270e49.jpg (47814 byte)
Figure 44. Stand alone finger jetty in a tidal area. Solid part of the landing must not project further than naturally occurring obstacles, in this case a rocky outcrop
Figure 45 shows a floating platform anchored in position by four vertical piles and connected to dry ground by a gangway pivoted to a frame. The platform is free to rise and fall with the tide.
In areas where water level variations occur over a long stretch of time, such as lakes, a different anchoring system is required because the coastline recedes or advances over a large distance.
Figure 46 shows a typical floating platform made from empty oil drums and timber sections. Refer to Chapters 4 and 8 for the protection of timber and the steel drums immersed in water. Plastic drums need no treatment.
Figure 47 shows such a platform held in place by four prepositioned anchors and two spuds. The two parallel mooring lines should pass over the platform, through a hand-operated winch, and back to the remaining two anchors. In this way the platform can be winched out as the water level drops and the shoreline recedes from the original coast. The platform should be connected to the shore by a series of interconnected floating gangways which either float on the water or come to rest on the dry bed as the water level drops.
v5270e50.jpg (37841 byte)
Figure 45. Floating platform landing
v5270e51.jpg (59963 byte)
Figure 46. Float using oil drums
v5270e52.jpg (36660 byte)
Figure 47. Floating landing - Lake side application
The platform should also be equipped with at least 2 spuds to prevent it from swaying during high winds or strong currents. Each spud should consist of a heavy, pointed, steel pipe with holes drilled every 300 mm for grips to be inserted at the right level. The spuds can thus be lifted off the bottom until the platform is repositioned in deeper water and then dropped again.
The anchors should be placed as far away as possible from the platform and in no case less than 5 times the depth below the platform; in other words, if the depth of water below the platform is 4 metres, then the anchors must be dropped away at least 4m x 5 = 20m away.
The anchors themselves should preferably be made of steel and weigh as much as is possible to handle without the aid of cranes.
Figure 48 shows a typical timber finger jetty on piles with boats moored on both sides. This kind of jetty is very similar to the one described in Figure 40.
The piles can be made of timber, steel or reinforced concrete. Ideally, the deck should be built in timber or concrete.
v5270e53.jpg (33732 byte)
Figure 48. Timber finger jetty
SLIPWAYS
The traditional slipway in many small beach-side communities is still the natural beach where boats are hauled ashore for scrubbing, cleaning and repair. However, inside a harbour and in the absence of a large tide,a beach is not always practical and a man-made slope or slipway is required.
A typical slipway consists of an opening in the quay wall across which a solid smooth surface is cast in concrete.
Ideally, the slipway should not be less than 5.0 metres across and the slope not steeper than 10 percent (or 1 on 10 slope) and the tip should dip at least 1.50 metres into the water as shown in Figure 49. To build a slipway, a bed of fine stone chippings or gravel should first be laid to the required slope and levelled. From mean sea level up the slope, a 300 mm thick slab should be cast in one piece in concrete. From mean sea level down to 1.50 metres below, the slope should be covered in precast concrete slabs, at least 250 mm thick. The slabs should not exceed 500 x 500 mm and care should be taken to lay them evenly on the prepared bed
v5270e54.jpg (39841 byte)
Figure 49. Typical cross-section of slipway
Figure 50. Slipway precast slabs
of gravel. The tip of the slipway should be protected by concrete-filled jute bags against scouring as shown in Figure 49. If boat trailers are not available for launching the vessels, then 150 x 150 mm timber sections should be laid down and bolted to the concrete slope to act as a rubbing surface for the timber keels. Figure 50 shows typical dimensions for the interlocking precast slabs required for laying under water.
Figure 51, on the other hand, shows how a permanent slipway should be built on a sandy beach. Timber piles should be driven in two straight lines at 500 mm intervals and each bent spanned by a thick timber section. Chapter 4 describes in detail the types of timber suitable for immersion in water. The cross members or sleepers should be screwed into the vertically cut piles with heavy duty screws in stainless steel or brass. Light rails or timber runners should then span across the sleepers for a trolley to run up and down the slipway.
To haul the vessels up the slope, a hand operated 1 to 2 ton winch is usually sufficient. The winch should be bolted to a block of concrete (separate from the slipway slab) at least 500 mm thick.
v5270e55.jpg (32564 byte)
Figure 51. Beach slipway
<section>4</section>
CHAPTER 4
TYPICAL CONSTRUCTION MATERIALS
The basic construction materials required for marine work consist of cement, aggregates, reinforcing steel, rubble, timber or steel piles, fastenings, timber wales or sections and some other minor items.
Cement is a green-grey powder which sets hard within a few hours after the addition of water and which therefore acquires strength with time. There are many types of cement available on the market, the most common type being known as OPC, or Ordinary Portland Cement. The most suitable type of cement for marine works, however, is SRC or Sulphate Resisting Cement. Cement typically comes in 50 kilogram paper bags.
v5270e56.jpg (8759 byte)
Figure 52. Cement
In making good concrete, the aim is to bind the individual pieces of stone with a cement paste so as to produce a mix as dense and as non-porous as possible. Hence, the aggregate (both the sand and the stone) has to be hard for the concrete to be durable. Good aggregate can only just be scratched by a steel penknife. Concrete made with soft coral stone is not durable and will disintegrate with time.
Crushed aggregate is angular in shape whereas river or beach gravel is rounded. Aggregate obtained from the sea will contain salt which is harmful to concrete and must be washed repeatedly with fresh water before being used in concrete. Coral aggregate should only be used as a last resort and then only if environmental conditions permit the harvest of living coral.
v5270e57.jpg (17331 byte)
Figure 53. Aggregate
The most reliable source of rubble for construction is the quarry. A quarry is usually worked for a whole range of sizes of stone and the yield of the right sizes depends a lot on the experience of the person carrying out the blasting with explosives as well as the geological homogeneity of the ground. As with the aggregate, durability depends on the hardness of the stone. Again, as a general rule, a steel penknife should just be able to scratch the stone. If the stone scratches very easily then the stone rubble is not suitable for breakwaters or quays or any structure in contact with sea water and an alternative supply should be sought.
v5270e58.jpg (19692 byte)
Figure 54. Rubble
Reinforcing steel is used inside a concrete section to improve the strength of the concrete. In marine work, steel should have a minimum concrete cover of 50 millimetres to prevent sea-water corrosion.
Typically, steel bars come in a range of diameters, from a little as 6 millimetres to 32 millimetres. The length of the bars is usually limited to 12.0 metres.
Reinforcement is also available in welded steel mesh. Steel bars are usually supplied by weight and weights (in kilograms per metre length of bar) of the most commonly used sizes are:
6 mm diam 0.222 kg/metre
8 mm diam 0.395 kg/metre
10 mm diam 0.617 kg/metre
12 mm diam 0.888 kg/metre
14 mm diam 1.208 kg/metre
18 mm diam 1.998 kg/metre
20 mm diam 2.466 kg/metre
24 mm diam 5.551 kg/metre
v5270e59.jpg (22916 byte)
Figure 55. Steel
v5270e60.jpg (29046 byte)
Figure 56. Cement and steel storage
HINTS ON GOOD SITE PRACTICE
Just as a good cook uses the best ingredients fresh from the market, a few basic housekeeping rules on the construction site will ensure that the building materials employed remain suitable for construction purposes:
a) cement should not be stored on site for more than six weeks. It should be used as quickly as possible;
b) cement and steel should be temporarily stored about 150 mm off the ground and covered by waterproof sheets tied down to pegs as shown in Figure 56;
c) enough space should be left under the sheets for air to circulate to avoid water from condensing onto the cement bags;
d) cement from punctured bags should not be used for construction;
e) cement and steel should not be stored in places where water collects in puddles after rain;
f) if rain is forecast for the day, concrete work should be postponed;
g) cement, cement paste and fresh concrete should not be touched with bare hands; Cement in any of these forms may crack bare skin and lead to bleeding and infection.
In marine construction frequent use is made of piles in either steel, timber or reinforced concrete, Figure 57.
Piles are necessary when the ground is very soft (marsh, swamp or muddy river bed) in which case a number of piles are driven into the ground to form a stable foundation.
To avoid deterioration, all piles must be protected; steel piles should be painted with special epoxy paints, timber piles should be treated with creosote oil and concrete piles should be made with SRC or sulphate resisting cement.
v5270e61.jpg (13021 byte)
Figure 57. Piles
Timber fastenings are required for holding timber sections together.
Depending on the actual size of the timber members, fastenings should consist of either bolts or screws and not nails. When nails corrode they snap suddenly without warning.
v5270e62.jpg (19245 byte)
Figure 58. Fastening
Figure 58a shows the hexagonal bolt which must be either made of galvanised steel or better still of brass or stainless steel.
Figure 58b shows a heavy duty hexagonal screw, again made of brass or galvanised steel.
Figure 58c shows the normal counter-sunk screw which is also available in brass.
The basic construction material nowadays is concrete and the science of mixing the various ingredients that make up concrete is called mix design.
WHAT CONSTITUTES A GOOD CONCRETE MIX?
A proper mix is one that produces a dense and strong concrete which is durable and resistant to the elements. Such a mix is a balanced recipe composed of cement, fine aggregate (sand), coarse aggregate (stone) and fresh water.
Cement:
As described earlier, the cement should be O.P.C. or better still, S.R.C. not older than six weeks.
Fine aggregate:
Sand should either be washed beach sand or crushed aggregate from a nearby quarry. Either sand must be free from excessive quantities of silt and dust.
Coarse aggregate:
The stone aggregate should not be larger than 50 millimetres and must be hard, non-porous and free from excessive quantities of dust. Coral should not be used for aggregate because it is too soft, porous and contains sea salt which is harmful to steel reinforcing bars.
Water:
The water used in the concrete mix should be clean drinking water free from impurities such as salt.
PROPORTIONS OF CEMENT AND AGGREGATES
The proportion of cement to aggregate depends on the strength, impermeability and durability required. Experience has shown that the equivalent of a 1:2:4 (that is for every 1 kg of cement, 2 kg of sand and 4 kg of stone aggregate) concrete is suitable for general construction purposes in cost and strength. Workable mixtures richer in cement than 1:2:4, for example, 1:1:2, are much stronger but more expensive owing to the higher content of cement.
Instead of simply using a rich mixture it is generally more economical to obtain the necessary good concrete by careful grading and mixing of the aggregates and water in a normal 1:2:4 mix.
THE 1:2:4 CONCRETE MIX
As its name implies, a 1:2:4 mix is a mix of 1 part cement, 2 parts sand and 4 parts coarse aggregate by weight.
Using a standard 50 kg cement bag as base measure, a 1:2:4 mix by weight becomes a 50kg + 100kg + 200kg batch. However, as it is not always possible to weigh such large amounts of aggregate, an equivalent mix by volume may be used.
EQUIVALENT MIX BY VOLUME
To every 50 kg bag of cement, 0.07 cubic metres of sand and 0.14 cubic metres of stone should be added.
MIXING BY VOLUME
To mix the above materials, a wooden measure box should be constructed with the inside dimensions as shown in Figure 59. Sand and coarse aggregate should then by shovelled in and a straight edge run over the top of the box as shown in the bottom figure.
Each level box measures 0.035 of a cubic metre. Therefore, a 1:2:4 mix is equivalent to:
1 standard 50 kg cement bag
2 box measures of sand
4 box measures of coarse aggregate
v5270e63.jpg (32613 byte)
Figure 59. Mixing concrete by volume
Depending on the size of the concrete mixer, the batching or mixing should follow the above proportions. So, if the mixer is big, for every 2 bags of cement, 4 boxes of sand and 8 boxes of stone should be added.
ADDING WATER
The strength and workability of concrete depend to a great extent on the amount of water used in mixing. There is an optimum amount of water for each mix that produces a concrete of greatest strength.
A smaller amount than the optimum decreases the workability of the concrete leaving it too stiff to work. More than the optimum amount increases the workability (by making it more fluid) but decreases the strength and durability.
The optimum amount of water is influenced by:
a) The origin and quality of the aggregate (concrete with porous aggregate requires more water than normal);
b) The amount of silt or dust in the sand;
c) The humidity of the aggregate (if the aggregate was exposed to rain the previous day then less water is required the next day).
The most practical method of assessing the optimum amount of water required to make the strongest possible concrete is to carry out trial tests by adding water bit by bit to the mixer and testing the concrete as follows.
Using a piece of smooth, thin metal sheet, an open-ended truncated cone should first be constructed as shown in Figure 60a. Ideally, the seam should be welded vertically down one side, two handles should be welded on either side and the inside rendered very smooth. The inside should be kept well-oiled to prevent it from rusting.
When just enough water has been added to the concrete mixer for the concrete to appear wet but stiff, the cone should be filled in three successive layers with some concrete and compacted by hand using a 20 mm steel
bar. The top should then be trowelled level and the cone lifted off. As soon as the cone is lifted off, the concrete cone will slump or settle down as shown in the figure. The ideal slump for most practical purposes is 50 mm.
Should the concrete not slump by 50 mm a little bit more water should be added to the mixer and the whole test repeated until the slump reaches 50 mm. Water should be added half a litre at a time by means of a measuring can and not directly with a water hose. See Appendix 1 for handling and placing concrete.
v5270e64.jpg (14794 byte)
Figure 60. Testing workability of fresh concrete
v5270e65.jpg (40332 byte)
TIMBER
Timber is cut and machined from trees, themselves the product of nature and time. Man has found timber to be a cheap and effective material and continues to use it in vast quantities. However, criticisms levelled at timber as a material are a consequence of man's misuse of one of nature's most important products. Unlike so many other materials, especially those used in construction, timber cannot be manufactured to a particular specification; instead, the best use has to be made of the material already produced, though it is possible to select timbers with the most desirable range of properties.
DURABILITY OF TIMBER
Durability is a term which has different meanings for many people: it is defined here in the broadest sense to embrace the resistance of timber to attack from salt water, corrosion of fastenings, fungi and insect attack.
v5270e66.jpg (50705 byte)
Figure 61. Cross-section of a tree trunk
A closer look at Figure 61 shows that a tree trunk consists of two distinct sections; the inner section or heartwood, and the outer section or sapwood.
In some of the hardwoods, the sapwood is characterised by the presence of large diameter vessels or pores, with only a few fibres present. In the heartwood, the pore diameter is considerably smaller and the bulk of the tissue comprises fibres. It is not surprising, therefore, that only the heartwood with its low porosity, is suitable for marine work.
MARINE BORERS
Timber used in sea or brackish (salty) water is subject to attack by marine-boring animals such as the shipworm and the gribble. Marine borers are widely distributed, but they are particularly destructive in tropical waters, Figure 62. Most timbers do not have sufficient resistance to marine borers to be used untreated. Figure 62 shows how the gribble and the shipworm or Teredo destroy timber structures.
The timbers listed below are generally recognized as being resistant to marine-borers. Some particularly resistant types of timber are obtained from tropical rain
forests which are fast disappearing. Tropical rain forests are a non-renewable source of timber and should be protected from exploitation. Hence, preference should be given to species grown in plantations, which are a renewable source.
CONTINENT SOURCE COMMON NAME
AFRICA PLANTATION OPEPE
ASIA PLANTATION TEAK
AUSTRALIA INDIGENOUS IRONBARK
AUSTRALIA PLANTATION SOUTHERN BLUE GUM
S. & CENTRAL RAIN FORESTS GREENHEART
AMERICA RAIN FORESTS RED LOURO
v5270e67.jpg (25893 byte)
Figure 62. Damage to timber piles by borers
Figure 62a. Wood Gribble and "Hour Glass" effect on piles
Figure 62b. Teredo Shipworm and internally bored pile
As explained before, the timber may be divided into two types: the heartwood and the sapwood. The heartwood of the above-mentioned species may be used untreated for marine piling and jetty construction. Besides being very dense with negligible porosity, the heartwood also secretes toxic substances which protect it from attack.
On the other hand, the sapwood of the above is both more porous and lacks the protective toxic secretions. For marine work it is advisable to use timber that has been impregnated under pressure with preservatives. Suitable preservatives are coal tar creosote, creosote-coal tar solutions and copper/chrome/arsenic water borne mixtures. Experience has shown that when timber is thoroughly impregnated with one of the above preservatives it will last a very long time. For this reason it is best to choose a timber which is easy to treat and to repeat (by dipping) the treatment after the sections have been cut and holes drilled into them. As the ambient conditions and timber resources vary from place to place, advice should be sought from the nearest Forest Products Commission or Office regarding the most suitable renewable timber to use.
DURABILITY
GRADE OF DURABILITY APPROX. LIFE IN CONTACT WITH GROUND (YEARS)
Very durable more than 25
Durable 15 to 25
Moderately durable 10 to 15
Non-durable 5 to 10
Perishable less than 5
Timber in direct contact with sea or brackish water (jetty piles for example) should be heartwood of one of the species listed as "DURABLE", Opepe or Ironbark. Timber used externally but not in direct contact with sea or brackish water (jetty deck) may be a "DURABLE" or "MODERATELY DURABLE" which has been treated with a preservative, like oak, chestnut, Douglas fir or maritime pine.
v5270e68.jpg (20695 byte)
Figure 63. On-site treatment by dipping
Figure 63 above shows a series of oil drums split in half and welded together to form a long bath. The timber sections to be treated should first be cut to the required size and bolt holes drilled at the appropriate points. The section should then be immersed in a bath of coal tar creosote for at least 24 hours. After the required treatment, the timber should be allowed to dry before handling.
DURABILITY TABLE
Class Moderately Durable
Life 10-15
Durable
Very Durable
over 25 in years
Hardwoods: 
Oak Agba Afrormosia
Sapele Idigbo Afzelia
Seraya Mahogany^1 Ekki
Walnut^2 Oak^3 Greenhart
Mahogany^4 Chestnut Iroko
Jarrah
Makore
Opepe
Teak
Softwoods: Larch Pitch pine
Douglas fir Yew
Pine^5 Western red cedar
[1] American, [2] European & African, [3] European, [4] African, [5] Maritime.
Note that all sapwood is perishable, unless treated. Only the heartwood of the species in the last column are naturally resistant to marine borers.
<section>5</section>
CHAPTER 5
TYPICAL CONSTRUCTION EQUIPMENT
INTRODUCTION
There are several types of equipment available for marine construction; a description of the more common types follows together with some hints on how to best utilize some of the equipment for specific marine-related duties.
The high cost of purchase, however, puts most of this equipment beyond the reach of village cooperatives, artisanal contractors and small general building contractors.
Hence, in this book it is assumed that most of the heavy plant will be made available through the Government or Public Works Department, or local contractors, and this chapter should be used as a guide to the general type of equipment required for marine work. When planning the construction of a marine related project, it would be useful to know before hand what type and size of construction plant is available in the vicinity of the village or landing.
v5270e69.jpg (34788 byte)
Figure 64. Crawler crane
Figure 65. Lifting attachments
Figure 64 shows a typical crawler crane. As its name implies, a crawler crane crawls forward on steel tracks. This is the most ideal type of crane for building breakwaters because it is very stable, requires no outriggers (stabilisers which extend from the crane chassis of all rubber tyred cranes) and is less likely to bounce off an uneven rubble surface into the water! The most important characteristic is the nominal lifting capacity as this will dictate the maximum outreach that the crane can handle with a given jib size.
Figure 65 shows some typical lifting attachments which may be hooked-up to a crawler crane.
Figure 65a shows a rock grapple used to pick up and place heavy pieces of rock.
Figure 65b shows a common clam-shell used to dredge the sea bottom. Most clam-shells have a soft metal (usually lead) lip to make them as watertight as possible; without this lip, most clam shells leak and cannot be used to dredge fine sand, silt or mud. A clam-shell should not be used to place rock on breakwaters.
Figure 65c shows how to sling a piece of rock with a quick release attachment to enable the crane driver to release the rock underwater.
v5270e70.jpg (24164 byte)
Figure 66. Dragline
Figure 67. Hydraulic excavator
Figure 66 shows a crawler crane with a drag-line attachment. As its name implies, a drag-line consists of a sliding bucket which is dragged along the ground or sea bottom and is used for dredging.
The drag-line used to be the standard form of near-shore dredging until the hydraulic excavator (a much smaller machine and more compact to transport over long distances) made its appearance.
Figure 67 shows a typical hydraulic excavator. This machine now forms the backbone of most marine work due to its adaptability.
Most makes offer interchangeable buckets and fore-arm lengths; for normal marine work a long fore-arm is required to reach as far away as possible.
Hydraulic excavators can also be mounted on special barges (see Figure 69) to act as dredgers, in which case a large bucket should be attached to the fore-arm.
v5270e71.jpg (28474 byte)
Figure 68. Cutter suction dredger
Figure 69. Barge mounted excavator
Figure 68 shows a typical cutter-suction dredger. A cutter-suction dredger consists of a rotary cutter coupled to a suction pipe; the cutter cuts through soft rock (like coral, for example) and the suction pipe draws the broken rock through pipes and discharges the dredged material some distance away. This piece of equipment is very costly and should not be used unless considerable dredging is involved. A dismountable (can be broken down into four or more pieces for transport) cutter-suction dredger has no propulsion and has to be assisted by a tug boat or fishing boat.
Figure 69 shows a hydraulic excavator mounted on a steel pontoon. This combination of equipment is ideally suited for shallow excavations and general marine work. Prior to choosing or building a pontoon for a particular excavator, stability calculations should be performed by an experienced engineer to determine the suitability of the barge for the size of the excavator and the number and type of lashings needed to hold the excavator in place. The excavator should not be operated without first being lashed down securely to the pontoon deck. A second vessel, or open barge, is usually required in conjunction to haul the dredged material away.
v5270e72.jpg (26869 byte)
Figure 70. Bulldozer
Figure 70 shows a typical bulldozer which comes with either a bucket or a simple blade. This kind of machine is a necessity when dumping rubble at sea to build breakwaters because the core material is kept level after dumping using a bulldozer. The bulldozer brings us to the end of the list of the most common types of machines required for marine construction. A special point to notice is that all the machines run on tracks and not rubber wheels. It is good practice to rinse the tracks with fresh water at the end of a working day if the tracks came into contact with sea water.
v5270e73.jpg (21317 byte)
Figure 71. Tractor/trailer or truck equivalent
If heavy duty tipper trucks are not available, normal agricultural tractors and trailers may be used as trucks for delivering rubble, aggregate or sand to a construction site. Considerably more use of direct labour is involved but at local village level this should not present any problems. The trailers should preferably be made of steel and should be protected on the inside with timber planking. The timber prolongs the useful life of the trailer by absorbing the impacts of individual stones thrown onto the trailer. Care should be exercised when traversing the uneven surface of a rubble core with all rubber-tyred vehicles.
v5270e74.jpg (23722 byte)
Figure 72. Petrol-driven concrete mixer
Ideally, all concrete should be mixed using a proper concrete mixer. Concrete mixers come in various sizes depending on the amount of fresh concrete required. For normal village level use, a small mixer like the one shown in Figure 72 should be purchased. Such mixers run on either a petrol or diesel driven engine and, if maintained properly, provide many years of trouble-free operation. Extreme care should be devoted to maintaining the mixing drum clean of set concrete as this impairs the efficiency of the mixing operation.
v5270e75.jpg (38754 byte)
Figure 73 Floating platform
Figure 73 shows a floating platform constructed from used oil drums. Floating platforms may also be constructed in timber with plastic drums as additional floats.
If a welding generator is available on site then a welded steel platform on oil drums should be constructed.
Platforms are general purpose items and are used to transport materials and light machinery to inaccessible places. Refer to Chapter 8 for corrosion prevention measures.
Figure 74 shows a whole range of equipment which in some cases may be worth purchasing and keeping for general village use.
Figure 74(a) shows a small diesel driven air compressor which may be used to power a number of air tools like chisels, drills, hammers, saws, pumps, etc. A typical compressor should supply about 5,000 litres of air per minute. For marine work, air-driven tools are safer than electric-powered tools.
Figure 74(b) shows a portable diesel driven generator/welding unit. A typical unit should supply about 12 KVa.
Figure 74(c) shows a typical petrol driven concrete vibrator with a 150 diameter vibrating needle, mandatory for all types of concrete work.
Figure 74(d) shows a common petrol driven compactor used for compacting pavements and road beds.
Figure 74(e) shows a typical small piling winch. The winch comes with a drop weight capable of being released quickly for pile driving purposes.
v5270e76.jpg (22268 byte)
Figure 74. Range of equipment for general village use
Figure 74a. Compressor
Figure 74b. Generator/Welding set
Figure 74c. Concrete vibrator
Figure 74d. Compactor
Figure 74e. Simple piling rig
Another useful item of equipment is an oxyacetylene cutting torch consisting of an oxygen and an acetylene cylinder mounted side by side on a portable frame. Generally two oxygen cylinders are required for every acetylene cylinder.
<section>6</section>
CHAPTER 6
FITTINGS, SERVICES AND NAVIGATION AIDS
INTRODUCTION
Once the breakwater and quays or jetties have been built, various minor mechanical components are required for the shelter to function efficiently and safely. These components may be divided into three main groups depending on their function inside the harbour:
(a) mooring fittings;
(b) shore facilities;
(c) navigation aids.
The mooring fittings include the bollards, tyre fenders and mooring lines and sinkers. The shore facilities include the refuelling station, the slipway winch, the fishermen's rest and net lofts and possibly a market stall and toilets. The navigation aids consist of the two marine lanterns (one red and one green) placed at the entrance to the fishing shelter. Other lights may also be required to indicate navigation channels or dangerous reefs.
v5270e77.jpg (19894 byte)
Figure 75. Simple pipe bollard
Shown above is a simple method of constructing a steel bollard which may then be cast in concrete. Taking a basic 100 diameter steel pipe, two holes should be cut to allow a piece of 20 diameter steel bar to pass right through. The lower end of the tube should then be slotted as shown to increase the grip inside the concrete. Once the bar has been inserted through the holes, it should be held in place by a spot weld on either side and the tube filled with concrete. The bollard should then be inserted in the fresh concrete leaving about 300 millimetres exposed.
v5270e78.jpg (19847 byte)
Figure 76. Mooring ring
Figure 77. Anchor bolts (drilled)
The mooring ring is a cheaper alternative to the steel bollard. It consists of a length of 20 millimetre steel bar bent into a ring and welded, and held in place as shown in the figure above. The main advantage of mooring rings over conventional bollards is that they keep the quay free of obstacles. Both bollards and mooring rings should be placed not more than 5.0 metres apart.
All types of shore-moorings made from steel (pipe bollards and mooring rings) should be protected from corrosion.
See Chapter 8 on corrosion for possible types of treatment.
Whenever possible, fenders should be fitted to the capping of a hard quay to prevent damage to moored fishing vessels. Anchor bolts are needed to fix the fenders to the quay.
There are two kinds of anchor bolts; one is used for existing quays, where the concrete capping block already exists, and the other for capping blocks which are about to be cast.
The first kind of anchor bolt is the "RAWL" bolt shown above in Figure 77 which can be bought from a good hardware store. A hole should first be drilled into the existing concrete and the bolt inserted. The friction grip is activated by tightening the bolt. A minimum bolt diameter of 20 millimetres is recommended for all uses in close proximity to sea water to compensate for corrosion.
v5270e79.jpg (27240 byte)
Figure 78. Anchor bolts (cast in place)
Figure 79. Continuous timber fender
The second type of anchor bolt is the type that can be cast in predetermined places during construction. To build the anchor, four 20mm diameter nuts should be welded together in conjunction to 6mm diameter anchor grips, as shown in Figure 78.
The position where the anchor bolt is required should then be marked on the outside formwork and a 22mm diameter hole drilled through the mould. The anchor may then be held in place by bolting it to the formwork and casting concrete round it. Once the formwork is removed, a neat, clean hole presents itself for the bolt to be inserted.
The simplest type of fendering is the continuous strip of timber, shown in the above figure. It consists of a strip of timber, about 150mm x 150 mm running along the whole length of the quay. Provided that the timber does not enter into contact with sea water, any kind of strong timber may be used provided it is treated as described in Chapter 4. The timber strip should be held in place by 20mm diameter bolts drilled at 1.0 metre intervals. If the tidal variation is over 1.0 metre, then vertical strips of timber should be used every 1.0 metre or so. Because the lower end of such a strip would invariably be immersed in water at high tide, only suitable timbers should be used.
v5270e80.jpg (27021 byte)
Figure 80. Individual fenders
Figure 81. Mooring line and sinker
Old car tyres have been used as individual fenders for years and as such still provide the cheapest form of simple fendering. To prevent the suspending chain from chaffing against a vessel's side, a 20mm diameter bar hanger should be formed and inserted through an incision at the crown of the suspended car tyre. The tyre fender thus presents a clean soft rubbing surface even when compressed against the boat's side.
The fender should be suspended from an anchor bolt cast into the concrete capping block.
The above figure shows a good way of arranging moorings in congested spaces without the use of either buoys or the vessel's own anchor.
The mooring consists of a length of light galvanised chain slightly longer than the vessel to be moored and tied to the bollard, joined to an adequate length of 12 to 20mm rope via a "D" shackle. The heavy sinker at the bow forms the permanent anchor on the sea bottom. On arrival, the fisherman picks up the chain end from the bollard and follows it to the "D" shackle which he then secures to the stern. The bow is then secured directly to the bollard. When the fisherman casts away the mooring, the chain sinks to the bottom without fouling the propellers.
v5270e81.jpg (30795 byte)
Figure 82. Refuelling point
Figure 83. Slipway winch
To avoid pollution, a centrally located refuelling point should be set up as shown in Figure 82. A concrete base, 200mm thick, should be cast and a containment wall built around the central area. The function of this wall is to collect all the fuel if the tank were to leak. The main valve should be a bronze gate valve (with padlock) and the pistol a ball valve type with no rubber seals (common water taps are not suitable). The end of the hose should be stored higher than the maximum level of the fuel in the tank to prevent accidental leakages. Buckets with sand should be stored near by for soaking up spilt fuel.
The best way to improve the efficiency of the slipway is to install a simple hand-operated winch, like the one shown in Figure 83. It should be anchored to a sturdy concrete base and should have a tooth ratchet installed to prevent accidental slippage. A steel dowel should also be used to lock the drum in position.
Although winches may be constructed locally, steel ones are readily available from various sources and consideration should be given to purchasing one at village level.
v5270e82.jpg (27934 byte)
Figure 84. Drinking water supply
Figure 85. Connecting water tanks
Running fresh water should be made available at all fishing shelters for the personal use of fishermen and hygiene facilities. Figure 84 shows a simple arrangement for providing running water. Two hundred litre drums should be elevated on scaffolding at least 3 metres above the ground and water pumped up via a hand-operated pump drawing fresh water from a reliable source like a borehole or water supply truck. Fibreglass or plastic drums may also be used as water storage tanks.
The 200 litre drums (number of tanks to suit number of facilities provided) may be either in galvanised steel or plastic (fibreglass) but all the piping should preferably be made of plastic or rigid PVC. Figure 85 shows how several tanks should be interconnected to provide a greater supply of fresh water. Each separate tank is provided with a vent and stop cock in such a way that it may be isolated from the rest for cleaning without interrupting the supply of water.
v5270e83.jpg (25737 byte)
Figure 86. Piped seawater for beach landings
Figure 86 shows the arrangement for supplying an isolated beach landing with running seawater, suitable for washing fish and basic personal hygiene.
The most important thing to bear in mind in such instances is that seawater corrodes steel very quickly unless it is treated with very expensive coatings. The best way to eliminate problems with steel corrosion is to replace steel items with plastic ones wherever possible. Stainless steel fittings are very expensive and should be limited to critical items like the ball valve tap (bronze and teflon).
Hence, both suction and pressure pipes should be made of PVC, the header tank of fibreglass, and the hand pump rendered suitable for seawater by galvanising it.
In areas where the coastline is sandy, the suction hose may either be attached to a jetty pile or breakwater or else sunk into the sand attached to a sand drain. Great care should be taken when constructing the sand drain (a pierced drum packed with fine to coarse aggregate) because sand sucked into the pump will eventually damage the pump's foot valve. A simple sand trap is advisable.
v5270e84.jpg (32605 byte)
Figure 87. Fish stall
Figure 88. Soakaway
Figure 87 shows a simple fish stall constructed from concrete. A perforated plastic pipe runs over the top of the stall and via a suitable valve (plastic or stainless steel) provides running seawater from the sea or drinking water header tank. To avoid polluting the shelter area, the water that runs off the stall (containing blood) should be piped away into a soakaway if seawater is used, or better still, piped to a septic tank if drinking water is used (see Figure 90).
Figure 88 shows a typical soakaway which is the simplest way to drain biologically polluted effluent into the ground. There is, however, a great risk of polluting the ground water if the soakaway is too close to the ground water drinking supply, such as a shallow borehole or well.
As a general rule, in sandy areas typical of many coastal areas, the soakaways should be limited to the shelter area way from the village wells. Soakaways cannot be used in areas where clay is present. Effluent from both the fish handling area and the sanitary facilities should, in fact, be pretreated prior to draining it in a soakaway by means of a septic tank unless sea water is being piped.
v5270e85.jpg (44600 byte)
Figure 89. The septic tank
Septic tanks are rectangular chambers with two or three separate compartments usually buried below ground level, which receive the polluted water from the fish handling areas (fish stalls) and sanitary facilities (toilets), Figure 89.
After coarse screening through a basket sump, the effluent is retained inside the compartments for a period of one to three days. During this period, the solids in suspension settle to the bottom of the tank where they are attacked and digested by bacteria.
As a result, the volume of sludge is greatly reduced and the effluent clarified to some extent. If the fishing shelter is big enough to warrant the construction of a septic tank, or the shelter is too close to the village freshwater wells that a septic tank is needed as an anti-pollution measure, then the whole water drainage system should be run on fresh water and not seawater. Unlike seawater, fresh water will keep the septic tank working at maximum efficiency ensuring that the effluent leaving the septic tank is as unpolluting as possible. Technical help should be sought regarding dimensions and specifications.
v5270e86.jpg (38371 byte)
Figure 90a. Typical beach landing
Figure 90b. Fishing village
Figure 90c. Combined fishing shelter and village
Figure 90(a) shows a typical beach landing arrangement, with the soakaway close to the fish stall using seawater. This layout should only be used if the village is at least 100 metres away.
Figure 90(b) shows a similar layout for a fish stall very close to the village's fresh water well. In this case, however, the soakaway should be placed as far away from the well as possible.
Figure 90(c) on the other hand, shows a complete layout for a combined fishing shelter/village requiring the installation of a septic tank. The fish stall effluent passes through the basket screen and on to the septic tank via a trap. The effluent from the toilets is also connected to the septic tank via another trap. The effluent from the hand basins, however, is taken to a separate soakaway to prevent detergents from entering the septic tank. This layout should be run on fresh water only. Ideally, the pipes should be in PVC and slope between 2 and 4%.
To start the biological process in the septic tank, a piece of rotten meat should be inserted in the first chamber. Special pellets are also available off the shelf.
Figure 91 shows a typical general-purpose shed made of timber. The basic structure of the shed consists of 150 diameter timber piles driven into the ground and connected at various levels by timber cross members. Timber trusses support either galvanized or asbestos sheeting or local thatch roofing. If the timber piles cannot be driven into the ground, then concrete foundation blocks should be cast around the base.
All the timber used in the shed should be treated as described in Chapter 8 to protect the structure from possible attack by insects. All the fasteners should be made from galvanized steel.
The timber shed may have a variety of uses, such as storage, boatbuilding or fish market or fishermen's cooperative. Should the shed be intended as a fish market, the following additional specifications are recommended, Figure 92:
a) the floor of the shed slopes outward at a slope of about 1:80;
v5270e87.jpg (43514 byte)
Figure 91. Timber shed
b) the floor consists of a 200mm thick concrete slab with a smooth finish to prevent blood from soaking into the floor. Special surfacing epoxy compounds are available for fish halls;
c) the timber column piles are protected around the base with concrete to prevent wet rot from destroying the piles at the base;
d) the floor drains outwards into a peripheral drain which links up with either a soakaway, if seawater is used to wash fish or the septic tank if fresh water is used.
With the above recommendations, the fish hall can be cleaned easily by a water hose without causing damage to the timber piles.
v5270e88.jpg (37499 byte)
Figure 92. Covered market
COLD STORAGE AND ICE: In warm climates, freshly caught fish spoils very easily thus reducing the value of the catch.
Spoilage may only be prevented or delayed by smoking (only suitable for certain fish) or some form of cold treatment.
Smoking requires large amounts of timber or trees which are a fast disappearing commodity and in the future will require renewable sources (plantations).
The alternative method of preservation is by cooling. On board small fishing vessels cooling may be achieved by crushed ice stored in specially made ice boxes. In a fishing harbour the ice (in block or flake form) is usually produced on site by an ice making machine.
It is not the intention of this booklet to discuss the relative merits of the method of cooling (ice or chill rooms) or the most suitable type of ice (block, crushed, flake or tubular) to be employed.
Planning for the installation of an ice plant or chill room is a complex exercise and should be left to specialists. Moreover, the high costs of the equipment and the consumables (power or fuel and clean drinking water are not always available locally) may not warrant the effort if access to good markets is non existent and fishermen cannot sell their catch for a higher price.
Depending on the size of the artisanal fleet, it may be more cost effective to buy ready-made crushed ice from commercial suppliers and store it at the harbour in ice boxes for sale to fishermen, processors and households.
NAVIGATION AIDS
On almost all coasts and on off-lying dangers, landmarks at salient points are illuminated at night. These lights may be divided into three classes - landfall lights, position lights and lighted aids to navigation. Under the first heading come lighthouses which are invariably of great power and are usually visible at a great distance. Position lights are also of considerable power, but their primary function is to indicate the position of a harbour mouth or headland. The third class -lighted aids to navigation - comprises those lightbuoys which mark the existence of an offshore shoal or rock, or a navigable channel.
All lights, buoys and signs should be in conformity with the specifications for lights and shapes contained in laws of harbours and pilotage of the country concerned.
Lights are distinguishable from each other by their character, colour and period.
Character:
A light may either be fixed, flashing or occulting (a fixed or steady light which is eclipsed or blanked-out at stated intervals. Lightbuoys nearly always carry flashing or occulting lights to distinguish them from riding lights of moored vessels.
v5270e89.jpg (13203 byte)
Figure 93. Small marine lantern
Colour: The colour of a light unless otherwise specified must be white.
Position lights are usually red (port or left side) and green (starboard or right side).
Period:
The period of a light is the interval between recommencement of successive phases. In a simple flashing light the period is the length of time between one flash and the next: in a group flashing system it is the interval between the beginning of one complete phase and the beginning of the next.
v5270e90.jpg (22744 byte)
Figure 94. Floating marker
v5270e91.jpg (36264 byte)
Figure 95. Fixed marker
Figure 96. Offshore mooring of marker buoy
Before installing any proper lights, the appropriate Government Office (Navy, Coastguard or Ministry of Works) should be informed so that steps are taken to revise the current sea charts of the area.
Figure 93 shows a typical marine lantern in High Density PolyEthylene (HDPE) or so called "heavy plastic". Common plastic decomposes when exposed to sun light (the sun's rays contain ULTRA VIOLET RADIATION which breaks down plastics) and should be avoided. Most lanterns also come with four stainless steel bolts for fixing and a light cell which automatically switches on the lantern at dusk and off at dawn.
The more sophisticated lanterns come with an automatic lamp changer which can replace up to six burnt lamps automatically. The visibility of a light from a lantern depends on the power of the lamp and its height above sea level.
At sea or in navigation channels, lanterns are usually mounted on a floating buoy, Figure 94, and anchored as shown in Figure 96.
In tidal areas, where rocks may be exposed at low tide, a fixed marker may be installed as shown in Figure 95.
Figures 97 and 98 show two ways of building simple light towers for harbour entrances. Figure 97 consists of a stone tower, made from locally available rock cemented together, and a 25mm diameter PVC pipe embedded down the middle and leading to a battery storage compartment. The compartment should face away from the sea and a suitable door in galvanised plate or aluminum installed to protect the 12 V car battery needed to run the light.
Figure 98 shows a temporary arrangement for a light tower but with the battery stored a long distance away from the tower. In this case, great care should be taken in selecting the power cables because the drop in voltage in a long thin cable is considerable and the battery will need frequent recharging. The greater the distance the thicker the cable has to be.
v5270e92.jpg (31471 byte)
Figure 97. Stone light tower
Figure 98. Temporary light tower
<section>7</section>
CHAPTER 7
SHELTER MAINTENANCE
A fishing shelter, no matter what size, generally requires periodic maintenance to keep it functioning properly.
Shelter maintenance falls under two broad headings: environmental control of naturally occurring phenomena, and anti-pollution control of the fishing effort. The first type of maintenance covers dredging (sand may silt up the entrance to the shelter periodically), floating weeds and flotsam. The second type of maintenance covers the collection and proper disposal of liquid and solid wastes generated by the fishing effort and entirely controllable.
GROUP 1 MAINTENANCE
DREDGING
If a shelter lies on a sandy coast it may be prone to periodic siltation which in most cases calls for dredging. Dredging is a very costly operation and involves the quick removal of accumulated sand by mechanical means.
Before any dredging operations are undertaken, a fairly precise estimate of the volume of dredged material is usually required. This is best achieved by drawing up a grid map of the soundings in and around the shelter area (see Chapter 2) and updating it as required (every six months or yearly). The amount of deposited material should then be calculated to determine the best type of dredging equipment to use.
LOOSE SAND: For very small quantities of sand, in the inshore zone, say 1000 cubic metres or less, consideration should be given to using either a submersible pump suitable for suspended solids or a hydraulic excavator working off a mound of core material (see Chapter 3) dumped for the purpose and working backwards towards land, scooping up both the sand to be dredged and the core.
Both these items may be available from a local contractor and the pump in question usually runs on compressed air and may be installed on a fishing boat if the area to be dredged is far away from the quay.
The size and operating pressure of the compressor will determine the maximum working depth of the pump.
For large quantities of sand, say 1,000 to 10,000 cubic metres, distributed over a large surface area, a pontoon mounted excavator should be considered. The operating depth will be governed by the length of the excavator's forearm.
Larger quantities of sand should be tackled by professional dredging contractors using suction dredges.
In all the above cases, due care should be given to where the dredged sand is to be dumped in order to prevent currents from transporting it back to where it was dredged from.
CEMENTED SAND, CORAL AND CLAY: In the presence of lightly cemented sand (weak sandstone), coral and coralline deposits and clays a cutter suction dredger like the one shown in Figure 68 is usually required to break up the material before it is pumped away for disposal.
For very small quantities, a hydraulic excavator equipped with a very narrow toothed bucket may suffice.
HARD ROCK AND BOULDERS: In general, a rocky sea bed cannot be dredged economically. However, rocky outcrops or the occasional boulder should be tackled by explosives and eventual dredging.
SEAWEED: Seaweed occurs in two different ways; it may be indigenous to the area where the shelter is located or it may be brought in as flotsam by wind or currents. If seaweed is indigenous then the shelter should be dredged to rid the area of the roots. This may have to be repeated frequently to prevent fresh weed from growing again. However, advice should be sought from the Fisheries Department prior to uprooting indigenous weed lest it performs an important biological function such as providing food or nursery grounds for local species of fish. Dead seaweed may either be caught in nets strung across the mouth of a harbour during certain times of the year or else collected by hand off the beach after a storm.
Dredging by any other means is not economical and very time-consuming because seaweed tends to foul most moving mechanical parts.
FLOTSAM AND BULKY WASTE: In addition to dead seaweed, flotsam may also consist of dead timber or cane brought down a river by a flood; in addition, a harbour may also contain general man-made rubbish dumped overboard, such as old tyres, pieces of old rope, oil cans, batteries etc.
Cleaning up a shelter once flotsam has entered may be very laborious and consideration should be given to stringing a fishing net across the shelter entrance when the wind blows from directions known to bring in huge quantities of floating debris.
Man-made rubbish, on the other hand, can only be picked up by hand using a diver or dredged by a crane-operated clam-shell bucket. Both solutions are expensive and unnecessary if anti-dumping laws are strictly enforced by the harbour master.
GROUP 2 MAINTENANCE
POLLUTION ABATEMENT
The pollution in and around most fishing shelters may be divided into three main groups:
a) visible pollution of the harbour water by spilled fuel or discharged raw sewage, visibly affecting the quality of the water;
b) invisible pollution of the water by hazardous wastes, such as heavy metals (like cadmium, mercury, lead and nickel), paint solvents and so on, which do not visibly influence the appearance of the water;
c) degradation of the natural harbour environment by discarded litter, above and below water level. Though not toxic as such, litter dumped into the harbour basin actually interferes with routine dredging operations, making maintenance very expensive.
The most common pollutants associated with the fishing effort are:
a) spilt diesel fuel from faulty hose pistols, leaking drums and general careless handling during refuelling operations; discarded used engine oil; bilge water dumped overboard; raw sewage from the onboard toilets dumped into the harbour, and offal when fish is gutted and cleaned onboard boats inside the harbour.
b) discarded starter batteries, rechargeable nickel-cadmium cells from radios, torches and walkie-talkies and button cells from watches, calculators, clocks, etc.
c) unwanted tyre fenders, lengths of wire rope, chain and nets dumped into the water; discarded engine blocks and rusting hulls and trailers; discarded containers such as polystyrene fish boxes, oil and grease cans and paint containers.
The above pollutants arise from man-made activities which require proper legislation and enforcement to control.
The measures needed to tackle this source of pollution come under two headings:
1. Quayside regulations & enforcement;
2. Waste management & recycling.
1 - QUAYSIDE REGULATIONS
Quayside regulations are environmental protection laws designed to protect the environment from abuse by unscrupulous fishermen. In particular, such regulations should prohibit:
a) the dumping of crank-case oil and bilge water overboard;
b) the flushing of onboard toilets inside the shelter;
c) the cleaning of fish onboard moored vessels;
d) the discarding of any type of battery;
e) the littering of the port area with any kind of waste;
f) the use of toxic antifouling paints.
Appendix 2 provides a complete series of cartoon drawings entitled "Cleaner Harbours" outlining both the sources of pollution and the remedial measures recommended to mitigate the effects of the fishing effort on the environment.
Ideally, the cartoons should be first enlarged to A-3 size and the fisherman shown in the drawings made to resemble fishermen operating in your area (features and attire); converted to slides, the series provides an ideal tool for extension workers. Blown up to poster size, some of the cartoons may be posted at the entrance to fishing harbours to remind users about their obligations.
The series may also be converted into a booklet and distributed in fisheries training colleges as part of the curriculum.
2 - WASTE MANAGEMENT
Each of the regulations mentioned generates a concentration of waste product which, if not collected and recycled properly, becomes a greater hazard to the well-being of the fishing community.
To manage this waste properly, two things are necessary: a reliable collection system and a method of recycling or safe disposal. Both are important and the one cannot be implemented without the other; it is pointless collecting used oil in a big container if the person collecting the oil does not know what to do with it. It is hence evident that to function properly, waste management must be integrated into existing commercial or artisanal activities.
The proper ways to collect and ideas of how to recycle used engine oil, bilge water, starter batteries, toxic solid waste, non-toxic solid waste, offal and sewage follow.
USED ENGINE OIL
v5270e93.jpg (24953 byte)
Figure 99. Oil collection
COLLECTION: The waste oil should be collected in modified 200 litre oil drums (Figure 99) strategically placed inside the fishing shelter. Note that the drum must not remain in contact with the ground because in the presence of moisture, the drum may corrode and leak oil.
RECYCLING: Specialist oil processing companies take back the used oil for reprocessing if supplies can be guaranteed. Some Government agencies actually run a collection system on a national scale for a small fee.
BILGE WATER
v5270e94.jpg (33087 byte)
Figure 100. Bilge water separator
Figure 101. Battery store
COLLECTION: Bilge water consists of sea water mixed with oil that leaked out of the engine oil seals. It should be pumped out from inside the vessels and placed in a receiving tank similar to that shown in Figure 100.
RECYCLING: Bilge water is easily separated into oil and sea water if it is allowed to settle naturally. Water, being heavier than oil, will settle from the bottom from where it may be gently drained off into a container for evaporation using the small tap. The oil/diesel residue may either be used for heating purposes or poured into the used-oil storage tank.
12 V STARTER BATTERIES
COLLECTION: Spent 12 V batteries contain plates of lead immersed in acid inside a plastic case. Sunlight may decompose the plastic casing, hence the importance of not abandoning the batteries out in the open. Lead is very toxic and if not handled properly may enter the food chain. Used batteries may be stored in a large bin as shown in Figure 101 until collected.
RECYCLING : Most suppliers take the spent batteries back for industrial reprocessing. If done properly, lead plates may be recycled at village level to make sinkers for nets. The acid must be disposed of separately in plastic tanks.
TOXIC SOLID WASTE
v5270e95.jpg (14800 byte)
Figure 102. Toxic waste container
COLLECTION: Toxic Solid waste comprises all those manufactured items which cannot be dissembled, like oil filters, spark plugs, torch and radio batteries, button cells from watches, containers of paint stripper, hydraulic oil etc. Plastic drums should be strategically placed around the shelter. Old oil drums which rust and permit toxic chemicals to leach away into the ground are not suitable for these materials.
RECYCLING: Very little recycling can be done with these items and generally speaking they are buried in special landfills away from drinking water wells.
NON-TOXIC SOLID WASTE
v5270e96.jpg (36141 byte)
Figure 103. Waste centre
Figure 104. Plastic drums with lids
COLLECTION: The non-toxic waste comprises all other voluminous rubbish like old tyres, old pieces of rope and netting, broken fish boxes etc. Figure 103 shows a typical collection point made of locally available stone and concrete (dimensions A, B and C to suite local requirements).
RECYCLING: Metal items should be collected and sold to scrap dealers. Tyres may be converted to fenders, timber fish boxes may be sold as fire wood. Styrofoam boxes should be avoided because they break up easily and litter and cannot be recycled safely (they give off dangerous fumes when burnt).
OFFAL
COLLECTION: Ideally, fish should be cleaned and gutted on the journey back to the harbour and dumped at sea where it provides food for other fish. Offal should never be dumped inside the harbour basin or discarded in corners within the harbour area or village; besides giving off offensive smells it also poses a health hazard attracting pests. 100-litre plastic drums with airtight lids are available on the market and these should be used to collect offal from fish markets or moored boats.
DISPOSAL: Mixed with some types of grain offal may be used as animal feed or fish silages. Very small quantities may be safely buried.
SEWAGE
In or around the fish harbour or landing, the sources of raw sewage may consist of the village outfall together with the onboard facilities which discharge directly into the water. As described in the previous chapter, the harbour should be provided with toilets and the whole area should be connected to a septic tank and soakaways, Figure 90.
Allowing raw sewage to be dumped near the fish landing will only exacerbate health problems, making it a potential flashpoint for disease.
SPECIAL NOTE ON PLASTICS
Most common household plastic containers (buckets, containers and basins) are not suitable for outdoor use because the PVC they are made from ages rapidly and cracks when exposed to the sun's rays. Such items containing foul or toxic waste should not be left exposed to the sun for lengthy periods.
SOME ENVIRONMENTAL TIPS
The following are some additional environmentally friendly tips:
A) Try not to use polystyrene fish boxes unless absolutely necessary. Rigid plastic ones are available (these last longer) or, if these are too expensive, wooden ones should be used;
B) If the fishing village is too far away from a main town or city, consumables should be bought in bulk at village level. For example, instead of buying 50 one-litre cans of oil, a 50-litre drum of oil should be bought and sold by the litre. A 50-litre drum may be returnable but the 50 one-litre cans have to be disposed of locally because nobody will take them back;
C) Moving mechanical parts (like hinges, winches, ratchets, etc.) should, in general, be greased and not oiled. Grease tends to stick to the moving part requiring less maintenance. Oil, on the other hand, runs off the part very quickly and needs constant replenishment.
<section>8</section>
CHAPTER 8
CORROSION
INTRODUCTION
Due to its relatively high strength, steel has many advantages as a construction material and steel products have been used in a wide variety of applications.
The most common problem with using steel in a marine environment, however, is its susceptibility to corrosion. Hence, for a more effective utilization of steel, some knowledge of the corrosion phenomena and methods for protecting against it are necessary.
CORROSION PROCESS
For steel to corrode (that is for rust to form) it must be exposed to oxygen or air. Moreover, in the presence of other atmospheric agents, such as water (rain or moist air) and salt (sea spray) steel corrodes at a much faster rate.
Furthermore, when immersed in sea water, steel is also subjected to galvanic corrosion, similar to that between steel and brass fittings on a boat.
v5270e97.jpg (23799 byte)
Figure 105. Corrosion zones in a marine environment
In Figure 105 above,
Zone A is exposed to moist air and salt-laden spray and is a generally corrosive zone for steel products.
Zone B is constantly wet with salt water which also contains a lot of dissolved oxygen. This is the most aggressive zone for steel.
Zone C is also very aggressive for steel because galvanic corrosion is also present.
ANTI-CORROSION SOLUTIONS
There are five possible solutions to protect steel products against the effects of corrosion:
a) use stainless steel instead of normal steel;
b) coat normal steel with zinc;
c) coat normal steel with special plastics;
d) paint normal steel with special paints;
e) cathodic protection using zinc anodes similar to those used on vessels; this solution is only suitable for immersed steel, like piles or buoys.
SOLUTION A: Stainless steel is normal steel mixed with other metals like nickel and chrome. However, the cost of stainless steel makes it impractical for everyday use except for minor fittings like bolts and nuts.
SOLUTION B: Coating steel with zinc, another metal, is generally referred to as "GALVANISING" and is the most common way
of protecting small manufactured objects like mooring rings, pipe bollards, bolts, clamps, chains, shackles, water pipes, etc. The goods to be coated are usually dipped in a bath of molten zinc at special workshops. Once an object has been hot-dipped in zinc, no welding, cutting or drilling should be performed on it as this will destroy the integrity of the protective coating.
SOLUTION C: Coating steel with special wear resistant plastics is another way to protect against corrosion; however, the high cost involved in the actual coating process (special workshops) makes this method impractical for everyday use.
SOLUTION D: Painting steel with special paints is by far the most common method of protecting large structures in steel.
The surfaces to be painted should be thoroughly cleaned with a steel brush (or preferably by sand blasting). The undercoat should consist of a zinc based primer. The second and third coats should consist of a tar based epoxy paint.
When painting is contemplated, the following should be borne in mind:
a) common household paints are not suitable for the marine environment because like some plastics, they age very quickly when exposed to the sun's rays;
b) diesel, kerosene and petrol are not chemically compatible with marine paints and the proper or recommended paint thinner should be used;
c) when handling epoxy based paints, rubber gloves should always be worn.
SOLUTION E: Protecting steel with zinc anodes (cathodic protection) is similar to protecting metal fittings on a vessel (rudder and propeller) with zinc anodes. In many cases, zinc anodes are used in conjunction with painting to further prolong the life of steel structures immersed in seawater, like steel piles, pontoons, metal floats etc.
Aluminum fittings, in contact with wet steel, are also subject to galvanic corrosion.
<section>9</section>
CHAPTER 9
WEIGHTS AND MEASURES
The dimensions and weights indicated in this booklet are all given in metric measurements.
CONVERSION TABLE
LINEAR MEASUREMENTS
Multiply by to obtain
Inches 0.0254 Metres
Feet 0.3048 Metres
Yards 0.9144 Metres
Metres 39.3701 Inches
Metres 3.2808 Feet
Metres 1.0936 Yards
CONVERSION TABLE
WEIGHTS
Multiply by to obtain
Ounces 28.3495 Grams
Ounces 0.0283 Kilograms
Pounds 0.4536 Kilograms
Pounds 0.000045 Tons
Tons 2204.62 Pounds
Kilograms 2.2046 Pounds
The basic metric unit for volume is the cubic metre which is made up of 1,000 litres. The cubic metre is abbreviated in the form m^3.
CONVERSION TABLE
VOLUMETRIC MEASUREMENTS
v5270e98.jpg (10904 byte)
Multiply by to obtain
Gallons 4.546 Litres
Gallons 0.00455 Cubic metres
Litres 0.219978 Gallons
Litres 0.001 Cubic metres
In most countries, superficial areas are measured in local units which differ from country to country.
In engineering, however, the metric unit of measurement is the square metre (m^2). Large areas are measured in hectares (ha) and vast expanses in square kilometres (km^2).
1 hectare = 10,000 square metres
1 square kilometre = 100 hectares
CONVERSION TABLES
AREAS
Multiply by to obtain
Square ft 0.03097 Square metres
Square yds 0.8361 Square metres
Acres 4046.86 Square metres
Square m 1.19599 Square yards
Hectares 11960.0 Square yards
SOME IMPORTANT WEIGHTS
COMMON LIQUIDS
1 litre of fresh water = 1.0 kg
1 litre of oil * = 0.80 kg
1 cubic metre of fresh water = 1000 kg
1 cubic metre of sea water = 1020 kg
* Because oil weighs less than water it always floats on the surface; the actual weight will depend on the specific gravity of the oil.
COMMON SOLIDS
1 cubic metre of cement powder weighs approximately 1800 kg.
1 cubic metre of normal limestone aggregate weighs roughly 2,100 kg. Aggregate made from crushed coral weighs much less depending on the porosity of the coral.
1 cubic metre of concrete made with normal aggregates weighs about 2,300 kg. Concrete made with coral aggregate may weigh as little as 1,500 kg per cubic metre.
However, 1 cubic metre of normal concrete immersed in sea water has an effective weight of less than 2,300 kg; something to be borne in mind when casting anchor blocks for vessels. For example: What is the submerged weight of a concrete anchor block measuring 400mm x 400mm x 300mm high:
Volume of anchor = 0.4x0.4x0.3 = 0.048 m^3
Weight in air = 0.048x2300 = 110 kg
Uplift in water = 0.048x1020 = 49 kg
Submerged weight = 110 - 49 = 61 kg
Hence although the 110 kg anchor block is heavy to handle, it only provides 61 kg of pull when placed in water and may drag along the bottom during rough weather.
The weight of timber varies according to the species; some examples:
OPEPE 750 kg/cubic metre
TEAK 640 kg/cubic metre
IRONBARK 1120 kg/cubic metre
GREENHEART 1040 kg/cubic metre
RED LOURO 640 kg/cubic metre
BLUE GUM 830 kg/cubic metre
As the previous table shows, both Greenheart and Ironbark weigh more than sea water and so do not float.
METALS
The weight of the following metals, 1000mm x 1000mm (1 square metre) x 1mm thick, may be expressed as follows:
ALUMINUM 2.56 kg
ZINC 7.20 kg
STEEL 7.80 kg
BRASS 8.55 kg
COPPER 8.90 kg
LEAD 11.37 kg
The volume of fresh water 1000mm x 1000mm x 1mm high is equivalent to 1 litre and accordingly weighs 1 kg.
CONVENTIONS
Civil Engineering, like other branches of engineering, follows a preset order of presentation, conventions and symbols in order that drawings and plans may be easily read and understood.
DIMENSIONS : On normal drawings, dimensions up to ten metres are usually expressed in millimetres. Over ten metres, dimensions may be expressed directly in metres. Diameters are usually expressed in millimetres; a 100mm diameter pile is expressed as "f 100".
LEVELS : Levels above and below mean sea level are usually expressed in metres up to two decimal places. A quay one and a half metres above sea level is said to be at +1.50 m. Similarly, a sounding of two metres is expressed as -2.0 m.
In the presence of a tidal range, all levels should refer to chart datum or Low Water Spring Level (LWS), Figure 22.
SYMBOLS : The symbols for sand, rock, etc used in this booklet are internationally recognised symbols (see Table).
Table of symbols
- NATURE OF GROUND
SAND or SILT
GRAVEL
SOFT CLAY and MUD
HARD ROCK
- MATERIALS
CONCRETE
TIMBER
STEEL BAR
- GENERAL
LEVELS
BENCHMARKS
MEAN SEA LEVEL (msl)
DRAWING SCALES
All drawings, excluding sketches, are drawn to a scale, see Figure 105.
v5270e99.jpg (20139 byte)
Drawing scales are necessary to represent actual construction dimensions on paper.
A scale of 1 to 50 or 1:50, means that 50 times the length A-A in the figure is equal to 1 metre in real life
Moving to a smaller scale of 1:100 (1:50 is twice as big as 1:100), length B-B is also seen to represent 1 metre.
Similarly, on an even smaller scale of 1:200, length C-C also represents 1 metre.
What scale should be selected?
How big should the drawing be?
The International printing paper A-series sizes are a very common standard and should be adhered to.
A1 SIZE : 841mm long x 594mm wide
A3 SIZE : 420mm long x 297mm wide
v5270ea0.jpg (50511 byte)
Figure 106. Some commonly used metric scales
Layout drawings of shelters or harbours should be as big as possible. Taking an A1 SIZE paper, 841mm or 0.841m long, at a scale of 1:200, a stretch of coast 0.841x200 = 168.20 metres long will fit on the drawing. A scale twice as big, 1:100, would only fit half the above length or about 84 metres.
v5270ea1.jpg (28460 byte)
Construction details like for example cross-sections, require a scale not smaller than 1:50, preferably 1:20.
A 1:20 scale is obtained by assuming 10m to be equivalent to 1 metre, as shown in the figure.
<title>FAO Training Series. Construction and maintenance of artisanal fishing harbours and village landings</title>
APPENDIX 1
BASIC SAFETY EQUIPMENT
Figure 107 shows a variety of equipment currently in use on construction sites to guarantee the personal safety of construction workers and if finances permit, should be acquired prior to the start of construction activities.
Figure 108a shows a plastic helmet or hard hat which must be worn at all times, especially in the presence of suspended loads (cranes) and scaffolding.
Figure 108b shows a pair of rubber boots which should be worn when casting concrete to protect feet from attack by cement and eventual bleeding.
Figure 108c shows rubber gloves which should be worn by the workers actually handling cement, fresh concrete and marine epoxy paints. Figure 108d is a simple face mask with a separate filter element and must be worn by workers handling, opening and emptying cement bags at the concrete mixer. Figure 108e shows a pair of welding/safety goggles which must be worn whilst welding (dark glass) or cutting (clear glass).
v5270ea2.jpg (32069 byte)
Figure 107a. Hard hat
Figure 107b. Rubber boots
Figure 107c. Rubber gloves
Figure 107d. Face mask
Figure 107e. Welding goggles
v5270ea3.jpg (17551 byte)
Figure 108. Workability of concrete with time
HANDLING CONCRETE
Figure 108 shows how with the passage of time, a good workable mix turns stiff, requiring the addition of more water to render it workable again, thus reducing both its strength and durability.
A given workable mix will stiffen more rapidly when:
a) porous aggregate is used;
b) aggregate contains too much dust;
c) aggregate temperature is too high.
Apart from using good materials as
v5270ea4.jpg (18500 byte)
Figure 109. Placing concrete under water
described in Chapter 4, concreting should be carried out early in the morning before the sun has had time to warm up the aggregate stockpiles.
The formwork should always be prepared the previous day and oiled just prior to the concreting making sure that no oil goes on the steel reinforcing bars.
When concrete has to be poured underwater a tremie should be set up as shown in Figure 110a to prevent the water from washing out the large aggregate from the concrete mix, as in Figure 110b. The tremie is gradually pulled up as the pipe fills up with concrete. The cement content for an underwater mix should be double that of the 1:2:4 mix described in Chapter 4.
v5270ea5.jpg (37984 byte)
Figure 110. Correct use of concrete vibrator
Except underwater, all concrete should be vibrated using a poker vibrator like the one shown in Figure 74c. The vibration compacts the fresh concrete by eliminating the air pockets trapped in the mix during the mixing and generally allows for a drier mix (less water required for compaction), thus enhancing the strength and durability of the finished concrete.
To achieve the right standard of compaction (concrete that is over-vibrated would lead to separation or segregation of the aggregate), the poker should be worked into the concrete at regular intervals in an orderly fashion, Figure 110b. Each successive layer should not exceed 300mm. In Figure 110a, the poker has been operated in a haphazard manner producing a substandard cast.
CURING
As soon as a pour is complete, the exposed surface should be covered with jute or reed mats and water sprinkled on it at regular intervals for at least 3 days to prevent the exposed surface from drying out too rapidly. If left exposed to the sun the surface will dry very quickly, shrink and crack. Once these shrinkage cracks develop, the surface cannot be repaired and the concrete casting will deteriorate very rapidly. The concrete will only reach maturity after 28 days but precast elements may usually be handled after 7 days.
<title>FAO Training Series. Construction and maintenance of artisanal fishing harbours and village landings</title>
<section>1</section>
APPENDIX 2
CLEANER HARBOURS
Regulation No 3 of Annex V of MARPOL 73/78, Regulations for the prevention of pollution by garbage states :
"the disposal into the sea of all plastics, including but not limited to synthetic ropes, synthetic fishing nets and plastic garbage bags, is prohibited".
The above mentioned Annex V entered into force on 31 December 1988 and as such should form the basis of the quayside regulations mentioned in Chapter 7.
With the above in mind, a series of cartoon drawings has been drawn up as an aid to anti-pollution awareness programmes.
The following 31 cartoon drawings were drawn up for use in the Mediterranean Sea area and should be customised to be compatible with other regions of the world.
WHO SHOULD USE THEM?
The enclosed set of drawings have been drawn up for those countries whose artisanal fisheries industry is expanding rapidly. Extension workers in the field, fisheries training colleges, fisheries enforcement officers and harbour masters should find this work useful. The programme may also be used as an elementary public awareness programme within a larger educational framework. Some of the drawings are also suitable for making posters.
HOW CAN THEY BE USED?
To be used effectively, they should first be enlarged to A3 Size. Secondly, they should be customised to reflect the local fisheries scene: for example, the illustrated fisherman should be given a local look by altering his facial features, hat and attire, the fishmonger may have to be female to reflect certain traditions, the vessels should reflect local craft as much as possible and so on. Thirdly, instances depicted in the drawings in the country of intended use should be photographed on slides:
A trip round the coastal areas will usually present numerous opportunities to photograph the conditions outlined in the drawings. Finally, the drawings themselves should be transferred to slides and a package prepared consisting of a sequence of the 31 drawings with, say, an equal number of case histories sandwiched in between.
The slide package should then be run on a good slide projector with the appointed person giving a running commentary. This will inevitably involve the same person going round the various landings unless more copies and projectors are made available.
Better still, the entire package and commentary can be taped on a video cassette and copies distributed around the country: VCRs are easier to come by even in remote villages. In this case, suppliers to the fisheries industry (net manufacturers, engine suppliers, boat builders, oil companies, etc.) may act as sponsors of the video cassettes by paying to advertise. This would cut costs considerably.
On the following pages, each cartoon drawing is accompanied by a small caption describing the intended message to be conveyed to the fishing community: it is left up to individual appointees to elaborate further on each topic.
It must be stressed at this point that the programme's humorous side is intended as a psychological tool to make offenders aware of their misdeeds without antagonising them or the various categories that make up a fishing community (fishermen and/or boat owners, engine mechanics, fish processors, market operators, etc.
Further suggestions would be welcome.
v5270ea6.jpg (56473 byte)
v5270ea7.jpg (62924 byte)
v5270ea8.jpg (60174 byte)
v5270ea9.jpg (60799 byte)
v5270eb0.jpg (52801 byte)
v5270eb1.jpg (57895 byte)
v5270eb2.jpg (58856 byte)
v5270eb3.jpg (49142 byte)
v5270eb4.jpg (57179 byte)
v5270eb5.jpg (48667 byte)
v5270eb6.jpg (66409 byte)
v5270eb7.jpg (50965 byte)
v5270eb8.jpg (47599 byte)
v5270eb9.jpg (48220 byte)
v5270ec0.jpg (55012 byte)
v5270ec1.jpg (58832 byte)
v5270ec2.jpg (58419 byte)
v5270ec3.jpg (56738 byte)
v5270ec4.jpg (52516 byte)
v5270ec5.jpg (65441 byte)
v5270ec6.jpg (63733 byte)
v5270ec7.jpg (46116 byte)
v5270ec8.jpg (42507 byte)
v5270ec9.jpg (57376 byte)
v5270ed0.jpg (48443 byte)
v5270ed1.jpg (52978 byte)
v5270ed2.jpg (54461 byte)
v5270ed3.jpg (49086 byte)
v5270ed4.jpg (57122 byte)
v5270ed5.jpg (52491 byte)
v5270ed6.jpg (53019 byte)
<section>2</section>
REFERENCES
REFERENCES ON MARINE ENVIRONMENT PROTECTION
The following is a list of publications on the protection of the marine environment published by the International Maritime Organization, Publications Section, 4 Albert Embankment, London SE1 7SR, England.
These publications provide Governments, particularly those of developing countries, with an overview of practical guidelines to combat pollution at sea.
GUIDELINES ON THE PROVISION OF ADEQUATE RECEPTION FACILITIES IN PORTS:
Part I (oily wastes), Part II (residues and mixtures containing noxious liquid substances), Part III (sewage), and Part IV (garbage); Catalogue Nos. 5807702E, 1976; 5828609E, 1986; and 5847812E, 1978 edition.
MANUAL ON OIL POLLUTION:
Section I (Prevention), Section II (Contingency planning), Section III (Salvage), Section IV (Combatting oil spills); Catalogue Nos. 5578301E, 1983; 5608802E, 1988; 5668303E, 1983 and 5698811E, 1988 edition.
IMO/UNEP GUIDELINES ON OIL SPILL DISPERSANT APPLICATION AND ENVIRONMENTAL CONSIDERATIONS; Catalogue No. 5758218E, 1982 edition.
MARPOL 73/78, Consolidated Edition 1991
OILY-WATER SEPARATORS AND MONITORING EQUIPMENT; Catalogue No. 6088710E, 1987 edition.
