<section>e</section>
Acknowledgments
Acknowledgments
The first version of this training package was prepared by Paul Sommers for use in Indonesia in the FAO/UNDP Technical Support to the WFP Transmigration Development Project (INS/89/004). This expanded version was revised by Chris Landon-Lane following extensive field testing in Indonesia. The training package has benefited from the sound technical expertise in nutrition and horticulture of both authors as well as their local knowledge and extensive working experience in Southeast Asia. The illustrations were prepared by Mr Haryanto and Chris Landon-Lane.
Further acknowledgments are due to Jane Sherman who edited the first version of the training package and contributed her expertise as a trainer. Extensive comments were also received from FAO staff members in the Plant Production and Protection Division's Horticultural Crops Croup and from the Food and Nutrition Division, which supervised and guided the preparation of this training package.
<title>Improving nutrition through home gardening - A training package for preparing field workers in Southeast Asia</title>
<section>1</section>
Introduction
Introduction
This training package, Improving nutrition through home gardening, is for the instruction of agricultural extension agents and other field workers in Southeast Asia. It aims to strengthen their ability to promote home gardening for better family and community nutrition. The package was prepared by the Food and Nutrition Division of FAO on the basis of training materials developed for the FAO/UNDP Technical Support to the WFP Transmigration Development Project (INS/89/004) in Indonesia.
Access to an adequate amount and variety of safe foods at all times is one of the most basic rights of every individual, yet it remains difficult to attain for a significant number of families in Southeast Asia. However, when households are able to complement their resources such as land and labour with improved tools and seeds and the right information, they can increase their productivity and obtain sufficient nutritious foods by fully developing their land.
In the pert-urban areas of Southeast Asia, families often farm 500 to 1 500 m^2 of land around their home. This area offers great potential for improving household food supplies. For the purpose of this book, this entire area will be referred to as the home garden. The home garden can be used to raise many kinds of fruit, vegetables, staple food crops, medicinal plants, spices and, sometimes, farm animals and fish. It is also used as a playground for children, a work area and a place for storage of farm produce and equipment. The home garden also has an important economic function as a source of food production for sale and income generation.
THE ROLE OF AGRICULTURISTS IN IMPROVING COMMUNITY AND FAMILY NUTRITION
Agriculturists are usually trained to promote the production of food and cash crops and animals but are rarely given the training required to promote better diets and nutritional practices. By virtue of their direct access to rural farm families, extension staff are well placed to promote improved household food supplies and nutritious diets through the development of home gardening.
Where appropriate, agricultural extension workers can provide guidance and encourage the community to produce, not only for sale, but also for home consumption. It is a valuable investment in human resource development to expose extension workers to and train them to address human problems such as malnutrition as well as crop and animal production.
This training package has attempted to integrate food production and consumption issues and thereby to provide a comprehensive set of materials for teaching agricultural extension, home economics and community development workers to assist families in improving food production and adding nutritional value to their diets.
WHAT ARE THE COMPONENTS OF THE TRAINING PACKAGE?
The training package has three components:
- course materials and technical notes for trainers (marked in green) and course materials for participants (marked in yellow) - these are divided into ten sessions;
- information and participation
- home garden technology leaflets (marked in grey)
The course materials for trainers and participants provide an introduction to each topic and should be given to trainees as hand-outs after each session. The technical notes for trainers set out a programme of activities in which the trainer may lead the class.
The information sheets for trainers and participants contain technical information on each topic and should be distributed to and used by trainees as indicated in the technical notes for trainers.
The home garden technology leaflets are for use by extension workers and families whose members are able to read. There are 15 leaflets, each of which provides information on a different technology option or type of improvement a family may want to make to its home garden in order to increase food production, provide a greater diversity of fruit, vegetables and other plant crops and add nutritional value to its diet.
WHAT IS THE PURPOSE OF THE TRAINING PACKAGE?
The materials contained in the training package assist the trainer in showing how the home garden can make a significant contribution towards meeting daily family food needs for good nutrition and health. The aim of the course is to provide agricultural extension workers, home economists and community workers with the technical, extension and planning skills necessary to help rural households identify problems and opportunities for improving home food production and to attain better nutrition for all the family.
A variety of foods are necessary for good family nutrition but, to keep the training materials simple, their focus is on food crops such as roots, vegetables, legumes and fruit that are common in home gardens. There is less technical emphasis on other crops, small farm animals and fish.
WHO SHOULD DO THE TRAINING?
Ideally, two trainers are needed: one with a background in agriculture and the other with experience in community nutrition. Both should have experience in in-service training in the informal education sector and be familiar with the needs and problems of rural communities. Materials for trainees should be provided by the trainer in the form of hand-outs.
WHO SHOULD PARTICIPATE IN THE TRAINING COURSE?
The people to be trained include agricultural extension, home economics and community development workers as well as others concerned with nutrition improvement through community development. Trainees should have some secondary school education and have experience in agriculture, community work or practical family nutrition. Women's group leaders and home economics workers should also be encouraged to participate because their work is traditionally focused on assisting rural women in home gardening, budgeting and nutrition.
WHAT IS THE CONTENT OF THE TRAINING SESSIONS?
The training package is divided into ten sessions. The trainees gain an understanding of the home garden in daily family life and learn about nutrition in Sessions 1 to 4. The way a home garden can contribute to family and community nutrition is explored in Session 5, while Sessions 6 and 7 teach students how to assess a home garden and a family's nutrition status. Practical ways to plan and manage a home garden and nutrition improvement activities in a community are presented in Sessions 8 to 10.
Improving food production requires both technical and managerial solutions to problems encountered in the home garden. The technical part of the solution can only be found by field workers after they have worked with the community to appraise the situation. This training package follows such an approach, with technical and management issues carefully integrated into the course.
WHERE SHOULD THE TRAINING BE CONDUCTED?
The training should be conducted in a rural area in or near villages where trainees can visit home gardens and work directly with village families. Examples of suitable venues include local schoolrooms, a community meeting hall or a large local house. There should be accommodation nearby for those trainers or participants who come from outside the village.
HOW SHOULD THE TRAINING BE CONDUCTED?
The training requires access to both a classroom and the field, and encourages the trainer to make use of a range of training activities: formal classroom presentations, discussions, household visits and interviews, group work, role play and case-studies. Suggestions for trainers on how to conduct each session are contained in the technical notes for trainers. Fieldwork and household visits are often used directly after formal presentations to support, reinforce and practice what has been covered in the classroom.
WHAT IS THE DURATION OF THE TRAINING COURSE?
The training is designed to take six days to complete. Sessions I to 6 require half a day each, Sessions 7 and 8 require a full day each and Sessions 9 and 10 require half a day each but can be extended to one or more days, depending on the situation and aims of the organization supporting this training. Additional time needs to be allocated for refreshment breaks and travel to field sites, if necessary.
WHAT MATERIALS ARE NEEDED?
The trainer must have a copy of the training package and will also need a flip chart with large sheets of paper and pens, or a blackboard and chalk for teaching activities. Some of the charts, tables, forms, information sheets and home garden technology leaflets in the training package can be copied on to a flip chart prior to the training sessions. Materials, information sheets and survey forms for use by trainees during the sessions need to be photocopied.
Each participant should also receive a full set of home garden technology leaflets. Participants can use these in their daily work with farming families and also distribute them to literate farmers in the villages.
WHAT CONTRIBUTION DOES THE TRAINING COURSE MAKE TO IMPROVE NUTRITION AND COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT?
Every household and community is different, and so solutions to problems of food production and nutrition must be adapted to the needs of each family. Trained field workers can help each family to examine its home garden and select the changes that it can and wants to make. Later, the field worker can help the family to assess the improvements and evaluate the results.
While preparing these materials, it has not been possible to take account of individual country differences and needs. These should be assessed and the training materials adapted to fulfill the specific needs of different situations and countries in Southeast Asia.
<section>2</section>
Course materials and technical notes
Day 1
Session 1: The role of the home garden: Household survey 1
Session 2: The importance of better household food supplies
Day 2
Session 3 :Practical nutrition for field workers (1)
Session 4: Practical nutrition for field workers (2)
Day 3
Session 5: Contribution of the home garden to daily family food needs
Session 6: Case-study
Day 4
Session 7: Collecting data on food and nutrition problems and home garden utilization: Household Survey 2
Day 5
Session 8: Promoting home gardening for better nutrition
Day 6
Session 9: Plan of action (1)
Session 10: Plan of action (2)
Course materials and technical notes
Day 1
Session 1: The role of the home garden: Household survey 1
COURSE MATERIALS AND TECHNICAL NOTES
Objective
By the end of this session participants will be able to understand the importance of the home garden in the daily lives of rural people.
The home garden can produce many different things: fuel for cooking, wood for building, food, Income, medicinal plants, herbs, spices and flowers
OVERVIEW
The home garden is traditionally a very important piece of land for rural households of Southeast Asia. Covering an area of about 500 to 1 500 m^2, the structure and function of home gardens are similar throughout the region. The home garden can be defined as a farming system which combines different physical, social and economic functions on the area of land around the family home. Within the typical home garden are social areas for meetings, children's play and gardens for display; economic areas for growing food, medicinal plants and trees and for raising animals and fish; physical areas for storage, living, washing and waste disposal. It is a place for people to live in but it also produces a variety of foods and other things for both home use and income.
The major part of this session covers a home garden survey which concentrates on three important aspects - the home garden as:
- the most direct way of providing daily food;
- a source of income for the purchase of other foods;
- a means to produce non-food items such as medicinal herbs, spices, fuelwood and building materials.
ACTIVITIES
Note: The trainer must read and understand the Technical Notes for Session 1. The trainer must also have identified a household nearby for the class to visit.
Objective. The trainer states the objective of the session and explains how long it will be, how it will be conducted and what is expected from participants.
Discussion. The trainer uses the Technical Notes to explain technical points during the activities and leads the participants in a discussion. The trainer refers to the Technical Notes to explain:
- the definition of a home garden and its importance to households;
- the roles and uses of the home garden;
- foods commonly produced in the home garden.
The trainer invites participants to contribute to the discussion with examples from their own experiences. Next, the trainer prepares for the Household Survey by distributing Survey Form I and explaining each question.
Household visit. Trainer and participants visit a home garden. Participants walk around the home garden and make general observations. They then complete questions 1, 2, 3 and 4 of Survey Form 1 individually.
Small-group work. While they are still in the home garden, participants divide into small groups to compare their responses to questions 1, 2, 3 and 4 of Survey Form I and then to discuss and complete questions 5 and 6.
Group discussion. The trainer leads the whole group in a discussion aimed at reaching a consensus on the importance of the home garden to the household.
Summary. The trainer summarizes the main points of the session.
MATERIALS REQUIRED
- Survey Form 1.
TECHNICAL NOTES
THE ROLE OF THE HOME GARDEN: HOUSEHOLD SURVEY 1
Priority messages
THE HOME GARDEN IS AN IMPORTANT LAND UNIT FOR HOUSEHOLDS, AS IT IS OFTEN THE CENTRE OF FAMILY LIFE
A WELL-DEVELOPED HOME GARDEN IS A COMPLETE FARMING SYSTEM
THE HOME GARDEN IS THE MOST DIRECT MEANS OF SUPPLYING FAMILIES WITH MOST OF THE NON-STAPLE FOODS THEY NEED YEAR ROUND
The home garden is an important land unit for households, as it is often the centre of family life
The rural landscape in Southeast Asia is typically a mixture of different farming systems. Surrounding a lowland village is a rice-based agriculture with fields of rice and other staple crops (e.g. maize, sweet potato or beans) and cash crops (e.g. groundnuts or vegetables). On uplands further from the village, shifting agriculture is practiced and sometimes there are plantations of forest and of commercial or industrial crops such as tea, coffee and rubber.
Within the village, the small area surrounding a house is the home garden. Because the home garden is in the village, it is often close to a source of water, it is usually better protected from floods and wild animals than other farmland. Access is good because roads or paths lead to the village. This is where the family builds its house and it is the central daily living area.
The home garden can be defined as a farming system that combines different physical, social and economic functions on the area of land around the family home. It is used as a place of work and for the storage of farm produce. The home garden is also a place where people live and meet each other and where children play. Its economic functions are crop production and livestock rearing for home consumption or sale for income.
A well-developed home garden is a complete farming system
The home garden includes all of the functions of the entire farming system. A well-developed home garden can provide:
- Enough nutritious food, including some staple foods, for all the family year round. This also includes extra food stocks for processing and sale to obtain income, and a reserve for special occasions or emergencies (e.g. sometimes a staple food crop is lost in a flood, eaten by pests or reduced because the farmer falls sick and cannot work for a period of time).
- Income from the sale of home garden produce. Sale from home garden produce can make a substantial contribution to a family's income (to buy daily essentials and farming inputs that cannot be produced on the family's farmland as well as other goods and services).
- Important farm development activities take place in the home garden. Some farm inputs come from home garden activities, for example plant propagation, raising and housing draught animals, and making or repairing tools. The home garden is also a place for trying out new crops and farming techniques.
The home garden is the most direct means of supplying families with most of the non-staple foods they need year round
A well-developed home garden contributes significantly to daily food needs. It can supply households with nearly all the non-staple foods they need, such as fruit, vegetables, legumes, coconuts and root crops as well as spices, tea, coffee, medicines and flowers for ornamental purposes or for sale.
Food items that cannot be produced in the home garden or on other family land can be purchased from the sale of other items produced in the home garden. For example, coconut oil or woven mats produced from the home garden can be sold to traders or shops and the money used to buy foods that the family cannot grow.
The three kinds of farmland owned by typical families
SURVEY FORM 1
THE FUNCTIONS OF THE HOME GARDEN
1. What are the main uses of the home garden you are observing?
Social or living areas:
Rest or meeting area
Children's play area
Flower garden
Other
Physical or utility areas:
Storage rooms
Washing area
Crop drying/processing area
Other
Economic or production areas:
Food crop area
Plant nursery
Cash crop area
Other
2. Of the food items below, does the home garden produce none, some or all of what is needed?
Item
None
Some
All
Coconut
Tree fruits
Vegetables
Root crops
Legumes
Spices
Small animals
Coffee
Fish
Others
3. What major food items does the household purchase?
4. What are some of the things produced in the home garden for sale for income?
TO BE ANSWERED AFTER OBSERVING THE HOME GARDEN
5. Name the three most important ways in which the home garden contributes towards the daily food needs of households.
6. Why is the home garden important for households? Give three reasons.
Session 2: The importance of better household food supplies
Objective
By the end of this session participants will appreciate the importance of household supplies as a basic condition for the nutritional well-being of all the family. They will also be familiar with the food system; that is, the chain of activities from food production to food consumption
A family's nutritional well-being depends on adequate food supplies
OVERVIEW
Nutritional well-being requires access to enough nutritious and safe food to meet the dietary needs of all members of the household throughout the year. Attaining better food supplies and nutritional well-being is more than just producing enough food locally. It also requires sufficient resources (such as land and labour), tools, skills and knowledge. Roads and transport to markets are necessary so that goods such as food and other essentials can be traded and so that household members can find employment as well as having access to other commercial and government services.
This session focuses on the importance of household food supplies for the well-being and health of all its members. Factors that make it either easier or more difficult for people to obtain enough food are discussed.
ACTIVITIES
Note: The trainer must read and understand the Technical Notes for Session 2.
Objective. The trainer states the objective of this session and explains how long it will be, how it will be conducted and what is expected from participants.
Discussion. The trainer uses the Technical Notes to explain technical points during the activities and uses the following questions to lead participants in a discussion of how to improve household food supplies.
- What is the meaning of "a good food supply"?
- What are the effects of a household not having adequate food supplies?
- What factors contribute to the food supply of a household?
Small groups work on factors that make it difficult for a household to attain a good food supply. Groups record their summary and conclusions on the blackboard or large piece of paper. Participants divide into small groups to:
i) discuss and complete Table 2.1, Problems in the food system (p. 16-17);
ii) discuss one of the following sets of questions:
- How isolated is the village you are studying?
- Does isolation affect:
- Buying and selling opportunities?
- Work opportunities?
- When is isolation a constraint (all year or only part of the year)?
- Are locally grown products mainly sold in the village, neighboring villages or in more distant town markets?
- Is there an opportunity to expand marketing? If so, how?
- When village people buy food in the towns, which main foods do they purchase?
Which foods are more expensive, less expensive or about the same in price? Give some examples.
Presentation. Each group presents its findings to the other participants for discussion.
Review/summary. The trainer reviews the main points of the discussion. These points will serve as background information for Sessions 7 and 8.
MATERIALS REQUIRED
- Blackboard for group summary.
- Table 2.1, Problems in the food system.
TECHNICAL NOTES
THE IMPORTANCE OF BETTER HOUSEHOLD FOOD SUPPLIES
Priority messages
ADEQUATE HOUSEHOLD FOOD SUPPLIES ARE ESSENTIAL FOR FAMILY WELL-BEING AND ESPECIALLY FOR THE HEALTHY GROWTH AND DEVELOPMENT OF CHILDREN
SEVERAL FACTORS MAKE "FOOD FIRST "THE PRIORITY STRATEGY FOR HOME
GARDEN DEVELOPMENT
Adequate household food supplies are essential for family well-being and especially for the healthy growth and development of children
"A good household food supply" can be defined as having access to enough nutritious and safe food to meet the dietary needs of all household members year round. Households can obtain food supplies either through their own food production or food purchases, but more often through a combination of both. Some factors that help people to have enough food are sufficient fertile land, access to credit and agricultural advice, seeds and other inputs, good storage and a sufficient number of family members who are healthy and strong enough to work on the farm or to undertake off-farm employment.
Poor diets and inadequate food intake are not always the result of a lack of food or of money to buy food. People must have some knowledge of nutrition: the most important information is what kinds of food to eat and how to prepare the food in the right quantities and mixes and in a way that is safe and clean for children's healthy growth and development.
In Southeast Asia, too many young children become seriously ill because they do not eat enough of the right kinds of food. There is a direct link between having a variety of nutritious foods and staying healthy. Studies in Southeast Asia and around the world have shown that when people do not eat the right amount of nutritious food they cannot fight off illness, even when access to medical services and a healthy environment make it easier to stay healthy. It is also important for mothers to know about proper feeding practices and to be able to have enough time for child care to keep their children healthy and well nourished.
An inadequate diet can affect other members of the household as well. Many households have limited family labour available to work their farmland. A poor diet leads to poor work ability and illness, illness means visiting the health centre and too many visits to the health centre mean lost working time as well as lost money. These losses can be reduced or prevented if everyone in the family eats enough healthy foods, drinks clean water and practices good hygiene.
Several factors make "food first" the priority strategy for home garden development
Developing the home garden for food production is a very important part of attaining an adequate food supply for the household. There are several reasons why this is so.
One reason is the isolation of many rural villages. Food from other areas must sometimes be transported from far away so are either expensive to buy in the village or are not available.
Opportunities for earning income are also limited in a number of villages. Although cash crops (tobacco, rubber, tea, coffee, etc.) can provide income, many of these agricultural commodities obtain very low returns on investment at present. For isolated villages, the cost of transport to markets or factories is very high.
There are other factors in the food system that make it difficult to ensure that household food supplies are adequate. The most common ones are listed in Table 2.1, which should be used as a checklist to identify local problems in the food system.
Growing one's own food as much as possible makes the best economic sense. Fortunately, if properly developed, the home garden can supply a significant proportion of a household's daily food needs. The things that can be done to help families to grow enough of a variety of nutritious foods for their own consumption are discussed later in this course.
TABLE 2.1
Problems in the food system
Stage of food system
Typical problems in the food system
Typical problems in your local food system *.
Home garden land
- Shortage of land
- Unsure tenure
- Infertile land
- Shortage of water
Clearing the home garden
- Too few people to clear the land
- Hand tools which limit the amount of land cleared
- Late land preparation because of bad planning
Planting the home garden
- Limited variety of crops
- Cash crops grown instead of food crops
- Crops planted wrongly
- Poor seed distribution
- Limited inputs
- Limited extension advice
- Women farmers are not contacted by extension services
- Limited family labour
Harvesting the home garden
- Stealing of crops
- Labour shortage
- Late pest damage
Home storage and preservation
- Inadequate on-farm storage
- Producers sell most food
- Pests or mould destroy food
- Lack of equipment
- Insufficient knowledge of food preservation
Food distribution and marketing
- Markets tar from food-producing areas
- Poor roads
- Shortage of lorries and spare parts
- Shortage and high cost of fuel
- Inefficient marketing system
Buying
- Lack of money
- Too many debts
- Not enough money budgeted for food
- Poor-value foods bought
- Healthy foods difficult to get
Food preparation
- Parents not knowing the right foods to cock
- Lack of fuel
- Lack of mother's time
- Shortage of equipment
- Shortage of water
- Low-prestige foods not used
- Food values lost in cooking
Sharing within the family
- Children not getting adequate share of food
- Too many children
- Taboos on certain foods for children or mothers
- Bigger children eating taster
- Poor appetite
- Lack of information on children's needs
Eating
- Loss of appetite through illness
- Food too bulky for enough to be eaten
- Infrequent feeding
- Lack of variety in foods
- Diarrhoea preventing body from keeping and using food
- Parasites taking food from body
- Increased nutrient requirements through illness
* Use this third column to write down the most important problems in your local food system.
Source: Adapted from FAO. 1985. Field programme management:: food and nutrition. A training pack: Rome.
Day 2
Session 3 :Practical nutrition for field workers (1)
Objective
By the end of this session participants will:
- understand the meaning of the word "nutrition";
- know what food consists of;
- know why nutrients are needed and the amount of each kind needed;
- know the value of specific foods
Home garden produce
OVERVIEW
Most people eat because they are hungry. However, while the feeling of hunger tells you to eat, it does not tell you what to eat. Field workers promoting home gardening need to have a basic understanding of nutrition in order to help households achieve adequate daily nutrition. This session will define the meaning of "nutrition" and identify the main nutrients in food. It discusses the importance of each nutrient, how much of each nutrient is needed in the diet and the nutrient value of different foods.
ACTIVITIES
Note: The trainer must read and understand the Technical Notes for Session 3.
Objective. The trainer states the objective of this session, explains how long it will be, how it will be conducted and what is expected from participants.
Discussion. The trainer uses the Technical Notes to lead a discussion on the following questions:
- What is "nutrition" about? Participants should try to explain what their understanding of "nutrition" is.
- What are the nutrients in food and what are they for?
- Does the amount and type of food needed by different people vary? How does it vary? Why does it vary?
Discussion of the value of different foods. The trainer uses Survey Form 1 (from Session 1), to list on a blackboard the main foods grown in local home gardens. The trainer asks participants to estimate the value of each food in terms of energy (carbohydrates and fat), protein and micronutrients (vitamins and minerals).
After the group discussion and presentation, the trainer confirms or adjusts the participants' estimate, referring to Table 3.3, Nutritional value of home garden foods (p.24). Finally, the trainer distributes or displays Table 3.3 as a reference document for the activities in Session 4(2).
Reading for information on dietary deficiencies. The trainer draws the following box on the blackboard and invites participants to speculate briefly on the effects of the lack of specific nutrients.
Symptoms of nutritional deficiencies
Cause
Effects
Not enough energy
Lack of fat in the diet
Too few protein foods
Lack of iron (Fe)
Lack of vitamin A
Lack of iodine
Lack of vitamin C
Participants then read Information Sheet 5, Food and nutrition problems. After reading, they complete the box together with the trainer.
Summary. As a group, participants use important information from this session to think of messages to spread among family members. For example:
- Variety is important in the diet.
- Different foods contain different kinds and amounts of nutrients.
- Meals should contain a mixture of several kinds of food.
- If children do not get the right kinds of food, they will not develop properly.
- The home garden can contribute significantly to the family's daily food needs.
MATERIALS REQUIRED
- Survey Form 1.
- Table 3.3, Nutritional value of home garden foods.
- Information Sheet 5, Food and nutrition problems.
- Blackboard for Box, Symptoms of nutritional deficiencies, and for group summary.
TECHNICAL NOTES
PRACTICAL NUTRITION FOR FIELD WORKERS (1)
Priority messages
"NUTRITION" IS ABOUT FOOD AND HOW IT IS USED IN THE BODY
FOOD IS MADE UP OF A COMBINATION OF NUTRIENTS
NUTRIENTS ARE NEEDED TO KEEP THE BODY ALIVE AND HEALTHY
THE AMOUNT OF NUTRIENTS NEEDED VARIES FOR EACH PERSON AND AT DIFFERENT STAGES OF LIFE
"Nutrition" is about food and how it is used in the body
Nutrition is an area of knowledge and practice. It is concerned with the food system; that is, how food is produced, collected, bought, processed, sold, prepared, shared and eaten. It is also concerned with what happens to food in the body - how it is digested, absorbed and used and how it finally influences the well-being of the human body.
Food is made up of a combination of nutrients
Food is made up of nutrients such as carbohydrates, fats, protein and micronutrients (vitamins and minerals). Nutrients are needed for energy (for activities such as working, playing, running), for growth (building and maintaining the body) and for protection against infection.
In the past, nutrition workers used the idea of the "three food groups" (food for energy, food for building the body and food for protection) when they taught people to plan meals. However, it is important to teach that many foods belong to more than one food group and that people need to eat a variety of foods to stay healthy.
For example, most of the foods in Table 3.1, Nutrient composition of raw foods, contain some of each type of nutrient. They all contain carbohydrates and fats for energy, protein for building and maintaining the body, and small amounts of vitamins and minerals for protection against infection.
However, each food has different amounts of each nutrient, so the message to convey is that, to get a balanced diet, people must eat a variety of different foods. For example, groundnuts and soybeans are good sources of carbohydrate, fat and protein but provide very little vitamin A and C; or rice is a good source of carbohydrate but is a poorer source of protein, fat and vitamins. To balance their diet, people must complement staples such as rice (rich in carbohydrates) with foods from animal sources (rich in protein) and green leafy vegetables, such as pumpkin leaves and yellow-coloured fruits, which are very rich in vitamins.
TABLE 3.1
Nutrient composition of raw foods
Foods (100g)
Energy (heal)
Protein (8)
Fat (g)
Vitamin A (Re)*
Vitamin C (g)
Rice (polished)
Groundnut
Soybean
Pumpkin leaves
Guava
*Re = Retinol equivalents in _g: 1 Re = 33.3 International Units (IU).
Nutrients are needed to keep the body alive and healthy
Most farmers know that crops need certain nutrients in order to grow well. Plants get these nutrients from the soil or from fertilizer. In a similar way, people need certain types and quantities of nutrients from their diet, from the time of conception to old age. A lack of nutrients leads to illness and even death and, in young children, affects growth and development as well as health (see Information Sheet 5, p.95)
The amount of nutrients needed varies for each person and at different stages of life
The amount of energy and nutrients that people need to obtain from their food in order to keep healthy and active varies with age, sex, level of activity, pregnancy, lactation and state of health. The most critical stage of human development is from conception to about 36 months. This is when physical growth occurs most rapidly. Therefore, it is crucial that pregnant and lactating women and small children receive the right amount of nutritious food in order to ensure proper growth, brain development and resistance to infection.
Table 3.2 shows the estimated nutritional requirements for a family household with five members. It shows that children need a large amount of energy - more than half that required by many adults.
Please note that the table mentions only some of the vitamins and minerals essential for health and development. There are many others which are important and must be provided in a daily diet.
TABLE 3.2
Daily requirements of energy, protein, fat, vitamins A and C for different sex and age groups
Family member
Age (Years)
Energy (kcal)
Protein (g)
Fat (g)
Vitamin A (Re)
Vitamin C (mg)
Father (active)
Lactating mother
Child-bearing age
Child (1)
Less than 1
Child (2)
Child (3)
*The assumption is that breast milk satisfies the child's needs.
TABLE 3.3
Nutritional value of home garden foods
Energy
Protein
Fat
Vitamin A
Vitamin C
Avocado
Cashew nut
Avocado
Fruit
Cashew fruit
Banana
Cowpea
Cashew nut
Banana
Citrus
Breadfruit
Eggs
Coconut milk
Bitter cucumber
Custard apple
Canna root
Fish
Coconut oil
Canistel
Guava
Cashew nut
Groundnuts
Groundnuts
Mango (ripe)
Litchi
Cassava
Hyacinth bean
Milk and milk products (buyer, ghee, etc.)
Papaya (ripe)
Longan
Coconut flesh
Long bean
Pumpkin
Mango
Coconut oil
Meat
Papaya (ripe)
Groundnut
Milk
Leaves
Pineapple
Jackfruit
Mung bean
Amaranth
Rambutan
Maize
Pigeon pea
Bitter cucumber
Soursop
Rice
Sesbania grandiflora
Cassava
Tomato
Sugar cane
Soybean
Drumstick tree
Sweet potato
Wing bean
Gnetum gnemon
Taro root
Papaya
Yam
Pumpkin
Sauropus sp.
String bean
Sweet potato
Taro
Water spinach
Note: The table indicates which foods are particularly rich in these nutrients.
Session 4: Practical nutrition for field workers (2)
Objectives
By the end of this session participants will be able to:
- recognize nutritional deficiencies in diets;
- plan balanced meals using locally grown foods;
- identify useful snacks made locally;
- list essential foods that can be grown in the home grade
OVERVIEW
A diet must contain enough of the right nutrients. Different cultures have their own traditional foods and cooking methods so it is important to recognize local food preferences when planning a diet. In this session participants will use their knowledge of nutrition and their own experience to recognize and plan nutritionally adequate meals and snacks and to draw conclusions about the potential contribution of the home garden to a good diet.
ACTIVITIES
Note: The trainer should be familiar with Table 3.3, Nutritional value of home garden food, (p.24). The trainer should read and understand the Technical Notes for Session 4 and use the information in the following activities.
Objective. The trainer outlines the objective of this session and explains how long it will be, how it will be conducted and what is expected from participants.
Exercise. The trainer gives the class an example of two meals. Together they review the composition of the meals, select the meal they feel is nutritionally complete and explain what is missing in the other one.
Example:
Meal 1
Meal 2
Taro root
Fish
Coconut oil
Rice
Pumpkin flesh
Cassava leaves
Pineapple
Question and answer. The trainer introduces Table 4.1, Composition of food eaten by a typical family in one day (p.28) and refers to Table 3.3, Nutritional value of home garden foods. In order to understand the nutritional value of the daily diet of a family, participants study the tables and ask each other questions on important facts. For example:
- Which has more vitamin A, three cups of spinach or two cups of string bean leaves?
- Which nutrient(s) does coconut oil contain?
- Which combination of foods would provide enough protein for a three-year-old child?
Snacks. Snacks are the foods that you eat between main meals. The trainer talks about the value of snacks as a contribution to the diet (see technical notes) and refers participants to Information Sheet 8, Snacks for young children (p. 105). Together, the trainer and participants make a list of local snack foods and estimate the nutritional value for each snack.
Small-group work. The trainer talks about the value of food and the reasons why families like different foods. Participants then divide into small groups and plan family meals for one day (breakfast, morning snack, lunch, afternoon snack, dinner). The size of the family and the age and sex of family members should be as given in Table 3.2. Participants must:
- plan the meal using the foods grown in the home garden that they observed in Household Survey 1 of Session 1;
- plan for nutritional variety and completeness;
- specify what other foods need to be added to complete the diet, and estimate the cost of these foods.
Helpful ideas for participants are provided in Information Sheet 6, Recipes for family meals (p.97).
Presentation. Each small group presents the day's diet to the class and responds to their comments.
Summary. The class as a whole notes the most common foods in their plan of the day's diet and divides the foods into:
- foods that can be grown in the home garden;
- foods that must be bought from the market or shop.
MATERIALS REQUIRED
- Copies and/or charts of Tables 3.3 and 4.1.
- Information Sheet 6, Recipes for family meals.
- Information Sheet 8, Snacks for young children.
- Blackboard for summary.
TECHNICAL NOTES
PRACTICAL NUTRITION FOR FIELD WORKERS (2)
Priority messages
SNACK FOODS FROM THE HOME GARDEN CAN BE AN IMPORTANT SOURCE OF NUTRIENTS
THERE ARE MANY REASONS WHY FAMILIES LIKE DIFFERENT FOODS. THE NUTRITIONAL VALUE OF A FOOD IS ONLY ONE FACTOR TO CONSIDER WHEN PLANNING MEALS
COMPLETE, NUTRITIOUS AND TASTY MEALS CAN BE PLANNED BY ADDING ITEMS FROM THE MAIN FOOD GROUPS TO THE NORMAL STAPLE FOOD
Snack foods from the home garden can be an important source of nutrients
Snack foods eaten between main meals are a normal part of the family diet. They are usually foods that provide energy quickly and are eaten fresh or cooked. A batch of cooked snack foods such as cassava cakes and coconut sweets can supply the family for several days. Some good snack foods are:
- cooked or fried root crops and maize;
- starchy fruits (e.g. banana, cooked breadfruit);
- sweet fruits (e.g. mango, ripe papaya, sugar cane);
- roasted groundnuts and soybeans.
A home garden containing a wide variety of crops for snack food helps to maintain good nutritional levels in the family.
There are many reasons why families like different foods. The nutritional value of a food is only one factor to consider when planning meals
Agricultural workers often think of food in terms of different crops. Some are hard to grow, some are easy to grow, some get good prices at the market. Field workers concerned with improving nutrition think of the nutritional content of food. However, families may consider other things besides farming and nutrition. They choose the food they eat for a variety of reasons, including habit, tradition end preference for a particular taste, texture end colour as well as the time it takes to prepare a meal. Many people feel that they have not eaten properly if they have not had one of their normal staple foods at least once a day.
Complete, nutritious and tasty meals can be planned by adding items from the main food groups to the normal staple food
Use the Family mixed meal guide (p. 28) to plan meals for a varied and nutritious diet. Start with a local starchy staple (such as rice, cassava, maize, yam, taro or sweet potato) and combine it with one or more foods from each of the food groups.
Family mixed meal guide
In this way people can choose the foods they enjoy as well as plan complete and nutritious meals that satisfy the body's physiological needs.
TABLE 4.1
Composition of food eaten by a typical family In one day
Kind of food
Weight
Amount (g)
Energy (kcal)
Protein (g)
Vitamin A (IU)*
Vitamin C (mg)
Iron (mg)
Rice
3.5 cups, dry
Soybean curd
2 large pieces
Fresh fish
6 medium pieces
Spinach
3 cups
Papaya (ripe)
5 medium slices
Cassava root
10 pieces
Long bean leaves
2 cups
Gnetum gnemon leaves
2 cups
Banana
5 pieces
Coconut oil
Coconut flesh
2 small nuts
Total
Portion of daily need (%)
*IU = International Units.
Note: The family consists of a father, mother and three children. See Table 3.2 (p.23) for their sex and ages. Values are approximate.
Source: Soerojo, R. 1991. The utilization of home gardens for the improvement of family nutrition and income. In Proc Seminar on Pekarangan Land. Development Possibilities and their contribution to Farmers' Welfare, p. 108--116. Centre for Agro-Socioeconomic Research, AARD, Ministry of Agriculture, Indonesia, with FAO
Day 3
Session 5: Contribution of the home garden to daily family food needs
Objective
By the end of this session participants will understand the contribution a home garden can make to the food supply that a family needs each day.
Food groups
OVERVIEW
The home garden, if large enough, has the potential to supply most of the non-staple foods and some of the staple foods (e.g. roots and tubers and some rice) that a family needs each day of the year. In every village there are examples of home gardens which are managed well. These home gardens produce a wide variety of food crops which supply the family throughout the year with fruits and vegetables, roots and tubers, some meat and fish, legumes, spices, medicines, etc. Two examples are studied in detail.
ACTIVITIES
Note: The trainer should read and understand Information Sheets I to 4 (p.8 1-93) as well as the Technical Notes for Session 5 and then use this information in the following activities.
Objective. The trainer states the objective of this session and explains how long it will be, how it will be conducted and what is expected from participants.
Reading. Participants divide into four groups. Each group studies one of the following sets of information sheets and the corresponding home garden technology leaflets, and prepares to answer questions about them.
- Information Sheet 1, Soil management, and Home Garden Technology Leaflets 5, 6 and 7;
- Information Sheet 2, Water management, and Home Garden Technology Leaflet 8;
- Information Sheet 3, Weed and pest management, and Home Garden Technology Leaflets 7,9 and 10;
- Information Sheet 4, Crop management, and Home Garden Technology Leaflets 11, 12, 13 and 14;
- Information Sheet 5, Food and nutrition problems, and Home Garden Technology Leaflets 1 and 2.
Question and answer. The trainer displays the summary notes listed on p. 31. Using these as a guide, participants think of questions about each subject to ask each group in turn.
Talk and discussion. The trainer introduces an example of a well-developed home garden (Figure 5.1, p.35) and invites participants' comments on:
- the variety of uses of the example home garden;
- aspects of management (such as the "raised bed" system or multilayer cropping);
- the nutritional variety and adequacy of the crops produced.
The trainer adds comments and confirms or qualifies the participants' comments in order to highlight the major aspects of good home garden development (see Technical Notes).
Local examples. Participants are asked to give examples of good home garden management from their own experience.
Summary. The trainer summarizes the conclusions from the session.
MATERIALS REQUIRED
- Blackboard or chart display of the Summary Notes.
- Figure 5.1, A home garden on mixed land, and related notes.
- Information Sheets 1 to 4.
- Home Garden Technology Leaflets.
- Blackboard for group discussion and summary.
SUMMARY NOTES
(for question and answer activity)
SOIL MANAGEMENT
Protect the soil
Feed the soil
- Cover the soil with plants
- Mulch around plants
- Clear only the areas to be planted
- Make and use compost
- Use barriers to stop loss of soil
- Grow green manure crops
- Plant legumes
WATER MANAGEMENT
Dry season
Wet season
- Plant in sunken areas
- Raise mounds
- Select appropriate crops
- Select crops that like water
- Use all water sources
- Protect young plants from rain
- Mulch
- Use tall containers
- Shade
- Use a trellis
- Remove weeds
- Dig in organic matter
- Dig in organic matter
WEED AND PEST MANAGEMENT
Insects and diseases
Animals
- Feed the soil
- Root crops - coconut shells
- Plant in suitable place
- Make a fence
- Plant in suitable season
- Plant a living fence
- Select strong variety
- Do not repeat same plant in same place
Weeds
- Remove diseased parts
- Cut or cultivate
- Use ash or spray
- Mulch
- Include insect-repellent plants
- Cover crop and create natural shade
- Remove weeds
CROP MANAGEMENT
Multiple cropping
Multilayer cropping
- Plant together, harvest different time
- Climbing plants
- Follow one crop with another kind
- Plants of different height
- Do not put same plant in same place
- Long-term system
- Trellis
Intensive vegetable square
- Select crops that the family likes
- Protect the area
- Feed the soil
- Do not put same plant in same place
MAKING AND USING A HOME GARDEN MAP
Appraising the home garden Planning improvement
- Identify three different areas - Set objectives
- Get the right people to help - Locate technology options using the map
TECHNICAL NOTES
CONTRIBUTION OF THE HOME GARDEN TO DAILY FAMILY FOOD NEEDS
Priority messages
A WELL-DEVELOPED HOME GARDEN MAKES A VITAL CONTRIBUTION TO HOUSEHOLD FOOD SUPPLIES BY:
- SUPPLYING A VARIETY OF NUTRITIOUS FOODS ALL YEAR
- PROVIDING INCOME FROM THE SALE OF ITS PRODUCTS
WELL-DEVELOPED HOME GARDENS EXIST IN MOST VILLAGES
IMPROVING THE HOME GARDEN MEANS EXPANDING ITS STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION
A well-developed home garden makes a vital contribution to household food supplies
A home garden can supply a family with substantial quantities of a variety of foods all year round. First, the home garden can produce food for meals; and, second, products from the home garden can be sold for income to buy other essential things.
The priorities for family food supplies are an adequate quantity and sufficient variety. The household needs enough staple food, but also enough of the right kind of other foods. Variety in the home garden produces different foods with essential nutrients. Young children, especially, need a sufficient quantity and variety of food.
The household also needs the right food in all seasons of the yea' Food production is often lowest from the middle of the dry season to the middle of the wet season. The start of the wet season is also the time when sickness among young children is most common and they need foods rich in vitamins for protection. A well-developed home garden can provide food in all seasons. Snack foods from the home garden are also important in the family diet.
Income from the home garden also contributes to the household food supply. Some crops, animals or products made in the home garden (e.g. handicrafts) can be sold or exchanged for food or other things needed for the well-being of the family (e.g. education, health care, clothing).
Well-developed home gardens exist in most villages
Well-developed home gardens can be found on a walk through most villages. These households have the ideas, skills and resources to produce all year many different staple crops, roots, vegetables, fruits, livestock and sometimes fish.
Many layers of plants can be seen in a well-developed home garden. Tall plants are combined with shorter plants. Plants grown together mature at different times. Animals consume plants from the home garden and return manure to the soil.
Improving the home garden means expanding its structure and function
It is clear from Figure 5.1 that the key to improving household food supplies is to improve the physical structure and technical system of the home garden. To achieve this, four important principles must be observed:
Diversify the kinds of crops and animals to provide a variety of foods in all seasons of the year. Most well-developed home gardens grow a large number of different crops as well as different varieties of one crop. As an example, one well-diversified home garden had more than 35 different crops as well as three types of livestock. This family said that their home garden produced nearly all it needed.
Intensify the home garden structure in order to produce the maximum amount of foods and other products from the area available. Production from most home gardens can be intensified - that is, more things can be produced using the same amount of land and about the same amount of inputs. Well-developed home gardens typically use a cropping system in which different crops are selected which can be grown together in the same place. An example is planting sweet potato and mung bean together between fruit-trees. All the plants share the light, water and soil nutrients because they have different heights and are harvested at different times. In this way, three crops are produced where there normally would only be one crop. A mature multilayer structure in which trees meet overhead can have other crops planted beneath and does not require much work after it is established, but careful selection of suitable crops is important.
Increase the number of products and activities in the home garden. Surveys show that most households are able to increase the number of products or conduct more activities in their home garden. Well-developed home gardens use the land for a number of products and activities, including food production, production for income, the production of spices, the manufacture of medicines and the provision of fuelwood and building materials.
Improve the productivity of individual crops to reduce losses and use inputs better. Home garden surveys have shown that the growth and yield from most crops could be improved with very little extra effort by making use of natural resources. Organic matter can be used to improve the soil, while multistory cropping can increase production by improving home garden conditions.
FIGURE 5.1: A home garden on mixed land
Structure
The home is 1 000 m^2 and is located in a region of undulating land. There is a very small area of flat land around the house (10 percent of the total area) gut the majority is sloping land (more than 30 degrees of slope) and wetland. The sloping land is planted in a multilayer structure of crops. Short-term, medium-term plants planted are planted together in the same area. The wetland has been made into four sunken beds. Rice is grown in two beds and fish and water spinach (Ipomoea aquantica) in the other two beds. Various tree crops are grown on the raised between the sunken beds.
Function
The home garden function mainly as a source of daily food and income. In addition, it provided spices and medicinal herbs.
Nutrition contribution
The home garden is the major supplier of daily food. Agricultural products and brick are also to purchase food and other items that cannot be produced in the garden. The combination of foods from crops, livestock and fish gives a good diet in terms of energy, protein and micronutrients.
Session 6: Case-study
Objective
In this session, participants apply their knowledge of nutrition and home garden potential to a case-study in preparation for applying it to a real life situation.
Some home garden crops
OVERVIEW
By now, most of the technical information of this training package has been conveyed. The remaining training sessions teach participants how to apply this knowledge in various ways. Therefore, in this session the knowledge and concepts covered so far are actively reviewed and are then used in a case study of a household situation. The case-study is analysed and recommendations are made.
ACTIVITIES
Note: The trainer should read and understand the Technical Notes for Session 6 and use this information in the session's activities. The trainer should also be familiar with the Case-study Notes (p.41) and Case-study Diagnosis (p.43).
Objective. The trainer states the objective of this session and explains how long it will be, how it will be conducted and what is expected from participants.
Information review. This activity may be done by small groups or by the whole class. Using the Review Notes (p.39), the trainer writes the Elements of information on one part of the blackboard and draws Figure 6.1, Information review chart on the other part. The trainer asks participants to suggest where the information elements fit on the review chart. Note that these are only some examples of information elements and new elements can be added or repeated. Try to keep the chart simple.
Case-study. This exercise may be done by the whole class or by small groups with a summary by the whole class, depending on the time available. Participants read the Case-study Notes and discuss the significance of each piece of information. In the summary, the trainer should refer to the Case-study Diagnosis.
Recommendations. As a summary of the session, the whole group should formulate and agree on a short list of priority recommendations for the case-study household.
MATERIALS NEEDED
- Review Notes.
- Case-study Notes and Case-study Diagnosis.
- Blackboard or large piece of paper for group review and summary.
REVIEW NOTES
ELEMENTS OF INFORMATION
Income
Wild animals
Ground cover
Labour shortage
Infertile land
Snack foods
Distant markets
Fuelwood
Living fences
Energy/carbohydrate
Raised bed system
Nuts, beans
Multilayer cropping
Lack of knowledge
Pumpkin leaves
Erosion
Night-blindness
Protein
Soil management
Cultural preference
Staple food
Vitamins A and C
Medicinal plants
Fatigue
Variety of foods
Protection from infection
FIGURE 6.1: Information review chart
TECHNICAL NOTES
CASE-STUDY
Priority messages
MANY HOME GARDENS ARE NOT FULLY DEVELOPED IN STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION
IMPROVING THE HOME GARDEN MAKES GOOD ECONOMIC AND NUTRITIONAL SENSE
Many home gardens are not fully developed in structure and function
As discussed in the previous session, examples of well-developed home gardens exist in most villages. The home garden is used to obtain household food supplies and contribute to family well-being through two main activities:
- by growing a variety of foods;
- by producing goods that can be sold to buy essentials that cannot be grown on family farmland.
Unfortunately, far too many home gardens are not fully developed even after many years of occupancy. The home garden structure often shows poor use of the land, and its potential to produce crops and livestock is not reached. For example:
- the land is not intensively cultivated - many home gardens have only a single layer of plants;
- there is not enough diversity of crops, often a single-crop system is used;
- crops are poorly suited to their location;
- individual crop production is poor;
- trees produce poorly because of overcrowding or bad pruning;
- obtaining an income is the main reason for cultivating the home garden;
- home gardens are not well maintained and weeds overcome crops.
Improving the home garden makes good economic and nutritional sense
Many households produce cash crops and try to get some employment off the farm. It is uncertain whether these activities can earn enough income for purchasing an adequate diet. Also, for many commercial crops, a long period of growth and care is needed before produce can be harvested and sold, and future prices are not always certain. Thus, growing food in the home garden is a safe option for obtaining daily food and extra income.
Although food production is undertaken in nearly all home gardens, very few home gardens are actually producing enough food to supply most of the households' diet. In addition, an insufficient knowledge of nutrition undoubtedly contributes to food shortages and nutrition problems in the family.
This session's case-study exemplifies many of these problems.
CASE-STUDY NOTES
1. The family consists of a husband, wife and two children, aged five and two. The husband works full-time away from home.
2. The family has a 1 000 m^2 home garden in a humid tropical lowland climate and has been there for ten years. Previously, the family lived in a different area and had very little land.
3. The children both have coughs and the five-year-old cannot see well at night. The family's diet consists mainly of rice, with soybean and a few eggs. The mother thinks that the family eats reasonably well.
4. The main crops grown are coffee, pineapple, clove, cocoa, cassava, taro, katuk, soybean, groundnut and mung bean, with some banana, mango and long bean (see Table 6. 1).
5. Food shortages occur for five months from the middle of the dry season to the middle of the wet season. The family buys the extra food it needs, in particular rice. It says the home garden does not supply its food needs.
6. The home garden is used for both income and food. The cloves, cocoa, coffee and pineapple are cash crops. The household keeps a few chickens and ducks for home use and these roam the home garden freely.
7. With the present management, less than half the home garden is used for growing food at any time of the year. Seventy-five percent of the land is planted with annual plants and only 25 percent is planted with perennial tree crops (mostly clove and cocoa). Only 25 percent of the total land area is used for growing two or more crops at the same time in the same area (multiple cropping).
8. Many of the plants are growing poorly. The trees are not producing well and a large number do not bear any fruit - they appear unpruned. Some (e.g. the coffee) do not seem to have enough shade. The annual plants produce poorly in the dry season and are often eaten by animals, including the chickens.
9. The soil in this area is sandy and naturally infertile with a shallow topsoil. Twenty-five percent of the home garden is wetland and subject to floods, 50 percent is upland and flat. The remaining 25 percent is sloping but not terraced.
TABLE 6.1
Crops and animals produced in the case-study home garden
Crop/animal
Number of plan/animals
Bearing
Non-bearing
Coconut
Coffee
Banana
Pineapple
Rambutan
Jackfruit
Gnetum gnemon
Sesbania grandiflora
Mango
Clove
Cocoa
Cassava
Sweet potato
Taro
Yam
Amaranth
Cassava leaf
Katuk (Sauropus sp.)
Chili
Ginger
Turmeric
Lemon grass
Soybean
Groundnut
Long bean
Mung bean
Chickens (eggs, meat)
Ducks
CASE-STUDY DIAGNOSIS
1. There are four family members and it should be possible to feed them all well, if necessary, from the home garden. However, one family member works off the farm and therefore cannot contribute much work to the home garden. Most of the income goes towards paying the children's school fees and health care. The two young children are particularly vulnerable to the effects of poor nutrition.
2. The family's previous land was much smaller than its present home garden, so the management of a large piece of land is unfamiliar to them. It now has a much greater range of agricultural options and may therefore need advice.
3. The children's symptoms suggest that their diet is inadequate. The cause is not only a lack of appropriate foods but the parents' unawareness of the need for those foods. There is too little variety and a lack of fresh fruit and vegetables in the diet. In particular, the night blindness of the five-year-old is almost certainly due to a lack of vitamin A.
4/5. The crops produced for home consumption to some extent reflect these deficiencies. Some very common and nutritious fruits and vegetables are missing (e.g. citrus, papaya and pumpkin). Most of the other crops are produced for sale. Although there are several foods rich in vitamin A (e.g. taro leaves, katuk [Sauropus sp.] and cassava leaves) these do not appear in the diet. The home garden is not providing enough food and, as a result, the family is forced to purchase food. The family thinks that the home garden is insufficient, but it is not fully utilized. A lack of sufficient family labour is one of the contributory factors.
6/7. The home garden is used to a large extent for income. To see whether this is a wise policy, we would need to balance the income against the cash needed to provide the household with a proper diet. It is clear that the home garden is capable of producing much more. A multilayer, mixed cropping system is recommended, with a variety of plants of different heights grown in the same area. Since only 25 percent of the home garden is planted with trees, plenty of land is also available for planting more trees. The initial work involved in developing the home garden will need the husband's labour; once the garden is established, the wife will be able to carry out most tasks.
8. Productivity can be increased in other ways - by pruning, providing shade, choosing the best variety of plants for the area and increasing plant diversity. Better water management would entail using water run-off from the house roof, the washing area and kitchen, and mulching around annual plants that are sensitive to drought. Plants must be protected against local animals using fences or other plants.
9. Since the local soil is infertile and the land includes areas that are easily eroded and flooded, the household will first need assistance in soil management. The sloping land will need some protection from erosion. The wetland could be developed into a raised bed and canal cropping system. Soil fertility will need to be increased by fertilizing with organic matter.
Conclusion
From the information given, the main conclusion is that there are many ways to improve the situation. Home gardening for better nutrition can be improved through a strategy that:
- raises the household's awareness of the potential of the home garden to provide daily food requirements as well as some extra income;
- encourages, advises and supports households to take immediate action to improve their home gardens.
Day 4
Session 7: Collecting data on food and nutrition problems and home garden utilization: Household Survey 2
Objective
By the end of this session participants will be able to gather and interpret information needed to understand:
- the food and nutrition situation of a household;
- the actual and potential contribution of the home garden.
OVERVIEW
On this visit to a household, participants collect detailed information and use it to assess the household's food and nutrition situation. In this session, participants do not give advice or make recommendations. How to advise households is the subject of the next session.
ACTIVITIES
Note: The trainer must have selected a household nearby for the participants to visit. The husband and wife of the household must both be present to help the class with the survey. The trainer should be familiar with Survey Form 2 (p. 47) and the Notes for Surveyors (p. 55). This session will require one to two hours in class and two to three hours (more if travel to the field is required) for the household visits.
Preparation. Participants should read Survey Form 2 and discuss the purpose and significance of the questions referring to the Notes for Surveyors before visiting households. Table 2.1, Problems in the food system (p.17-18) will also be needed.
Household visit.
- Participants start a dialogue with household members, requesting them to answer questions of parts A, B. C and D (Background, Nutrition, Food sources and Problems in the food system) of Survey Form 2.
- Participants walk around and observe the home garden and complete parts E to H (Agricultural conditions, Biological load, Management of the home garden and Crops and livestock produced in the home garden) of Survey Form 2.
Note: The trainer should make a rough sketch map of the home garden, similar to Figure 5.1 (p.35), during the visit. It will serve as a reference for discussions in this session and Session 8.
Follow-up: preparation for group presentations. Participants divide into four groups, each to work on one set of questions of part I (Follow-up to Household Survey 2). Do not complete the Plan of action for the questions in part I, as this will be completed in Session 8. Following this, each group presents its findings on the respective follow-up question. The group presentations may be done immediately after the household survey or as a preliminary to the following session.
Summary. The trainer summarizes the conclusions of the session.
MATERIALS REQUIRED
- Copies of Survey Form 2 and Notes for Surveyors.
- Copies of Table 2.1, Problems in the food system.
- Blackboard for group summary.
SURVEY FORM 2
FOOD AND NUTRITION PROBLEMS AND HOME GARDEN UTILIZATION
A) Background
1. How many household members are there and what are their ages?
2. Do any household members have off-farm work now?
3. Do any household members have experience in farming or home gardening?
4. Do any household members think the home garden is adequate to supply their food needs?
5. What is the main function of the home garden at present?
Daily food needs
Income
Both
B) Nutrition
6. What did the children eat yesterday (including snacks)?
Morning -------------------------------
Afternoon -------------------------------
Evening --------------------------------
7. Do parents think they are feeding children enough of the right kind of food?
8. Have the children had any illnesses in the last month?
Illness
Number of times
Cough ------------------------------
Diarrhoea -----------------------------
Night-blindness ---------------------------
Other -------------------------------
C) Food sources
9. How much of the household's food comes from the home garden?
Most
About half
Much less than half
10. What important food items does the household buy with cash?
11. What important food items does the home garden supply for home consumption and how are they prepared?
Item
Preparation (fresh, cooked, processed)
D) Problems in the food system
12. What major problems are there in the food system (use Table 2.1 as a checklist)?
E) Agricultural conditions
13. What approximate percentage of the home garden land is:
Lowland swamp
Flat upland
Sloping upland ..?
14. What is the soil texture?
Sandy
Sandy clay
Clayey
15. How deep is the topsoil?
Shallow
Deep
16. What is the soil fertility like?
Poor
Adequate
Good
F) Biological load
17. Approximately what proportion of the total home garden land is used for:
Growing food
Other purposes ..?
18. How much of the total home garden land is used for growing:
Annual plants
Perennial plants ..?
19. How much of the total home garden land is planted in:
One layer of plants
Two layers of plants
Three or more layers of plants ...?
20. Are most of the plants growing well or poorly?
G) Management of the home garden
Item
Good
Poor
Remarks
Spacing of trees
Use of organic matter
Use of drains to grow food
Use of hedges and terraces on slopes
Protection from erosion
Pruning of trees
Layering of crops
Diversity of crops
H) Crops and livestock produced in the home garden
Record the number of plants and animals and their condition in Table 7.1 (p. 50).
TABLE 7.1
Home garden crops and animals
Crop/animal/product
Number of bearing plants
Number of non-bearing plants
Remarks
Coconut
Coffee
Banana
Pineapple
Rambutan
Jackfruit
Papaya
Mango
Cove
Citrus
Cocoa
Cassava root
Cassava leaf
Chili
Katuk (Sauropus sp.)
Sweet potato
Taro
Yam
Pumpkin
Spices: Ginger
Turmeric
Lemon grass
Groundnut
Long bean
Mung bean
Poultry eggs (duck, chicken)
Goats
Fish
I) Follow-up to Household Survey 2
1. Has the household achieved year-round food supplies?
- Yes
No
Does the diet provide sufficient energy and nutrients?
- If not, what is lacking? --------------------
- Why? -----------------------------------
What are the main child health problems identified by the household?
- Do these health problems indicate nutritional deficiencies? -----------
- What kinds of food would improve the household's diet? -----------
How much of the household's food needs are being met from the home garden?
What major problems are there in the food system?
Plan of action
How does the household plan to solve the food problems?
2. Could the home garden contribute more to household food needs in terms of quality and diversity ?
Yes
No
What nutrients are scarce?
Is there a variety of crops for each nutrient?
Which plants on the list of home garden crops and animals are not common in this home garden?
- Trees ---------------------------------
- Annual crops ------------------------------
Plan of action
What coos the family plan to grow?
What problems were raised and how can they be solved?
Problem
Solution
What aspects of nutrition did the family need to know about?
3. Could the home garden contribute a larger quantity of food to the household's supply?
- Yes
No
Does the soil need:
- Feeding
Water management
Erosion prevention ...?
Could productivity be significantly increased?
- If so, how?
- Multilayer planting ------------------------------
- Increased diversity ------------------------------
- Pruning ------------------------------
- Plant selection ------------------------------
- Use of organic matter ------------------------------
- Plant spacing------------------------------
- Pest management ------------------------------
Plan of action
How many plants will be planted and where?
Plant
Number
Location
a)
b)
c)
What are the problems and how can they be solved?
a)
b)
c)
4 What human resources are available?
Is the household well-informed about nutrition?
Is the household new to this area?
Are the household members experienced farmers?
Do they have a realistic appreciation of the home garden potential?
How much labour is available for the cultivation of the home garden?
Who does most of the work on the home garden?
Plan of action
What are the problems and what does the family plan to do?
Crop
Problem
Proposed action
General
NOTES FOR SURVEYORS
COLLECTING DATA ON FOOD AND NUTRITION PROBLEMS AND HOME GARDEN UTILIZATION: HOUSEHOLD SURVEY 2
A) Background
1. How many people are there in the household? We need to know the size of the household, the age and the nutritional needs of the family members.
2. Do any members of the household have off-farm work now? This tells us what labour is available to cultivate the home garden. Labour shortages are one of the major blocks to home garden development.
3. Do household members have experience in farming or home gardening? This question indicates how much advice and support they will need.
4. Do household members think the home garden is adequate to supply their food needs? Together with observations in Part E, this will show whether the household has a realistic appreciation of the home garden's potential.
5. What is the main function of the home garden at present? If a main function is to meet food needs, then we need to find out whether it is fulfilling this function. However, if income is the main purpose, we must ask if the income generated covers the cost of purchased foods and whether other food crops could be integrated into the cash crop system.
B) Nutrition
6. What did the children eat yesterday (including snacks)? A danger sign is a lack of nutritional variety throughout the day. In particular, we need to know if children eat enough fruit and vegetables that are rich in vitamins A and C.
7. Do parents think they are feeding the children enough food of the right kind? The answer to this question, together with the other data gathered, should show whether the household is well-informed about what a nutritious diet is.
8. Have the children had any illnesses in the last month? Night-blindness indicates a lack of vitamin A in the diet. Coughs might also be due to a vitamin A deficiency reducing resistance to infections. Diarrhoea means that children are losing nutrients and water, in which case they need regular feeding and sufficient liquids to prevent dehydration.
C) Food sources
9. How much of the household's food comes from the home garden? This indicates how well the home garden is providing food for the household, and also the need for cash to buy food.
10. What important food items does the household buy with cash? Surveyors should try to find out which foods could be produced in the home garden in order to save cash. Questions 12 and 13 together indicate how much the home garden is contributing to household food supplies.
11. What important food items does the home garden supply for home consumption and how are they prepared? Interviewers should try to identify crops that have the potential for simple home processing (e.g. banana, cassava) but are not being processed by the household (see Information Sheet 7, Home processing and preparation of weaning foods, p.101).
D) Problems in the food system
12. What important problems are there in the food system? Answers to this question will indicate major impediments to household food supplies - real and imagined.
E) Agricultural conditions
13. What percentage of the home garden is lowland swamp, flat upland or sloping upland? The answers will indicate what needs to be done to improve the quality of the soil, such as feeding the soil or erosion protection.
14. What is the soil texture? Sandy soil will not hold much water and dries out quickly; it may need a lot of organic matter to retain water and improve productivity. Clayey soil will hold water but may be difficult to work in the dry season.
15. How deep is the topsoil? Shallow soil will need more improvement than deep soil. Shallow soil can indicate an erosion problem.
16. What is the soil fertility like? Poor soil will need more work to improve it.
F) Biological load
17. What percentage of the total home garden area is used for growing food or for other purposes? We need to know what else the land is being used for so that we can estimate what proportion is available for growing crops. We can then decide whether or not this remaining land is fully used and whether it could produce more.
18. How much of the total home garden is used for growing annual plants or perennial plants? Introducing more perennial plants, especially trees, can increase the productivity of the land by extending the top layer of plants, providing shade and natural compost and preventing the growth of weeds.
19. How much of the total home garden land is planted in one layer, two layers or there or more layers of plants? The multilayer system also increases productivity.
20 Are most of the plants growing well or poorly? If some plants are growing poorly, we need to study the management of the plants.
G) Management of the home garden
Spacing of trees. If trees are overcrowded, they will be competing for light and nutrients.
Use of organic matter. Mulch should be used to conserve moisture around annual plants that are sensitive to drought. Manure and compost should also be dug into the soil to feed it.
Use of drains to grow food. Water run-off from wells and kitchens should be used for crops when water is scarce.
Use of hedges and terraces on slopes. The contour across slopes should be structured to prevent erosion.
Protection from erosion. Soil should be covered by plants or mulch and barriers should be in place to prevent soil from being washed away.
Pruning of trees. Trees produce more when they are properly pruned.
Layering of crops. Different crops are good for the soil and promote nutritional variety.
Diversity of crops. The information gathered for part H will show in detail how many crops the home garden is producing. The greater the variety, the better the chances of ensuring that enough food is produced for family needs throughout the year.
H) Crops and animals produced In the home garden
Table 7.1 shows the productivity of each crop and animal and invites comments on those that should be producing better than they are now. Remarks should try to identify the reason for poor production. For example:
- coffee - lack of pruning
- mango - flowers, but never bears fruit (not suited to climate)
- citrus - poor fruit (must prune dead branches and fertilize)
Day 5
Session 8: Promoting home gardening for better nutrition
Objective
By the end of this session participants will be able to:
- understand how to use a consultative method to help households improve food supplies;
- survey a household and use the consultation method individually
OVERVIEW
The issues discussed so far have been mainly technical. However, promoting home gardening requires a strategy that takes account of the socio-economic situation and culture of the household and it should be seen as an interactive process. The importance of helping households to make their own decisions is stressed in a consultation, based on the use of part I (Follow-up to Household Survey 2 in Session 7). The consultation method is rehearsed in class before being practiced during individual household visits.
ACTIVITIES
Note: The trainer must be familiar with the Technical Notes for Session 8 and the Household Consultation Method (p.61) and have arranged for individual participants to visit households to conduct the consultation.
Objective. The trainer states the objective of this session and explains how long it will be (two hours in class and about two hours for the consultation), how it will be conducted and what is expected from participants.
Presentation. The trainer introduces the Household Consultation Method and the follow-up (part I) to Household Survey 2 (Session 7), reading through it briefly.
Role play using the data from Household Survey 2. The trainer explains the consultation method, referring to the notes on p.61-63.
- Participants divide into four or more groups and each group plays the role of household or consultant. For each of the four parts of the Household Consultation, there should be two households and two consultants represented.
Note: Wives are often responsible for the home garden, but both husband and wife should participate in the role play, as they make joint decisions on home garden development.
- Participants prepare their roles, briefing themselves on the data from Household Survey 2 and consulting Tables 8.1, 8.2 and 8.3 (p.64-66) if appropriate.
- Each group then portrays a consultation session. While watching, the remainder of the group completes part I, Follow-up to Household Survey 2 (Session 7).
Discussion. The whole group discusses its reactions to counseling and being counseled.
Individual visits. Participants should now make their own arrangements to visit a home garden individually where they will conduct a Household Survey and Consultation with the active participation of the household. The consultation is conducted by following the method practiced.
The day after completing the household consultation, each participant should present to the trainer a completed Survey Form 2, including part I.
MATERIALS REQUIRED
From Session 7:
- Sketch map of the surveyed home garden.
- Table 7.1, Home garden crops and animals (from Survey Form 2).
- Copies of Survey Form 2.
From Session 8:
- Copies of notes on Household Consultation Method.
- Table 8.1, Suggested minimum plantings for home gardens.
- Table 8.2, Suggested crop locations in the home garden.
- Table 8.3, Suggested layers of crops.
TECHNICAL NOTES
HOUSEHOLD CONSULTATION METHOD
Priority messages
HOUSEHOLD CONSULTATIONS SHOULD ASSIST RURAL PEOPLE IN MAKING THEIR OWN DECISIONS
HOUSEHOLD CONSULTATIONS SHOULD ASSIST RURAL PEOPLE IN MAKING THEIR OWN DECISIONS
This household consultation method is designed to help rural people make their own decisions about their system of food supply. Visiting consultants should provide information but should ask and listen as much as giving advice. It is not necessary to follow this method strictly; it is more important to work with members of the household to decide on actions to be taken to solve their food and nutrition problems.
At the start of the consultation, the consultants should greet the household members and make sure both wife and husband can participate in the consultation. The visiting consultants should also explain the purpose of their visit and make sure the family is comfortable about the questions and the implications of the answers.
The trainer should emphasize that, if a child's health problems appear urgent, the participants visiting that home should suggest a visit to the village health post.
HOUSEHOLD CONSULTATION
Preparation. Complete parts A to H of Survey Form 2 with the household. Next, during the consultation complete sections I to 4 of part I (Follow-up to Household Survey 2), as explained below.
Section 1. Has the household achieved year-round food supplies?
The consultant completes section 1, part 1, Survey Form 2 and:
- asks the mother to suggest ways of immediately helping the children to gain weight and grow, if necessary;
- identifies with the mother any nutritional gaps in the children's diet;
- discusses gaps in food availability with the husband and wife (e.g. lack of weaning foods, lack of time for the mother to feed the child) and identifies gaps in food processing, food preparation and food utilization;
- analyses with both husband and wife why these gaps exist;
- discusses how to fill these gaps by:
- growing more of what is needed
- growing and selling to purchase what cannot be grown;
- processing what is already available.
The consultant and the family together complete the Plans of action at the end of section 1, part 1, on Survey Form 2.
Section 2. Could the home garden contribute more to household food needs In terms of quality and diversity?
The consultant completes section 2, part I, Survey Form 2, and then:
- reviews Table 7.1, Home garden crops and livestock, with the family and discusses any obvious nutritional and food gaps;
- asks the family to suggest a few crops that it likes to eat but does not at present grow;
- discusses with the family why it is not growing these foods.
- If there is a technical problem (e.g. home garden structure, function, crop productivity), the consultant should give advice.
- If planting materials are in short supply, the consultant should advise on sources of or ways to improve supply (e.g. seed exchanges, starting a local nursery or obtaining supplies from the ministry of agriculture).
- If the family members do not know the food value of the selected crops, the consultant should provide a simple list such as Table 3.3, Nutritional value of home garden foods, if someone in the family can read. Otherwise, a drawing or poster showing all the different foods can be prepared for distribution to families after the work is completed.
The consultant and the family together complete the Plans of action at the end of section 2, part I, Survey Form 2.
Section 3. Could the home garden contribute a larger quantity of food to the household supply?
The consultant completes section 3, part I, Survey Form 2, and then:
- discusses with the husband and wife how this particular home garden structure can be intensified (e.g. more trees, multilayer cropping);
- discusses the remarks on individual crops in Table 7.1 with the husband and wife and brings up any general or specific problems such as use of fertilizer, crop protection and better crop varieties;
- consults Table 8.1, Suggested minimum plantings for home gardens, and decides with the husband and wife on the number of each crop to be planted;
- consults Tables 8.2, Suggested crop locations in the home garden, and 8.3, Suggested layers of crops, and identifies possible locations for the selected plants. The consultant should make a simple sketch map of the home garden and explain to the farmers why it is useful.
The consultant and the family together complete the Plans of action at the end of section 3, part I, Survey Form 2.
Section 4. What are the human resources?
The consultant completes section 4, part I, Survey Form 2, and then:
- discusses with the husband and wife the importance of nutrition knowledge to the health of their family members;
- describes the ways that the husband and wife can find out more about nutrition (such as nutritious local foods, cooking and food processing methods, local health centres, women's groups) and farming techniques (such as good home gardens in the area, farmers' groups or agricultural extension agents);
- provides copies of appropriate home garden technology leaflets (if available) for their reference;
- describes the potential of the home garden, pointing out how local conditions such as land area, labour, soil type or rainfall will limit or enhance the garden's food potential, and decides with the husband and wife how much time they can make available for work required in the garden.
Together, the consultant and the family complete the Plans of action at the end of section 4, part I, Survey Form 2.
TABLE 8.1
Suggested minimum target plantings for home gardens
Crop
Mini mum number
Every three months Frequency
Root crops
Sweet potato
Taro
Yam
Cassava
Legumes
Groundnut
Soybean
Mung bean
Long or French bean
Vegetable crops
Water spinach
+ (upland)
Pumpkin
Amaranth
Rape or jute
Katuk (Sauropus sp.)
Cassava (leaves)
Fruit
Papaya
Coconut
Banana
Jackfruit
Guava
Citrus
Spices and medicinal plants
Lemon grass
Chili
Black pepper
Garlic or onion
Ginger
TABLE 8.2
Suggested crop locations In the home garden
Plants for moist areas
Plants that cover the soil
Taro
Pumpkin, cucumber
Water spinach
Vine legumes
Sugar cane
Sweet potato
Banana
Lemon grass
Plants to grow on a trellis
Plants as living fences
Wing bean
Katuk (Sauropus sp.)
French bean
Long bean
Pandanus
Cassava
Pumpkin
Pineapple
Gourd
Lemon grass
Passionfruit
Gliricidia sp.
Yam
Salak
Black pepper
Bitter cucumber
Plants to grow under a trellis (shade)
Most leafy plants
Some root crops, e.g. taro, sweet potato
TABLE 8.3
Suggested layers of crops
Crop
Upper storey
Middle storey
Lower storey
Coconut
x
x
Breadfruit
x
Durian
x
Tamarind
x
Sesbania grandiflora
x
Rose apple
x
Jackfruit
x
Rambutan
x
Banana
x
Litchi
x
Cashew nut
x
Coffee
x
Papaya
x
Cocoa
x
Soursop, custard apple
x
Taro
x
Ginger
x
Katuk (Sauropus sp.)
x
Chili
x
Lemon grass
x
Tea
x
Sweet potato
x
Eggplant
x
Pumpkin
x
Yam
x*
Pepper
x*
Bitter cucumber
x*
Long bean
x*
Passionfruit
x*
*Vine crops that can grow on trees or trellises.
Day 6
Session 9: Plan of action (1)
Objective
By the end of this session participants will be able to:
- understand why a plan of action is essential for good management of a field programme;
- identify the main components of a plan of action for improving household food supplies through home gardening
A field worker discussing a home garden sketch map with farmers
OVERVIEW
Individual consultations are valuable but cannot give families all the knowledge and skills needed to make their own decisions and act on those decisions. The community as a group needs to take actions that make people aware of the importance and urgency of improved food production and better nutrition as well as to provide information and practical training on how to achieve these. Proper action requires planning, which can be done using a simple project planning method. In this session, the basic terminology and principles of project formulation are discussed, illustrated and applied.
ACTIVITIES
Note: The trainer must read and understand the Technical Notes for Session 9 and Project Outline 1: Training in home garden development (p.71).
Objective. The trainer states the objective of this session and explains how long it will be, how it will be conducted and what is expected from participants. A full day is needed for this session.
Presentation of method for project planning. The trainer uses the Technical Notes to introduce the elements of a project, emphasizing that the project method is based on simple reasoning and is particularly valuable because it guides people in preparing for needs and any problems that might occur after work starts on the project.
Discussion: formulating a project. The trainer displays the first three sections of Project Outline 1: Training in home garden development, showing the rationale, goal and objective of the project outline. The trainer asks the participants to work together (or in groups) to finish writing the plan of this project for their own area, including discussion and preparation of the:
- outputs (also when they should be achieved);
- activities and inputs;
- timetable.
Participants can propose the project elements in any order but should try to identify them correctly with the trainer's guidance.
Feedback. The trainer displays the complete Project Outline I and invites participants to discuss the differences between this and their own project outline.
Note: Project Outline 1 is only an example. The participants' own project outlines will probably be more sensitive to local needs and conditions.
Short discussion. The trainer displays the first two columns (problem and causes) of Table 9.1, Food and nutrition problems (p.72), and invites participants to suggest what kind of community action is suitable in each case. The trainer then displays the third column and participants compare their solutions with those in the table.
MATERIALS REQUIRED
- Project Outline 1: Training in home garden development.
- Table 9.1, Food and nutrition problems.
TECHNICAL NOTES
PLAN OF ACTION (1)
Priority messages
COMMUNITY ACTION MUST RAISE AWARENESS AS WELL AS PROVIDING PRACTICAL TRAINING
ACTION TO PROMOTE HOME GARDENING FOR BETTER NUTRITION NEEDS CAREFUL PLANNING
Community action must raise awareness as well as providing practical training
In previous sessions participants have learned to recognize the importance of households having food security, i.e. having access to enough nutritious foods year round, and the potential of the home garden to contribute to it. They have applied their knowledge both to case-studies and to individual real life situations.
The next thing is to consider how an improved household food supply can be achieved for a whole community. The strategy adopted must involve:
- raising people's awareness of the importance and urgency of improving the home garden's production for better nutrition and extra income;
- encouraging and supporting them, by means of practical skills training, to take immediate action using existing resources.
Action to promote home gardening for better nutrition needs careful planning
Any project or programme designed to reach a number of households will need careful planning. One of the most effective ways of planning an action programme is to work systematically through the elements of project formulation:
- rationale and goal;
- objectives;
- strategy;
- outputs and targets;
- activities and agents;
- inputs;
- timetable and work plan.
Planning a project is like planning a journey. You need to decide why you are going (rationale and goal); where you want to go (objective); how you propose to get there (strategy); what the immediate result of your trip will be (output); when you expect to arrive (target); what preparations you need to make and how you will travel (activities); what you will need, e.g. documents, vehicles, petrol (inputs); and how long it will all take (timetable).
A methodical approach makes it possible to:
- see how realistic the project is and whether it will fit into the existing work programme;
- anticipate problems;
- check on the progress of the work (monitoring) and on whether the project has achieved its aims (evaluation).
The elements of project formulation are described in greater detail below.
ELEMENTS OF A PROJECT
The rationale is the reasoning behind the plan. In the case of home garden development, the lack of knowledge and skills among the householders means that some form of education is important. The rationale should also make clear who is to benefit from the plan. Women are often the managers of the home garden and household food supply; therefore, women will generally be the direct target group and beneficiaries of home garden improvement projects while children will be the main indirect beneficiaries because they will benefit from better nutrition.
The goal is the ultimate aim. In this training course, the goal is improved food production and nutrition through better use of the home garden.
The objectives are what is hoped will happen as a result of the project activities (e.g. households improve their farming methods in specific ways, they produce more food as well as a wider range of foods and families have better diets). An objective is more specific than a goal and it should be stated so as to make it possible to measure (in quantitative terms) progress towards it.
The strategy is the general procedure proposed for achieving the objective. It should take into account all local constraints and conditions; for example the culture and expectations of the beneficiaries, budget restrictions, seasonal factors and limitations on resources.
The outputs are the actual products of the project activities (e.g. 20 people trained, one demonstration home garden developed, 300 recipes circulated). There may be many outputs for one objective. In a detailed plan, the description of an output should include the quantity of the output and a date by which the output must be completed.
The activities are what is done during the project to produce the outputs (e.g. training, demonstrating, selecting trainees, producing charts). In a detailed plan, it is very important that the description of activities makes it clear who is responsible for each activity.
The inputs are all the things (labour, equipment, money) necessary to make the activities possible. In the detailed plan, these should be quantified (e.g. ten person-days, 30 note pads) and costs estimated.
The timetable sets out the time needed to complete all the activities of the project and makes it possible to measure progress. It can be prepared as a detailed work plan showing exactly who does what, when, over what period and with what result.
Note: These elements are illustrated in Project Outline 1: Training in home garden development.
PROJECT OUTLINE 1: TRAINING IN HOME GARDEN DEVELOPMENT
Rationale
Home gardening can be greatly improved by enhancing use of the garden. Many home gardens are not fully used, mainly because of a lack of knowledge. Home garden owners or managers need more information on how to manage land, diversify and intensify the crop base and improve individual crop productivity.
Goal
Improved food production and nutrition through better home garden utilization.
Objective
To enable households to put into action their own plan for the improvement of their home garden, involving:
- improving soil management;
- diversifying the food crops grown;
- intensifying land use;
- improving productivity of individual plants.
Strategy
A field worker will help families to analyse the main problems that exist in their home gardens. The field worker will also help to identify families who have developed their home gardens well and who apply good practices.
Home garden owners or managers (e.g. husband or wife or both) will be invited to a series of training sessions, involving demonstrations of good home garden practices and an introduction to new techniques. Home garden owners or managers will then, with the help of the field worker, develop plans for improvement of their own home gardens.
Outputs and targets
Note: For each of the following outputs and targets, a date for completion should be set.
- Identify main home garden problems with the participation of home garden owners or managers.
- Identify well-developed local home gardens.
- Prepare training plan and materials.
- Train ten home garden owners or managers.
- Develop individual plans for home gardens and prepare a list of the materials required (and costs) in discussion with the home garden owners or managers.
Activities
The field worker:
- surveys local home gardens, identifying their potential for increased food production and the problems involved;
- identifies two or three examples of home gardens showing good veil management, diversified and intensified cropping systems and good individual crop productivity;
- prepares a training course;
- invites home garden owners or managers to participate in the training course;
- conducts five half-day training sessions, including:
- one walking tour of "good example" home gardens, using the home garden owner or manager as guide
- one demonstration session on easy new techniques
- two follow-up discussion sessions
- one session for finalizing individual home garden plans
- arranges supplies of seeds and seedlings as necessary;
- visits participants' home gardens to discuss the feasibility of improvement plans.
Inputs
The following inputs are needed:
- field worker - 23 days of work;
- seeds and seedlings from the ministry of agriculture;
- technical support (one or two advisers for training sessions) from the ministry of agriculture, the local university or other specialist local institutions.
Timetable
- Information collection: ten days;
- planning of training: five days;
- training: three days;
- follow-up visits: five days.
TABLE 9.1
Food and nutrition problems
Problem
Causes
Solution
The productivity of the home garden has not reached its potential
Soil improvement techniques are not fully utilized
Identify simple soil improvement techniques
The cropping system is not the most suitable for high productivity
Teach households about the techniques
Individual plant productivity is not good
Teach households about multilayer and multiple cropping
Identify problems and demonstrate solutions
Home gardens do not meet daily food needs
Households are not aware of appropriate crops
Teach households about appropriate crops
Households do not have access to enough good planting materials
Ensure villages grow their own planting materials
- Find out where they are available
The family diet is inadequate and lacks variety
Households are not familiar with specific nutritional needs of family members, especially those of young children
Educate households to understand the benefits of a greater variety of foods and adequate nutrition
Session 10: Plan of action (2)
Objective
By the end of this session participants will have designed a realistic work plan for their own community.
OVERVIEW
The principles studied in the previous session are now applied to designing real plans of action for local needs and conditions.
ACTIVITIES
Note: The trainer must read and understand the Technical Notes for Session 10 and Project Outline 2, Training in diet and nutrition (p.76), and Project Outline 3, Developing a home garden (p.77).
Objective. The trainer presents the objective and explains the relevance of the session, emphasizing that a "realistic" plan is one that is small and manageable and makes use of available resources. A full day should be available for this session.
Discussion. The trainer writes a list of commonly available local resources on the blackboard and asks participants to discuss and compare the resources available in their own areas.
Design a community action plan. The trainer asks participants to work in groups to design one of the following community action plans:
- Project Outline 2: Training in diet and nutrition
Objective: to help ten households learn about adequate food and nutrition and how to create a varied diet using local foods.
- Project Outline 3: Developing a home garden
Objective: to encourage 15 households to improve their home garden by using good practices aimed at:
- improving soil management;
- diversifying the food crops grown; intensifying land use;
- improving productivity of individual plants.
Participants should use the method for project planning to help them prepare a workable plan. However, it should be emphasized that obvious common sense is far more important than a rigid design.
Presentations. The trainer asks groups to present the outline of their plan of action and respond to comments from other participants.
Note: The trainer may wish to display and discuss the example outlines for these two projects (Project Outlines 2 and 3) which are included in the Technical Notes. However, in the same way as for Project Outline 1, the trainer should emphasize that these are only "model" project plans in that they are logical and consistent.
Individual planning of work programme. The trainer asks participants to work individually to develop the outline of a work programme which they can implement in their own community. Later, the trainer selects participants to present their programmes to the whole group for discussion.
MATERIALS REQUIRED
- Blackboard for presentations.
- Project Outline 2, Training in diet and nutrition, and Project Outline 3, Developing a home garden.
TECHNICAL NOTES
PLAN OF ACTION (2)
Priority messages
TO BE EFFECTIVE, PLANS MUST BE SMALL AND MANAGEABLE
THE MOST EFFECTIVE STRATEGY IS TO WORK WITH THE PEOPLE AND RESOURCES AVAILABLE
To be effective, plans must be small and manageable
It is better to undertake and complete one activity successfully than to undertake many and not complete them. Far too many community projects start with good intentions but fail to achieve anything. There are many reasons for unsuccessful projects, but a common cause of failure is that the activities planned are too ambitious and require too much from both the field worker and the household.
When planning community projects, field workers should therefore aim at small, achievable objectives. For example, by the end of the training course:
- 80 percent of the households attending should be able to apply at least two new techniques to improve the productivity of their home gardens;
- twenty households with malnourished children will select two new crops to cultivate which will significantly diversify their diet.
The most effective strategy is to work with the people and resources available
Community projects must work within the limit of available resources. Following is a list of some commonly available local resources:
- well-developed home gardens in the area;
- local skills, knowledge and good practices;
- home garden service centres;
- local colleges or universities;
- service stations of the ministry of agriculture;
- local government;
- survey information, including the surveys carried out in this course.
PROJECT OUTLINE 2: TRAINING IN DIET AND NUTRITION
Rationale
There is evidence of malnutrition in the area, which threatens the growth and development of children. The dietary deficiencies are mainly due to people's lack of knowledge of what makes up a proper diet. Training would encourage people to make better use of existing food sources and to develop the contribution of foods to their diet.
Goal
Improved food production and nutrition through better home garden utilization.
Objective
To help 20 households learn about adequate food and nutrition and how to create a varied diet using local foods.
Strategy
The people (home garden owners or managers) are not highly educated and will respond best to visual messages and practical experience. Training will therefore be based mainly on pictures and practice, including a walking tour of a well-developed home garden and demonstrations of simple food preparation and processing techniques.
Outputs and targets
- Twenty trained people (home garden owners or managers);
- a picture booklet or charts showing food values of commonly grown local crops;
- step-by-step illustrations of food preparation and processing procedures.
Activities
- Preparation of booklets or charts.
- Training (four half-days) consisting of inputs on:
- the importance of nutrients and their effect on health;
- the food value of commonly grown local crops;
- simple food processing techniques;
- recognizing and creating an adequate, nutritious and safe diet.
Inputs
- Training material designer: five days;
- artist: five days;
- nutritionist: two days;
- trainer: total of two days;
- printing of picture charts.
Timetable
- Preparation of pictures and photos for training materials and testing: ten days;
- preparation of training materials: ten days;
- training: three half-days over three weeks.
PROJECT OUTLINE 3: DEVELOPING A HOME GARDEN
Rationale
Home gardening can be greatly improved by development of the home garden. Many people in the villages lack the experience, knowledge and skills to make improvements. Sometimes they also lack appropriate planting materials. Knowledge and skills can be transferred by identifying successful home garden managers who are prepared to work together with other less successful or knowledgeable households, supported by agricultural extension staff. The need for planting materials can be fulfilled by setting up nurseries in individual home gardens, which can be managed by the respective owners or managers on a commercial basis. Visible success is more persuasive than a thousand lectures.
Goal
Improved food production and nutrition through better home garden utilization.
Objective
To encourage 200 households to improve their home garden by applying good practices aimed at:
- improving soil management;
- diversifying the food crops grown;
- intensifying land use;
- improving productivity of individual plants.
Strategy
Two or three households with well-developed home gardens will be identified to serve as demonstration and learning sites. Planting materials can be produced by these demonstration farmers and other interested home garden owners or managers. Demonstration tours and exchange visits can be conducted on a regular basis.
Outputs and targets
- Well-developed home gardens identified and serving as demonstration sites;
- number of visitors per year;
- number of demonstrations carried out per year;
- quantity of seeds and seedlings distributed.
Activities
- Identify the most commonly grown plants and main cropping patterns in the area.
- Work with demonstration home garden managers to demonstrate how best to intensify and diversify the home garden crops grown.
- Establish experimental plants and control groups for demonstration purposes.
- Conduct demonstrations involving techniques for intensifying land use and increasing productivity.
- Interested home garden owners or managers produce planting materials for distribution.
- Organize and conduct demonstration tours and exchange visits among home garden managers or owners to show improvements and enable people to learn from each other which home garden management practices are feasible.
Inputs
- Home garden owners or managers prepared to use their home garden as a demonstration site;
- one day's work per week by an agricultural extension worker over a specified period;
- seeds and seedlings from the ministry of agriculture;
- technical support from local training institutions.
Timetable
- Preliminary research and design: two months;
- home garden development: one year;
- demonstrations, tours, plant production: year round.
<section>3</section>
Information sheet
Information sheet 1: Soil management
Information sheet 2: Water management
Information sheet 3: Weed and pest management
Information sheet 4: Crop management
Information sheet 5: Food and nutrition problems
Information sheet 6 : Recipes for family meals
Information sheet 7 : Home processing and preparation of weaning foods
Information sheet 8: Snacks for young children
Information sheet
Information sheet 1: Soil management
INFORMATION SHEETS
The home garden can be farmed all year round and year after year if the soil is kept in good condition by protection and "feeding". Further soil management information suitable for farmers is included in Home Garden Technology Leaflets 5, Soil improvement (p. 127); 6. Use of sloping land (p. 133); and 7, Cover cropping (p. 137). If these leaflets are not available, select local agricultural extension materials for use and distribution.
PROTECT HOME GARDEN SOIL
Preventing soil erosion is the first priority on sloping land. If the soil is not protected, the fertile topsoil can be washed away and lost forever. The remaining soil is usually less productive and the result is lower food production from home garden crops. The challenge is how to protect home garden land while using it for daily food and non-food needs.
Erosion was not considered a problem when the land was in its natural state. The mix of native plants kept the soil covered at all times. It is important to imitate nature and keep the soil covered. The following measures are therefore suggested:
- If the home garden is to be planted for the first time and the land is still covered with vegetation, clear only the areas to be planted. Avoid clearing the entire area.
- If the home garden has been in use for some years, the following steps should be taken immediately:
- Make sure all of the home garden soil is covered with plants or mulch.
- Provide protection by planting along the contour. Make hedges using plants with multiple functions, such as the genera Gliricidia and Tephrosia and lemon grass.
Plants of different height
GOOD SOIL GROWS HEALTHY PLANTS
If the natural fertility or structure of the soil is poor, the soil needs to be continuously "fed" with organic matter (e.g. leaves and manure) in order to improve productivity. As the organic matter decomposes, it becomes food for the soil and plants. It also improves the soil structure by loosening heavy clay and binding sandy soil.
One of the main goals of home garden development is to make the soil fertile and well-structured so that a wide range of useful crops will be healthy and grow well. Healthy plants yield more and are also better protected from insects and disease.
FEED THE SOIL
Feeding the soil with organic matter is very important, especially in the early years of home garden improvement. Waste from crops and livestock should not be removed from the home garden but should be used to feed the soil. Organic materials can be collected and buried to improve the soil or they can be decomposed into compost, which can be used as a fertilizer.
LONG-TERM SOIL MANAGEMENT
Ideally, the best way to protect and feed the soil is to apply organic matter or compost regularly and to keep the soil covered with plants. A multilayer cropping system in which a mixture of trees and other plants with different maturity times are grown together will protect the soil and recycle nutrients. Leguminous plants (e.g. peas and beans) are especially useful in providing continuous food for the soil.
Information sheet 2: Water management
There are ways to manage soil moisture above and below the soil surface. Following are some appropriate techniques for different kinds of soil and different seasons. Further water management information suitable for farmers is included in Home Garden Technology Leaflet 8, Using wetland (p. 141). If this leaflet is not available, select local agricultural extension materials for use and distribution.
PLANT ROOTS NEED WATER AND AIR
About 90 percent of a plant's weight comes from water. No food plants produce a good harvest if they do not receive the right amount of water at the right time. Most of the water is taken in by plants through their roots. It is critical, therefore, that the soil be able to hold the correct amount of moisture to promote growth. At the same time, there must be enough air trapped in tiny holes in the soil to allow the roots to breathe.
Some heavy, sticky soils are too dense to allow air in and the water to drain away. Plant roots cannot breathe, which causes growth problems for most. If this kind of soil dries out, it sets like cement and water takes a long time to soak into it. Sandy, fine-grained soils are too loose to be able to hold water before it drains away. Plant roots cannot find enough water for growth and the plant suffers. For both of these kinds of soil, the regular application of organic matter will improve the ability of the soil to hold and release enough of both water and air.
Basin-like or sunken area
WETLAND
The management of water is the key to home garden development in low-lying areas prone to flooding. Soils that flood easily and frequently can be made more productive with good drainage. Digging a large hole can sometimes successfully drain the water from the nearby soil and will also provide a place to raise fish.
The raised bed and canal system is another way to farm in wetland. In the canal beds, rice, taro, lotus, water chestnut and water spinach can be grown. On the raised beds, annual food plants and tree crops such as citrus are grown.
HOW TO MANAGE SOIL MOISTURE IN A DRY CLIMATE OR DRY SEASON
General
- Prepare the planting area so that the plant will grow in a basin-like or sunken area. This will help to prevent surface water from running off.
- Select crops that will grow well under drier conditions (e.g. mung bean, cassava, eggplant and trees). They may not be favourite foods but at least something can be produced.
- Select short-term vegetable crops that can be grown near a source of water such as a water well, the drain from washing areas or a water tank.
Short term crops planted near a water source
Above the soil surface
The aim is to keep the soil surface cool and to prevent loss of moisture through evaporation. The use of organic material and waste water can extend the length of the growing season for annual crops.
- Cover the soil around plants with a mulch of leaves or cut grass.
- Provide young plants with shade to keep them cool.
- Remove weeds because they compete with the plants' moisture intake.
Place mulch around plants
Below the soil surface
The aim is to retain moisture in the soil. Organic matter in the soil will soak up and hold moisture.
- Incorporate compost or organic material in the soil. One large sack of composted organic material should be sufficient for an area of about 10 m^2. Use one sack at the start of the wet season and one sack at the start of the dry season.
HOW TO MANAGE SOIL MOISTURE IN THE WET SEASON
The aim of water management in the wet season is to ensure that plants do not become flooded with water or damaged by heavy rainfalls.
Above the soil surface
- Plant annual crops in mounds of soil that will allow surplus water to drain off.
- Plant crops that like to grow in wet areas, such as taro, water spinach, lotus and rice.
- Use coconut fronds or other materials to protect young plants and those with tender leaves from heavy rain.
- Where low flooding is likely, grow plants in containers of soil above the ground. Grow vine plants up on to a trellis.
- Do not put a thick mulch around water-sensitive annual plants. A mulch in the rainy season will keep the soil too wet.
Below the soil surface
- Soils that do not drain well benefit from the incorporation of organic matter.
Plant into raised soil beds
Protect sensitive plants from rain
Water-sensitive plants planted in containers
Information sheet 3: Weed and pest management
Problems with weeds, insects and animals can reduce the production of a home garden and be a cause of frustration for farmers. Often the problems will disappear if plants are chosen to suit their location and if the soil and water are managed well. Some techniques are provided here but further weed and pest management information suitable for farmers is included in Home Garden Technology Leaflets 7, Cover cropping (p. 137); 10, Living fences (p. 147); and 13, Multilayer cropping (p. 157). If these leaflets are not available, select local agricultural extension materials for use and distribution.
PROBLEMS FROM WEEDS
Competition from weeds is a major problem for food plants in many home gardens. Weeds compete for nutrients, water, sunlight and space, so other plants grow poorly and die. Areas where weeds are dense can harbour rats, snakes and insect pests. Weeds tend to be a bigger problem in home gardens that do not contain mature trees. If not well-managed, weeds can cost labour that would otherwise be used for cultivating useful plants in the home garden.
Grass weeds can be a big problem because grasses can invade the garden quickly. However, they can benefit the home garden by preventing soil erosion and providing material for mulch or for roof thatch.
Quick-growing vine plants reduce weed growth
How to control weeds
The key factors in the control of weeds are shading them from sunlight and keeping the soil covered so that they cannot find a place to grow.
There are three techniques for quickly controlling weeds:
- Cut or dig out weeds using a knife or hoe.
- Cover the ground with 6 cm of mulch to prevent weeds from receiving sunlight. Weeds cut by hoe or knife can be used as mulching material. Other kinds of mulch are rice straw and leaves.
- Quick-growing vine plants will also reduce weeds by covering the ground. Examples are legumes, pumpkin and sweet potato.
For a more permanent control of weeds, plant crops that permanently shade the soil surface. The multilayer cropping system, where plants of different height are grown together, is the most effective system.
A multilayer mixture of plants prevents weeds from receiving enough sunlight
PESTS AND DISEASES
Domestic and native animals as well as insects and diseases can damage home garden plants.
Insect and disease problems tend to be seasonal, with the greatest problems occurring in the rainy season. Problems with animals occur all year round but, often, the scarcity of other food for animals in the dry season results in more damage to home garden plants. In order to know when and where pest problems are likely to occur, it is important to learn the habits and life cycle of pests. A good farmer knows as much about plants as he or she knows about plants' enemies.
How to prevent and manage pest and disease problems
- Weak plants suffer more from attacks by insects or disease than healthy plants. Good crop management, including attention to water, soil and weeds, will help reduce damage from insects and disease.
- Choose crops according to the season and the location. If an annual plant does best in full sunlight and grows best when planted at the beginning of the dry season, then the grower should try to make sure it is planted in these conditions. If grown in the wrong season and in the wrong location, it will probably be vulnerable to attack.
- Select plants that will grow well in the local climate. Plants originating from another climate may not grow well. For example, mango produces well in hot lowland areas where the dry season coincides with flowering and fruiting. Flowers will be damaged by insects and disease and fruit harvest will be poor if the climate is very humid all year.
- Do not grow the same vegetable crop in exactly the same place as it was planted before. Plant the vegetable crop a few metres away from where it was grown before, and plant a different crop (such as a legume) where the vegetable crop was planted before. This will help prevent a buildup of disease infection in the soil.
- Remove diseased leaves and other plant parts. This will reduce the amount of material that insects and diseases can feed on.
- Sprinkle ash around the base of young plants and also very lightly on new leaf growth to deter insects and fungus.
- Grow plants, such as chili, lemon grass, basil, marigolds, etc., which are known to repel certain insects.
- Use home-made pest sprays produced from neem fruits, tobacco, chili or soap and water to deter chewing and sucking insects.
DAMAGE FROM ANIMALS
Chickens commonly roam free in home gardens. Although they can catch insects and leave manure to fertilize the soil, chickens can become pests when they attack and seriously damage plants in their search for food. Following are some simple ways of protecting plants from attack.
- Protect root crops by placing coconut shells around the plants.
- Plant cassava or place bamboo or other sticks around the plant base so that chickens cannot dig up the roots or peck at the plant.
Protection against animals
Domestic animals such as cattle, sheep, pigs and goats can be a threat to home gardens. Goats and pigs sometimes roam around villages and will eat many kinds of plants. Damage from animals can discourage home gardeners to the point of abandoning food growing.
Wild pigs, where they are not hunted for food, can be persistent and often evade farmers and cross weak fences, but living fences can keep them out successfully. One successful method to deter animals from entering a home garden is a living fence of pineapple, salak or pandanus, densely planted together with Gliricidia trees.
A chicken a banana shoot
A wild pig eating cassava
Information sheet 4: Crop management
There are many different methods of farming suitable for the home garden. In each method the farmer manages the different parts of the system (e.g. soil, water, weeds and crops) in order to produce as much of the crop as possible now and in future. This means that the farmer must always take care of the home garden for future production. Information Sheets I to 3 describe some of the common home garden problems and ways to avoid them. This Information Sheet discusses the main factors to consider when deciding how to grow crops in the home garden. For more details, read the relevant Home Garden Technology Leaflets or local agricultural extension materials.
FARMING REQUIRES SKILLS AND EXPERIENCE
Farming the home garden is not a simple task. Plants, animals and insects behave differently in different seasons and sometimes they become problems when a farmer least expects it. A farmer needs to experience the climate and conditions of an area before he or she can be confident about developing a home garden successfully. A person who has not managed a home garden or farm before must make reaming a high priority.
The first skill needed is observation. Each day, the farmer should take a walk around the home garden and look closely at the plants and insects. Changes in plant growth, such as the appearance of new seedlings, flowers or fruit, often require the farmer to take action in order to protect plants from pests, weeds, too much sunlight or rain. The farmer will learn by observation and experience what happens to the plant as it grows and when the changes occur. One of the best ways to gain experience is to watch how experienced farmers work and develop their home gardens.
The second skill is planning, using the knowledge gained from observing plants in the home garden. All food plants need time to grow to the right size or stage before they are ready to be harvested. From observation and experience a farmer will know how long the growing time will be and exactly what the plant or fruit looks like when it is the best time to harvest. The farmer can then plan in advance what needs to be done after the crop is harvested and can select the next crop to be planted after the first is harvested. In this way the farmer makes sure the land and the family's resources are always employed in the production of food.
METHODS OF FARMING THE HOME GARDEN
Some methods of farming, or cropping systems, are easier than others to use successfully. Different cropping systems are more popular with people from certain cultural backgrounds than with others. Some cropping systems are more suited to a particular climate or situation than others. For example, the raised bed and canal system (described in Information Sheet 2, Water management) is only suitable for wetland. Details of some methods of farming suitable for the home garden are in Home Garden Technology Leaflets 11, Multiple cropping (p.151): 12, Intensive vegetable square (p. 153); and 13, Multilayer cropping (p. 157).
Information sheet 5: Food and nutrition problems
PROTEIN-ENERGY MALNUTRITION
Symptoms
Protein-energy malnutrition (PEM) is a common nutrition problem in many countries. PEM occurs if children do not eat enough to supply their energy and nutrient needs. They first become underweight or wasted, and if they do not eat an adequate diet for a long time, they fail to grow normally and become stunted. Children who are malnourished usually have less energy to do things, they learn slowly, and have low resistance to fight infections.
Causes
Children with PEM often come from poor families which do not produce enough food or which earn too little income to provide sufficient food for the household. Sometimes children from well-off families also become malnourished, not because the family lacks food but because parents are lacking in knowledge on the special food needs of young children and on how to prepare good, clean nutritious meals. Other factors, such as a shortage of water, a lack of fuel and cooking equipment and a shortage of the mother's time for food preparation, affect feeding and may adversely affect children's nutritional status.
Frequent infections caused by poor hygiene and sanitation also contribute to malnutrition. Children who frequently become ill are more likely to be malnourished, as they lose their appetite and refuse to eat. On the other hand, children who are malnourished have less resistance to infections and are more frequently ill than children who are well nourished. In order to stay healthy, children need to eat a diet which contains all essential nutrients. A diet should contain the right combination of energy, protein and micronutrients (vitamins and minerals).
Groups at risk
Infants and preschoolers are the groups most vulnerable to malnutrition. Pregnant and lactating women are the next most vulnerable group, together with elderly people and those who are just recovering from illness. Malnutrition among infants from six months of age occurs if they do not get enough breast milk or if weaning foods are started too late or do not provide all the energy and nutrients needed. From the age of six months, infants need both weaning foods and breast milk.
Assessment and prevention
In healthy people there is a balance between weight and height. Healthy children will increase their weight every month. Thus weight measurement is the easiest way to see whether a child is suffering from PEM, especially for infants and preschoolers. A monthly weight measurement is very important for children under five years. Preventive action can be taken quickly when weight reduction reveals that children are malnourished. Children should be taken regularly every month to the village health post for weighing.
MICRONUTRIENT DEFICIENCIES
Our body needs only small amounts of vitamins and minerals. These nutrients must be obtained from foods, since the human body cannot develop them itself. A lack of sufficient micronutrients in the diet will result in deficiency diseases which may even endanger people's lives. Most children with micronutrient deficiencies usually also lack energy and protein.
Vitamin A deficiency
Vitamin A deficiency is one of the most important nutritional diseases among young children. It causes night-blindness and, in more serious cases, may damage the eyes, cause blindness and increase the risk of infection and death. Vitamin A deficiency occurs when a child or an older person does not eat enough foods containing vitamin A or when there is little fat or oil in the diet. Fat and oil help the absorption of vitamin A, so when the diet is low in fat, less vitamin A is absorbed. Vitamin A deficiency is often made worse by infections such as measles and diarrhoea, which increase vitamin A needs.
The best way of preventing vitamin A deficiency is to encourage families to grow and eat plenty of foods that are rich in vitamin A. These include plant foods such as green leafy vegetables, mangoes and papayas; among animal foods, liver is an especially rich source of vitamin A. Breast milk is the only source of vitamin A for infants, and lactating mothers should therefore eat plenty of foods rich in vitamin A as well.
Anaemia
Anaemia is the most widespread nutritional disorder in the world. The commonest cause of nutritional anaemia is iron deficiency or a lack of iron in the diet. Other causes of anaemia are parasitic infections, such as hookworm, and the loss of blood during menstruation and childbirth. Iron is an important mineral which is needed to form red blood cells and transport oxygen in the blood. People with anaemia usually have a pale tongue and lips while the inside of the eye is white. Anaemia reduces people's ability to work, increases their tiredness and slows learning in children.
High-risk groups are: women, especially during pregnancy or soon after delivery; babies and young children; and adolescents who are growing fast, especially girls.
Nutritional anaemia can be prevented by ensuring that women and children eat enough iron containing foods, i.e. small amounts of liver, meat and fish, and more foods containing vitamin C so as to increase iron absorption, such as citrus, guava and some green vegetables. The prevention of anaemia can also be promoted by avoiding coffee or tea immediately after a meal, as there are chemical substances contained in coffee and tea which inhibit iron absorption.
Iodine deficiency
Iodine deficiency is caused by a lack of iodine in food and in the soils on which food is grown. Sea fish is a good source of iodine, thus iodine deficiency is rarely found in seashore areas and more often in mountainous areas with leached soils and where sea fish is scarce. The thyroid gland at the front of the neck stores and needs iodine for hormone production but, if there is insufficient iodine in the diet, the gland stops producing thyroid hormones and signs of deficiency appear, called iodine deficiency disorders (IDD). Iodine deficiency disorders include goitre, which is indicated by a swelling of the thyroid gland. IDD also contributes to low birth weight, inhibits body growth in children and impairs mental development. In severe cases, brain damage can result. To prevent IDD, the use of iodized salt is highly recommended. In some areas iodine is added to drinking-water.
Information sheet 6 : Recipes for family meals
Note: These recipes are examples from Indonesia. Similar ones can be developed by trainers from other countries using these information materials.
Soybean bakwan
Ingredients
Seasoning
Soybeans, 250 g
Red onion, 6 pieces
Carrots, 100 g
Garlic, 2 cloves
Amaranth, 100g
Coriander powder, 1 spoon
Spring onion, 25 g
Cumin powder, 1/4 teaspoon
Celery, 25 g
Salt, - spoon
Eggs, 3
Flour, 250 g
Water, 2 large cups
Oil for frying
1. Soak the soybeans overnight, then boil them and drain away the water.
2. Chop the vegetables finely and mix with chopped garlic and red onion.
3. Beat the eggs and mix them with the soybeans and other vegetables.
4. Make a batter with the flour and water and add the ground spices.
5. Mix the vegetables and the batter and deep fry the mixture one spoonful at a time. If the batter is not the right consistency, add more flour or water.
Tempeh pepes
Ingredients
Seasoning
Tempeh, 5 pieces
Red onion, 4 pieces
Eggs, 5
Garlic, 2 cloves
Dried, shrimp or fish
Candlenuts, 5
Amaranth
Fresh basil or celery, 50 g
Carrots, 250 g
Turmeric powder
Tomatoes
Red chilies
Celery
Green chilies, 2
Spring onions
A little tamarind water
1. Slice the tempeh into small slivers.
2. Chop the amaranth, carrots, tomatoes, celery and spring onions finely.
3. Finely chop the dried fish or shrimp.
4. Beat the eggs.
5. Grind together the red onions, garlic, candlenuts, turmeric and basil.
6. In a little oil, lightly fry the tempeh, then add the carrots, amaranth, tomatoes, celery and spring onions.
7. Add the ground spices and tamarind water.
8. Remove the vegetables from the heat.
9. Slice the chilies finely and throw away the seeds.
10. Divide the vegetables into six portions and sprinkle the chilies on top of each. Place each portion in a banana leaf or tin foil and pour over the beaten egg. Bake in the oven or charcoal until the egg is cooked.
Gnetum leaf tumis
Ingredients
Seasoning
Gnetum leaf, 150 g
Shrimp paste, 1 spoon
Long beans, 15, cut into 2 cm lengths
Galingale, 2 cm
Petal (Sesbania grandiflora seed pods), 10,
Bay leaf, 1
divided in two
Hot chilies, 10
Small dried fish, 100 g,
Green chilies, 3
washed and strained
Red chilies, 3
Onions, 8
Garlic, 2 cloves
Oil, 3 spoons
1. Chop the garlic, onion and chilies finely.
2. Heat the oil and fry the chilies, garlic and onion. Add the bay leaf and galingale.
3. Add the small dried fish and shrimp paste, then mix it until the fish is cooked.
4. Add the Sesbania grandiflora seed pods (Petal) and long beans, then the Gnetum leaf and a little water.
5. Mix until the mixture is cooked.
Optional: Monosodium glutamate (Aji no moto in Indonesia) may be added to increase the flavour.
Filled bitter cucumber
Ingredients
Seasoning
Bitter cucumbers, 3
Galingale, 2 cm
Tuna fish, 250 g
Red hot chilies, 10
Grated coconut, 1/3
Citronella grass, 2
Coconut milk from 2/3 coconut
Salt
Onions, 6
Candlenuts, 3
Turmeric, 1 cm
1. Boil the bitter cucumber with 1 spoon of salt until half cooked.
2. Slice the cucumber lengthwise and throw away the seeds.
3. Grind the onion, candlenuts, salt and turmeric.
4. Mix the tuna fish, grated coconut, 2 or 3 spoons of coconut milk and ground spices.
5. Place the mixture in the bitter cucumber, then tie it up.
6. Boil the rest of the coconut milk with the galingale, citronella grass and chilies. Place the filled bitter cucumbers in the mixture until they are cooked and the coconut milk becomes dry.
7. Take the cucumbers out, untie them and cut them up.
Spinach chips
Ingredients
Seasoning
Rice flour, 200 g
Candlenuts, 3
Tapioca, 50 g
Garlic, 3 cloves
Spinach leaf, 200 g
Coriander, 1 teaspoon
1. Grind the candlenuts, garlic and coriander.
2. Mix these with the rice flour, tapioca and water as needed.
3. Place the spinach leaves in the batter and fry one by one in oil.
Information sheet 7 : Home processing and preparation of weaning foods
WEANING
Weaning is the process of introducing foods other than breast milk to a small child, and gradually increasing the amount so that, eventually, the child gets enough energy and nutrients from ordinary family food.
During the first six months of life, most small children get all their nutrients from breast milk. However, by the age of six months, many children cannot get enough energy and nutrients from breast milk alone; they need other foods as well. Some infants may outgrow the supply of breast milk and begin to need other food at about four or five months.
At about the age of six months, most infants show from their behaviour that they are ready to start on other foods. They sit up and reach out for food; they are interested in new tastes and they are willing to try other foods; they may have one or two teeth and they start to chew; they really seem hungry - even though they get plenty of breast milk. If the mother does not start to give weaning foods at this stage, the child may stop gaining weight at a healthy rate and become underweight.
WEANING FOODS
Good weaning foods need to be:
- rich in energy and nutrients;
- clean and safe;
- soft and easy to eat;
- easy for the family to obtain (such as food grown in the home garden);
- easy to prepare.
Using staples for weaning foods
The first food a baby eats is usually a soft or semi-liquid food made from a starchy staple (e.g. rice, cassava, maize, taro or banana flour). However, a plain meal from cereal or banana flour alone is not enough; these are not sufficiently rich in energy, and they lack protein and vitamins A or C. It is therefore important to add legumes (e.g. mung beans or soybeans, which are a rich source of protein) to cereals, tubers or banana flour. Transforming bananas, mung beans or soybeans into flour is a way of using food grown on the home garden. The mixed flour can be used to make not only weaning foods, but also cakes or other snacks for children and adults.
The problem of bulky foods
Staple foods such as rice, cassava, maize or bananas are usually high in starch content. This means that they absorb a lot of water, which makes the food bulky. Consequently, large amounts have to be eaten for a child to obtain all the energy and nutrients it needs. Small children have small stomachs, however, and it is difficult for them to eat large amounts.
Overcoming the problem of bulky foods. To enable young children to get enough energy and nutrients from bulky foods, there are two things that families can do:
- feed children often;
- enrich the bulky food.
Feed children often To get enough energy and nutrients from bulky foods, a child of six to 12 months, needs about five small meals per day, in addition to breast-feeding.
Enrich the bulky food. To enrich a bulky food means to add an energy-rich and/or a nutrient-rich food, or both. In order to make a staple food more energy-rich, a spoonful of oil or fat can be added to the child's meal. This increases the energy concentration without adding to the volume and it makes the meal easier to eat.
Adding a protein-rich food such as legume flour to the cereal or banana flour; a good mixture is two to three parts of cereal or banana flour to one part legume flour. Also, mashed beans or peas or mashed fish can be added to cereal or banana flour to add protein.
Foods that are rich in both energy and protein are groundnuts, oilseeds, skinned and well cooked mashed soybeans or coconut milk. These can be added to weaning foods.
To make sure that a young child gets enough vitamins A and C, and to increase the absorption of iron, families should give some of the following foods each day. They can either mix the food with the enriched porridge or give them separately:
- mashed dark green vegetables;
- mashed orange-coloured vegetables such as pumpkin;
- mashed tomatoes;
- mashed fruit such as papaya, guava or mango;
- the juice of oranges or lemons.
Processing of banana, soybean and mung bean flour
The process of making banana, soybean and mung bean flour is given below.
Note: Bananas for flour are best picked when they are about three-quarters ripe, i.e. about 80 days after flowering. At this time, the fruit starch is at its maximum and the banana has a good flavour, with a balance between sour and sweet.
Mung beans and soybeans should be firm and dry before they are crushed in order to eliminate anti-nutrients, i.e. substances which inhibit nutrient absorption and use by the body.
Making banana flour
Bananas
Heading
Peeling
Slicing
Sun drying
Milling or pounding
Screening
Banana flour
Making soybean flour
Soybeans
Soaking in water (6 hours)
Boiling (10-15 minutes, 100C)
Draining
Roasting I
Peeling
Roasting II
Milling or pounding
Screening
Soybean flour
Making mung bean flour
Mung beans
Soaking in water (only 2-3 minutes)
Draining for 6 hours (cover with banana leaves to maintain humidity)
Roasting
Milling or pounding
Screening
Mung bean flour
Banana pudding
Recipe for a traditional weaning food made from banana flour and mung bean flour.
Ingredients
Banana flour, 40 g
Skim milk (tempeh flour), 30 g
Mung bean (or soybean) flour, 9 g
Sugar, 20 g
Salt, 1 g
1. Mix all ingredients with 250 ml of boiled water and stir well.
2. Add another 250 ml of hot water, then heat over a low fire. Stir the mixture while heating until it is ready.
3. Pour into a bowl and leave until cold.
Information sheet 8: Snacks for young children
Cassava steamed cake
Ingredients
Fresh cassava, 1 kg
Sugar, 1-2 cups
Eggs, 5
Liquefied 100 g
Ovalet, 1 spoon
Sweetened condensed milk, 1/2 can
made up to I cupful with water
1. Peel, wash and grate the cassava.
2. Squeeze the cassava in a cloth until it is reduced to 550 g.
3. Whip the eggs until white, add the ovalet and whip again.
4. Mix the cassava and milk with the whipped eggs, add the margarine.
5. Place the batter in a baking dish and steam for 10 minutes.
6. Decorate the cake with cheese or whipped margarine and sugar flour.
Banana cookies
Ingredients
Banana flour, 200 g
Cornflour, 50 g, blended to a thin paste
Sugar, 150 g
Eggs, 3
Salt and essence
1. Beat the sugar, eggs, salt and essence.
2. Add the banana flour, cornflour and margarine.
3. Place the batter in a baking dish and bake until cooked.
Banana pancake
Ingredients
Banana flour, 160 g
Skim milk, 30 g
Baking soda, 6 g
Salt, 4g
Egg, 1
Water, 400 ml
1. Thoroughly mix all ingredients with the water.
2. Heat a little oil in small frying pan (pancake pan), then add 3 spoonfuls of batter, cover the pan and heat for approximately 6 minutes.
3. Turn the cooked pancakes out on to a plate and repeat step 2 several times until the batter is finished.
Cassava kroket
Ingredients
Seasoning
Cassava, 500 g
Salt
Leeks, 100 g
Garlic, 2 cloves
Carrots, 250 g
Red onion
Celery, 50 g
Black pepper powder, 1 teaspoon
Coconut oil
1. Chop the carrots, leeks, celery, garlic and red onion.
2. Fry the garlic and red onion in a little oil. Add the chopped vegetables and salt and stir until the vegetables are cooked.
3. Peel the cassava and soak in water for 1 hour.
4. Grate the cassava, then squeeze and throw away the liquid.
5. Take 1 spoon of grated Cassava and shape it into a plain ball. Place 1/2 spoon of mixed vegetables on it, then shape it again into a circular or oval ball.
6. Heat the oil and fry the grated Cassava until cooked - the colour will turn to a reddish yellow.
<section>4</section>
Home garden technology leaflets
Home garden technology leaflet 1: The home garden
Home garden technology leaflet 2: Planning improvements to the home garden
Home garden technology leaflet 3 :Growing plants for daily nutrition
Home garden technology leaflet 4: Planting crops for a continuous food supply
Home garden technology leaflet 5: Soil improvement
Home garden technology leaflet 6: Use of sloping land
Home garden technology leaflet 7: Cover cropping
Home garden technology leaflet 8: Using wetland
Home garden technology leaflet 9: Safe and effective crop protection
Home garden technology leaflet 10: Living fences
Home garden technology leaflet 11: Multiple cropping
Home garden technology leaflet 12: Intensive vegetable square
Home garden technology leaflet 13: Multilayer cropping
Home garden technology leaflet 14: Growing fruit- and nut-trees
Home garden technology leaflet 15: Home garden nursery
Home garden technology leaflets
Improve family nutrition by developing your home garden
What is the purpose of these leaflets?
The purpose of the leaflets is to help farmers improve family food supplies and nutrition year round through home gardening.
This package contains 15 technology leaflets with ideas and technical recommendations on how to improve family food supplies and nutrition through home gardening.
Each leaflet provides information on a technology option or on the type of improvements farmers can make in their home garden to increase food production, to provide a greater diversity of plant foods and to add nutritional value to the family's daily diet.
Who are the leaflets for?
The leaflets are intended for use by agricultural extension workers and farmers who are able to read. The leaflets should be used in situations where a farm family wishes to:
- set up a new home garden for family food production and income;
- develop or expand an existing home garden to improve food production and diversify crops;
- improve family food supplies and nutrition.
How should the leaflets be used?
The leaflets provide basic information, ideas and suggestions on different technology options or home garden improvements. They can be used either singly or in combination with one another, depending on the type of improvements farmers wish to make. Agricultural extension workers should assist farmers in selecting the technology they want to adopt in accordance with the kind, variety and quantity of home garden crops they want to grow.
Farm families should always contact their agricultural extension worker if they need help or advice with technical farming issues such as crop management, pesticide use, water management and many other topics.
Home garden technology leaflet 1: The home garden
WHAT IS A HOME GARDEN?
This leaflet aims to help you understand the many different things that make up a typical home garden. When you know how the home garden is made up (its structure) and what it does and produces (its functions or outputs) you will be able to improve the home garden's output to suit your own family's needs.
The home garden is an integrated system which comprises different things in its small area: the family house, a living/playing area, a kitchen garden, a mixed garden, a fish pond, stores, an animal house and, of course, people. It produces a variety of foods and agricultural products, including staple crops, vegetables, fruits, medicinal plants, livestock and fish both for home consumption or use and for income.
WHAT ARE THE BASIC STRUCTURE AND FUNCTIONS OF THE HOME GARDEN?
The home garden compound has different areas and functions. There are three main areas within the typical home garden. Each of these provides different things for the family that lives there. The areas are shown in Figure 1, divided only by dotted lines because, in reality, the functions of the areas overlap the imaginary dotted boundaries.
Figure 1 Basic home garden map
The social area
Location: in front of the house, incorporating the clean-swept courtyard.
Use: mostly a place for social activities - meeting and talking, children's play, display gardens and also for drying grain.
The utility area
Location: around the house.
Use: mostly a place for physical objects or activities - living, washing, storage, animal house and latrine but also kitchen garden.
The production area Location: the rear part of the garden.
Use: mostly a place for growing food and cash crops and raising animals (e.g. fish, chickens, pigs).
WHAT IS THE SIGNIFICANCE OF THE HOME GARDEN AMONG THE FAMILY'S FARMLANDS?
Most families have more than one area of land for farming. Usually a family has a home garden area and a food cropping area near to the village. Together, these areas of land make up the family's farmlands. The family divides its working time and resources between these two areas. Each area of land is used in a different way but, together, the two areas must provide all the family's needs.
The home garden has a special significance because among a family's most important basic needs are food and shelter. If developed well, the home garden can provide:
- Enough nutritious non-staple foods for all the family year round, including extra food stocks for processing and sale to obtain income and a reserve for special occasions or emergencies (e.g. sometimes a staple food crop is lost in a flood, eaten by pests or reduced because the farmer falls sick and cannot work for some time).
- Income from the sale of home garden produce. Sales of home garden produce can contribute considerably to a family's income (to buy daily essentials and farming inputs that cannot be produced on the family's farmlands as well as other goods and services).
- Farm development. The home garden has a plant nursery for growing plantation seedlings, for trying out new farming ideas and crops and for processing and storing seeds for the next planting season.
HOW TO APPRAISE YOUR HOME GARDEN
Before trying to improve your home garden, you have to find out more about it; particularly why it is not producing more food or income or providing inputs for farm development. There are many things to find out because the home garden has different functions, i.e. social, utility and economic functions. You should allow at least one hour for the appraisal.
Step 1: Get the right people to participate
Different people know different things about home gardens. The farmer and the housekeeper are the most important because they know the home garden's history and what the home garden provides for their family. The local agricultural extension agent will be able to help identify plants and to assess the soil and other technical aspects. You may want to ask other people to participate, for example your neighbours, relatives or women's farmer group members.
Step 2: Make a map of the home garden
Make a map of your home garden with the help of the others. One way of doing this is by drawing a "mud map" on the ground with a stick and using stones, leaves and other materials to represent the locations of major features such as trees and areas for food crops, vegetables, herbs, buildings and activities. Mark areas where the land is sloping or swampy. You can use Figure I, Basic home garden map, as a guide.
Step 3: Make a copy and keep it
Copy the map as clearly as possible on to paper with your notes. The map will make it much easier to think about the chances and improvements you want to make.
Figure 2 Discussing and drawing the home garden map
Home garden technology leaflet 2: Planning improvements to the home garden
Every home garden can be improved to fulfill your family's needs better. A well-planned and well-tended home garden can provide nutritious food, income, medicines, seeds and seedlings for the family's other land areas. At the same time, it will be a beautiful place to live in. To improve your home garden, you need to know four things:
- what your home garden produces now;
- what you would like your home garden to produce in future;
- how you can improve your home garden;
- what inputs are needed.
STEP 1: KNOW YOUR HOME GARDEN
Make sure you have a good idea of the structure and main functions of your home garden. A map of your home garden will help you and others assisting you to visualize exactly what your home garden is and what it can do (making a home garden map is described in Home Garden Technology Leaflet 1).
STEP 2: SET OBJECTIVES
Make a list of the main things you want your home garden to produce. You should also identify the major constraints you need to overcome, such as wild pigs, poor soil or sloping land. Some examples of objectives are listed in Table I. Keep your list simple at first; you can add to it later.
TABLE 1
Examples of home garden objectives
Provide daily nutritional needs for the family
Provide more income
Increase food production
Diversity food production
Make the garden easy to care for
Provide a place for farm animals
Keep out pests
Reduce weeding
Provide a nursery for estate crop's
Make use of all area available
Planning improvements and changes to your home garden requires some thinking. Deciding what you want to do depends on your situation, such as soil type, sloping land, and how much time and money you have available. Your wife or husband and maybe a friend should participate in the planning. Also ask your agricultural extension agent for technical advice to help you make the right decisions.
STEP 3: SELECT TECHNOLOGY OPTIONS
Choose those technology options in Table 2 that meet your needs and situation. Note that you can choose either a single technology option or a combination of several options, depending on the type of land and resources that you have.
Using the home garden map, identify where the technology options should be located. The technology options sometimes overlap, for example Living fences (Home Garden Technology Leaflet 10) are useful around an Intensive Vegetable Square (Home Garden Technology Leaflet 12). Walk around the home garden with the map and try to imagine how the technology options you have selected will fit together into a system.
TABLE 2
Technology options in the Home Garden Technology Leaflets
Leaflet number
Technology option
Leaflet number
Technology option
Growing plants for daily nutrition
Living fences
Planting crops for a continuous food supply
Multiple cropping
Soil improvement
Intensive vegetable square
Use of sloping land
Multilayer cropping
Cover cropping
Growing fruit- and nut- trees
Using wetland
Home garden nursery
Safe and effective crop protection
Each of these technology options are briefly described in the respective leaflets, and you can probably recognize many of them in the home gardens and farmed land of your village. For more detailed information and advice, ask your agricultural extension agent or a neighbour who has a well-developed home garden.
Use the map as a vision of the garden you want to create. Everyone who works in the garden, including advisers, should refer to the map. In this way it is easier to ensure that each step in the completion of the garden is thought about, discussed and understood.
Figure 1 Example of home garden map with different technology options
Home garden technology leaflet 3 :Growing plants for daily nutrition
Nutrition is about all the aspects of food and how it is used in the body. Most people eat because they are hungry. However, while the feeling of hunger tells you to eat, it does not tell you what to eat. This leaflet gives a brief description of some of the main nutrients that make up food, why each nutrient is needed and which kinds of home garden foods provide healthy meals.
FOOD IS MADE UP OF A COMBINATION OF NUTRIENTS
Food is made up of nutrients such as carbohydrates, fats, protein and micronutrients (vitamins and minerals). Nutrients are needed for energy (working and playing), for growth (building and maintaining the body) and for protection against infection.
Many foods contain several nutrients; for example, rice, groundnuts and soybeans contain carbohydrates and fats for energy, protein for body building and small amounts of vitamins and minerals for protection. Green leafy vegetables such as pumpkin leaves and orange fruits are very rich sources of vitamins A and C for protection. Animal foods such as fish, chicken and eggs are also rich sources of nutrients, especially protein and carbohydrates, and some vitamins and minerals.
NUTRIENTS ARE NEEDED TO KEEP THE BODY HEALTHY
Plants require certain types and quantities of nutrients in the course of their life to keep them alive and healthy. In the same way, people need a sufficient variety of nutrients from conception to old age. Small children and pregnant or lactating mothers, especially, must have enough nutritious food to ensure proper growth, mental development and health.
It is essential to eat a variety of plant foods every day in order to remain healthy and well-nourished. Also, animal foods such as fish, chicken and eggs should be eaten as often as they are available. Table 1 (p. 120) shows a list of foods and the nutrient in which they are particularly rich.
MAKE A KITCHEN GARDEN TO PROVIDE A VARIETY OF FOODS
The easiest way to get a variety of nutritious foods on a daily basis is from a kitchen garden (Figure 1, p. 120). Located near the kitchen, the garden can be watered and fertilized with kitchen wastes very easily. When a mother is preparing a meal, she need only take a few steps outside to pick herbs, green leaves, spices, vegetables or fruits from the garden.
EAT A VARIETY OF NUTRITIOUS FOODS EVERY DAY
Green leaves, vegetables or orange and yellow fruit and vegetables should be eaten every day. Most fruit and vegetables taste better and are more nutritious when they are fresh. Children especially like ripe fruits. These taste better because they are full of sugars and vitamins. Beware, however, because soft, ripe fruits (e.g. papaya) and tender green leaves are easily damaged on a trip to or from the market. Handle and wrap produce carefully and store it in a cool place.
TABLE 1
Nutrients from home garden foods
Energy
Protein
Fat
Vitamin A
Vitamin C
Avocado
Cashew nut
Avocado
Fruit
Cashew fruit
Banana
Cowpea
Cashew nut
Banana
Breadfruit
Eggs
Coconut milk
Bitter cucumber
Custard apple
Canna root
Fish
Coconut oil
Canistel
Guava
Cashew nut
Groundnut
Groundnut
Mango (ripe)
Litchi
Cassava
Koro bean
Milk
Papaya (ripe)
Longan
Coconut flesh
Long bean
Butter (ghee, etc.)
Pumpkin
Mango
Coconut oil
Meat
Papaya (ripe)
Groundnut
Milk
Leaves
Pineapple
Jackfruit
Mung bean
Amaranth
Rambutan
Maize
Pigeon pea
Bitter cucumber
Soursop
Rice
Sesbania grandiflora
Cassava
Tomato
Sugar cane
Soybean
Drumstick tree
Sweet potato
Wing bean
Gnetum gnemon
Taro root
Papaya
Yam
Pumpkin
Katuk (Sauropus sp.)
String bean
Sweet potato
Taro
Water spinach
Figure 1 A kitchen garden
PREPARE A NUTRITIOUS MEAL FOR ALL THE FAMILY
Start with a common starchy staple food (e.g. rice) and combine it with one or more foods from each of the various food groups shown in Figure 2.
FIGURE 2 Family mixed meal guide
The guide shows how you add foods to the staple. Try to add one or more foods from each part of the guide. From the left: legumes and/or food from animals; from the right: fruit and/ or vegetables; from above: some energy-rich foods; from below: some flavouring foods.
Home garden technology leaflet 4: Planting crops for a continuous food supply
YEAR-ROUND FOOD SUPPLY
Every family should have access to enough nutritious food to ensure that all its members stay active and healthy. Food can be produced on the family's land or bought with money from sales of crops, or earned from an off-farm job. However, the best security is a home garden which always produces food for home consumption year round.
SAVE CASH BY GROWING YOUR FOOD
Many villages are located at some distance from towns and markets. Food supplies coming from outside are often expensive and difficult to transport, especially if heavy rain has flooded or damaged roads. A well-developed home garden can supply sufficient food for consumption on a daily basis. Growing your food at home saves money and effort and ensures a regular supply of food when roads are cut off. Table 1 (p. 124) is a guide to the minimum plantings that are needed for regular daily harvests.
SELL EXCESS FOR CASH
Off-farm employment can provide cash income. However, it is not a reliable source of income. Activities such as road construction and tree felling are available for a limited period of time only. Your home garden can provide cash from sales of crops such as fruit, vegetables and processed foods made from soybean, cassava and coconut year round.
AVOID TOTAL CROP LOSS THROUGH PLANT DIVERSITY
Farm crops are sometimes ruined by wild animals, drought, flood, pests or diseases, especially if they are in a monocropping system. Crop diversity in the home garden reduces the spread of plant diseases and ensures that many food plants survive even if there is a flood or drought. Root crops, fruit- and nut-trees should be interplanted with staple food crops, legumes and vegetables. Crops that take longer to mature are mixed with shorter-maturing plants in the multiple cropping method of farming. Fill the home garden by mixing plants of different heights for multilayer cropping, and use all available areas, even swamp or slopes. For more information, see Home Garden Technology Leaflets 6, 8, 11 and 13.
HOME GARDEN FOOD RESERVES
It is very important to have reserves of food or money (or both) so that your family can live through emergencies or special occasions. For example, if you fall sick and cannot work or your staple food crop is ruined somehow, you may need to raise some money quickly.
Fruit-trees can give a continuous supply of food throughout the year or in different seasons. Find out the harvest times of different fruits in your area and plant in such a way as to have fruit all year.
Root crops are living food stores which can be left in the ground until you need them. Many also provide nutritious leaves (e.g. cassava, sweet potato, amaranth).
Chickens and other animals can be fed on household scraps and home garden plants. You can keep them for sale or for eating when you need to.
TABLE 1
Suggested minimum target plantings for the home garden
Crop
Minimum number
Frequency / Every three months
Root crops
Sweet potato
Taro
Yam
Cassava
Legumes
Groundnut
Soybean
Mung bean
Long bean or French bean
Vegetable crops
+ (upland)
Water spinach
Pumpkin
Amaranth
Rape or jute
Katuk (Sauropus sp.)
Cassava leaves
Fruit
Papaya
Coconut
Banana
Jacktruit
Guava
Citrus
Spices and medicinal plants
Lemon grass
Chili
Slack pepper
Garlic or onion
Ginger
TABLE 2
Suggested crop locations In the home garden
Plants for moist areas
Plants that cover the soil
Taro
Gourd
Water spinach
Vine legumes
Sugar cane
Sweet potato
Banana
Lemon grass
Plants to grow on a trellis
Plants as living fences
Wing bean
Leucaena
Koro bean
Drumstick tree
Long bean
Sesbania sp.
Pumpkin
Cassava
Gourd
Pineapple
Passionfruit
Lemon grass
Yam
Gliricidia sp.
Pepper
Bitter cucumber
Plants to grow under a trellis (shade)
Most leafy plants
Some root crops, e.g. taro, sweet potato
Home garden technology leaflet 5: Soil improvement
WHAT IS IMPORTANT IN SOIL?
Good soil is essential for a good harvest. Soil must have all the nutrients necessary for plant growth, and a structure that keeps plants firm and upright. The soil structure must hold enough air and water for plant roots, but must allow excess water to drain away.
THE LIVING SOIL SYSTEM
Most nutrients are naturally recycled from the soil through plant roots and back to the soil through fallen leaves and other organic matter. Worms, insects and tiny organisms such as fungi feed on organic matter and change it into humus which makes topsoil dark and gives it a good structure. Humus is quickly lost or washed away if the soil is left exposed. Subsoil is usually less fertile.
FIGURE 1 Topsoil is the best part
THERE ARE DIFFERENT TYPES OF SOIL
Some soil is naturally fertile (such as river plain soil or volcanic soil) but, in many places, the soil is naturally infertile or has lost nutrients through clearing, regular burning or continuous cropping without the application of fertilizer. Some features of common soil types are shown in Table I (p. 128). To grow good crops, a farmer must improve soil fertility and structure.
TABLE 1
Common soil types and treatments
Soil type
Features
Methods of improvement
Sand
- Poor structure
- Regularly add organic matter and fertilizer, use green manure crops
- Poor fertility
- Cannot hold water
Silt
- Poor structure
- Add coarse organic matter
- Good fertility
Clay
- Dries hard
- Add organic matter, compost and gypsum
- Holds too much water
Acid subsoil
- Subsoil layer is toxic to some plants
- Keep soil inundated (rice paddy)
- Grow shallow-rooted plants (vegetables)
- Apply ground limestone (3 kg/10 m^2)
PLANT NUTRITION
Good crops will only grow if there are enough nutrients in the soil. Table 2 shows the three main chemical nutrients that plants need.
TABLE 2
Nutrients and their functions
Nutrient
Function
Deficiency symptoms
Sources
Nitrogen (N)
Growth in leaves and stems
Pale green or yellow leaves
Urea, ammonium nitrate, ammonium phosphate (MAP or DHAP), NPK or other nitrate fertilizer
Green colour and pest/disease resistance
Poor growth
Leaf fall
Animal waste
Pest problems
Compost
Green manure crops
Phosphorus (P)
Beans, seeds and fruit(early maturity)
Stunted growth
Superphosphate, MAP, DHAP, NPK
Root formation
Diseases
Chichen manure
Drought resistance
Poor formation of side shoots and flowers
Ash Ground animal bones
Potassium (K)
Strong roots and stems
Curled, wrinkled or burnt leaves
Potassium chloride (muriate of potash), potassium nitrate, NPK
Fat seeds and fruits
Uneven ripening
Ash
Helps move nutrients around the plant
Poor growth
Manure
Banana leaves and stems
Maize cobs
Compost
HOW TO MANAGE SOIL FERTILITY
Some chemical nutrients in the soil are stable (e.g. phosphorus) while others are quickly lost or consumed (e.g. nitrogen). A farmer needs to make a basic application of enough nutrients to start a garden and then maintain the supply of nutrients by regular applications as the crops grow. Poor soil will become productive if properly managed. Manure and compost are needed to improve soil structure while chemical fertilizer is needed for a higher production. The general method is to dig compost, organic matter, manure or chemical fertilizer into the soil just prior to planting. This is the basic application. After planting, apply small amounts of manure, compost or chemical fertilizer alongside plants about every two weeks until harvest.
Fertilizer
The quickest way to put plant foods into the soil is to use chemical or mineral fertilizers containing one or more of the three chemical nutrients needed by plants (see Table 2). Fertilizers can wash away quickly so do not apply them too early before planting. Fertilizers cost money and are very concentrated so you only need to apply about one handful for every 4 m^2. Never put fertilizer in a heap too close to a plant or it may burn the roots or stem of the plant. It is better to spread the fertilizer out and lightly mix it into the soil surface.
Compost
Compost is easy to make and does not cost anything if you have the time, some space in your garden and access to materials such as animal and kitchen waste, leaves and grasses. Compost pits are common but they take time to dig and nutrients are lost in the ground below the pit. It is better to make a compost heap. Make the compost in layers and add kitchen refuse every day. Turn or mix the compost heap every month to help it rot and break down. It takes three to four months to become dark and ready to use. Keep the heap in place with logs, banana stems or bricks around the edge.
Figure 2 Example of a compost heap
FIGURE 3 Hedgerow use
Green manure and compost crops
Another way to feed the soil is to grow green manure crops and dig them into the soil after cutting. These crops are also very good for compost, especially legume plants (such as leucaena, Flemingia sp. pigeon pea and centre) which collect nitrogen. Legume trees such as leucaena can be grown above or near the food crops and their branches occasionally pruned off and left on the ground as manure. Low legume plants can be planted with a food crop to help improve the soil and keep out weeds.
TABLE 3
Green manure crops
Hedgerow green manure crops
Green manure/compost cover crops
Leucaena
Grasses
Flemingia sp.
Centro (Centrosema sp.)
Gliricidia sp.
Puero (Pueraria sp.)
Pigeon pea (Cajanus sp.)
Water hyacinth (swamp)
Guinea grass
Setaria sp.
Using compost and manure
Manure can be dried in the shade (for example under a stable) and stored for later use. Fresh manure may burn plants if placed too close. Compost is best when it is crumbly like forest litter and not heavy or sticky. Compost and manure can be mixed into the soil in a hole before planting a tree or dug into a garden before planting vegetables or food crops. A compost trench (Figure 4) is useful for a row of new crops or for feeding established crops. Compost and manure can be sprinkled on the soil surface, but it is better if it is protected from full sunlight. Fully rotted compost is good to mix with sandy soil for use in a nursery.
Figure 4 Compost trenches
Mulch
Another way to feed the soil is using mulch, which protects soil from erosion and reduces weeds.
Mulch materials such as straw or green manure cuttings should be spread about 4 to 6 cm thick around plants.
Figure 5 Mulch
Home garden technology leaflet 6: Use of sloping land
All of the home garden area can be used to grow useful plants, but sloping land needs special care to keep the soil in good condition.
PREVENT EROSION
The best part of the soil is the dark layer of topsoil, which takes many years to develop.
Topsoil is rich in plant nutrients and beneficial soil organisms such as worms. Under the topsoil is the yellow or light brown subsoil which may be very acid and is harder for plants to grow in. Humus is a layer of rotting plant debris which feeds the topsoil. These two layers are lost easily through erosion by rain, wind, cultivation, foot traffic and by the ground being swept clean every day.
Figure 1 Topsoil is the best part
Cover the soil
Soil can be covered with mulch (see Home Garden Technology Leaflet 5) or with living c over crops. Covering the soil reduces weeds and prevents the soil from washing away when it rains.
A straw mulch or humus layer also prevents soil from sticking to your feet and "walking" out of the garden, taking fertilizer and nutrients with it. Figure 2 (p. 134) shows how to use cover crops.
Figure 2 Cover cropping
Plant hedgerows
Hedgerows planted horizontally across the slope stop rainwater from moving fast over the soil and carrying off the topsoil. Figure 3 shows how to use hedgerows while useful plants for cover crops and hedgerows are shown in Table 1.
Figure 3 Hedgerows
TABLE 1
Cover crops and hedgerow plants
Cover crops
Hedgerow plants
Food crops
Food hedgerows
Sweet potato
Pineapple
Water spinach
Salak
Pumpkin, cucumber, melon
Lemon grass
Cassava
Other
Multipurpose trees
Grasses
Pigeon pea (Cajanus sp.)
Puero (Pueraria sp.)
Cailiandra sp.
Centro (Centrosema sp.)
Flemingia sp.
Stylo (Stylosanthes guianensis)
Leucaena
Calopo (Calopogonium mucunoides)
Sesbania grandiflora
Mucuna sp (lives 4-7 months)
Cowpea
Make barriers to catch soil
Logs, banana stems and horizontal channels (Figure 4) catch soil when it moves down hill. Paths wear down quickly, and sloping paths should have wooden steps, otherwise steps cut into the soil may be washed away by floods.
Figure 4 Channels and barriers
Terraces
Terraces can be found in many home gardens. The most important thing is to protect the sloping part of the terrace by planting grasses or hedgerow crops, otherwise the terraces will slide downwards with erosion. When making a terrace, keep it flat by using an A-frame (see Figure
5). Terraces are an excellent long-term way of increasing the cultivated area of a home garden.
Figure 5 Terraces
Do not attempt to start making terraces by yourself if you have not had previous experience. It is advisable to ask the agricultural extension workers in your village or a neighbour who has constructed terraces before to show you what to do.
Home garden technology leaflet 7: Cover cropping
COVER THE SOIL
Covering the soil reduces weeds and prevents the soil from washing away when it rains. Erosion of the humus layer and topsoil from your home garden greatly reduces crop growth and yield at harvest. Soil can be covered with living cover crops or with mulch (see Home Garden Technology Leaflet 5). Cover cropping is the long-term technique for weed control in the home garden. Mulching is a short-term technique to keep weeds from getting established.
How cover crops work
By covering the soil with trailing vines and leaves, cover crops shade the soil surface and protect it from the impact of falling rain which wears away the soil. A dense mat of cover crop provides strong competition against any weed seed which finds its way into the crop. The competition and the shade make the cover crop the winner over most weeds. For example, cowpea will climb up and smother alang-alang.
Figure 1: Vegetable cover crops
Figure 2 Cover cropping between tree crops
Two kinds of cover crops
Food plants can be used as cover crops (see examples in Table I). Many other plants can act in the same way. For example, taro plants can be planted close together to become a cover, especially in wet or swampy areas. Another method is multiple cropping (see Home Garden Technology Leaflet 11) where different food crops are planted together, covering the soil.
Most other kinds of cover crops (grasses and creeping legumes) are not food crops. Legumes have friendly bacteria in their roots which provide nitrogen nutrient for the soil. Both grasses and legumes can be cut for green manure (see Home Garden Technology Leaflet 5), although legumes should not be cut very close to the ground.
TABLE 1
Cover crops
Cover crops
Establishment and care
Food crops
Sweet potato
- Feed these with compost to help growth of cover and food parts
Water spinach
- Most of these can be interplanted with other food crops
Pumpkin, cucumber, melon
Other
Grasses
- Grasses: Uproot a clump and split it into pieces (splits) that include roots and leaves. Plant about 30 cm apart (closer for mall grasses like Manila grass)
Komak
Puero (Pueraria sp.)
- Broadcast legume seeds or dig them 2 cm into the soil 30-50 cm apart. Hard, dry seeds may need to be scarified before planting
Centro (Centrosema sp.)
Stylo (Stylosanthes guianensis)
Calopo (Calopogonium mucunoides)
Mucuna sp. (lives 4-7 months)
Cowpea
How to establish a cover crop
For a food cover crop such as sweet potato or pumpkin, you need to cultivate the soil and mix in some rich compost to feed the growth of the crop. Weeding will need to be done once or twice in the first month until the crop is established.
Plant sweet potato and water spinach using 12 to 20 cm vine cuttings (best with roots), placing them upright or angled with 10 cm of the cutting buried in the soil. Water spinach can also be grown from seed planted I cm deep. The top 2 cm of a sweet potato tuber with shoot buds can also be planted in the same way.
Sweet potato cuttings about 30 cm long (with roots) or the tops of the tuber (with shoot buds) are planted about 30 cm apart. It is best to plant the sweet potato in rows and to dig in a compost trench under the row before planting to help the tubers grow.
For pumpkin, plant three or four seeds for each planting hole. Mix in two handfuls of compost per hole and place the seeds 4 cm deep. Pumpkins should be planted about I m apart to make a good cover crop.
Pumpkin, cucumber and melon are grown only from seed, planted 2 cm deep.
Legume cover crops such as cow pea will not usually require weeding and can survive without compost on reasonable soil. Ask your extension agent for advice on where to get planting materials and how to treat seeds.
Figure 3 Planting sweet potato cuttings
Home garden technology leaflet 8: Using wetland
Low-lying and swampy land can be very productive for many crops, including rice. In a home garden, even a very small area of wetland, such as the banks of a drain, can be used for growing food all year.
THE SURJAN SYSTEM
Management of water is the key to home garden development in low-lying areas prone to flooding. Soils that flood frequently can be made more productive with good water drainage. Figure I shows a home garden using the "surjan" system, which is made by digging soil from wide water channels and piling it up into flattened mounds (beds). In the channels, wet rice, wet taro and water spinach can be grown, sometimes together with fish. On the raised beds, annual food plants and/or tree crops, especially citrus, can be grown.
Figure 1 Surjan system
THE SWAMP GARDEN AND FISH POND
Where there is a gully or small creek, a pond can be dug out and allowed to fill with water. If it is necessary to make a small dam, use clayey soil (subsoil) in the dam wall because topsoil and any organic matter, such as sticks and plant stems, will let water through. Also make sure there is an overflow channel which guides water around the dam wall if there is very heavy rain and the pond floods. Without an overflow channel the dam wall may weaken and collapse.
Cover the banks of the pond or channel with useful crops (see Table I, p. 142) to prevent the soil from washing into the pond and to make use of the land. Depending on the water depth, set some plants in the bottom of the pond. Climbing plants, especially pumpkin and gourds, can be grown on a trellis over the pond to shade the water and keep it cool.
TABLE 1
Some useful wetland plants
Plants
Use
Water spinach
Edible stems and leaves
Taro
Edible leaves and root bulbs
Lotus
Edible leaf stems, root bulbs and seeds
Banana
Fruit, leaves for packaging
Rice
Grain
Water hyacinth
Compost
Ginger
Edible leaves
Sugar cane
Stems
Lemon grass
Leaves for flavouring
Fish such as tilapia and nila will grow well feeding on tiny organisms in the mud at the bottom, but they must also be fed daily with soft green leaves such as cassava. Growing plants such as water spinach in the pond will provide a place for the fish to hide from the sun or from predators.
Figure 2 Fish pond and swamp land
Home garden technology leaflet 9: Safe and effective crop protection
WHAT ARE PESTS AND DISEASES?
A good farmer must know how to manage pests and diseases of crops and, to do this, he or she must understand what pests and diseases are. The first skill to learn is how to recognize what kind of pest or disease is causing the problem. Here are some simple points to remember:
- Pests and diseases are all living things - insects, fungi and bacteria. Generally, they cannot survive for long without a place to live.
- Insects can sometimes be seen on plants or in the soil. They mostly damage plants by chewing holes in roots, leaves and fruit or by sucking sap out of the leaves, stems and fruit. Not all insects are pests, some (e.g. bees) pollinate flowers so that crops have fruit and seeds.
- Fungi are very small but sometimes can be seen as mushrooms. They attack all parts of plants. Signs of fungi may be a powdery substance under leaves, rotten patches, black spots on stems, leaves and fruit or wilting because of rotten roots. Fungi may spread through rain that is splashed up from soil on to plants or they may be carried by wind from one plant to another.
- Bacteria and viruses are only visible with a microscope. They may cause rot in roots and stems, oozing sap, distorted or striped leaves, black spots and other symptoms. They spread through water, soil and affected plants.
TABLE 1
Some common pests and diseases in Southeast Asian home gardens
Pests or disease
Plants attacked
Symptoms
Controls
Root rot (Pythium sp. or Phytophthora sp.) (Fungus)
Papaya and many others
Wilting
Plant in well-drained soil
Collapse of plant
Do not replant where root rot has occurred
Rotten roots and stem
Avoid introducing root rot in contaminated soil
Bacterial wilt (Pseudomonas solanaceraum)
Ginger, tomato and many others
Wilting and yellowing of leaves
Plant only disease-free seed
Blackening inside stem
Do not replant with susceptible crops
Plant a legume crop
Burn affected plants
Mosaic virus
Papaya
Yellow, stunted leaves
Destroy affected plants
Plant only disease-free seed
Mealybug and scale insects (various species)
Citrus and many others
Wilting
Wipe insects off plants by hand
Wax-covered insects on stems
Spray with appropriate pesticide or light oil
Encourage ladybird insect predators
Tomato grub (Heliothis sp.)
Many vegetables and maize
Holes in fruit
Remove and kill caterpillars
Use appropriate pesticide
GOOD FARMING PRACTICES PREVENT PROBLEMS
There are important and simple ways to help plants stay healthy and productive.
- Grow plants where soil, water and light conditions suit them. Papaya needs full sunlight, coffee needs shade. Taro likes wet soil but papaya might get root rot and die in the same place. It is important to select the correct plant for each place in your garden.
- Feed your crops and they will feed you. Yellow leaves, poor growth and small fruit are often due to a lack of water or nutrients in the soil. If a plant is sited correctly and no pests or fungi can be seen under the leaves, the application of fertilizer or manure may improve plant growth.
- Minimize competition. Plant crops with just enough space for each one to grow to full size. Weeds can sometimes grow faster than crops and they take soil nutrients necessary for crop growth. Weeds should be removed before planting. Mulch between crops will prevent many weeds from taking root until the crop is well established and covers the soil.
- Protect plants from strong winds, seasonal dry winds or salty winds from the sea. Wind can reduce growth and damage leaves and flowers. Use multipurpose trees as living fences (see also Home Garden Technology Leaflet 10, Living fences).
- Try to avoid planting large areas of a single crop (monocropping). If one plant gets sick, the disease spreads rapidly throughout the whole crop unless there is another different crop as a barrier. Interplanting can be a useful technique to increase the number of crops in one place.
- One way to keep fungi away from vine plants (such as pumpkin) is to grow them on a trellis. For more details read Home Garden Technology Leaflet 13, Multilayer cropping. If the soil is very wet or has a lot of clay in it, try growing plants above the soil in baskets or containers filled with good soil and compost.
PHYSICAL CONTROL METHODS
The safest way to avoid pest and disease problems is to practice good garden hygiene. Remove and burn plants affected by diseases before the disease spreads. Dead branches, fallen fruit and tall, dense weeds can house pests and diseases. Remove and burn or compost materials where pests and diseases live and breed. Keep the compost heap away from growing vegetables. Do not replant the same kind of crop in the same place; plant a different kind of crop instead (read more about this in Home Garden Technology Leaflets 11, Multiple cropping and 12, Intensive vegetable square).
NATURAL PESTICIDES AND DETERRENTS
There are many household items which can deter insects. Sucking insects such as aphids can be deterred by sprinkling ash over the insects. They are usually on the underside of leaves. Ash sprinkled around the base of plants can deter some crawling insects. Soapy water poured or sprayed over sucking insects can also be effective. Slugs and other pests can be trapped in a hall: buried bottle with a little beer remaining in the bottom. Coffee grounds will deter many insects.
Certain plants are known to repel many types of insect, and some farmers plant these as companions to food crops. Garlic, marigold and lemon grass are some of these plants.
Some farmers know how to prepare natural pesticides from extracts of certain plants, seeds or fruit which can be mixed with water and sprayed on to plants. Some common examples in Southeast Asia are tobacco, neem fruits, rotenone and oil from citrus skin. In general, a farmer must experiment a little to find an effective solution which is easy to prepare. Do not forget that these natural pesticides can also be poisonous to animals and humans. Follow the same safety rules as with chemical pesticides.
SAFE USE OF CHEMICAL PESTICIDES
Occasionally, the use of chemical pesticides is the best method of pest and disease control. Many different pesticides are widely available. They cost money, however, and while they are powerful, they may be ineffective and dangerous if used incorrectly. Using them in a home garden is not the same as using them in a field situation such as a rice paddy. Always read the label on pesticide packages and respect the following rules for safe and effective use of pesticides:
- Specific targets. Many pesticides are only effective against specific pests or diseases. Identify the pest or disease causing the problem before you select a pesticide.
- Protect yourself. When handling pesticides, especially when mixing or spraying, do not let the chemical touch your body and, if it does, wash it off immediately. Wear gloves or plastic bags over hands, wear a breathing mask or a cloth to filter the air you breathe as well as a hat and a shirt or jacket.
-Mix correctly. Follow the instructions on the label to mix the chemical to the right concentration. Do not add more than the rate specified because this may reduce its effectiveness. Repeat applications only according to the frequency written on the label.
- Withholding period. After any pesticide is applied to a crop, a certain period must pass before the crop can be harvested and eaten or sent to market. This is the keep-out period. For some pesticides it is only one day, but for others it may be two weeks. Poisoning may occur if the crop is eaten inside the keep-out period. If children or animals cannot be kept away from the crop, do not use the pesticides.
- Storage and disposal. Keep pesticides safely locked away from children to avoid poisoning. If there is pesticide left over in the tank after spraying, pour it out but make sure you do this away from streams and ponds so that it does not poison the water and fish.
- If in doubt. Do not use a pesticide if you are not sure of the procedures.
Home garden technology leaflet 10: Living fences
PROTECTION WITH PRODUCTION
Food crops need protection from animals and sometimes from people. The idea behind a living fence is that certain plants make good fences and at the same time produce useful things for people, for livestock and for soil improvement. Table I lists some plants for making living fences. Some people make good fences using living plants as well as wood or bamboo poles. In most villages there are home gardens with living fences which can be good examples to follow.
TABLE 1
Plants for living fences
Plants
Notes
- Gliricidia sp., Leucaena sp., Sesbania sp., drumstick tree
- Leaves are useful for animal fodder it cut regularly at 1.5 m from ground
Salak, pineapple, pandanus
Plant in double rows:
Cassava, katuk (Sauropus sp.)
Plant 5 cm apart and strengthen the fence with bamboo strips
Goats usually roam free in the village but they can cause much damage in the home garden. Fences should be erected around vegetable areas and food crops. A living fence of lamtoro (Leucaena sp.) planted close together and bound with strips of bamboo will keep them out at the same time as providing them with fodder. Another kind of fence can be made with sticks of cassava bound with bamboo strips.
Figure 1 Living fences with edible leaves
Wild pigs are smart and they particularly like root crops. One way to deter pigs is with a thick fence of plants that have spines or thorns, such as salak, pineapple or pandanus.
Figure 2 Salak fence
Figure 3 Pandanus around young coconut
Chickens are usually left free to scavenge for food, including insects and seeds, but they will also strip leaves from plants and seriously damage vegetables and young plants.
Figure 4 Plant cassava or use bamboo or other sticks around plants
Figure 5 Protect root crops by placing coconut around the base of the plant
Home garden technology leaflet 11: Multiple cropping
CONTINUOUS SUPPLY
Overlapping the planting times of several different crops in the same place will provide a year-round supply of food crops and vegetables. In large-scale farming, monocropping is common because of the ease of planting and harvesting, but there are problems of weeds and pest attack. Multiple cropping has been practiced for food crops in many countries and is useful in the home garden.
DIVERSITY GIVES HEALTHY PLANTS
Growing different crops together minimizes pest problems and makes efficient use of soil nutrients. Legumes (such as beans) will provide some nitrogen nutrient to other crops such as maize or tomato when planted together. Some plants such as chili, garlic and marigold flowers can keep certain pests away from neighbouring plants. These companion plants and others can be mixed into or around a planted area.
INTERPLANTING AND ROTATION PLANTING
Plants belonging to the same family should not be planted repeatedly in exactly the same place for more than two years, otherwise pests and diseases will build up in the soil. Table I shows some of the family groups of plants for rotating around the garden; for example they may be replanted in the next row. It is best to plant legumes before crops of the other families (see Home Garden Technology Leaflet 12 for more information). Cassava, maize and other food crops can be inter planted between other crops.
TABLE 1
Vegetables in the same family
Family
Solanaceae
Cucurbitaceae
Leguminosae
Tomato
Cucumber
Groundnut
Chili
Pumpkin
Soybean
Eggplant
Squash
Long bean
Sweet pepper (Capsicum sp.)
Bitter cucumber
Centro (Centrosema sp.)
Sweet potato
Melon
Cowpea
Water spinach
INTERPLANTING WITH TREES
Tree crops such as coconut, citrus and cinnamon can be planted 6 to 10 m apart. The area in between is good for other crops such as coffee or cocoa, but especially for regular interplanting of annual food crops (e.g. groundnuts, maize, cassava) or vegetables. Monocrop tree crops such as oil palm can be interplanted for the first five to six years, after which they can be underplanted with cover crops.
Figure 1 Interplanting
FOOD CROP PLANTING SEQUENCES
The sequence of crops planted should follow the changes in season during the year, especially rainy seasons. As a guide for home gardens where hand watering supplements rainfall, crops should be planted in beds or rows according to the example sequences in Table 2. In the dry season, leaf crops should be planted in the shade and crops such as mung bean and cassava in beds that are watered less frequently.
TABLE 2
Examples of crop sequences
Bed
Month
--Maize-
##### Soybean ###
----Maize---
#### Groundnut ##
==== Tomato ===
# Mung bean #
>>>Long bean >>>>
==Sweet potato ===
>>>Long bean>>>
==Sweet potato
+++ Pumpkin +++
### Soybean ###
++ Pumpkin ++
:::: Cassava::::
Home garden technology leaflet 12: Intensive vegetable square
SETTING UP THE VEGETABLE SQUARE
A small area of 30 to 40 m^2 can provide a household with fresh vegetables all year. The idea is to grow different kinds of vegetables one after another on well-fertilized beds.
Step 1
Mark out the square into four planting beds, about I m wide and 5 m long. The beds should be as wide as you can easily manage, leaving some room for paths in between.
Step 2
Cultivate the soil in the beds down to at least 20 cm. Break up the soil with the back of a hoe until it is fine and loose. Mix in about 5 kg of good compost per square metre of bed and add some fine topsoil to raise the level of the bed to about 20 cm above the path.
Step 3
Now you are ready to plant. Make a fence around the vegetable square to keep out wandering animals before any seedlings come up.
Figure 1 A vegetable square system
CHOICE OF CROPS
Choose crops that will provide good daily nutrition (see Home Garden Technology Leaflet 3) and that the family likes to eat. Remember that tall and ground-level plants can be grown together in a multilayer system, such as long bean on poles above cucumber, or eggplant above sweet potato. Plan the schedule of planting according to the growing time for each type of vegetable (see Table 1). Plant vegetables that can be harvested together in the same place. Alternatively, plant fruit vegetables (e.g. tomato, eggplant, maize, chili, cucumber) with leaf and root vegetables (such as water spinach, amaranth, taro, cassava) so that the fruit vegetables can be harvested without disturbing the leaf and root vegetables.
TABLE 1
Planting details for selected vegetable crops
Spacing
Crop
Depth for seed or cutting (mm)
Between plants (cm)
Between rows (cm)
Harvest (days after panting
Amaranth
Long bean
From 70
Tomato
From 100
Eggplant
From 100
Pumpkin
Cucumber
Mustard**
Celery
Sweet potato
20 (leaves) 100 (roots)
Water spinach
From 45
Okra
*Distance between 2.5 m supporting poles.
**Brassica juncea.
PLANTING
Small seeds (e.g. tomato, mustard, cabbage and amaranth) should be sprinkled in a row, covered lightly, and the seedlings thinned out after they emerge. Alternatively, they can be germinated in a seed bed or nursery and transplanted as seedlings to the garden bed. Larger seeds (beans, pumpkin) can be planted directly into the garden bed. Seedlings may require shade from direct sun in the first week if there are no trees around the vegetable square. A coconut frond supported by sticks will provide good shade. After seedlings emerge, the bed should be covered with mulch to protect the soil from becoming too hot and drying out the plants. Mulch will also reduce weeds.
TABLE 2
Vegetables in the same family
Family
Solanaceae
Cucurbitaceae
Legurninosse
Tomato
Cucumber
Groundnut
Chili
Pumpkin
Soybean
Eggplant
Squash
Long bean
Sweet pepper (Capsicum sp.)
Bitter cucumber
Centro (Centrosema sp.)
Melon
REPLANTING
Plants of the same family should not be planted repeatedly in exactly the same place for more than two years, otherwise pests and diseases will build up in the soil. Table 2 shows some of the main groups of plants that should be planted in another bed after one or two growing seasons. It is best to plant legumes before crops of the other families because they increase nitrogen nutrients in the soil (see Home Garden Technology Leaflet 11).
Home garden technology leaflet 13: Multilayer cropping
NATURAL FOREST
The multilayer structure of natural forest is built up over many years. There are tall trees, medium sized trees and shrubs, climbing vines and leafy shade plants in the shade. This layered structure uses all the sun light available for plant growth, thereby reducing weeds, and keeps the soil healthy.
LONG-TERM CROPPING SYSTEM
In the home garden, the layers can be filled with plants that are of daily use to the household. This system mixes plants with short, medium and long terms before maturity and harvest, similar to multiple cropping (see Home Garden Technology Leaflet 11). Figures I and 2 show some ideas for designing parts of the home garden using a system of mixed planting. Plants for different levels are shown in Table 1 (p. 158).
Figure 1 Heights of plants
Figure 2 A multilayer cropping system
TABLE 1
Crops for different layers
Crop
Layer
Coconut
Canopy or ceiling
Breadfruit
Durian
Jackfruit
Upper middle layer
Jambu
Rambutan
Clove
Cashew nut
Banana
Coffee
Lower middle layer
Papaya
Cocoa
Soursop
Pigeon pea
Taro
Lower layer
Turmeric
Ginger
Chili
Lemon grass
Sweet potato
Ground layer
Cucumber
Pumpkin
Climbers
Bitter cucumber
Yam
Pepper
Long bean
Passionfruit
TRELLIS
The construction of a frame for climbing plants allows the area underneath to be planted. The roof of a stable can also be used' for example.
Figure 3 Trellis systems
Home garden technology leaflet 14: Growing fruit- and nut-trees
THE BENEFITS OF FRUIT- AND NUT-TREES
Fruit- and nut-trees are special in the home garden because, unlike vegetables, they will produce for many years. Fruits and nuts are good sources of vitamins, minerals, fats and oils and protein. Fruit is a good snack food for children. Trees are also useful for shade, timber and as a support for climbing plants such as yam, pepper or passionfruit. A selection of different kinds of tree will produce fruit at different times of the year, so the availability of food is spread out.
Where to plant fruit- and nut-trees
All plants grow best where the conditions suit them. Trees occupy the middle and upper layers of the garden and most of them prefer full sunlight. Crops can be planted underneath or between fruit-trees to maximize garden production (see also Home Garden Technology Leaflet 13, Multilayer cropping).
Trees can be grown on a range of soil types because they are able to find nutrients and water deep in the soil. Most fruit-trees do not tolerate wetland (banana is an exception). On wetland, dig out canals and use the soil to make raised beds between the canals. Plant fruit-trees (such as citrus) on the raised beds.
Young trees will grow faster if they are sheltered from strong winds or salty winds from the sea. Flowers and fruit can also be knocked off trees such as sugar apple, mango and citrus by too much wind. However, some fruit- and nut-trees such as jackfruit, tamarind and coconut can be planted as living fences and as shelter for other crops.
Figure 1 Shelter for young trees
FACTORS IN TREE SELECTION
When selecting seedling or grafted varieties of fruit-trees for a home garden, study the characteristics of the tree's parents. Always choose healthy-looking trees with straight roots if buying from a nursery. Some things to consider are:
- Time of harvest season. Is there fruit all year or only once a year'? Is this a time when other food is plentiful or in short supply'?
- Size, taste, texture and use of fruit. Will the tree suit the conditions in your garden'? Can you grow crops under it or will the leaves block out too much light?
- Tree shape and size. Does the variety have strong branches or do they hang down and put the fruit too close to the ground? Will the fruit be easy to harvest?
- Disease and pest resistance. Find out if there are any pests and diseases and how to manage them. Choose tree varieties which are known to be resistant to local pests and diseases.
PROPAGATION
Propagating fruit- and nut-trees requires special skills and experience and is best left to farmers who have fruit-tree nurseries. Other farmers can buy trees from the nursery after studying the characteristics of each variety. Buying trees reduces the risk and delay involved in growing your own (for more information see Home Garden Technology Leaflet 15, Home garden nursery). The best trees to buy are carefully selected and grafted, which means that they will be true copies of their mother plant. Grafted trees or trees grown from cuttings often have special names for each variety. For example, some well-known mango varieties are Kayu Manis (Indonesia), Nam Dorkmai (Thailand) and Carabao (Philippines).
PLANTING
Taking special care when planting seedlings or grafted trees will help them to establish quickly and safely. Tree roots should never be left exposed to sunlight or left where they will dry out. Dig a hole almost twice as deep as the length of the roots on the seedling and mix a generous amount of compost and a little fertilizer into the soil at the bottom of the hole. While holding the plant in the middle of the hole, fill the hole with soil and more compost (Figure 2). If the area is wet, plant the tree in a mound of soil higher than the general soil surface. If the area is dry, plant the tree in a basin, lower than the surrounding soil.
Figure 2 Tree planting
SPACING BETWEEN TREES
Plant trees with enough space between them to minimize competition. Look at a mature specimen of the tree you want to plant to get an idea of the spacing. For example, in Figure 3 a citrus tree's branches spread 1.5 m from one side to the other. This kind of citrus tree should, therefore, be planted with at least 1.5 m spacing. Many fruit-trees develop feeder roots close to the soil surface which can compete with other crops, so trees should be planted further apart when crops will be planted underneath.
Figure 3 Tree spacing
PEST AND DISEASE CONTROL
Fruit-trees will be best prepared to fight pests and diseases if they are planted in conditions which suit them. Conditions include optimum light or shading, shelter, drainage and soil type. Many problems can be avoided if good farm hygiene is practiced: plant only healthy trees, remove and compost fallen or diseased fruit, prune out dead branches and do not bring soil from around infected plants into the garden. For more information, read Home Garden Technology Leaflet 9, Safe and effective crop protection.
TREK HUSBANDRY
Fruit-trees, like other plants and animals, will grow and produce better if they receive proper care.
- Pruning. Some trees such as citrus, mango and sugar apple benefit from tree shaping. At planting, select the strongest upright branch to become the future trunk of the tree. As the tree grows, carefully prune out branches that are very close or rubbing together. This lets air and light circulate through the tree, reduces diseases and can improve fruiting. Prune off weak branches and those that let fruit hang too close to the ground where animals or soil diseases can attack them. Take out dead branches where pests may be living.
Figure 4 Pruning
- Feeding. Trees benefit from fertilizer, particularly at planting. Generally, a small handful of NPK fertilizer or 2 kg of good compost should be applied at planting. Every four months, apply some more. Apply fertilizer or compost before (not during) tree flowering and again when fruit is half-mature. Laying organic matter or mulch under the tree will help to provide organic matter, reduce weed competition and retain soil moisture.
- Watering. Young fruit-trees are sensitive to drought and need daily watering in the dry season for the first year or two. Older trees will be more resistant. Fruit such as papaya will benefit from daily watering for their whole life.
SUGGESTED TREKS: FRUITS, NUTS AND SPICES
Avocado
Persea americana Mill.
Banana
Musa acuminata
Breadfruit
Artocarpus altilis (Parkins.) Fosb.
Carambola, star fruit
Averrhoa carambola L.
Cashew nut
Anacardium occidentals L.
Citrus (many kinds)
Citrus spp.
Cocoa
Theabroma cacao L.
Coconut
Cocos nucifera L.
Coffee
Coffea arabica, C. robusta
Custard apple, sugar apple
Annona reticulate, A. squamosa L.
Durian
Durio zibethinus L.
Guava
Psidium guajava L.
Jackfruit
Artocarpus heterophyllus Lam.
Litchi
Litchi chinensis Sonn.
Mango
Mangifera indica L.
Papaya
Carica papaya L.
Passionfruit
Passiflora edulis Deg.
Pill nut
Canarium ovatum Engl.
Pineapple
Ananas comosus Merr.
Rambutan
Nephelium lappaceum L.
Rose apple
Eugenia jambos L.
Salak
Salacca edulis Reinw.
Sapodilla, chico
Achras zopota L.
Soursop
Annona muricata L.
Tamarind
Tamarindus indica L.
Home garden technology leaflet 15: Home garden nursery
THE HOME GARDENS THE BEST PLACE FOR A NURSERY
A nursery in the home garden can be used to grow seedlings for all parts of the family farm areas. Locating the nursery within the home garden and close to the homestead means that seedlings and cuttings can receive regular watering and protection from pests and weed competition. For some plants, transplanted seedlings are more likely to survive in the field than those grown from directly sown seed. A nursery should always be well fenced to keep out animals.
TABLE 1
Uses of a nursery
Plant type
Activity
Vegetables
Grow seedlings in a seed bed before transplanting
Grow roots on cuttings before transplanting
Fruit-trees
Grow seedlings
Graft seedlings
Estate tree crop
Grow seedlings to a safe size for planting out
SEED BEDS AND SOWING
Large seeds such as beans and pumpkin are planted directly into the garden, but small seed such as lettuce, celery, tomato, coriander and rape should be germinated in seed beds and later transplanted to the garden bed.
The seed bed soil should be fine, with all sticks and stones taken out, and it should be raised about 15 cm above the surrounding area. Mix some sand into the soil to improve drainage and avoid seedling attack from fungus. Press the soil down hard with a flat board, then make shallow furrows in the soil. Sow the seed into the furrows then lightly cover the seed with soil. Make the soil firm by putting the board on the seeds and standing on it. Finally, put a thin mulch on the soil and water the seed bed.
Figure 1 A seed bed
Figure 2 Sowing seed
Figure 3 Transplanting vegetable seedlings
SEED PRODUCTION
The quality of seed determines the success of a vegetable crop. Hybrid seeds need high inputs. Seed quality deteriorates over a few generations so, every five years, change the source of seed to one outside your home garden. Only choose the best plants to keep for seed and remove any diseased or poor plants before flowering so that their bad characteristics are not inherited in the seed. Dry seed well (but do not overdry it) and store in airtight bags or containers protected from rats.
CUTTINGS
Growing plants from parts other than seed, such as stem or root pieces, is one way to make new plants. These cuttings should be taken from the best plants and kept in the nursery until new roots or shoots form (two to four weeks). Use a sharp knife to make your cuttings. Cuttings always need sandy soil for good drainage but they must be watered regularly to avoid their drying out. Plant them in a seed bed (Figure 1).
TABLE 2
Some plants obtained from cuttings
Plant
Part of plant
Sweet potato, water spinach, taro
15-20 cm vine cutting top of root with shoot buds
Seedless breadfruit
25 cm root, 2 cm thick, set almost flat in the seed bed with top end 3 cm above the soil
Pineapple
Side shoots
Katuk (Sauropus sp.)
15 cm stem cutting, set 5-10 cm in the soil, with leaves above the ground
CONTAINER GROWING
Plants with expensive seeds and those that take a long time to grow (such as oil palm) can be grown in containers such as poly bags or pots made from strips of banana leaf. Make sure the pot is big enough for the plant's roots to grow without becoming cramped. The plant will transplant better if the roots have been allowed to grow long and deep. Soil in the containers should include some compost or a little fertilizer to feed the growing plant.
<section>5</section>
Annex
Index of plant names and alternative crops
Annex
Index of plant names and alternative crops
Species suitable to local conditions and dietary preferences within areas of Southeast Asia can be selected from this index. Note that these are only some plant species common in home gardens in Southeast Asia.
Common name
Scientific name
Grains
Maize
Zea mays
Rice
Oryza sativa L.
Sesame
Sesamum indicum L.
Sorghum
Sorghum bicolor (L.) Moench
Root crops
Canna
Canna eculis
Carrot
Daucus carota
Cassava, tapioca
Manihot esculenta Crantz
Lotus
Nelumbo nucifera
Puero, kudzu
Pueraria phaseoloides, P. thunbergiana
Radish
Raphanus sadvus L.
Sweet potato
Ipomeea batatas (L.) Lam.
Taro
Colocasia esculenta (L.) Schott
Water chestnut
Eleocharis dulcis
Wing bean
Psophocarpus tetragonolobus (L.) DC
Yam
Dioscorea spp.
Leaf vegetables
Amaranth
Amaranthus gangeticus L., A. tricolor
Cassava, tapioca
Manihot esculenta Crantz
Ceylon spinach
Basella rubra L.
Edible cane, sugar cane
Saccharum edule Hassk., S. officinarum
Field mustard
Brassica campestris L.
Hibiscus, bele
Hibiscus manihot
Indian lettuce
Lactuca indica L.
Indian mustard, kai choy
Brassica juncea (L.) Czern. & Coss.
Jute
Chorchorus spp.
Leek
Allium porrum L.
Melindjo
Gnetum gnemon L.
Pumpkin
Cucurbita mixta
Scarlet runner bean
Phaseolus coccineus L.
Spinach
Spinacia oleracea
Sweet bush, katuk
Sauropus androgynus (L.) Merr.
Sweet potato
Ipomoea batatas (L.) Lam.
Taro
Colocasia esculenta (L.) Schott
Water spinach, kangkong
Ipomoea aquatica Forsk., I. replans L.
Watercress
Nasturtium officinale R. Br.
Fruit vegetables
Bitter cucumber
Momordica charantia L.
Cucumber
Cucumis sativus L.
Eggplant
Solanum melongena L.
Okra
Hibiscus esculentus L.
Pumpkin
Cucurbita pepo, C. moschata, C. maxima
Roselle
Hibiscus sabdariffa L.
Sweet pepper
Capsicum annum L.
Tomato
Lycopersicon esculentum Mill.
Herbs, spices, medicinal and other crops
Celery
Apium graveolens
Chili, chili pepper
Capsicum annuum L.
Coriander
Coriandrum sativum
Garlic
Allium sativum Linn.
Ginger
Zingiber officinale
Lemon grass
Cymbopogon citrates
Marigold
Calendula officinalis
Neem
Azadirachta indica
Onion. bunching onion
Allium fistulosum L.
Sugar cane
Saccharum officinarum L.
Tea
Camellia sinensis L.
Tobacco
Nicotiana tabacum
Turmeric
Curcuma longa
Beans and legumes
Cowpea
Vigna unguiculata (L.) Walp.
Hyacinth bean
Lablab purpureus (Dolichos labla L.)
Long bean
Vigna sesqipedalis (L.) Verdc.
Mung bean
Vigna radiate (L.) Wilczek
Pea
Pisum sativum L.
Peanut, groundnut
Arachis hypogaea L.
Soybean
Glycine max (L.) Herr.
Kidney bean, French bean
Phaseolus vulgaris L.
Wing bean
Psophocarpus tetragonolobus (L.) DC
Trees, fruits, nuts and spices
Avocado
Persea americana Mill.
Banana
Musa acuminate
Breadfruit
Artocarpus altilis (Parkins.) Fosb.
Carambola, star fruit
Averrhoa carambola L.
Cashew nut
Anacardium Occidentals L.
Citrus (many kinds)
Citrus spp.
Cocoa
Theobroma cacao L.
Coconut
Cocos nucifera L.
Coffee
Coffee arabica, C. robusta
Custard apple, sugar apple
Annona reticulate, A. squamosa L.
Durian
Durio zibethinus L.
Guava
Psidium guajava L.
Common name
Scientific name
Litchi
Litchi chinensis Sonn.
Jackfruit
Artocarpus heterophyllus Lam.
Mango
Mangifera indica L.
Papaya
Carica papaya L.
Passiontruit
Passiflora edulis Deg.
Pili nut
Cananum ovatum Engl.
Pineapple
Ananas comosus Merr.
Rambutan
Nephelium appaceum L.
Rose apple
Eugenia jambos L.
Salak
Salacca edulis Reinw.
Sapodilla, chico
Achras zopota L.
Trees, multipurpose and soil conservation
Calllandra calothyrsus
Drumstick or horseradish tree
Moringa oleifera Lam.
Flemrogla congesta, F macrophylla
Gliricidia septum
Leucaena
Leucacna spp.
Pandanus
Pandanus tectorius Sol. ex Parkinson
Pigeon pea
Cajanus cajan (L.) Huth
Sesbania grandiflora (L.) Pers.
Tephrosia tetraptera
Fodder, compost and soil conservation crops
Centro
Centrosema pubescens
Calopo
Calopogonium mucunoides
Cowpea
Vigna ungulculata (L.) Walp.
Guinea grass
Panicum maximum
Lablab
Lablab purpureus
Mucuna pruriens
Puero, kudzu
Pueraria phaseoloides, P. thunbergiana
Setaria anceps
Stylo
Stylosanthes guianensis
Vetiver grass
Venveria spp.
Water hyacinth
Eichhomia crassipes (C. Martius) Solms - Laub.
