<title>Role of Acacia species in the rural economy of dry Africa and the Near East</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
The importance of Acacia species in rural life in dryland Africa and the Near East cannot be overstressed. Acacia formations are the major component of 817 million hectares of dry and very dry woodlands and steppes of Sub-Saharan Africa. They are always present even in the heart of the Sahara and the Kalahari, where other hardy species have given up in the harsh dry conditions; they are an important link in the ecosystems of dry zones on which many wildlife species rely; they are a major support to the livelihood of the population in large expanses of the Sahelian steppes up to the woodlands of the Sudanian zone and the deserts of the Near East.
Acacia formations are central to the sustenance of the huge herds of cattle, sheep and goats of these regions; they contribute to the increasing energy needs of households in rural as well as in urban areas and they provide timber for shelter, handicrafts and utensils. The non-wood tree products that they offer to human communities include the universally used gum arable, tannin from pods, leaves or bark, medicines and many other commodities. All these are still intensively used in Africa and the Near East and will remain so for some time to come.
The influence of Acacia species as individuals and stands in maintaining and restoring soil fertility is of paramount importance to populations who cannot always afford to buy fertilizers to sustain their agricultural production. Finally, one should not forget the role of Acacia trees in the landscape and in beautifying villages and individual dwellings.
The Forestry Department of FAO has, since 1990, accumulated information on the Acacia species and corresponding formations with particular reference to their contribution to rural development in Africa and the Near East. A number of specialists have provided useful reports on West Africa (Pr. Guinko Sita of the University of Ouagadougou); East Africa (Mr. Abul Ghasim Seif El Din from Sudan); Near East (Professor Ibrahim Nahal of the University of Aleppo, Syria). Dr G.E. Wickens has prepared the present report from the contribution of A.G. Seif el Din "A first synthesis for Africa" and other documentation available in FAO, the U.K. and elsewhere. It is hoped that it will be useful to researchers and development agents in the field. FAO is greatly indebted to these colleagues mentioned above and to all who commented on previous drafts.
This work was conceived and coordinated by E.H. Sène, Chief, Forest Conservation, Research and Education Service, Forest Resources Division, Forestry Department. Colleagues in this arid the Forest Resources Development Service, and members of the Subgroup on Desertification of FAO's Interdepartmental Working Group on Environment and Energy, which deals with drylands, contributed valuable and helpful guidance and comments.
Information will continue to be gathered on the role of local and exotic Acacias in Africa and the Near East, especially in relation to their contribution in combating desertification, for future updating of this report.
J.P. Lanly
Director
Forest Resources Division
Forestry Department
Always present... where other hardy species have given up.
<section>2</section>
Abstract
Some 160 Acacia species are native of Africa and the Near East, in the drier regions of which 78 (97 taxa) are reported to be utilized for fuel, timber, forage, gum, tannins, fibre, medicine, food, handicrafts, domestic utensils, environmental protection, soil fertility, shade and shelter, game refuge, amenity and ornamental plantings, and agroforestry. Much of the information is provided by means of tables although the major uses, fuel, forage, gums and tannins are discussed in some detail.
Their distribution and role in the Sahel, Horn of Africa, East, Southern and North Africa, Arabia and the Thar-Sind Deserts are briefly described. The four most widely distributed and utilized species, A. nilotica, A. Senegal, A. tortilis and Faidherbia albida are treated separately. Some of the introduced acacias are briefly discussed, especially regarding physiological problems associated with their introduction in the Sahel.
There are problems in the management of Acacia communities, many of which have already been subjected to anthropogenic pressures. It is difficult enough to manage for sustainable development for timber, fuel and non-wood products for the rural communities; the demands by urban communities for fuelwood certainly cannot be met from forest resources within the arid and semi-arid regions. In severely decertified areas there is very little hope of improvement. Protection of local communities in the higher rainfall areas through sound management is recommended in order to form a base from which it is possible to attempt reclamation of the decertified regions.
<section>3</section>
Introduction and acknowledgements
This study is an attempt to better understand the role played by Acacia species in the rural economy of the drier regions of Africa and the Near East, the latter extending from the eastern Mediterranean and Red Sea to the Indian Desert.
Much of the information presented has been gleaned from the Libraries of the Food and Agriculture Organization, Rome, Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew and the Oxford Forestry Institute. Special acknowledgement is given for invaluable support provided by Mrs. F. Monti of the Forestry Library Service Point. I am greatly indebted to the help given me by D.M.W. Anderson, J. Ball, C.W. Fagg, W.J. Howard, J.K. Jackson, P.D. Koné, M.L. Malagnoux, P.L. Pugliese, F. Riveros, El Hadji Sène, and many others, who have aided me in the production of this report.
<section>4</section>
Preface
Acacia species are widely distributed through the drier regions of tropical and southern Africa, often the dominant tree and in some areas forming monospecific communities. In North Africa eastwards to Sind the genus is less well represented, mainly due to overexploitation, although in Arabia through Iraq and Iran eastwards to Pakistan and India species of Prosopis may replace Acacia both ecologically and economically.
Most species are important sources of browse, fuel and pole timber; some are important commercial sources of gum and tannin. Many are utilized by the rural populations in local medicines, for fibre, domestic utensils and handicrafts. Nitrogen-fixing, their potential for use in agroforestry, apart from a few species, has been neglected. Some can be effectively utilized for shade, shelter, live fences, soil stabilization as well as street trees and ornamentals.
In the past, the role of Acacia species in the rural economy and their economic potential has not been fully appreciated. For some rural communities they are absolutely essential for their survival, in others they may be of secondary importance. Importance is a relative concept, governed by availability and quality. Acacia seeds as a source of food are only just beginning to arouse interest, stimulated by the nutritional studies of seeds eaten by the Australian Aborigines!
The part played by Acacia species in the ecosystem is still imperfectly understood, the autecology of only a very few species has been studied; their associated biota are virtually unrecorded. Species of Acacia from Australia tend to be better understood and have consequently been widely introduced for timber, fuel, browse and ornamentals. That does not imply that they must be more suitable, just that knowledge leads to appreciation and helps to make them easier to manage.
Recent environmental and sociological changes resulting from prolonged drought, desertification, internal strife, AIDS and dwindling national resources and their effect on the rural economy are largely unrecorded. Indeed it would require a major international input to provide a proper assessment. Without such a study it is difficult to fully appreciate the role Acacia, and other species, must play in the rural economy of the present day.
Some of the information has been conflicting; deforestation has meant that species that were formerly economically important may have been replaced by other, often less effective, species. Changing economies has also meant that some usages are no longer required. However, the demand for fodder and fuel is likely to remain.
<section>5</section>
Part one: Acacia in the ecosystem
1.1 Acacia in Africa and the Near East
1.2 The ecosystems
1.3 Biomass production
1.1 Acacia in Africa and the Near East
There are c. 1250 species of Acacia, of which 134 species (represented by 170 taxa) are native of Africa, with 20 species (26 taxa) extending into Asia and 6 species (7 taxa) native to East Asia (Ross, 1979; Hassan and Styles, 1990; Lock, 1989, 1991). For the purposes of this present study Faidherbia albida (formerly known as Acacia albida) is also included here since its role in the rural economy is so similar to that of the Acacia that its omission by what are relatively minor taxonomic distinctions does not appear to be justified; never-the-less it is still treated throughout this document as Faidherbia albida. The accepted names of species cited in the text and their synonyms found in the consulted literature are listed in Annex A.
Despite this richness of Acacia species, relatively few appear to have been investigated. They are Acacia nilotica, A, senegal, A. tortilis and Faidherbia albida; their taxonomy and distribution are dealt with in Brenan (1983) and are further discussed in Part 4. This does not imply that the other species are worthless. Indeed, some are extremely important locally; all species make some contribution to the environment and rural economy by way of shade, shelter, soil stabilization and fertility, browse, fuel, etc. (Table 1.1).
1.2 The ecosystems
Approximately 55 per cent of the land surface of Africa is arid or semi-arid (Jahnke, 1982, cited by Seif el Din, 1991) and is illustrated in Annex B. These areas are characterized by annual rainfalls of less than 100 mm to c. 600 mm in a short season of 2-4 months. In some parts of Ethiopia, Kenya and Uganda a bimodal regime prevails and although the total annual rainfall may be higher, the distribution of the rainfall and the intensity of the dry season imposes a semi-arid regime. The total precipitation in the arid and semiarid regions varies widely from year to year and its distribution within a year is also variable. This low, erratic and poor distribution of rainfall means that the productivity of annual crops, especially in areas with less than 400 mm, is unpredictable, placing even greater value on perennial vegetation, especially multipurpose trees such as the Acacia.
The semi-arid ecosystems of tropical Africa are, with few exceptions, either thorn scrub or thorn savanna, with Acacia as the dominant species, either forming pure stands, e.g. Acacia mellifera thorn scrub, A. seyal thorn savanna, Acacia albida riparian woodland (now more correctly known as Faidherbia albida riparian woodland), etc. These ecosystems are important rangelands for the livestock industry, especially in those areas where A. tortilis is widespread.
Grasses and herbs alone cannot support a livestock industry in the semi-arid regions; browse, especially from Acacia species, plays an essential part. The dietary requirements of herbivores requires an intake of 20-25% browse, of which some 5% is consumed during the rainy season when herbage is relatively plentiful and 30% in the long dry season. Consequently the loss of these Acacia and other browse species would mean that herbivores would no longer be able to live through the dry season without costly and currently uneconomic food supplements. Livestock production is undoubtedly the most suitable industry for the utilization of the rangelands but full regard must be made for sustainability not exploitation. It has been suggested that in the Sahel, if the present trend in overexploitation and desertification continues unhindered, most of the browse species would disappear within the next 20 to 25 years and the livestock industry, which is the main economic activity would be
seriously jeopardized (Le Houérou, 1989).
Pure stands of A. mellifera or, in higher rainfall areas, A. seyal often occur on clay plains. Such areas can be suitable for irrigation, as is the case of the so-called 'cotton soils', the Quaternary alluvial clay plains of the Blue and White Nile in northern Sudan. In recent decades large areas have been clear felled for the mechanized cultivation of irrigated crops of cotton, sorghum, groundnuts, sugarcane, etc. with disastrous results with regard to fuel wood resources and wind erosion - the latter being associated with an increase in both number and severity of dust storms (Wickens, 1968). It should be noted that the black 'cotton soils' of the Lake Chad basin are far less tractable than those of the Sudan despite the similarity in the vegetation and are better suited to the growing of rice and not wheat.
Riverine communities of Acacia nilotica subsp. nilotica or subsp. tomentosa, such as those growing on the alluvial soils of the Blue and White Nile are also widely used for the growing of such irrigated crops as cereals, beans, cucurbits, tomatoes, onions, etc. on both a peasant and commercial scale. As a result of the influx of displaced nomadic tribesmen into the Nile valley following the recent prolonged drought the trees of these communities are in danger of extinction due to excessive cutting for fuelwood (Wickens, in ed.).
Open stands of Faidherbia albida, especially in West Africa, are highly valued for the enhanced yields of crops grown beneath their canopy as well as being a source of highly nutritious browse during the dry season. The riverine stands along the Wadi Aribo in western Sudan probably present the largest concentration of this species in Africa and the Aribo basin is rightly regarded as a prime dry season grazing area. The trees are similarly valued to those in West Africa although the stands are now endanged following the heavy and indiscriminent lopping for browse during the past two decades by the camel nomads who have moved into the area following the desertification of their former grazing areas.
These are but a few examples of the valuable ecosystems being destroyed; without due regard to their role in the local rural economy, further examples will be given elsewhere in the text. In general the ecosystems represent a state of equilibrium between the rainfall and soils in terms of available moisture and anthropogenic factors such as fire (for land clearance and hunting), grazing, cultivation, fuelwood etc. Excessive anthropogenic pressure will eventually lead to desertification, an insidious process which, in arid and semi-arid areas is ultimately more damaging than deforestation of the rainforests in that even partial recovery is almost always impossible.
Desertification can be defined as the destruction through man's activities of the natural vegetation around such focal points as watering points, habitation, livestock routes, etc. Through time the destruction expands centrifugally until the various areas of devastation coalesce, presenting a false impression of a frontal advance of the desert. Desertification is independent of drought, which is a climatic phenomenon, although desertification can certainly be aggravated by drought, hence the present dramatic devastation in the Sahel. Whether the albedo effect of desertification affects the climate and prolongs the drought remains debatable.
Although it has been repeatedly stated, e.g. Seif el Din (1991), etc. that the farmer and pastoralist appreciated the value of the natural vegetation, this is considered a rather sweeping and somewhat inaccurate generalization. It is apparent from the recent SOS Sahel Oral History Programme that practically all those questioned did not appreciate until too late the role trees had played in preventing desertification (Wickens, in prep.). The value of trees certainly appears from the examples cited above not to be appreciated by desert nomads, perhaps understandably so since they inhabit an area where trees are very few and far between and are consequently unfamiliar with their role in preventing erosion.
The boundaries between the different plant communities are not static. With the exception of abrupt pedological boundaries, such as occur in the central Sudan between A. senegal and A. mellifera where a dune system abuts onto a clay plain, boundaries are generally accepted as the point of interdigitation where there is a noticeable change in dominance, such as on clay soils where A. mellifera gives way to A. seyal. During the present extended period of drought, the former boundary of the more mesophytic A. seyal has retreated before the more xerophytic A. mellifera. Should the rainfall return to its pre-drought 'norm', the process will be reversed. However, where the desert has encroached onto the formerly lightly wooded A. tortilis grass savanna, the recovery is likely to be very slow indeed. A raw soil and low seed availability are not conducive to a rapid recovery. Indeed, according to Le Houérou (1989), the planting of indigenous woody species in francophone Sahel as
part of recovery programmes has proved largely unsuccessful in areas with less than 400 mm annual rainfall. The raw soils resulting from the desertification processes are generally inhospitable to plant life and it is the writer's opinion that ground cover should be established before trees, in line with the seral stages of succession.
The major mapping regions and their subdivisions recognized by White (1983) which are relevant to this present study are given in Table 1.2
Table 1.2 Vegetation regions of Africa and the major subdivisions containing dry zone Acacia species (White 1983).
Region
Area km²
Mapping units
Mediterranean/Sahara Regional Transition Zone
Argania spinosa scrub forest and bushland
Acacia gummifera-Ziziphus lotus bushland
Succulent sub-Mediterranean shrubland
Sub-Mediterranean anthropic landscape
Sahara Regional Transition Zone
Atlantic coastal desert
Red Sea coastal desert
Sahel semi-desert grassland
Sahel Acacia wooded grassland and deciduous bushland
Somalia-Masai Region
Somalia-Masai Acacia-Commiphora deciduous bushland and ticket
Karoo-Namib Region
Kalahari deciduous Acacia bushland and wooded grassland
Namib Desert
Total area
Acacia species are the dominant trees or shrubs in most of the mapping units shown in the above Table. Unfortunately, while the areas covered by the various regions is known, those of the mapping units have not been recorded although they probably occupy some 4,500,000 km².
1.3 Biomass production
As Fagg and Stewart (1994) have pointed out, there have been very few quantified studies of fodder production from the acacias (Tables 1.3.1 and 1.3.2). Preliminary results from A. tortilis subsp. heteracantha in the Tugela valley, South Africa (Milton, 1983), provide an estimated yield of 1 ton/ha/yr shoot and leaf dry weight, a figure that agrees favourably with foliage production in India from A. tortilis of 2.5 kg/tree/yr from young plantations (at 400 trees/ha). Booth (1966), working in Kordofan Province, Sudan, also obtained an oven-dry weight of 2.5 kg of leaf litter from a seven-year old A. senegal.
Table 1.3.1 Annual foliage and pod biomass production of A. senegal in Senegal (Bille, 1980)
Rainfall
Diameter
Twigs
Leaves
Pods
mm/yr
cm
kg/DM
g/DM
g/DM
Table 1.3.2 Annual foliage production (kg/DM) of Acacia species (Bille, 1980)
Diameter (Cm)
Species
Rainfall (mm)
A. laeta
A. seyal
A. tortilis
F. albida
The average foliar dry matter from Faidherbia albida in Mali over a number of sites was c. 300 kg/ha/yr (Cissé and Koné, 1992), while pod yields varied from 200 to 600 kg/ha/yr (Montgolfier-Kouevi and Le Houérou, 1983).
Pellew (1983a) working in the Serengeti National Park, obtained dry weight browse productivity rates of 5000 kg/ha/yr for A. xanthophloea, and 1725 kg/ha/yr for A. tortilis, with 90 and 49% of available canopy volume and a giraffe offtake of c. 80% and c. 60% respectively per annum, the upper browse level being 5.75 m.
The measurement of leaf biomass production is extremely complex and is discussed in some detail by Bille (1983). There does, however, appear to be a highly significant correlation between between trunk circumference and annual foliage production for which there is an exponential relationship per species (Cissé, 1983). Not only is the productivity of browse poorly known, it is also difficult to assess with any degree of accuracy. It is known to be related to rainfall and ecological environment and ranges from 100 kg to 1000 kg of edible DM/ha/yr. The feed value of the foliage in terms of energy is generally low to medium, ranging from 0.25 to 0.40 FU per kg of DM, i.e. 400 to 700 Kcal per kg of DM, while digestible protein is usually high, normally above 4% and often above 10% and may even reach as high as 30% in the Capparaceae (Le Houérou, 1983c).
<section>6</section>
Part two: The uses of Acacia in the rural economy
2.1 Wood products
2.2 Non-wood products
2.3 Services
2.1 Wood products
2.1.1 Fuel
It is generally accepted that the current use of trees for fuel nationally is exceeding incremental growth. The standing volume obtainable from some of the best 20 year-old Acacia woodlands is only 8.5 m³ ha (Vink, 1989), equivalent to about 0.42m³/ha of mean annual increment.
Wilson (1983) obtained annual values per capita of 0.50-0.62 m^3 of fuelwood for urban use in Niono, Mali, and cites 0.62 m^3 in northern Ethiopia and 0.63 m^3 in northern Nigeria. In those areas of Ethiopia where wood is extremely limited and cattle dung (which should have been used on cultivated land) has now become the principal fuel, as in Makalle, Tigre Province, with annual fuelwood consumption per capita now as low as 0.15 m^3 and, in areas where wood is still abundant, as high as 1.5 m^3. Other authors give values ranging from the annual fuelwood requirements in the Sahel of one person for cooking of 0.7 m^3 (Maydell, 1987) up to 1.5 m^3 (Montalembert and Clement, 1983) and, in Tanzania for Dar es Salaam, 2.1 m^3 (Hines and Eckman, 1993). For the higher ranges it is uncertain whether fuel consumption is for domestic use only or includes bakeries, brewing, brick kilns, potteries, blacksmiths, etc. Since the degree of drying and efficiency as a fuel also affects
fuelwood consumption, any conclusions based on the above figures would be inconclusive apart from obvious deduction that fuelwood consumption is exceeding supply and must inevitably affect other forms of tree usage too.
The present trend of a 2-3% annual population increase and its concomitant increase in demands for more fuel and land for food have placed an impossible strain on existing forest resources, especially in the drier regions. The Mbeere of northern Kenya have been forced to reduce their fuel consumption, great log fires no longer burn overnight in their compounds (Riley and Brokensha, 1988). Similar economies must surely be practiced throughout Africa, where an exponential population explosion creates a demand that excedes natural regeneration of the fuel source. However, more efficient stoves could reduce fuel consumption considerably and thereby substantially reduce some of the pressure on the existing fuel resources.
Whereas it is suggested that the use of fuel by the rural population, which relies heavily on dead wood, may be more or less in balance with regrowth, the urban population places an unbearable strain upon fuelwood tree resources. Land cleared for cultivation, especially in poorly-planned development schemes, also represent a future loss of potential fuelwood supplies (M.A. Trossero, verbal information, 1993). This is well illustrated by the changes in the source of fuelwood for Khartoum, Sudan.
The original source of firewood was from the fairly dense, even stands of Acacia tortilis subsp. spirocarpa which formerly occurred to the east of Khartoum (Harrison and Jackson, 1958). Although the cutting of living trees was illegal the firewood cutters had little difficulty in making a dead tree from a live one. There were quarrels between the firewood cutters and the graziers over this destruction of living trees as the pods were a valuable dry season feed for livestock.
In order to reduce the destruction of trees in the vicinity of Khartoum, the Government, by the 1940s, was bringing in subsidised firewood by rail from the clay plains in the region of Gedaref, some 370 km to the southeast. Both A. mellifera and A. seyal were used, but A. mellifera was the preferred species since A. seyal is susceptible to the bostrychid beetle Sinoxylon senegalense and, if not used quickly enough, is soon reduced to a pile of sawdust (J.K. Jackson, pers. comm. 1994). Charcoal production has helped to overcome this problem as well as easing transport difficulties. However, since the 1960s, vaste areas of the clay plain have been more or less cleared for irrigation and mechanized agricultural schemes and much of the A. mellifera has been eliminated. Woodcutters have been equally successful in destroying all the A. tortilis in the Khartoum area.
The effect of such clearance schemes has been that charcoal from relatively local A. mellifera has now been replaced by that from the more distant A. seyal. The latter species, because of its abundance, is now considered to be the most important charcoal source in the Sudan (Badi et al., 1989). A consequence of this shrub and tree clearance is that the incidence and severity of the haboob (dust storm) have also increased. Not only have the plant communities been ruined, the local people have been displaced from their land and their social structure destroyed. Many have been dispersed to new homelands, either in marginal areas or newly opened farming areas, and so the cycle of deforestation has continued.
The once abundant natural stands along the Nile of A. nilotica subspp. nilotica and tomentosa were formerly important sources of fuel for the Nile steamers and the railways as well as timber for boat building and railway sleepers (Muriel, 1901); they were even used to pay taxes (Schweinfurth, 1893). Plantations of these species are now minor sources of fuel for Khartoum.
Other urban areas have a similar history of fuel problems, for example Niono, Mali (Wilson, 1983), Nairobi, Kenya (Kinyanjui, 1985) and Kano, Nigeria (Cline-Cole et al., 1990).
In terms of calorific value, multiple use, natural regeneration, fast growth and yield under Sahelian conditions A. nilotica subsp. adstringens and tomentosa are regarded by Maydell (1986) as superior to all other indigenous candidates; subsp. nilotica, which differs from subsp. tomentosa in having glabrous to nearly glabrous pods and glabrous to shortly puberulous twigs, is not mentioned but should also be included.
See Table 2.1.1 for the use of Acacia species for fuelwood and charcoal. In the absence of alternative fuelwood sources, all Acacia species are probably used for firewood, even though the references cited do not mention their use, even A. oerfota with its slender branches and obnoxious smell. Conversion to charcoal has certain specific requirements, the species listed are therefore more likely to be a more accurate portrayal of usage.
2.1.1.1 Firewood
The desirable criteria for firewood species are (Riley and Brokensha, 1988; Hines and Eckman, 1993):
1. Rapid growth, high volume production, ability to coppice or sprout readily when cut. an requiring minimum management.
2. Wood dense with a low moisture content, relatively easy to cut, easy to handle, with few or no thorns, splitting easily and readily transportable; wood collected during the rainy season should not absorb moisture (the scandent or non-climbing shrub A. ataxacantha and A. brevispica are preferred by the Mbeere in Kenya for this reason despite their small dimensions)
3. Slow burning with high calorific value, producing very little smoke without objectionable nor toxic fumes and neither spits nor sparks.
These are criteria that are found in many Acacia species; they are also to be found in many of the Combretaceae. Although no comparative studies have been made, personal observation suggests that some Combretum species are slower growing than those of Acacia. This is supported by the preference of members of the Combretaceae by the Mbeere for charcoal, the hardness being equated with slow growth (Riley and Brokensha, 1988); in West Africa one of the most prized woods for charcoal is from Anogeissus leiocarpus (Combretaceae), while other members of the family, Combretum spp. and Guiera senegalensis provide most of the firewood as they are the most readily available coppice in fallow lands
The preferred Sahelian species in Burkino Faso and Niger are, because of their high calorific value, freedom from smoke and sparks, Acacia ehrenbergian, A. tortilis subsp. raddiana and A. nilotica subspp. adstringens, nilotica and tomentosa, while the wood of A. macrostachya and A. erythrocalyx is not highly regarded and are little used (Guinko, 1991). By their occurrence in large pure stands, offering easy harvesting and processing conditions, Acacia seyal formations have played a special role in the supply of charcoal to growing cities in Sudano-Sahelian Africa such as Dakar, N'Djamena as well as for many other cities in the Sudan where mechanized farming and the needs for fuel have contributed to the depletion of extensive areas of pure Acacia seyal stands.
Because of decreasing availability there is an increasing gap between preference and actual use. The deciding factor is availability and ease of collection (Riley and Brokensha, 1988). The use of such an obnoxious fuel as A. oerfota in the Yemen can only be tolerated because all other fuelwood sources have already been exploited; its local abundance in the lowlands is attributable to overgrazing and the replacement of more palatable species by the less palatable (Al-Hubaish and Müller-Hohenstein, 1984).
2.1.1.2 Charcoal
Charcoal, whether by desire or availability, is often the preferred or only fuel used in urban areas. Its manufacture can be a lucrative industry but inefficient practices can often result in a conversion efficiency that can be as low as 15% so that it is consequently a wasteful process.
The desirable criteria for charcoal are similar to those for fuelwood but requiring large, uniform stands producing wood of suitable dimensions and a high specific gravity (0.7-0.9) for efficiency and ease of manufacture. The characteristics of the finished product are: moisture <7%, ash <3 %, fixed carbon >75 % and apparent density >0.3 g/cc (FAO, 1962).
2.1.2 Timber
See Table 2.1.2 for timber properties and uses of Acacia species. According to Hines and Eckman (1993) the desirable criteria for construction and pole timber are:
1. Rapid growing, with straight stems of uniform size and small branches, naturally pruning and rapidly self-healing..
2. Possess good physical, mechanical, seasoning, preserving, and processing properties and insect, fungus and rot resistant.
For domestic use and handicrafts, such as platters, spoons, shuttles, mortars, tool handles, musical instruments, carvings, bows, arrows, etc. shape, strength, density, ability to peel, work or carve easily, freedom from splinters and, for such items as spoons and bowls, low permeability to liquids, are additional requirements.
While a number of species can provide pole timber, which is widely used in the domestic economy for construction purposes, commercial sawn timber is largely from A. nilotica subspp. indica, nilotica and tomentosa, A. polyacantha and A. sieberana.
<section>7</section>
2.2 Non-wood products
2.2.1 Forage
The desirable criteria for forage are, according to Hines and Eckman (1993):
1. Provision of palatable, non-toxic, nutritious foliage and fruit.
2. Ability to withstand browsing, lopping, pruning and coppicing
3. Quick growing, especially during the early stages of growth.
Forage refers to all browse and herbaceous food that is available to livestock and game animals; fodder, which is often wrongly applied to forage, refers to dried, cured plant material of crops such as maize and sorghum, including the grain. Browse refers to the tender twigs and leafy shoots of woody plants (Ibrahim, 1975) and is extended by Skerman et al (1988) to include their fruit. For the purposes of this document the former definition, which excludes pods, is used since, depending on the height of the tree or shrub, fallen pods may be available to some of the smaller mammals whereas the foliage is beyond their reach.
The Acacia trees provide a valuable browse for both game and livestock as well as being a valuable source of highly nutritious pods which can be stored as a dry season supplement for livestock (Table 2.2.1). Depending on the species, a flush of growth is often available at the end of the dry season before the grasses have begun to grow following the first rains (See Annex B for approximate analyses of Acacia browse, etc.). The woody vegetation thus provides a high quality food source at the critical period in late pregnancy of most undulates. It must be emphasized that this first flush of growth, which represents the major seasonal above-ground increase in biomass, is not growth per se but the relocation of stored food resources from the previous growing season. Growth begins after the flush, with the current season's production of photosynthates.
Browse is essential to all herbivores in arid and semi-arid environments since grasses alone are unable to supply maintenance requirements for more than a few months of the year (Table 2.2.1. 1). Indeed, cattle in Niger deprived of dry season browse showed serious signs of vitamin A deficiency. Furthermore, pseudo-contagious amaurosis, another vitamin A deficiency, is a common disease of cattle in deforested areas of the Sahel (Le Houérou 1983b). The crude protein content of most browse is generally considerably higher than that for grasses except during the early growing season (Walker, 1983).
It is worth while quoting a statement from the Commonwealth Agricultural Bureau Publication No. 10 (1947) and cited by Skerman et al. (1988) "It is a humbling fact for grass pasture experts to realize that probably more animals feed on shrubs and trees, or on associations in which trees and shrubs play an important part, than on true grass-legume pastures." The reliance on browse reflects the ecophysiology of the trees and shrubs that permits their survival in semi-arid ecosystems and produce greater quantities of nutritious fodder than can be obtained from grasses and forbs.
Because of their low presence, the indigenous Acacia play a very minor role in the browse regime of North Africa and the Near East, never-the-less they are of considerable local importance where species do occur (see sections 3.5 and 3.6). In the arid, semi-arid and sub-humid zones of subSaharan Africa, woody species are an important source of fodder as well as exerting an influence on the seasonality and productivity of the grass cover growing beneath their canopy.
The forage utilization of Acacia species is not confined to herbivores. A number of species are regarded locally as a good source of pollen and nectar for bees (Table 2.2.1.2. Wild honey is largely collected from natural cavities in trees or from crude hives suspended in the trees. Acacia honey is an underexploited food resource for both local and export markets and should be encouraged.
2.2.1.1 Forage Utilization
The degree to which browse is utilized by herbivores is species dependent. However, the recurrent droughts in subSaharan Africa have amply shown that the use of browse of any given soecies is also very dependent on the circumstances and overall availability of usable biomass. Cattle, sheep, equines, wildebeest, most antelopes, gazelles, white rhino and hippo are mainly grazers, but during the dry season balance their diet by browsing. Other species, such as goats, camels, eland, impala, kudu, elephant, giraffe, black rhino and a number of antelope are mainly browsers and can thrive satisfactorily on a purely browse diet (Le Houérou, 1983c).
The daily diet of herbivores, both wild and domestic, is selected almost entirely from the indigenous vegetation. As Dougall et al., (1964) have pointed out, it is important to know what plants are eaten by the different animals throughout the year, and what nutrients such plants might be expected to provide. For example, an elephant in the Tsavo East National Park Park, Kenya, during a single day in May (dry season), selected food from 64 species represent by 28 families, only 10 species of which were grasses (Dougall and Sheldrake, 1964), although what the choice would be for other months of the year is unrecorded.
The wealth of indigenous vegetation as a source of food for wildlife and domestic animals is enormous and it is essential that its preservation, regeneration and productivity should be assured for the future survival of the fauna. See Table 2.2.1 for the livestock and wild herbivores utilizing browse; the list is not exhaustive; see also section 2.3.4 for further discussion on herbivore survival and browse.
The structure of the herbivore community in a wildlife area can be quite complex but under pastoral conditions there is a direct ratio between cattle and goats and the effect of herbivory on the vegetation. Matching the herbivore community to the vegetation structure is essential if a stable system is to be achieved (Walker, 1983). Pollarding is widely used in some areas to keep the browse accessible.
Continuous grazing can result in the suppression of natural regeneration so that stands become senile and susceptible to drought and disease. For example, the stands of Acacia along the Senegal River became over-mature and even-aged due to lack of regeneration/or regeneration survival under grazing. Most of the aged stands succumbed to the prolonged drought during the late 1970s and the dead trees used for fuel (M.L. Malagnoux, verbal information).
The spines on many Acacia species can act as a self-regulating defense against excessive browsing; longer thorns can develop on, for example, branches of A. drepanolobium that are regularly browsed by goats than those out of reach of the herbivores (Young, 1987). However, thorns do not prevent giraffe browsing, for example, A. tortilis, in the Serengetti Plains but act by slowing down their feeding until a critical level is reached where it becomes too time consuming to seek the shoots between the spines and the animal moves on (Pellew, 1984). When the thorns are removed, increased browsing was observed among the free-ranging giraffe (Milewski et al., 1991). Excessive browsing while young can even reduce the plant to a densely spiny cushion shrub. It is suggested that spine development should be regarded by the grazier a management tool for evaluating grazing pressure.
Similarly, chemical deterrents may develop in the less spiny species, such as A. oerfoeta. The foliage of this species has a strong, obnoxious smell when bruised and in Kordofan Province, Sudan it was reported to deter even the browsing camel (Hunting Technical Services, 1964), although in recent years there have been several citations that it is now being browsed by livestock in the Sudan (e.g. Seif el Din, 1991). This is a recent phenonomem for the Sudan and is probably due to the shortage of browse as a result of the Sahelian drought from the late 1960s onwards and it would appear the local livestock have now aquired a taste for this species. Similarly, Ibrahim and Barker (1986) working in Somalia report that A. horrida is also sometimes refused on account of its unpleasant odour; while A. oerfota, which is also amongst the browse species present, is not mentioned as being rejected! Dougall et al. (1964) and Skerman et al. (1988) record A. oerfota as being an important
browse species in northern Kenya. Palatability is, of course, relative to what is available. It is possible that there are a number of chemical races of A. oerfota may be involved, providing several degrees of palatability.
2.2.1.2 Nutritional Value
The available proximate analyses for the various Acacia species are given in Annex C. The majority of analyses are based on a single sample and, as Walker (1983) has pointed out, such data can be misleading since the variation within a species sampled from different locations can be quite wide, at least for southern Africa and can be far greater than between species within a community. There is no reason to suspect the contrary throughout the continent. In general, the protein content for Acacia browse is high but, from the little information available, only half of the dry matter is digestible. Especially noteworthy is the high calcium content of the bark of A. tortilis subsp. spirocarpa (5.68%) and A. xanthophloea (4.07%).
Cyanogenic glucosides have been reported by Steyn and Rimington (1935) in the pods of A. erioloba, A. hebeclada subsp. hebeclada, A: lasiopetala, A. tortilis subsp. heteracantha and A. robusta. However, the authors conclude that there is no danger provided the pods are ingested slowly, i.e. in small quantities by livestock that are not excessively hungry.
Tannins are present in most vascular plants and in a number of Acacia species they occur in sufficient concentrations for use in tanning leather (section 2.2.3). Tannins also act as an anti-nutritional factor due to their ability to precipitate proteins from an aqueous solution: In tree leaves tannins are present in both neutral detergent fibre (NDF) and acid detergent fibre (ADF) in significant amounts and are tightly bound to the cell wall and cell protein and appear to be involved in decreasing digestibility. Two groups are recognized, condensed tannins and hydrolysable tannins. While the former are more effective in reducing digestibility, the latter can cause various toxic manifestations due to their hydrolyzing activity in the rumen. They have, therefore, an important influence on the digestibility of browse. Dietary condensed tannins (2-3%) may even assist rumen digestion by forming a protein-tannin complex, thereby reducing wasteful protein degradation. Condensed
tannins are known to be present in A. nilotica pods and have been shown to lower growth rate in sheep due to their ability to reduce nitrogen and NDF digestibility; a similar effect is also produced by the hydrolysable tannins in A. sieberiana pods (Kumar, 1992).
2.2.2 Gum
The polysaccharide exudate produced by a number of Acacia species (Table 2.2.2) are used for a number of domestic purposes, including adhesives, a constituent of ink, in crafts, as a cosmetic, in confectionery and as a food. The Hottentots of southern Africa are able to survive on gum for days, while the Moors harvesting gum in the North African desert are reputed to survive on a daily ration of 170 g (Grieve, 1931). Fagg and Stewart (1994) cite the example of the gum from A. gerrardii being in eaten in Oman, and Story (1958) of the Bushmen of the Kalahari eating gums from A. mellifera subsp. A. erioloba, A. erubescens, A. fleckii and A. tortilis subsp. heteracantha.
Gums are also widely used in traditional medicine since Pharaonic times as a soothing and softening agent, being taken internally for coughs, diarrhea, dysentery, haemorrhage, and as well as being used externally to cover inflamed areas.
Acacia gum from A. senegal and some 18 other species was, until the recent tightening of the specifications, a major item of commerce. The gums from this group of species, which include A. seyal (gum talha from West and East Africa), A. xanthophloea (from East Africa) and A. karroo (from southern Africa) are traded on the international markets, but only gum arable, from A. senegal, is now permitted for the food trade, the remainder being for industrial use only. However, acacia gum 'from A. senegal and other African species' is still official in the British Pharmacopoeia (1993) for use as a bulk-forming laxative and pharmaceutical aid. Similarly, while the US specification for the use of acacia gums in the food trade limits use to that from A. senegal (gum arable), the pharmaceutical specification also permits the use of gum talha from A. seyal; the rational being that only small amounts are used per patient and under medical supervision.
Gum arabic was traditionally defined as 'the gummy exudate from Acacia senegal or its related species', embracing a number of species that are not even remotely related taxonomically, despite the fact that the Test Article, evaluated as toxicologically safe as a food additive, refers solely to that from A. senegal. The increasing international pressure towards tighter trade specifications and labelling regulations, identity and purity has led to the Revised Specification (WHO, 1990a, b; FAO, 1990) where gum arabic is defined as originating from A. senegal or closely related species, with a specific optical rotation range of -26° to -34° and a Kjeldahl nitrogen content of 0.27-0.39%. This has limited the designation of gum arabic to members of the subgenus Aculeiferum which, in addition to A. senegal, includes A. laeta, A. mellifera, A. polyacantha subsp. campylacantha, although gum is not available commercially from any of these closely related species. The gums containing
tannins and with a positive optical rotation from species such as A. seyal, A. xanthophloea, A. karroo and A. nilotica are now excluded for use in food and consequently attract a lower price (Anderson, 1993); the presence of tannin in these gums is also considered carcenogenic.
Exudates from species other than A. senegal, occur as small tears and dribblets; their collection is consequently extremely time-consuming. This, together with the low price, currently at $US 1000 per tonne, compared to $US 5000 per tonne for gum arable, is likely to kill the export trade in acacia gums but is unlikely to have any serious effect on internal use as an edible comodity, adhesive and ingedient of traditional medicines.
Gum arabic is used in the food industry to fix flavours and as an emulsifier, to prevent the crystalization of sugar in confectionery products, as a stabilizer in frozen dairy products; its viscosity and adhesive properties find use in bakery products, and as a foam stabilizer and clouding agent in beer. In the pharmaceutical industry gum arabic is used as a stabilizer for emulsions, binder and coating for tablets, and as an ingredient in cough drops and syrups. In cosmetics it finds use as an adhesive for facial masks and powders, and to give a smooth feel to lotions.
Industrially, gum arabic is applied as an adhesive, as a protective colloid and safeguarding agent for inks, sensitizer for lithographic plates, coatings for special papers, sizing agent to give body to certain fabrics, and anti-corrosive coating for metals; it is also used in the manufacture of matches and ceramic pottery (Cossalter, 1991).
Gum arabic is a major export crop of the Sudan and, through the Gum Arabic Company, which has a statutory monopoly of the gum arabic trade from the Sudan, effectively controls about 85% of the World Market, with the West African countries Senegal, Mauritania, Mali, Chad, Niger and Nigeria supplying much of the remainder (Anderson, 1993). In the past, the rural population of the Sudan "gum belt" practiced a tree fallow rotation system with A. senegal, forming practically pure stands during the fallow period, thereby increasing soil fertility and reducing soil erosion while, at the same time, providing a dry-season source of income from the gum harvest. With increasing human and livestock populations and pressure on the cultivatable and grazing lands, the length of the tree fallow was decreased or, in some instances, eliminated. The carrying capacity of the range land also decreased, resulting in the necessity to fell the young trees for forage. The poor prices paid to the
farmers for their gum has also encouraged the cutting of trees for firewood and charcoal for an albeit short-term source of income.
Despite its advantages of low cost and superior performance over possible substitutes, in the past gum arabic has suffered from variations in quality due to the varying composition of each batch and also from the uncertainty of maintaining a regular supply, especially since the loss of so many of the trees in the Sahelian droughts of 1973-74 and 1982-83. As a result there has been a steady decrease in demand over the past 15-20 years. Gum arabic sales peaked at around 1970 at approximately 70000 t, of which about 70% went into confectionery products. The high prices and world shortage as a result of the 1973-74 drought resulted in some major users seeking alternative modified starches. Annual sales fell to about 40,000 t during 1978-82. The following disastrous drought created a further world shortage and loss of markets, with annual sales reduced to about 20000-24000 t. World consumption of hydrocolloids by the food industry is fairly stable but, due to the fluctuations in
the supply of gum arabic and the increasing availability of modified celluloses and fermentation products such as xanthin and gellan, major users are certainly beginning to pay serious attention to any cheaper alternatives to gum arable. Furthermore, gum importers and users consider that the Sudan, with its almost monopolistic control of the market, as bad for trade confidence. The spreading of sources of supply to give the Sudan control of only 50% of the market would lessen the risk of a major crop failure and improve confidence (Anderson, 1993).
A great deal of wasted effort has gone into the selection for higher gum yields. Elite trees have been identified and their seed sown; a somewhat pointless exercise with insect-pollinated trees. Furthermore, even the yields of elite trees are susceptible to unpredicatable fluctuations in yield. The chemo-physiology of gum production has not been thoroughly investigated and until it is known how and why gum is produced the proper selection and management for higher yields is not scientifically possible.
2.2.3 Tannins
The Acacia species whose bark or pods have been recorded as sources of tannin for taning leather are shown in Table 2.2.3, although it is suspected that many other Acacia species could also be used. The tannins are mainly used in the local tanning industries; very little is exported. Although more efficient solvents are available, for economic reasons it is the water-soluble tannins that are used in the commercial and local tanning industries. As already briefly discussed in section 2.2.1.2, there are two groups of tannins, condensed and hydrolysable tannins present in plants, and their chemistry affects their tanning properties. However, there appears to be no information available regarding the percentages of condensed and hydrolysable tannins present although, according to Siegler et al. (1986), most Acacia tannins are of the condensed type.
The exploitation of tannins from Acacia species is effected in many locations; in Senegal, Mauritania and Mali, the pods of Acacia nilotica subsp. nilotica are intensively used under the name 'Nep Nep'; also in the Sudan as 'sunt grains'. Sunt grains, which were formerly exported from the Sudan, are obtained mainly from the crushed pods of A. nilotica subsp. nilotica or subsp. tomentosa, after first removing the seeds; most of the pod cases are then removed by sifting. The residue contains 50-60% tannin, which gives a soft, plump, very light coloured leather. However, contamination of the pods with iron and mineral matter causes undesirable spotting of the leather (Howes, 1953). There is considerable confusion in the literature regarding the tannin content of A. nilotica because authors fail to mention the subspecies involved; the writer suspects that there could be considerable variation in the tannin content between the subspecies and possibly between individuals within
populations. Even Howes (1953), who admits to the existence of subspecies (as varieties of A. arabica), failed to identify the source of sunt grains, although his description of the pods and the vernacular name indicate subsp. nilotica or tomentosa. In Kano, Nigeria subsp. adstringens is reported to be the preferred subspecies for tanning goat skins for the Moroccan leather trade, the pod residues are afterwards fed to cattle (W.J. Howard, O.D.A., verbal information 1994). In Kenya the bark of the Australian Acacia meansii is processed for tannin at Thika.
2.2.4 Fibre
The Acacia species used for root and stem bark fibre are shown in Table 2.2.4. The fibres are used in the domestic economy and there appears to be no commercial potential. The general impression obtained is that such usages could also be carried out by other genera and that Acacia species are not an important fibre source.
2.2.5 Local medicine
The local medicinal uses of Acacia species are shown in Table 2.2.5. Their uses are not supported by any clinical studies and while the successful treatment of verereal diseases, diabetes or use as an aphrodisiac, etc. is problematic, there are active ingredients present which may be efficacious. Gum, for example, has an emollient activity, resulting in a softening soothing action on the skin or irritated internal surfaces. The astringent activity of tannins causes a contraction of mucous surfaces, coagulates proteins and is useful in stopping bleeding of small wounds and other discharges (Brown, 1977). Hagos et al. (1987) have demonstrated that the stem bark of A. tortilis subsp. raddiana, which is used in Somalia against asthma, contains pharmaceutically active compounds that inhibit muscular contractions of the lower small intestine of the guinea pig. Further research will doubtless reveal the presence of other pharmaceutically active compounds within the genus.
Acetic acid, alcohol and water extracts of the fruits of A. dudgeoni, A. nilotica subsp. adstringens and subsp. nilotica have been shown to have molluscocidal activity. The planting of the latter subsp. along waterways could prove beneficial in the control of schistosomiasis (Ayoub, 1982, 1985; Kloos and McCullough, 1987).
2.2.6 Food
The seeds of several African species are known to be eaten, either cooked or raw (Table 2.2.6.1), but very little is known about their nutritional value (Table 2.2.6.2). What little evidence is available suggests that Acacia seeds could be a very valuable and underexploited food resource. Certainly the Australian species have been found to be generally high in protein (17-25%), fat (416%) and carbohydrate (30-40%), i.e. comparing very favourably with such cereals as wheat and rice and even higher than some meats (Brand and Cherikoff, 1985; Thomson 1992). See also section 3.7 for discussion on the edible seeds from introduced species.
2.2.7 Handicrafts
The uses of Acacia species for handicrafts are shown in Table 2.2.7. These are mainly domestic although there is a small commercial potential for sales to the tourist industry. The general impression is that such usages could be carried out equally well by other genera and that Acacia species are not essential sources of handicraft materials.
2.2.8 Miscellaneous domestic uses
The domestic uses of Acacia species in the rural economy are shown in Table 2.2.8. Again the general impression is that such usages could be carried out by other genera and that Acacia is not a vital species.
<section>8</section>
2.3 Services
2.3.1 Environmental protection
The Acacia species recorded as being used for environmental protection are shown in Table 2.3.1; there are doubtless others that could be similarly used.
Although often phreatophytes, many species, especially in the drier regions, have extensive, subsurface lateral roots to take advantage of any light rainfall that might occur. Such subsurface root systems help to stabilize the soil. The aerial system too has a role in reducing wind erosion and ameliorating the microclimate although information on changes in humidity and temperature is generally lacking. Such species as A. nilotica subsp. indica, A. senegal, A. tortiliis and F. albida have been widely planted to fix and stabilize sand dunes and combat wind erosion.
The shade effect by reducing air temperatures also reduces soil evaporation and lowers soil surface temperatures; factual information on shade and soil temperatures is poorly documented. Working in Kenya, Amundson et al. (1994) report that midafternoon soil temperatures beneath the canopy of A. tortilis subsp. spirocarpa were reduced by 3-12°C. The depths at which these temperatures were measured is not records but measurements of soil surface and subsurface temperatures with or without a grass cover at El Obeid, Sudan and illustrated in Fig. 2.3.1 (Hunting Technical Services, 1964), suggest soil depth may not be important. However, in the absence of shade the high surface temperatures attained by bare soils must have an adverse and possibly lethal effect on any dormant or germinating seed lying on the soil surface, discouraging revegetation and encouraging desertification.
The lower shade temperatures also encourage a more mesophytic and generally more nutritious ground cover, which is further encouraged by the higher soil moisture in the vicinity of the trunk as a result of stem flow. The rainfall collected as a result of stem flow is not immediately available to the lateral roots, whose root hairs are more able to take advantage of leaf drip around the periphery of the canopy. So far unpublished work in USA suggests that stem flow infiltrates through the soil immediately surrounding the lateral roots to where it can eventually be utilized by the trees.
Measurements of total soil water content under F. albida taken just before the start of the rainy season gave a value of 8% beneath the canopy and 4% outside (Radwanski and Wickens, 1967). The authors hypothesize that the improved physical conditions beneath the canopy could be a contributing factor; lower shade temperatures could a be an additional factor.
2.3.2 Soil Fertility
The direct contribution of Acacia species to soil fertility is two-fold. Firstly, there is the contribution through nitrogen fixation (Table 2.3.2) and, secondly, that due to litter fall. The contribution of the latter is from the recycling of the minerals extracted from the soil by the root system (Radwanski and Wickens, 1967). The contribution in terms of nitrogen is probably minimal since the foliage on the ground probably undergoes two periods of rapid degeneration. The first is the rapid dehydration of the litter and loss of any volatile compounds, so that by the end of the long dry season the second decomposition will be of the remaining fibrous mass and minerals.
The exception is that of Faidherbida albida, where leaf fall occurs at the start of the rainy season and the litter is consequently readily decomposed and the nutrients incorporated into the soil. It has been demonstrated by Giffard, 1964) that the leaf litter from an average stand of 50 trees of A. albida per hectare returns to the soil an annual equivalent of 75 kg N. 12 kg P. 13 kg K, 20 kg S. 25 kg Mg and 120 kg Ca per hectare (Giffard, 1964). The growing of millet (Pennisetum glaucum) beneath the tree canopy can result in a 2.5- to 3-fold increase in yield without additional fertilizers.
There is also an indirect contribution from livestock browsing on the fallen litter, the decomposition of the dung following similar cycles to that of the litter. The quantitave effect of this contribution does not appear to have been evaluated.
2.3.3 Hedges, Shade and Shelter
The species of Acacia reported to be used for live and brushwood hedges, shade and shelter are recorded in Table 2.3.3. Doubtless other species can also fulfill these functions equally well. The shade value of these trees is evident from the large number of livestock crowding beneath a tree canopy during the midday heat.
Gillet (1983) comments adversely on the practice by the pastoralists of cutting large branches of such thorny species as A. nilotica, A. tortilis subsp. raddiana and A. seyal to construct zeribas (overnight brushwood enclosures for livestock); the practice is even more extensively used by agriculturalists to keep livestock off of their cultivated land. These zeribas last about two years before being destroyed by termites or even earlier by bush fires. The brushwood is either obtained by drastic mutilation of the trees or, as is often the case with the agriculturalists, from trees felled during land clearance. In many areas of the Sahel, where large areas have been cleared in an attempt to counteract the low crop yields due to desertification and low rainfall, there are no longer any trees remaining to provide the brushwood hedges. Live fences using A. mellifera and A. tortilis would be a solution, although the eratic rainfall, often compounded by problems of land ownership
and protection during early establishment, do not encourage planting.
2.3.4 Wildlife Resource
The Acacia species recorded as attractive to mammals, birds, edible insects are shown in Table 2.3.4; trees browsed by wild herbivores are recorded in Table 2.2.1.1 and a source of bee food in Table 2.2.1.2; those species listed as being browsed by only livestock are doubtlessly browsed by wild herbivores but their use by them has not been recorded in the literature studied.
Management for game refuge requires a high standard of management, not only to ensure against over-grazing but also to ensure that a proper balance is maintained between the different species, especially predators and prey, as well as between the browsing animal and the vegetation strata utilized. Giraffe, for example, usually browse trees higher than 2 m (Pellew, 1983b; Prins and Jeugd, 1993). In Tanzania, Prins and Jeugd (1993) found a close correlation between rinderpest and anthrax epidemics among wild herbivores, A. tortilis recruitment and associated bush encroachment resulting from removal of grazing pressures. The authors also consider elephant-induced tree mortality as over-rated, with impala as the main culprit in preventing natural regeneration.
As already discussed in section 2.2.1.1, the degree to which browse is utilized by herbivores is species dependent, some are mainly grazers, but during the dry season balance their diet by browsing while other species, can thrive satisfactorily on a purely browse diet. This can be explained in terms of the nutritive value and intake of browse by the two groups of herbivores. Since the maintenance requirements for cattle are 0.09 MJ/kg (0.65 FU/kg) of dry matter and the nutritional value of browse varies from 0.04-0.06 MJ/kg (0.25 to 0.40 FU) per kg of dry matter, browse alone cannot maintain cattle but can maintain sheep, who require only 0.05 MJ/kg (0.35 FU/kg) of dry matter, but this browse does not allow for production. However, goats, who only require 0.03 MJ/kg (0.19 FU/kg) can obtain maintenance and production from a purely browse diet. This explains why only goats, camels and some wild herbivores are able to survive in those arid and semi-arid where browse is the main
dietary intake and also explains why these animals are less susceptible to catastrophic droughts than cattle and sheep. It also follows, that for the yearlong productivity of sheep and cattle, a balance must be maintained between grazing and browsing, with browse forming 20 to 30% of the dry season diet. In West Africa a density of 25-50 trees per hectare is considered optimal in a Faidherbia albida - millet agricultural system with a canopy cover of 30-60% (Le Houérou, 1983c).
There is a significant difference between the grazing of domestic livestock and that of indigenous game animals, the former being more selective in their grazing habits as well as being less well adapted to coping with the range of vegetation available. For these reasons, Erkkilä and Siiskonem (1992), working in Namibia where bush encroachment by Acacia mellifera subsp. detiens and Dichrostachys cinerea can become a serious problem, recommend encouraging browsing by indigenous game, especially giraffe. However, it should be pointed out that bush encroachment is mainly a problem in southern Africa and is either absent or only a relatively minor problem in much of semi-arid northern Africa.
2.3.5 Amenity and ornamental value
Species reported to be planted as street trees or garden ornamentals are shown in Table 2.3.5. They appear to have rather limited popularity and their wider use is probably hampered by their relative slow growth; the often faster growing exotic species are generally preferred, especially in the Middle East.
2.3.6 Agroforestry
Agroforestry is defined as "a collective word for all land-use systems and practices in which woody perennials are deliberately planted on the same land management unit as crops and/or animals. This can be either in some form of spatial arrangement or in a time sequence. To qualify as agroforestry, a given land-use system or practice must permit significant economic and ecological interactions between the woody and non-woody components." (ICRAF, 1983).
The traditional agricultural system of rotating cultivated land with a period under bush fallow until such time as the soil has recovered its fertility is effective but slow, and is largely dependent for its speed of recovery on the natural regeneration of indigenous woody species. With an ever increasing population demanding more and more land under cultivation to provide more food, a more certain and rapid means of restoring soil fertility is required.
Agroforestry systems would appear to ensure a more rapid recovery and longer maintenance of soil fertility than under traditional fallow; with proper planning it should also offer greater protection against erosion in addition to providing a source of fuel, pole timber, wild food, browse, herbal medicines, etc. But is this necessary true for the drier regions?
The development of agroforestry systems have tended to be concentrated in the more humid tropics, where tree growth is relatively rapid and soil fertility is more speedily restored. There have been relatively few attempts to develop agroforestry in the drier regions. Kessler and Breman (1991) point out that water availability limits primary production in the northern Sahel of West Africa, with nutrient availability the critical factor in the southern Sahel and Sudanian zones. The woody species influence the water balance through rainfall inception, evapotranspiration and water infiltration as well as influencing nutrient redistribution by recycling minerals and increasing fertility. In a southwards direction the benefits of agroforestry increase more than proportionally with the rainfall. The writers conclude that the potential to increase nutrient availability through agroforestry systems in the drier regions is limited and that windbreaks would be more beneficial. In fact,
Le Houérou (1989) recommends a reticulated system of windbreaks for the Peanut Basin of Senegal where increasing human pressure on the land is destroying the existing millet-Faidherbia-millet rotation. His recommended solution is for an increased integration of agroforestry and animal production in order to increase draught power and restore fertility without reducing the area cropped. This involves a perimeter box of primary windbreaks of A. senegal, or F. albida subdivided internally by secondary windbreaks of A. holosericea and further subdivided by tertiary windbreaks of fodder species, according to rainfall, Combretum aculeatum, Bauhenia rufescens or Feretia apodanthera interplanted with Ziziphus mauritiana for protection.
The traditional 'gum gardens' of Kordofan Province, Sudan were a form of agroforestry based on a rotation where the land is cropped for 4-6 years, after which it is abandoned to an Acacia senegal, bush fallow from stump coppice regrowth for 9 or more years, the gum garden is then felled end the lend again cropped (Hunting technical Services, 1964, Seif el Din 1981). Unfortunately the combination of the Sahel drought, pressure for more cultivated land, low prices received by the tappers for their gum and the high prices obtained for fuelwood have virtually destroyed the system. Attempts to reinstate the gum gardens by planting seedling trees have been only partially successful due to the number of years with lower than normal rainfall.
Similar attempts to grow Faidherbia albida in agroforestry systems in Chad have also been only partially successful due to low rainfall and internal strife. It is also possible that species provenance might be a factor (see section 4.4). F. albida is an ideal tree for agroforestry in the higher rainfall regions of the semi-arid zone, the lack of foliage during the rainy season ensures a suitable light regime for the growing crops. The incorporation of leaf litter and the faces of browsing animals into the soil at the start of the dry season without excessive desiccation are condusive to improving soil fertility, an improvement that is manifested by the enhanced yields obtained from crops grown beneath the canopy.
In the drier regions of India Acacia nilotica subsp. indica has been widely grown in agroforestry systems there have been a number of recent reports of crop yields growing below the canopy being depressed. Root competition for moisture appears to be a factor but whether high tannin compounds in the soil could also be a factor has not been investigated (Adjers and Hadi, 1993). Comparative trials should also be carried out with subsp. cupressiformis, which has a narrow canopy, to see whether shade too could be a factor since both subspecies would be expected to more or less equally compete with crops for soil moisture.
An important factor that can inhibit the progress of agroforestry systems is that of land and tree tenure; without ownership there can be little incentive for development. Where the land is owned by the state, usage by local customary rights does not necessarily grant ownership of the trees. Changes in governmental doctrine can be a further complication, especially where land has been redistributed under a communist regime and later reverts to some form of democracy, resulting in conflicting rights of ownership. A number of examples of the intricate legal problems involved are discussed in Raintree (1987). Problems vary not only from country to country but also within countries. Before starting administrators of potential agroforestry development projects must ensure that there are no land and tree tenure pitfalls involved.
<section>9</section>
Part three: The role of Acacia in the rural economy
3.1 Acacia species in the Sahel
3.2 Acacia species in the horn of Africa
3.3 Acacia species in East Africa
3.4 Acacia species in Southern Africa
3.5 Acacia species in North Africa
3.6 Acacia species in the Near and Middle East
3.1 Acacia species in the Sahel
It is claimed by Guinko (1990) that more than 80% of the woody species in the Sahel are Acacia. The communities in which they occur are described below.
Sahel semi-desert grassland (White (1983, mapping unit 54a), occurs on the deep sandy soils of northern Sahel where the annual rainfall is less than 250 mm and the vegetation usually consists an admixture of bushes and bushy trees and extensive areas of grassland. The chief woody species are Acacia ehrenbergiana, A. laeta, A. tortilis, Balanites aegyptiaca, Boscia senegalensis, Commiphora africana and Leptadenia pyrotechnica. They all, apart from Acacia ehrenbergiana and Leptadenis pyrotechnica, also occur in the Southern Sahel.
The northern Sahel is considered too dry for the growing of rain-fed crops except around oases and along water courses. Pastoralism is the only acceptable usage, preferably as the ecologically friendly transhumance grazing, a life style unpopular to governments because of the difficulties in administrating transient populations.
To the south, where the annual rainfall is between 250 and 500 mm, lies the Sahelian Acacia wooded grassland and deciduous bushland (White (1983, mapping unit 43), and is the most widespread vegetation type on the sandy soils of the southern Sahel In West Africa the chief woody species are Acacia laeta, A. tortilis, Adansonia digitata, Balanites aegyptiaca, Boscia senegalensis, Calotropis procera, Combretum aculeatum, C. glutinosum, Commiphora africana, Leptadenia pyrotechnica and Maerua crassifolia; their distribution extends eastwards to the Sudan.
The characteristic tree of the deep sands of the Sudan is the gum acacia, Acacia senegal, often occurring in almost pure stands which are possibly of secondary origin, the result of abandoned mature gum acacia fallows. The pure stands of the shrub Guiera senegalensis may dominate exhausted fallow lands on sandy soils throughout the southern Sahel.
Rain-fed agriculture becomes increasingly more practical with increasing rainfall. Dry season browse and, where available, crop residues, are important sources of food for livestock, especially for those nomadic graziers who utilize the northern Sahel during the rains and migrate southward during the long dry season..
Rocky outcrops and shallow stony soils may support what is termed Sahel deciduous bushland (White, 1983), consisting of dense and ofen impenetrable bushland dominated by Acacia mellifera and Commiphora africana. Other associates include Boscia senegalensis, Dichrostachys cinerea and Euphorbia candelabrum. Such bushland is characteristic of the drier northern and eastern slopes of the Jebel Marra massif in the Sudan.
Acacia mellifera is also often the dominant shrub of the poorly drained, clayey depressions on the leeward side of some of the major rock outcrops (jebels), again often forming practically impenetrable thickets. In the drier parts Acacia tortilis, Balanites aegyptiaca and Commiphora africana are occasional constituents.
The vegetation of the Nile as it traverses the Sahara has been described by Haddid (1976). The silty soils of the lower middle terrace support the trees Acacia nilotica subsp. nilotica, A. seyal and Tamarix nilotica.
Further south in the Nile Valley, where the rainfall is between 400 to 570 mm, the cracking Pleistocene clays supports extensive areas of impenetrable thickets of Acacia mellifera, which alternate with open areas of bare clays or, wherever there is a veneer of sand with Schoenefeldia gracilis. Above 570 mm A. mellifera gives way to A. seyal, the latter often forming pure stands, sometimes in association with Balanites aegyptiaca. Acacia senegal, also occurs on clay soils in areas receiving more than 600 mm, the additional rainfall compensating for the lower available soil moisture, which is in agreement with Smith (1949) who postulates that tree species requiring 2x mm annual rainfall on sandy soils require 3x mm on clay soils.
It is generally accepted that the rural populations are aware that trees are a natural resource which has to be safeguarded. For some rural populations this is a fairly recent acceptance brought about by witnessing the devastation caused by desertification and drought during the past three decades. Other populations have long appreciated the value of certain trees, such as Faidherbia albida and its benefits to both crops and livestock, or Acacia senegal for its gum. On the other hand, the nomadic pastoralists, forced outside their own environment by the years of drought, perhaps tend to be less appreciative of the sustainability of what still must appear to be an abundant resource. Examples of the latter are to be found in Wadi Aribo Basin, Darfur Province, Sudan where, in the late 1960s, the camel-owning tribes left their drought stricken grazing areas for what had previously been a prime cattle wintering area in order to feed their camels on the abundant Faidherbia albida.
The new arrivals were both ruthless and wasteful in their severe pollarding of what had formerly been a carefully husbanded fodder resource. Similarly, nomads who had lost all their camels and were forced to settle along the Nile in northern Sudan, cut down all the local trees (chiefly Acacia nilotica and A. tortilis) to sell for fuel. It was only after the resulting dune encroachment threatened their villages that they began to appreciate the role the trees had played in stabilizing the soil and providing shade and shelter (Wickens, in ed.).
The usages of the various Acacia species for food, fodder, fuel, medicine, tannin, etc. are summarized in Table 3.1.1.3.
3.1.1 West Africa
3.1.1.1 Mauritania
Mauritania is entirely arid and in the western part the Atlantic Coastal Desert (White (1983, mapping unit 68a), forms a narrow strip bordering the Atlantic Ocean. Some 40-50 km wide, in the north it extends from the southern limit of the succulent shrubs at Saguia el Hamra (c.27°N) southwards to the northern limit of the Sahel (c.20°N). It is characterized by a relatively high humidity, lower temperatures and the absence of frost. Among the Sahelian species extending northwards into this Mauritanian coastal desert are Acacia tortilis, Balanites aegyptiaca and Salvadora persica and the grasses Panicum turgidum and Stipacrostis pungens (White, 1983).
Inland lies the Sahara regional transition zone (White, 1983, mapping units 67. 69-73). Here Acacia species are confined to the rocky beds of wadis and the gravelly alluvium of outwash fans, which are generally associated such Sahelian species as Acacia tortilis subsp. raddiana, A. ehrenbergiana, Balanites aegyptiaca Calotropis procera, Capparis decidua, Maerua crassifolia, Salvadora persica and Ziziphus mauritiana together with the grass Panicum turgidum.
The Sahel Acacia wooded grassland and deciduous bushland (White, 1983, mapping unit 43) extends along the Mauritanian border of the Senegal River. Plantations of Acacia senegal, have been established in this area, the gum of which is the property of the Moor landowners and not the farmers.
3.1.1.2 Senegal
A number of Acacia species occur abundantly in Senegal. In the northern border with Mauritania, along the Senegal river valley, Acacia nilotica subsp. nilotica used to occur in dense stands of high productivity on the alluvium of the river and benefiting from its floods; natural regeneration readily occurred provided there is no excessive overgrazing and trampling. The Acacia nilotica stands have been largely decimated by the drought spells, except for relatively young stands.
Acacia seyal was abundantly present in the so-called silvopastoral area of the Senegal, a large expanse of over 50000 km^2, sandy and rocky towards the east, along with Acacia tortilis subsp. raddiana accompanied by Sclerocarya birrea and Pterocarpus lucens in the east.. It also occurs in patches of pure stands on heavy clays and along the salty flats in central western Senegal and has contributed to the supply of energy to cities like Dakar, Thies and Mhour from the mid forties to mid sixties.
Faidherbia albida is concentrated in the densely populated groundnut basin in the Sere Region. The agricultural practices and traditions of the Serer population encourages natural regeneration of this tree, which is valued for its multipurpose uses (soil fertility/conservation, fodder, production of domestic utensils, etc.). The regeneration of Faidherbia albida has also been encouraged through specific projects and now through community forestry and agroforestry practices.
Other acacias also occur further south, such as Acacia sieberana in the the Sudano-Sahelian areas.
The regeneration of Acacia, especially A. tortilis and A. senegal is largely facilitated after ingestion by livestock. For the other species, regeneration is patchy and very often by sprouting from the root stock.
3.1.1.3 Burkino Faso and Niger
The importance of Acacia for the various ethnic groups inhabiting the thorn savannas and bushlands of Burkino Faso (Gourmantché, Mossi, Peuhl, Samo, Sonraii and Toureg) and Niger (Beriberi, Hausa, Peuhl, Toureg and Zarma) are discussed by Guinko (1991). The essential source of fuelwood for the rural populations of these land-locked countries is inevitably largely from Acacia, especially in the drier regions where the planting of alternative species is either impossible or extremely difficult.
3.1.2 Sudan
To the south of the Libyan Desert in areas where the annual rainfall ranges from 75 mm to 300 mm, the major vegetation communities consist of semi-desert grasslands with A. tortilis subsp. spirocarpa and Maerua crassifolia desert scrub in the east giving way in the west to A. mellifera and Commiphora africana desert scrub (Harrison and Jackson, 1958). Camel-owning tribes formerly utilized the region during the rainy season, migrating to the south for the dry season. Three decades of low rainfall have destroyed the vegetation and the region is no longer habitable (Asher, 1988).
In Darfur broad stands of Faidherbia albida occur on the alluvial terrace soils of the Wadi Aribo. Such soils are intensively cultivated during the rainy season and heavily browsed by migrant cattle during the dry season. The stands are generally even-aged, mature to over-mature, with little signs of any natural regeneration. As a result of the recent years of below average rainfall, migrant camels have also entered the area during the dry season over the past two to three decades. Many trees have been grossly mutilated by heavy lopping and it is feared that there could be a dramatic deterioration in the F. albida population (Hunting Technical Services, 1977).
Scattered Faidherbia albida is also found on the volcanic ash slopes of the Jebel Marra massif up to c. 2500 m, where they are chiefly valued as a source of dry season browse. Temperature limits the cultivation of sorghum and millet on the massif to 2200 m and below. The enhanced yields associated with cultivation beneath the tree canopy is attributed by the farmers to the dung produced by the browsing livestock. The tree is also utilized for green manure, brushwood fences, fuel, tannin and medicine. Although regenerating well from seeds, coppice regrowth and root suckers, there is a high tree mortality due to excessive lopping, the F. albida populations are becoming increasingly younger but not at present foreseeably endangered. Although live trees are legally protected against felling, such restrictions tend not to be observed on communal lands (Miehe, 1986).
The Acacia senegal, is the source of gum arable, a major export crop of the Sudan. In the past, the rural population of the Sudan "gum belt", which stretches from eastern Darfur to the Nile in eastern Kordofan practiced a tree fallow rotation system. During the fallow period A. senegal, formed practically pure stands, increasing soil fertility and reducing soil erosion while, at the same time, providing a dry-season source of income from the gum harvest. With increasing human and livestock populations and pressure on the cultivatable and grazing lands, the length of the tree fallow was decreased or, in some instances, eliminated. Larger areas were brought into cultivation in order to try and compensate for the decreased yields, albeit with little success. The carrying capacity of the range land has also deteriorated dramatically to the detriment of the livestock industry.
3.2 Acacia species in the horn of Africa
3.2.1 Somali
The typical vegetation of much of Somalia is described by White (1983, mapping unit 42) as Somalia-Masai Acacia-Commiphora Deciduous Bushland and Thicket. Characteristically this community is dense, mainly deciduous bushland or impenetrable thicket, 3-5 m tall with scattered emergent trees up to 9 m tall. In those areas of Kenya and Somalia where the rainfall is less than 250 mm, the vegetation is intermediate between bushland and shrubland, consisting of low 2-3 m tall bushes and stunted trees, principally of Acacia reficiens subsp. misera, which forms a thin cover over a ground layer of mainly small shrubs. Pastoralism is the primary occupation.
The role of the Acacia species in the life of the nomadic Somali pastoralists is described by Lawrie (1954), who states that the "many species [of Acacia] play an important, almost vital, part in the lives of the Somali nomads. It might even be said that without these trees nomadic life would be impossible; at least it would be very difficult." They provide browse for the livestock, building material for the portable huts, protective fencing, fuel, fibre, and numerous other necessities (Table 3.2.1).
Although rough tribal grazing areas are recognized, albeit with huge overlaps, there is no tribal or individual ownership and consequently no responsibility for managing the grazing (Lawrie, 1960). The combined effect of desertification, drought and the present civil unrest must have had a dramatic influence on the nomadic way of life. Past attempts at a more rational control of grazing and watering points have been unsuccessful. It will require a very strong government indeed to develop a sustainable livestock industry among the various tribal factions of the Somali nomads.
To the south of Mogadishu, in the Bay region of southern Somalia, the broken, 6-8 m high tree canopy consists of A. bussed, A. mellifera, A. senegal, A. tortilis, Delonix elatoa, Dobera glabra, Cadaba spp., Commiphora spp. and Terminalia spp. Of these, A. bussei is the major source of charcoal for the Mogadishu township, current stocks are estimated to be less than 2 years' supply for Mogadishu, with tree recruitment failing to keep pace with exploitation (Bird and Shepherd, 1989). Charcoal cutting is carried out by a small group of local and migrant labour, for whom it currently provides an important source of income, although future prospects are not very bright. It is interesting to note that Trump (1986), with reference to the Bay region, provides a list of similar usages for A. bussei to that provided by Lawrie (1954), suggesting little change in the nomadic life style. Again, Acacia species rank among the most valued but vulnerable tree species utilized by the rural
population.
Livestock production is the major occupation in the Bay region, with cultivation restricted to the heavier textured soils. Current tenurial rights of cultivated land and grazing are ambiguous, compounded of the pre 1960 clan territorial rights for individual farm plots, communal access and common grazing lands followed by the Republic's abolishment of all traditional land-ownership rights and all land vested in the State. Previous tenurial arrangements have to be registered anew with leases up to 50 years. Communal properties are restricted to registered water collecting ponds maintained by the villagers and the range is open to all. In practice the local population continues to recognize their traditional rights. Meanwhile the Ministry of Agriculture remains responsible for the allocation of individual farmland rights while the National Range Agency is responsible for the rangelands, the two agencies acting independently (Bird and Shepherd, 1989).
3.2.2 Djibuti
In the semi-desert grassland and shrublands of Djibouti (White, 1983, mapping unit 54b) Acacia nilotica subsp. tomentosa forms pure or nearly pure stands on silty-clay soils subjected to seasonal inundation, with Ziziphus abyssinica as a minor associate and A. ehrenbergiana in association with thickets of Salvadora persica on drier sites. The ground flora includes the aquatic Aponogeton nudiflorum, patches of Echinochloa corona and patches of Cyperus rotundus. Pastoralism appears to be the sole occupation and where browse is essential for livestock survival.
Some grazing areas may be freely used by the Assayamara tribe throughout the year while other areas are tribal property (derso). The derso lands areas are strictly controlled by the tribe, both as to grazing animal and start of the grazing season although stocking rates are not controlled, nor is the end of the grazing season. However, where certain tree populations within the derso are considered to be of value to the farmer, including A. nilotica, Ficus spp. and Ziziphus mauritiana, they are the property of family groups.
The trees, which are evergreen (provided the interval between two floods or two periods of rain do not exceed 10-12 months), are lopped to provide browse for small ruminants and camels. At least some of the pods are harvested and stored. Lightly crushed, they are fed to milking goats and camels during the dry season. While the camel will eat the entire pod, goats only eat the pod casing and are reported to reject the seed. The ground pods in water are used for treating diabetes and ulcers. Unusually the wood is not used for fuel, even the dead wood from the lopped branches is allowed to rot, despite a shortage of fuelwood in the towns of Djibouti. Possibly there is some fetish associated with practice; it requires investigation since it may influence any future plans for fuel plantations. There are proposals for the re-establishment of degraded grazing areas with A. nilotica at 100 tree per hectare and the planting of the stoloniferous grass Sporobolus helvolus at 625 plants
per acre (Audru et al., 1992).
3.3 Acacia species in East Africa
3.3.1 The Pokot
The Pokot homeland (c.1°30'N 35°25'E) in northwestern Kenya lies to the south of Lake Turkana and east and northeast of Mt. Elgon and is part of the Acacia-Commiphora deciduous bushland and thicket (mapping unit 42 of White, 1983). The dominant shrubs are the 8-10 m high Acacia mellifera and A. reficiens subsp. misera. The Pokot are a farming and pastoralist people whose traditional management of the environment continues to ensure their survival. The three Pokot stategies are (1) integration of herding and farming subsistence activities, (2) multiple uses of shrubs and their products, and (3) the active participation of men, women and children in maintaining rangeland quality. The Pokot practice shifting cultivation on the steep slopes of the eastern branch of the Rift Valley escarpment and, on the lowland plains, open-range management of their cattle, sheep, goats, camels and donkeys. The farming and pastoral populations are not entirely separate for there is some exchange
between the two through marriage and young men from farming stock taking up livestock in order to earn enough to settle on their own farms. The surplus livestock products of milk, meat, blood, hide and horns, are exchanged for farm surpluses of grain, beans, cucurbits and spices.
The productivity of the lowland range is maintained by mixed grazing where the zebu cattle are outnumbered by goats, often by 5 to 1 or sometimes by an even higher ratio. The goats browse on the Acacia and keep it in check. The extensive use of Acacia branches for fencing (c. 2500 m for a family of 4 adults, 8 children, 40 cattle, 200 goats) and the annual burning of the range also help to maintain a shrub to grass cover of 24 to 34% respectively. The effectiveness of this management can be seen in areas that the Pokot were forced to abandon where within 5 years the ratio changed to 50% and 13%. The smothering effect of the thicket-forming A. mellifera on the ground flora together with the fact that it is one of the last trees to produce leaves and among the first to shed them each year are obvious factors in determing shrub to grass cover.
Various parts of the Acacia are used in local medicines, for fibre and gum. Log beehives are wedged in the upper branches, a variety of birds also roost and nest in the branches. The Acacia thickets serve as refuge for small game and fowl, which are hunted by the Pokot. This is a traditional system of management where the Pokot have maintained their subsistence and exchange system, effectively integrating low-potential lowland grazing areas with higher potential farming areas. So far they have successfully resisted attempts to make them adopt 'more productive' methods, especially in the farming area (Conant, 1989).
3.3.2 The Mbeere
The Mbeere occupy part of Central and Northern Frontier Provinces of northeastern Kenya lying to the west of the Tana River and including the Somalia-Masai Acacia-Commiphora deciduous bushland and thicket and the Zanzibar-Inhambane coastal mosaic vegetation (mapping unit 16a) of White (1983). The latter consists of scrub forest dominated by Diospyros cornii and Manilkara mochistia with edaphic grassland on gray-black cracking clays supporting scattered individuals of Acacia zanzibarica, Hyphaene compressa, Terminalia spinosa and Thespesia danis. The uses of the Acacia species are shown in Table 3.3.2.
Unlike the Pokot subsistence agriculture is predominantly one of land rotation and bush fallow. In the Tana valley cattle and goats are the primary industry. "Vegetation is vitally important, however, to all activities connected to subsistence, whether it is directly or indirectly used for agricultural pursuits" (Riley and Brokensha, 1988, 1:67). Indeed a wide range of plants are or were utilized in the domestic economy of the Mbeere. During the past two decades fuelwood has become increasingly more difficult to obtain. Farms were formerly fenced with thorny branches of Acacia mellifera, A. senegal, A. seyal and A. tortilis, now, because of the shortage of Acacia species, barbed wire is being used in the more intensively farmed areas. Riley and Brokensha (1988) place the blame on an increasing population and associated increased land clearance for farming rather than on excessive cutting. The local resources had also been taken for granted and people had failed to see that
they were dwindling until it was too late.
<section>a</section>
3.4 Acacia species in Southern Africa
The semi-desert vegetation of the Karroo-Namib Region (White) 1983), mapping units 51, 52, 53) represents the drier formations of southern Africa, extending southwards to beyond the Orange River with such scattered small trees and shrubs as Acacia erioloba, A. mellifera subsp. detinens, Boscia albitrunca, B. foetida, Ehretia rigida and Grewia flava. In areas of European settlement commercial ranching (cattle, sheep, goats and ostrich), albeit at low stocking rates, is the major occupation, with more traditional herding systems in the native areas.
Among the species confined to the northern part of the Region are the endemic Brandberg acacia, Acacia montis-usti, A. robynsiana, Adenolobus pechuelii, Commiphora spp., Euphorbia guerichiana and Rhigozum virgatum.
The riparian vegetation includes the widespread and gregarious Acacia karoo, Combretum erythrophyllum, Euclea spp., Pappea capensis, Rhus lancea, R. undulate, Tamarix usneoides and Ziziphus mucronata. In the northern part of the Region the riparian vegetation includes such tropical species as Acacia erioloba, Colophospermum mopane, Combretum apiculatum, Faidherbia albida, Ficus sycomorus and Sterculia africana.
Among the principal trees and shrubs growing on the sands of the Kalahari thornveld (White (1983), mapping units 35s p.p., 44 and 56) are Acacia erioloba, A. fleckii, A. hebeclada, A. luederitzii, A. mellifera, A. tortilis, Boscia albitrunca, Dichrostachys cinerea and Terminalia sericea. Broad-leaved species become increasingly more abundant in the northern parts despite the continued dominance of Acacia spp.
On the stony soils the principal species of the dense bushland is Tarchonanthus camphoratus; associated species include Acacia karroo, A. mellifera, A. tortilis, Boscia albitrunca, Buddleja saligna, Croton gratissimus, Diospyros lycioides, Ehretia rigida, Euclea spp., Grewia flava, Rhigozum spp., Rhus spp., Tarchonanthus minor and Ziziphus mucronata.
In the Windhoek Mountains (White (1983), mapping unit 35c) among the principal trees and. shrubs of the wooded grassland are Acacia hebeclada, A. hereroensis, A. reficiens subsp. reficiens, Albizia anthelmintica, Combretum apiculatum, Dombeya rotundifolia, Ficus spp., and Tarchonanthus camphoratus.
The uses of the Acacia species in the these formations are shown in Table 3.4
3.5 Acacia species in North Africa
The role of Acacia species in the rural economy of North Africa are shown in Table 3.5
3.5.1 Morocco
The little known endemic Acacia gummifera grows either as a 1-2 m high shrub or 5-6 m high tree with a globose crown. It is allied to A. nilotica from which it differs in having only 1-3 pinnae pairs, 7-12 pairs of leaflets per pinnae and tardily dehiscent pods; A. nilotica is absent from Morocco (Ross 1979).
A. gummifera occurs in the Argania spinosa scrub forest and bushland of the Mediterranean /Sahara regional transition zone (White (1983), mapping unit 49), Acacia gummifera-Ziziphus lotus bushland (White (1983), mapping unit 79 pro parse), and succulent sub-Mediterranean shrubland (White (1983), mapping units 10 pro parse, 49, 55 and 79 pro parse), growing on arid plains of central Morocco, at the base of the mountains to the south of Oum or Rbia and the plains of Haouz, Entifa, Tadla, Rehamna, Djebilet, Sous and Anti Atlas. A small forest of c. 1200 ha exists near El Kalaa, also in the region of Tanent - Beni Mellal in association with Euphorbia resinifera. It is often associated with another endangered Moroccan endemic, Argania spinosa (Sapotaceae). The species is reported to regenerate from seed during years with higher than usual rainfall.
A. gummifera yields abundant gum, known as gomme ammoniaque, which is marketed locally. It is also a source of fuel, charcoal, tool handles and other domestic uses. The trees are often mutilated for browse by horses and sheep; it is also browsed by hares. Indeed, the nomadic pastoralists would be unable to survive in southern Morocco without A. gummifera and its products (Boudy, 1950).
3.5.2 Tunisia
Over much of the area many centuries of firewood collection, cereal cultivation and overgrazing have reduced the former vegetation that included Acacia tortilis subsp. raddiana to the present-day degraded shrub steppe. Relics of this former vegetation occur in the Bou Hedma National Park in southern Tunisia, 80 km northwest of Gabes; the last Acacia near Menzel Habia, 50 km northwest of Gabes was felled some 15 years ago (Aronson et al., 1993). A. tortilis subsp. raddiana in Tunisia is a slow growing albeit long-lived species, attaining a diameter of 40 cm in 125 years and 90 cm in 250-300 years (Boudy, 1950). Due to its slow growth its potential for rehabilitating the former vegetation would, therefore, appear to be limited.
3.6 Acacia species in the Near and Middle East
The recorded uses of Acacia species in the dry regions of the Near East to India are presented in Table 3.6.
3.6.1 Arabian Peninsula
A number of Acacia species from tropical Africa extend into the Near East. In the Arabian peninsula, the arid, 100 km long, 8-20 km wide Ariva Valley, an extension of the Jordanian-Dead Sea Rift, drains into the Dead Sea. In the lower sections occur Acacia tortilis subspp. raddiana and tortilis and Ziziphus spina-christi. In Dhofar A. laeta is at the eastern limits of its range, where it can be found in the dry, north-draining wadis.
Typical coastal vegetation of the Red Sea and Persian Gulf consists of open Acacia-Maerua savanna with Acacia tortilis, Maerua crassifolia and the grasses Lasiurus scindicus and Panicum turgidum (Walter and Breckle, 1986), while the inland plain as far as the foothills supports Acacia ehrenbergiana, Cadaba rotundifolia, Salvadora persica and Tamarix aphylla (syn. T. articulate) (UNESCO, 1977).
In the Acacia-Commiphora deciduous bushland and thicket the woody species of the characteristic dense, 3-5 m tall bushland thicket where the scattered, up to 9 m high, emergent trees include Acacia asak, A. edgeworthii, A. etbaica, A. hamulosa, A. oerfota, together with a number of species of East African origin (White and Léonard, 1991). Pastoralism with some rain-fed and irrigated cultivation in the river valleys are the main occupations.
The subtropical desert vegetation of the Iranian arid coastal region along the eastern coasts of the Persian Gulf and the Gulf of Oman represents an eastern extension of the Arabian Desert. The vegetation consists of a spiny shrub and grass pseudo-steppe and includes among the Saharo-Sindian trees, Acacia nilotica subsp. indica, A. senegal, and A. seyal.
The role of Acacia species in the rural economy for much of Arabia is difficult to assess because of their relative scarcity over much of the terrain, where they are largely restricted to drainage lines. Certainly where they form large enough stands they appear to be appreciated.
In Dhofar A. tortilis subsp. tortilis, the only subspecies present in Oman, holds an important position in the lives of those herders where it forms the staple diet of their herds. Formerly some tribes even forbade the cutting or damage to the tree in any way, while in the more desert areas the lower branches were propped up in order to increase the area of shade (Miller and Morris, 1988).
3.6.2 Thar-Sind Deserts
The human population live in widely scattered hamlets and villages, a large part of the which leading a nomadic or semi-nomadic life with livestock as their main occupation. Much of the area has been degraded by over-grazing and excessive cutting of fuelwood (Bhandari, 1990). In areas of stabilized sands favoured by an accumulation of organic matter, the characteristic species include big, tuft-forming bushes such as Acacia jaquemontii, Calligonum polygonoides, Capparis decidua, Crotalaria burhia, Leptadenia pyrotechnica, Sericostoma pauciflorum and Ziziphus nummularia.
The gravel plains of the Thar-Sind Deserts includes among the more common trees and shrubs of the shrub vegetation Acacia leucophloea, A. nilotica subsp. indica, Capparis decidua, Maytenus emarginata, Prosopis cineraria, Salvadora oleoides and Ziziphus spp. Typical species of the riverine vegetation are Acacia nilotica subsp. indica, Salvadora persica and Tamarix dioica, while Acacia senegal, occurs in the valleys and depressions (Bhandari, 1990).
The uses of the Acacia species are presented in Table 3.6. Special mention should be made of the babul, A. nilotica subsp. indica, which is widely planted for shelter belts and in rainnfed agroforestry and irrigation schemes where the tree is an important source of browse, bark and pods are used for tanning, wood for fuel, building purposes, agricultural implements, etc. as well as being a source of gum (Bhandari, 1990). Some doubt has been cast on its value for agroforestry because of the depressed crop yields from beneath the canopy; this is discussed more fully in section 2.3.6.
On the fringes of the Himalayan foothills from Afghanistan through Pakistan and into India Acacia modesta is a major component of some of the vegetation types. Slow growing, it is much used for hedges as well as being a source of gum (Macmillan, 1954; Agarwal, 1983).
<section>b</section>
Part four: Selected species of Acacia
4.1 Acacia Nilotica
4.2 Acacia Senegal
4.3 Acacia Tortilis
4.4 Faidherbia Albida
4.5 Exotic Species of Acacia
Four widely distributed, multipurpose species are discussed, A. nilotica, A. senegal, A. tortilis and F. albida. Their overall uses are presented in Annex D, of which their major uses are respectively for timber, gum arable, browse, and agroforestry and browse. The introduced species are also briefly discussed.
4.1 Acacia Nilotica
A polyploid complex (Fagg, 1992) within which nine subspecies are recognized with more or less recognizable distinctive geographical ranges (Brenan, 1983):
Subspecies
2n
Habitat
Distribution
tomentosa
16x=208
riverine
West Africa from Senegal to Nigeria and Niger, Sudan and Ethiopia
nilotica
8x=104
riverine
Nigeria and Cameroon eastwards to Egypt and Sudan
adstringens
4x=52
dry savanna
Senegal to Cameroon eastwards to Sudan and Ethiopia
subalata
4x=52
dry savanna
East Africa from Sudan and Ethiopia south to Tanzania
leiocarpa
4x=52
dry savanna
East Africa from Ethiopia to Tanzania
kraussiana
4x=52
dry grasslands
southern Africa from Tanzania to South Africa
indica
4x=52
low altitude dry forests salt and alkaline tolerant;
Yemen, Oman, Pakistan, India, Burma
cupressiformis
4x=52
low altitude dry forests salt and alkaline tolerant;
Pakistan
hemispherica
4x=52
dry stream beds
Pakistan
There is considerable variation in habit ranging from the ovoid-crowned, evergreen or semi-evergreen, subsp. nilotica, tomentosa and indica to the deciduous, flat and spreading crowns of. subsp. adstringens, subulata and kraussiana, while subsp. cupressiformis possesses a narrow, erect crown reminiscent of a Lombardy poplar and subsp. hemispherica forms a hemispherical bush. Despite this wide range of habit and other taxonomic characters authors rarely note the subspecies when reporting on their utilization. This is regrettable since there are probably differences in tannin content between subspecies which affects their value as browse and tanning agents, as well as other attributes. Their ecology also differs, including their ability to withstand waterlogging.
Subspecies nilotica, tomentosa, indica and cupressiformis are grown under cultivation, the first three largely for timber, fuel and tannin while subsp. cupressiformis is finding increasing popularity in India for windbreaks around fields, its narrow crown casting less shade than other available windbreak trees. In India subsp. indica is extensively grown on degraded saline or alkaline soils with a pH 9 and a soluble salt content below 3% (Fagg, 1992). It is also grown in agroforestry schemes despite reports of lower crop yields from beneath its canopy. This is reported to be caused by competition for water (Adjers and Hadi, 1993).
4.2 Acacia Senegal
A widespread and rather variable species within which four varieties are recognized (Brenan, 1959, 1970, 1983; Cossalter, 1991):
Variety
Habitat
Distribution
senegal
deciduous wooded grassland, deciduous bushland, dry scrub with trees; 120-1680 m.
Mauritania, Senegal, Gambia, Ivory Coast, Ghana, Nigeria, Cameroon, Mali, Burkina Faso, Niger, Central African Republic, Chad, Sudan, Ethiopia, Somalia, Uganda, Kenya, Tanzania, Rwanda, Zaire, Mozambique,; Oman, Pakistan, India
kerensis
wooded grassland, deciduous bushland, dry scrub with trees; 460-1130 m.
Ethiopia, Somalia, Uganda, Kenya, Tanzania
leiorhachis
woodland and bushland, often with Colophospermum mopane; 460-910 m.
Ethiopia, Somalia, Kenya, Tanzania, S. Zambia, Mozambique, Zimbabwe, Botswana, South Africa
rostrata
woodland, wooded grassland and bushland; near sea level-c. 600 m.
?Somalia, ?Uganda, ?Kenya, Mozambique, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Angola, Namibia, South Africa; ?Oman
The gum exudate from var. senegal, is the major source of commercial gum arabic and is the variety that is being planted throughout the Sahel. According to Anderson and Weiping (1990) cited by Anderson (1990) each variety has a distinct and characteristic gum exudate: However, this does not affect the current status of gum arabic as defined by FAO (1990) and WHO (1990a) and discussed in section 2.2.2
4.3 Acacia Tortilis
A polyploid species (Fagg, 1991) within which four, more or less geographically demarcated subspecies are recognized in the arid and semi-arid lands of Africa and the Near East (Brenan, 1983):
Subspecies
2n
Habitat
Distribution
tortilis
4x=52
deciduous wooded grassland and bushland
Egypt south to Somalia extending east to Arabia
spirocarpa
4x=52
deciduous woodland and bushland, wooded grassland and semi-desert bushland and scrub; 520-1500 m.
Sudan and Ethiopia southwards to Zimbabwe, Botswana and Namibia
heteracantha
4x=52
woodland, wooded grassland and bushland, often riverine; 240-1100 m.
Mozambique, Zimbabwe, Botswana, S. Angola, Namibia, South Africa and Swaziland
raddiana
8x=104
semi-desert bushland and scrub, deciduous woodland
Senegal east to Sudan. Somalia and Kenya and extending through Egypt to Israel, Jordan and Saudi Arabia
Two varieties are recognized within both subsp. raddiana and subsp. spirocarpa, vars. raddiana and pubescens, and vars. spirocarpa and crinita respectively. Furthermore, subsp. raddiana is regarded by some authorities as a distinct species. Its recognition as a subspecies is justified on the grounds that var. pubescens would appear to be the putative hybrid between subsp. raddiana and subsp. tortilis (Brenan 1983).
A multipurpose tree whose utilization appears to be independent of any recognition of subspecific and varietal categories, although in the absence of trials it is uncertain whether the intraspecific variations have any great ecological significance.
4.4 Faidherbia Albida
The unusual behaviour foliage being present throughout the dry season and being shed at the start of the rainy season and the associated benefits of this tree for fodder and increased crop production are well documented (Wickens, 1969; Nongonierma, 1979; Baumer, 1983; Koné, 1986; Bonkoungou, 1987; CTFT, 1988; Vandenbeldt, 1992, etc.). The behaviour occurs throughout its distribution range on either side of the equator; in areas of bimodal rainfall there two changes of foliage may occur annually (Wickens, 1969).
Habitat
Distribution
alluvial soils of riverine woodland, deciduous woodland
Senegal eastwards to Egypt, Sudan, Ethiopia, Somalia and south through East Africa to Transvaal, Natal and Lesotho, Angola and Namibia; Israel, Lebanon and Yemen, widely introduced elsewhere in the tropics
The natural distribution would appear to be riverine and where, like A. nilitica subspp. nilotica and tomentosa, the root system is almost entirely below the water table during the rainy season (Wickens, 1966). The species also occurs inland, where it is not subjected to any seasonal inundation of the root system. It is possible that two races may have developed, with anaerobic or aerobic root respiration as the norm. It is suggested that this may be one of the factors why some provenances have failed in trials when introduced outside their normal habitat.
Faidherbia albida, which is among the five most common farmland trees around Kano, Nigeria, supplies 25% of the local firewood from regular loppings; dead wood from young trees that have died from drought is also collected; older trees were apparently less susceptible. The species is not regarded as a fuelwood source (Cline-Cole et al., 1990); however, given its availability it has been used more and more as other resources have been steadily depleted.
There have been only a few attempts at replanting beyond traditional establishment by farmers in the Sahel (Senegal, Niger, Burkino Faso, etc.) since there is adequate natural regeneration. Reports on natural regeneration of Faidherbia albida in Senegal have mentioned seed germinating in cattle dung. This is in direct contradiction to the findings in Darfur, Sudan (Wickens, 1969) where all the F. albida seed observed germinating in cattle dung became etiolated and soon died. The Wadi Azum basin in Darfur is regarded as one of the best forage areas in the Sudan and it is suggested that the excellence of the forage provided softer faeces and more readily available plant nutrients as well as rapid moisture changes, all factors combining to prevent healthy germination and establishment; it is further hypothesized that a drier, more fibrous diet would would produce faeces more suitable for plant growth. The observations by Lamprey (1967) and Koné (1986) regarding the natural
regeneration of Acacia species in dung would support such a hypothesis.
4.5 Exotic Species of Acacia
A number of phyllodenous Acacia species from Australia have been introduced into Africa and the Near East, mainly for fuelwood, soil stabilization and browse (Vercoe, 1987). More recently there has been increasing interest in Acacia seeds for food in dryland tropical Africa (House and Harwood, 1992), especially in view of their ease of cultivation and heavy yields of palatable seeds that can be easily stored for long periods. The seeds are high in protein, carbohydates and fats and with low levels of known toxic and anti-nutritional factors. Of particular interest are A. colei, A. cowleana and A. tumida (Harwood, 1993). Other Australian species with edible seeds that have been introduced into Africa and the Near East include A. adsurgens, A. ampliceps, A. aneura, A. eriopoda, A. holosericea, A. kempeana, A. ligulata, A. neurocarpa, A. salicina, A. sclerosperma and A. victoriae (Devitt, 1992). The seeds of the Central American A. farnesiana are also edible.
According to Goodchild and McMenimmam (1987) the browse from the phyllodenous species tend to have higher crude fibre, lower crude protein and phosphorous content and lower organic matter digestibility than other members of the genus. Because of their evergreen phyllodes such species are valued primarily as a drought fodder reserve for when other fodder is in short supply (Thomson et al., 1994). They are particularly valued in the drylands of Africa and the Near East.
Recent re-appraisal of the taxonomy of A. holosericea complex have resulted in the recognition of the diploid A. neurocarpa, the tetratraploid A. holosericea and the hexaploid A. colei, the putive hybrid between A. neurocarpa and A. cowleana (tetraploid) (Maslin and Thompson, 1993). The significance of this re-appraisal is that previous reports on the performance of A. holosericea sensu lato have to be reconsided. A. colei has shown outstanding growth in West Africa, being more drought tolerant than either A. holosericea and A. neurocarpa and with a vast potential as a new, highly nutritious food crop for dry, sub-Saharan Africa. There are now increasing plantings of this species for windbreaks, land rehabilitation and fuelwood production. Other promising multipurpose species with edible seeds include A. cowleana and A. tumida. The oils from the arils of both A. colei and A. cowleana have the additional economic potential as solvents of ballpoint pen ink (Thomson, 1992).
A number of Australian species were introduced into tropical Africa some 20 or more years, mainly via North Africa. The results were discouraging, in some cases resulting in the death of the plants under trial. More recent introductions into West Africa have included A. bivenosa, A. colei (as A. holosericea), A. coriacea, A. sclerosperma, A. trachycarpa and A. tumida. Trials in Senegal have shown very favourable biomass production at 40 months compared to indigenous species, the results of which also include thinning operation modifying the original spacing from 3 x 3 m to 3 x 6 m (Cossalter, 1987). The results are shown below:
Average weight (g) of dry phyllodes or leaves per tree
Average weight (g) of wood per tree
Australian species
A. holosericea
A. trachycarpa
African species
A. senegal,
A. seyal
A. tortilis
Interestingly, A. trachycarpa is not recognized as a browse species in Australia yet it is readily browsed by sheep and goats in West Africa (Cossalter, 1987).
Despite the success of the trials in Senegal, results further inland in the Sahel have been disappointing. Provenance collections from inland Australia are recommended (Cossalter, 1987, Souvannavong and de Framond, 1992). However, according to Le Houérou al. (1993) species of Acacia section Phyllodineae cannot be grown in the Sahel except in the Senegal coastal strip because of the very high saturation deficit (SD) and low relative humidity (RH) irrespective of the mean annual rainfall, whereas they can be grown in the arid and semi-arid regions of North, East, southeastern and southern Africa. In such areas the SD is generally below 12 hPa and the RH above 60%, i.e. SD less than half and RH more than double that for the Sahel, with similar figures for the Sahelian coastal strip of Senegal. There is obviously a physiological problem involved concerning evapotranspiration and, if provenance collections are to be made from inland Australia, due consideration must be made to SD
and RH values for that continent.
Because of their diminishing indigenous tree resources, all the North African countries now rely on exotic species for timber and other tree products (El-Lakany, 1987). A number of Australian acacias have been introduced into Africa and the Near East, including. aneura, A. cyclops, A. ligulata, A. pence, A. salicina, A. saligna, A. victoriae as well as A. farnesiana from Central America, of which A. saligna is regarded as the most important of the introduced species on account of its tolerance to moderate drought, ability to grow on poor soil and bind sand, high biomass production, high nutritive value for sheep and goats, ease of establishment and management and response to irrigation (El-Lakany, 1987).
<section>c</section>
Part five: Multipurpose management of Acacia formations: A short review
5.1 Future prospects
5.2 Research requirements
References
Tables
In the Sahel, North Africa and Near East the former Acacia communities have either deteriorated to almost beyond recovery or have even disappeared, especially in North Africa. Demands for fuel are undoubtedly the major cause of the loss of trees. Overgrazing resulting in the stunting of tree growth and prevention of regeneration, together with large-scale agricultural projects are additional factors. For example, in the Sudan even the large stands of A. mellifera which dominate much of the clay soils of the Nile and its tributaries are threatened. In the Nile Valley large areas which had supplied charcoal for Khartoum have been clear felled for irrigation, while to the west fuel supplies for El Obeid are making ever increasing inroads into the stands at the El Ain Forest Reserve where annual incremental growth is less than the present rate of extraction. The management plan for the El Ain Forest Reserve, which also includes non-wood forest products, can only provide a
sustainable fuel supply for the local villages but not El Obeid town (Vogt, 1994). There is a similar situation in Nigeria where some of the fuelwood for Kano has to be transported for 600 km.
It is clear that fuel demands of the urban populations must have a large impact on the tree resources of the rural areas, affecting not only the rural population but also the environment, wildlife refuge, etc. It is possible that a wider implementation of agroforestry practices supplemented by selective thinnings for fuel and timber from communal shelterbelts could meet the requirements of the rural agrarian communities. For such developments the cooperation of the rural populations is essential; numerous local schemes as being developed now, are consequently likely to prove more effective than non private or non community based projects.
The demands of the herdsmen have also to be met. This includes not only the sustainable availability of herbage and browse for the livestock but also the tree requirements for fuel and fencing by the herdsmen. Much of the rangelands are state owned and it would require very unpopular draconian measures to ensure that the livestock populations were kept below the carrying capacity of the range, i.e. the stocking rate must be regulated to permit natural regeneration and improvement. Without such measures deterioration of the range will continue to take place. The large scale reseeding and reafforestation of rangelands is not an economic proposition when considered in the purely economic terms of carrying capacity and return from offtake. The growing of fodder banks as part of the agroforestry rotation can help carry the livestock through the difficult dry season period. Livestock watering points must be so distributed and regulated that overgrazing in the immediate vicinity
are minimized, preferably by rotation. Ideally the dryland ranges should be used primarily for stock rearing with finishing on crop residues and biproducts in regions of higher rainfall or irrigated crops.
This is an idealized system for managing the Acacia communities for the benefit of the rural population in order to meet their needs for fuel, fodder, medicine, etc. as well as maintain the environment and its associated wildlife. But what of the urban populations? A large and probably unknown percentage are refugees from famine and strife. Many would probably return to their farms once stability is ensured. Forestry alone cannot meet all the fuel requirements of the major urban areas of the drylands of Africa and the Near East; it can, however, largely contribute if remaining natural stands (including of Acacia, especially the pure Acacia seyal and/or Acacia nilotica formations) are properly managed and their regeneration secured. Trees must be managed for sustainable production.
However, it must be stressed that the most important role of Acacia and other tree and shrub species is to stabilize the environment and thus prevent desertification, a role that safeguards both the national and rural economy. Any future afforestation schemes should be designed for maximum protection against desertification.
5.1 Future prospects
Desertification, the consequences of over-cultivation, over-grazing and deforestation, is an insidious process. The results are a degradation of the environment. To reverse the process, to return the land to its predesertified condition, is considered an impossible task. The task is not only aggravated, especially in the Sahel, by decades of lower than average rainfall, the rapid increase in human and livestock populations have created additional pressures which are unlikely to be controlled until too late. There is a finite, environmental limit to the carrying capacities of the drier regions in terms of human and livestock sustainability, even with fertilizer and irrigation inputs. The prospect of a climate change (Parry, 1990) casts additional gloom on future prospects.
The enormous scale of environmental degradation in recent decades makes the economics of remedial works beyond even international financial aid unless efficient, low cost and participatory modes of rehabilitation are promoted. The strategy should now be to prevent further desertification by concentrating on protecting the higher rainfall regions and later attempt reclamation by working from the protected area into the area of desertification. This does not mean that essential aid to the decertified regions should stop, rather that more thought should be given to preventative rather than remedial measures.
5.2 Research requirements
Many of the attributes of the Acacia species given in this report are based on a very few observations and varying, unqualified degrees of merit. The usefulness of a species depends very much on availability in terms of abundance and, as a food and fodder resource, seasonal availability, as well as the relative merits of other alternatives. References in the literature to preferred species are often ambiguous. People adapt, when one resource is lost or in short supply, a substitute may be used. The preferred species may have been that which is lost but, in time, becomes that which has been substituted. Contradicting statements regarding, for example, fuel and fodder preferences are invariably found to be merely relative. Such relativity makes it extremely difficult to draw any firm conclusions.
It is possible that the various attributes of the A. tortilis complex, a polyploid series are somewhat similar, so that the various subspecies are more or less interchangeable as regard products but not for ecological requirements, consequently information based on only the species name has therefore not been considered a serious problem. Problems in interpreting data do occur with A. nilotica if the relevant subspecies is not mentioned. This species also forms a polyploid complex of subspecies and, while subsp. nilotica and subsp. tomentosa occur in riverine habitats subjected to seasonal flooding and are often semi-evergreen or even evergreen, subsp. adstringens, subsp. leiocarpa occur in wooded grassland and dry scrub while subsp. kraussiana prefers dry grassland and river valleys away from flooding; all three are deciduous (Sahni, 1968; Fagg and Barnes, 1990). The tannin content is believed to vary considerably between the subspecies and possibly within a subspecies, and
this affects not only the usefulness for tanning but also suitability for browse and palatability.
Possible seasonal variations and provenance in the African acacias have not been investigated, neither has the presence of condensed tannins and gallotannins in browse been investigated. It is also recognized that the phyllodous acacias are high in tannin and consequently relatively unplatable to livestock, never-the-less they are a valuable dry season browse; provenance selection may result in species suitable for growing in the Sahel. Comparative trials for growth, yield and seasonable availability are also suggested.
Although the seeds of some African acacias are known to be eaten, very little work has been done on their potential in the human diet, whereas work on a number of Australian species has shown them to be richer in proteins and dietary amino acids than the cereals. What little work is available for African species is based on a very few samples, further analyses are required.
Despite being a major item of commerce for some seven decades very little is known about the production of gum although there appears to have been some interest in recent years in the physiochemical and macromolecular field of gum production (Fenyo et al., 1991). This is an essential field of research for without knowledge of how gum is produced it is not possible to manage trees for gum production.
<section>d</section>
References
Adjers, G. and Hadi, T.S (1993). Acacias in agroforestry. In: Awang, K. and Taylor, D.A. (eds.) Acacias for rural, industrial and environmental development. pp. 134-143. Winrock International Institute for Agricultural Research and Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Bangkok.
Agarwal, V. S (1983). Perspectives in botanicalmuseums with reference to India. Today and Tomorrow's Printers and Publishers, New Delhi.
Al-Hubaish, A. and Müller-Hohenstein, K. (1984). An introduction to the vegetation of Yemen. Ecological basis, floristic composition, human influence. GTZ, Eschborn.
Ali, S.L. (1973). Mimosaceae. Flora of West Pakistan no. 36. Department of Botany, University of Karachi. Karachi
Amundson, R.G., Ali, A.R. and Belsky, A.J. (1994). Stomatal responsiveness to changing light intensity increases rain-use efficiency of below-crown vegetation in tropical savannas. Journal of Arid Environments 28: in press
Anderson, D.M.W. (1978). Chemotaxonomic aspects of the chemistry of the Acacia gum exudates. Kew Bulletin 32:529-539.
Anderson, D.M.W. (1990). Commercial prospects for gum exudates from the Acacia senegal, complex. Nitrogen Fixing Tree Research Reports 8:91-92.
Anderson, D.M.W. and Wang Wieping (1990). Acacia gum exudates from Somalia and Tanzania; the Acacia senegal, complex. Biochemistry Systematics and Ecology 78:413-418.
Anderson, D.M.W. (1993). Some factors influencing the demand for gum arabic (Acacia senegal, (L.) Willd.) and other water-soluble tree exudates. Forest Ecology and Management 58: 1-18
Arnold, T.H., Wells, M.J. and Wehmeyer, A.S. (1985). Khoisan food plants: taxa with potential for (1985) future economic exploitation. In: Wickens, G.E., Goodin, J.R. and Field, D.V. (Eds) Plants for arid lands, pp. 69-86. Chapman and Hall, London.
Aronson, J., Floret, C., Le Floc'h, E. and Pontanier, R. (1993). Restoration and rehabilitation of degraded (1993) ecosystems in arid and semi-arid lands. II. Case studies in southern Tunisia, Central Chile and northern Cameroun. Restoration Ecology 1:168-187.
Asher, M. A (1988). Desert Dies. Penguin Books, London.
Audru, J., Labonne, M., Guerin, H. and Bilha, A. (1992). Acacia nilotica: a traditional forage species among the Afar of Djibout. In: Speedy, A. and Pugliese, P.-L. (Eds), pp. 277-292.
Ayoub, S.M.H. (1982). Molluscicidal properties of Acacia nilotica. Planta Medica 46:181 - 183.
Ayoub, S.M.H., Michael, A. and Yankov, L.K. (1984). Acacia nilotica in the control of algae. Fitoterapia 55:310-312.
Ayoub, S.M.H. (1985). Molluscicidal properties of Acacia nilotica subsp. adstringens. Journal of Tropical Medicine and Hygene 88:197-200.
Badi, K.H., Ahmed, A. El A. and Bayoumi, A.A.M.S. (1989). The Forests of the Sudan. Agricultural Research Council. Khartoum.
Baumer, M. (1983). Notes on trees and shrubs in arid and semi-arid regions. EMASAR Phase II. FAO, Rome.
Bhandari, M.M. (1990). Flora of the Indian Desert. Ed. 2. MPS Repros, Jodhpur.
Bie, S. (1991). de Wildlife resources of the West African savanna. Wageningen Agricultural University Paper No. 91-2.
Bille, J.C. (1983). Measuring the primary palatable production of browse plants. In: Le Houérou, H.N. (Ed.), pp. 185-195.
Bird, N.M. and Shepherd, G. Charcoal in Somalia. (1980). A woodland inventory in the Bay region of Somalia. Overseas Development Agency, London.
Bonkoungou, E.G. (1967). Monographie de Acacia albida Del., espèce agroforestière à usages multiples. IRBET/CNRST, Ouagadougou.
Booth, F.E.M. and Wickens, G.E. (1988). Non-timber uses of selected arid-zone trees and shrubs of Africa. FAO Conservation Guide 19, Rome.
Booth, G.A. (1966). Forestry Report. Study of the gum "Acacia senegal," and the supply of other forestry produce in relation to land use planning. Land and Water Use Survey in Kordofan Province of the Republic of the Sudan. DOX-SUD-A45. Doxiades Associates, Athens.
Boulos, L. (1983). Medicinal plants of North Africa. Reference Publications Inc., Algonac, Michigan.
Boulos, L. (1989). Egyptian desert plants with promising economic potential. Arab Gulf Journal of Scientific Research 7:91-108.
Boudy, P. (1950). Economie forestière Nord-Africaine. Vol. 2. Monographie et traitement des espèces forestières. fasc. 1. Editions Larose, Paris.
Brand, J.C. and Cherikoff, V. (1985). The nutritional composition of Australian Aboriginal food plants of the desert regions. In: Wickens, G.E., Goodin, J>R and Field, D.V. Plants for Arid Lands, pp. 53-69. George Allen and Unwin, London.
Brand, J. and Maggiore, P. (1992). The nutritional composition of Australian Acacia seeds. In: House, A.P.N. and Harwood, C.E. (eds), Australian dry-zone acacias for human food, pp. 54-67. Australian Tree Seed Centre, Canberra.
Brenan, J.P.M. (1959). Flora of Tropical East Africa. Leguminosae subfamily Mimosoideae. Crown Agents for Oversea Governments, London.
Brenan, J.P.M. (1970). flora Zambesiaca. Leguminosae (Mimosoideae). Crown Agents for Oversea Governments, London.
Brenan, J.P.M. (1983). Manual on taxonomy of Acacia species. FAO, Rome.
Broun, A.F. and Massey, R.E. (1929). Flora of the Sudan. Sudan Government Office, London.
Brown, J.A.C. (1977). Pears medical encyclopaedia. (revised by Hastin-Bennett, A.M.). Sphere Books, London.
Chakravarty, H.L. (1976). (Ed.) Plant Wealth of Iraq. (A dictionary of economic plants) Vol. 1. Botany Directorate, Ministry of Agriculture and Agrarian Reform, Baghdad.
Cissé, M.I (1980). The browse production of some trees of the Sahel: relationships between maximum foliage biomass and various physical parameters. In: Le Houérou, H.N. (Ed.), pp. 205-210.
Cissé, M.I. and Koné, A.R. (1982). The fodder role of Acacia albida Del.: extent of knowledge and prospects. pp. 29-37. In: Vandenbeldt, R.J. (Ed.), Faidherbia albida in the west African semi-arid tropics. Proceedings of a workshop, 22-26 April 1991, Niamey, Niger. ICRISAT, Patancheru and ICRAF, Nairobi.
Cline-Cole, R.A., Falola, J.A., Main, H.A.C., Mortimore, M.J. and O'Reilly, F.D. (1990). Wood fuel in Kano. United Nations University Press, Tokyo.
Coats Palgrave, K. (1977). Trees of southern Africa. C. Struik Publishers, Cape Town, Johannesberg.
Conant, F.P. (1989). The Pokot way with thorny shrubs: a case example. In: McKell, C.M. (Ed.), The biology and utilization of shrubs, pp. 593-602. Academic Press, San Diego.
Cossalter, C. (1987). Introducing Australian acacias in dry, tropical Africa. In: Turnball, J.W.. (Ed.). pp.. 118-122.
Cossalter, C. (1991). Acacia senegal, gum tree with promise for agroforestry. NFT Highlights,
NFTA 91-02. Nitrogen Fixing Tree Association, Hawaii.
Crane, E., Walker, P. and Day, R. (1984). Directory of important world honey sources International Bee Research Association, London.
CTFT (1988). Faidherbia albida (Del.) A. Chev. (synonyme: Acacia albida Del.) Monographie. Centre Technique Forestier Tropical, Nogent-sur-Marne,
Dalziel, J.M. (1937). The useful plants of west tropical Africa. Crown agents, London
Danin, A. (1983). Desert vegetation of Israel and Sinai. Cana Publishing house, Jerusalem. de Montalembert, M.R. and Clement, J. Fuelwood supplies in the developing countries. FAO (1983) Forestry Paper 42, Rome
Devitt, J. (1993). Acacias: a traditional Aboriginal food source in central Australia. In: House, A.P.N. and Harwood, C.E. (Eds), pp. 37-53.
Dicko, M. S. and Sikena, L.K. (1992). Fodder trees and shrubs in range and farming systems in dry tropical Africa. In: Speedy, A. and Pugliese, P.-L. (Eds), pp. 27-45.
Dicko-Touré, M.S. (1983). The contribution of browse to cattle fodder in the sedentary system of the Office du Niger. In: Le Houérou, H.N. (Ed.), pp. 313-319.
Dickson, V. (1955). The wild flowers of Kuweit and Bahrain. George Allen and Unwin, London.
Dougal, H.W., Drysdale, V.M. and Glover, P.E. (1964). The chemical composition of Kenya browse and pasture herbage. East African Wildlife Journal 2:86-121.
Dougal, H.W. and Sheldrick, D.L.W. (1964). The chemical composition of a day's diet of an elephant. East African Wildlife Journal 2:51-59.
El Hadidi, M.N. and Boulos, L. (1979). Street trees in Egypt. Cairo University Press, Cairo.
El-Lakany, M.H. (1987). Use of Australian acacias in North Africa. In: Turnball, J.W. (Ed.), pp. 116-117.
Eltringham, S.K. (1984). Wildlife resources and economic development. John Wiley and Sons, Chichester.
Erkkilä, A. and Siiskonen, H. (1992). Forestry in Namibia. Silva Carelia 20. University of Joensuu, Finland.
Fagg, C.W. (1991). Acacia tortilis: fodder tree for desert sands. NFT Highlights, NFTA 91-01. Nitrogen Fixing Tree Association, Hawaii.
Fagg, C.W. (1992). Acacia nilotica - pioneer for dry lands. NFT Highlights, NFTA 92-04 Nitrogen Fixing Tree Association, Hawaii.
Fagg, C.W. (1994). and Stewart, J.L. The value of Acacia and Prosopis in arid and semi-arid environments. Journal of Arid Environments In press
Fanshawe, D.B. (1962). Fifty common trees of Northern Rhodesia. Natural Resources Board and Forest Department, Lusaka.
Fanshawe, D.B. (1972). Fifty common trees of Zambia. Forest Department Bulletin No. 5. Ministry of Natural Resources and Tourism, Lusaka.
FAO (1962). Charcoal for domestic and industrial use. FAO, Rome
FAO (1971). Gum arabic - trends and prospects. Secretariat Note. African Forestry Commission, Third Session (Nairobi, Kenya, 7-12 February 1972). FO:AFC-72/2. FAO, Rome.
FAO (1986a). Natural resources and the human environment for food and agriculture in Africa. FAO Environment and Energy Paper 6, Rome.
FAO (1986). Databook on endangered tree and shrub species and provenances. FAO Forestry. Paper 77, Rome.
FAO (1990).Specifications for identity and purity, pp 23-25. In: Specifications for identity and purity of certain food additives. Emulsifiers, enzyme preparations, flavouring agents, food colours, thickening agents, miscellaneous food additives. FAO Food Nutrition Paper 49, Rome.
Fenyo, I.C., (1991). Vandevelde M.c. and Connolly, S. gommose et propriétés de la gomme d'Acacia senegal, In: Riedacker, A., Dreyer, E., Pafadnam, C., Joly, H. and Bory, G. (Eds). Physiologie des arbres et arbustes en zones arides et semi-arides. pp. 283-287. Editions John Libbey Eurotext, Montrouge.
Gammadid, I.D. (1968). Study of growth rates of Acacia bussei [Harms ex] Sjostedt in the Bay Region of Somalia. Commonwealth Forestry Review 68:27-34.
Ghazanfar, S.A. and Al-Sabahi, A.M.A. (1993). Medicinal plants of northern and central Oman (Arabia). Economic Botany 47:89-98.
Giffard, P.L. (1964). Les possibilités de reboisement en Acacia albida au Senegal. Bois et forêts des tropiques 95:21-33.
Gillet, H. (1980). Observations on the causes of devastations of ligneous plants in the Sahel and their resistance to destruction. In: Le Houérou, H.N. (Ed.), pp. 127-129.
Göhl, B. (1981). Tropical feeds; feed information summaries and nutritive values. Animal Production and Health Series No. 12. FAO, Rome.
Goldsmith,, B. and Carter, D.J. (1981). The indigenous timbers of Zimbabwe, Forestry Commission. Salisbury, Zimbabwe.
Goodchild, A.V. and McMeniman, N.P. (1987). Nutritive value of Acacia foliage and pods for animal feeding. In: Turnball, J.W. (Ed.), pp. 101-106.
Grieve, M. A (1931). Modern Herbal. Jonathan Cape, London.
Guinko, S. (1977). Traitment traditionelle de quelques maladies en Pays Bisa (Republique de Haute-Volta. pp. 26-45. In: Troisième colloque du CAMES. Médecine traditionelle et pharmacopée africaines, Kigali, Rwanda 8-15 Octobre 1977. Conseil Africain et Malagache pour l'Enseignement Superieur, Ouagadoougou, Haute-Volta.
Guinko, S. (1991). Etude sur le role des Acacias dans le developpement rural au Burkina Faso et au Niger. Ouagadougou. (mimeo).
Gupta, T. and Mohan, D. (1982). Economics of trees versus annual crops on marginal lands. Centre for Management in Agriculture (CMA), Monograph no. 81.
Gutterman, Y. (1993). Seed germination in desert plants. Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Hagos, M., Samuelsson, G., Kenne, L. and Modawi, B.M. (1987). Isolation of smooth muscle relaxing 1,3-diaryl-propan-2-ol derivatives from Acacia tortilis. Planta Medica 53:27-31.
Harrison, M.N. and Jackson, J.K. (1958). Ecological classification of the vegetation of the Sudan. Forests Bulletin, New Series No. 2. Agricultural Publications Committee, Khartoum.
Harwood, C.E. (1993). Report to AIDAB on "seeds of Australian trees" advisory visit to Burkino Faso and Niger 21 November - 14 December 1992. Australian Tree Seed Centre, Canberra (mimeo).
Hassan, A.S. and Styles, B.T. (1990). A conspectus of Somali Acacias. Oxford Forestry Institute, Oxford and Overseas Development Administration, London.
Hines, D.A. and Eckman, K. (1993). Indigenous Multipurpose Trees of Tanzania: Uses and Economic Benefits for People. FO:Misc/93/9 Working Paper, FAO, Rome.
House, A.P.N. and Harwood, C.E. (Ed.) (1992). Australian dry-zone acacias for human food. Australian Tree Centre, Canberra.
Hunting Technical Services Report on the Geology, Geomorphology and Soils, Vegetation and Present Land Use. (1964). Land and Water Use Survey in Kordofan Province of the Republic of the Sudan. DOX-SUD-A 26. Doxiades Associatres, Athens.
Ibrahim, A. and Barka, J.R. (1986). Pattern of Acacia distribution at the Artificial Insemination Center, Afgoi, Somalia. Somali Journal of Range Science 1:27-30.
Ibrahim, K. (1975). Glossary of terms used in pasture and range survey research, ecology and management. AGPC:MISC/34. FAO, Rome.
ICRAF (1983). An account of the activities of the International Council for Research on agroforestry. ICRAF, Nairobi.
ILCA (1987). Annual Report for 1986/87. ILCA, Addis Ababa.
Kerharo, J. (1974). La pharmacopée sénégalaise traditionnelle, plantes médicinales et toxiques. Vigot Frères, Paris.
Kessler, J.J. and Breman, H. (1991). The potential of agroforestry to increase primary production in the Sahelian and Sudanian zone of West Africa. Agroforestry Systems 13:41-62.
Kinyanjui, M. (1985). Charcoal enterprises supplying Nairobi. Agroenergy Ltd., Nairobi.
Kloos, H. and McCullough, F.S. (1987). Plants with recognized molluscicidal activity. pp 45-108 In: Mott, K E (Ed.) Plant molluscicides. John Wiley and Sons, Chichester.
Koné,, P.-D. (1986). L'Acacia albida Del. dans les systèmes agroforestiers: perception, motivation et attitude des populations du bassin arachidier. M.Sc. Thèse, Faculté de Forestierie et de Géodésia, Université Laval
Kumar, R. (1992). Anti-nutritional factors. The potential risks of toxicity and methods to alleviate them. In: Speedy, A. and Pugliese, P.-L. (Eds), pp. 145-160.
Lamprey, H.F. (1967). Notes on the dispersal and germination of some tree seeds through the agency of animals and birds. East African Wildlife Journal 5:179-180.
Lawrie, J.J. (1954). Acacias and the Somali. Empire Forestry Review 33:234-238.
Lawrie, J.J. (1960). The introduction of forestry and range management to the nomadic stock-rearing community in semi-arid Somaliland. Proceedings of the Fifth World Forestry Congress, 29 August - 10 September, 1960, University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, USA. Vol. 1, 363-365.
Le Houérou, H.N. (Ed.) (1983). Browse in Africa. The current state of knowledge. ILCA, Addis Ababa.
Le Houérou, H.N. (1983a). Browse in northern Africa. In: Le Houérou, H.N. (Ed.), pp. 55-82.
Le Houérou, H.N. (1983b). The role of browse in the Sahelian and Sudanian zones. In: Le Houérou, H.N. (Ed.), pp.83-100.
Le Houérou, H.N. (1983c). The role of browse in the management of natural grazing lands. In: Le Houérou, H.N. (Ed.), pp. 329-338.
Le Houérou, H.N. and Corra, M. (1983). Some browse plants of Ethiopia. In: Le Houérou, H.N. (Ed.). pp. 109-114.
Le Houérou, H.N. (1989). The Grazing Land Ecosystems of the African Sahel. Springer Verlag, Berlin.
Le Houérou, H.N., Popov, G.F. and See, L. (1993). Agro-bioclimatic classification of Africa. FAO Agrometeorology Series, Working Paper No. 6, FAO, Rome.
Lock, J.M. (1989). Legumes of Africa: A Check-list. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew
Lock, J.M. and Simpson, K. (1991). Legumes of West Asia: A Check-list. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew.
Macmillan, H.F. (1954). Tropical planting and gardening. Ed.5. Macmillan, London
Manjunath, B.L. (Ed.) (1948). The Wealth of India. A Dictionary of Indian Raw materials and Industrial Products. Vol. 1. CSIR, Delhi.
Maslin, B.R. and Thomson, L.A.J. (1993). Re-appraisal of the taxonomy of Acacia holosericea, including the description of a new species, A. colei, and reinstatement of A. neurocarpa. In: Harwood, C.E. (Ed.), Report to AIDAB on "seeds of Australian trees" advisory visit to Burkino Faso and Niger 21 November - 14 December 1992, pp. 92-107. Australian Tree Seed Centre, Canberra, (Reproduced from Australian Taxonomic Botany 5:729-743).
Maydell, H.-J. (1986). von Trees and shrubs of the Sahel - their characteristics and uses. G.T.Z., Eschborn.
Medley, K.E. (1993). Extractive forest resources of the Tana River National Primate Reserve. Kenya. Economic Botany 47: 171-183.
Miehe, S. (1986). Acacia albida and other multipurpose trees on the Fur farmlands in the Jebel Marrahighlands, Western Darfur, Sudan. Agroforestry Systems 4:89-119.
Milewski, A.V., Young, T.P. and Madden, D. (1991). Thorns as induced defenses: experimental evidence. Oecologia 86:70-75.
Miller, A.G. and Morris, M. (1988). Plants of Dhofar. Office of the Adviser for Conservation of the Environment, Diwan of Royal Court, Sultanate of Oman
Milton, S.J. (1983). Acacia tortilis subsp. heteracantha productivity in the Tugela dry valley bushveldt: preliminary results. Bothalial 4:767-772.
Montgolfier-Kouevi, C. (1980). De and Le Houérou, H.N. Study on the economic viability of browse plantations in Africa. In: Le Houérou, H.N.(Ed.), pp. 449-464.
Muriel, C.E. (1901). Report on the forests of the Sudan. Government Printer, Cairo.
Nahal, I. (1993). Role of Acacia species in rural development of North Africa and Middle East. FAO Near East Regional Office, Cairo.
NAS (1979). Tropical Legumes: Resources for the Future. National Academy of Sciences, Washington, DC.
Nongonierma. A. (1979). Contribution á l'etude biosystématique du genre Acacia Miller en Afrique occidentale. X Phénologie en culture et dans la nature, types biologiques, nombres chromosomiques. Bulletin IFAN 41, sér. A, 4:723-760
Palmer, E. and Pitman, N. (1972). Trees of southern Africa covering all known indigenous species in the Republic of South Africa, South-West Africa, Botswana, Lesotho and Swaziland A.A. Balkema, Cape Town.
Pardy, A.A. (1953). Notes on indigenous plants of Southern Rhodesia: Acacia albida Del. (Mimosaceae). Rhodesian Agricultural Journal 50: 325.
Parry, M. (1990). Climatic change and world agriculture. Earthscan Publications, London,
Parsa, A. (1948). Flore de l'Iran. vol. 2. Imprimerie Mazaheri. Teheran.
Pellew, R.A. (1983a). The production and consumption of Acacia browse and its potential for animal protein production. In: Le Houérou,, H.N. (Ed.), pp. 223-231.
Pellew, R.A. (1983b). The impact of elephant, giraffe and fire upon the Acacia tortilis woodlands of the Serengeti. African Journal of Ecology 21:41 -74.
Pellew, R.A. (1984). The feeding ecology of a selective browser, the giraffe (Giraffe camelopardalis tippelskirchi). Journal of Zoology, London 202:57-81.
Peters, C.R., O'Brien, E.M. and Drummond, R.B. (1992). Edibe wild plants of sub-Saharan Africa. Royal Botanic Gardens, Kew
Poschen, P. (1986). An evaluation of the Acacia albida-based agroforestry practices in the Hararghe highlands of Eastern Ethiopia. Agroforestry Systems 4:129-143.
Radwanski, S.A. and Wickens, G.E. (1967). The ecology of Acacia albida on mantle soils in Zalingei, Jebel Marra, Sudan. Journal of Applied Ecology 4:569-579.
Raintree, J.B. (ed.) (1987). Land. trees and tenure. Proceedings of an International Workshop on Tenure Issues in Agroforestry. Nairobi, May 27-31, 1985. ICRAF, Nairobi and Land Tenure Center, Madison.
Riley, B. W. and Brokensha, D. (1988). The Mbeere in Kenya. 2 vols. University Press of America, Lanham, MD
Ross, J.H. (l979). A conspectus of the African Acacia species. Memoirs of the Botanical Survey of South Africa No. 44.
Sahni, K.C. (1968). Important trees of the northern Sudan. Forest Research and Education Centre, Khartoum. UNDP/FAO, Khartoum.
Schweinfurth, G (1873). The heart of Africa. Travels and adventures from 1868 to 1871. (translation E.E.Frewer), 2 vols. Sampson Low and Co., London
Seif el Din, A.G. (1981). Agroforestry practices in the dry regions. In: Buck, L. (ed.). Kenya National Seminar on Agroforestry, Nairobi, Kenya 12-22 November, 1980, pp. 419-434. ICRAF, Nairobi.
Seif el Din, A.G. (1991). Acacia species in rural development in dryland Africa. Arid zone forestry and desertification control. FAO, Rome.
Seigler, D.S., Seilheimer, S., Keesy, J. & Huang, H.F. (1986). Tannins from four common Acacia species of Texas and northeastern Mexico, Economic Botany 40:220-232.
Singh P. (1909). A note on the manufacture of pure shellac. Indian Forest Memoirs, Chemistry Series 1,2: 1-20.
Skerman, P.J., Cameron, D.G. and Riveros, F. (1988). Tropical forage legumes, Ed. 2. Plant Production and Protection Series No. 2. FAO, Rome
Smith, J. (1949). Distribution of tree species in the sudan in relation to rainfall and soil texture. Sudan Forests Department Bulletin No. 4, Khartoum.
Souvannavong, O. and de Framond, H. (1992). Performance of dry-zone Acacia species and provenances recently introduced to the Sahel. In: Hopuse, A.P.N. and Harwood, C.E., pp. 82-89.
Speedy, A. and Pugliese, P.-L. (1992). Legume trees and other fodder trees as protein sources for livestock. Animal Production and Health Paper 102. FAO, Rome.
Steyn, D.G. and Rimington, C. (1931). The occurrence of cyanogetic glucocides in south African species of Acacia. Onderstepoort Journal of veterinary Science and Animal Industry 4:51-63.
Story, R. (1958). Some plants used by the bushmen of the Bechuanaland Protectorate and S.W. Africa in obtaining food and water. Memoirs of the Botanical Survey of South Africa, No. 30.
Tanaka, T. (1976). Tanaka's cyclopedia of edible plants of the world. Keigaku Publishing Co., Tokyo.
Thomson, L. (1992). Australia's subtropical dry-zone Acacia species with human food potential. In: House, A.P.N. and Harwood, C.E. (Eds), pp. 3-36.
Thomson, L.A.J., Turnbull, J. and Maslin, B.R. (1994). The utilization of Australian species of Acacia, with particular reference to those of the dry subtropics and the northern and central zone. Journal of Arid Environments 27: (in page proof)
Thoyer, A. (1986). Plantes médicinales du Mali. Ed. 2. Editions l'Harmattan, Paris.
Toutain, B. (1980). The role of browse plants in animal production in the Sudanian zone of West Africa. In: Le Houérou, H.N. (Ed.),pp. 103-108.
Townsend, C.C. (1974). Leguminales. In: Townsend, C.C. and Guest, E. (Eds) Flora of Iraq, Vol. 3. Ministry and Agriculture and Agrarian Reform, Baghdad.
Trump, E.C. (1986). Somalia forestry project energy planning study - Inventory section: report of vegetation ecologist. Overseas Development Administration, London.
Turnbull, J.N. (Ed.). (1987). Australian acacias in developing countries. Proceedings of an international workshop held at the Forestry Training Centre, Gympie, Qld., Australia, 4-7 August 1986. ICIAR Proceedings No. 16. Australian Centre for International Agricultural Research, Canberra.
UNESCO (1960). Medicinal plants of the arid zone. Arid Zone Research 13. UNESCO, Paris.
UNESCO (1977). Map of the world distribution of arid regions. MAB Technical Note 7. UNESCO, Paris.
Uphof, J.C.Th. (1968). A dictionary of plants used by man, ed. 2. Cramer, Weinheim.
Vandenbeldt, R.J. (Ed.) (1992). Faidherbia albida in the West African semi-arid tropics. Proceedings of a workshop 22-26 Apr 1991 Niamey, Niger. ICRISAT, Patancheru and ICRAF, Nairobi.
Vercoe, T.K. (1987). Fodder potential of selected Australian tree species. In: Turnball, J.W. (Ed.), pp. 95-100.
Vogt, K. (1994). El Ain Natural Forest Management Project. Management Plan for 1994-2011. SOS Sahel, London (mimeo).
Walker, B.H. (1980). A review of browse and its role in livestock production in southern Africa. In: Le Houérou, H.N. (Ed.), pp. 7-24.
Walter, H. and Breckle, S.-W. (1986). Ecological systems of the geobiosphere. Vol. 2, Tropical and subtropical zonobiomes. Springer-Verglag, Berlin, Heidelburg.
White, F. (1983). The vegetation of Africa. A descriptive memoir to accompany the Unesco/Aetfat/UNSO vegetation map of Africa. UNESCO, Paris.
WHO (1990a). Technological evaluation of certain food additives and contaminants. Food Additive Series 26: 77-79. WHO, Geneva.
WHO (1990b). Evaluation of certain food additives and contaminants. Technical Report Series 798: 24. WHO, Geneva.
Wickens, G.E. (1966). Reconnaissance vegetation survey for the United Nations Special Fund Jebel Marra Project in the Republic of the Sudan. Hunting Technical Services, Boreham Wood (mimeo, provisional issue)
Wickens, G.E. (1996). Savanna development, Sudan. Plant ecology. PL:SF/SUD/25. FAO, Rome.
Wickens, G.E. (1969). A study of Acacia albida Del. (Mimosoideae). Kew Bulletin 23: 181-202
Wickens, G.E. (1983). Alternative uses of browse species. In: Le Houérou H.N. (ed.), pp. 155-183
Wickens, G.E. (in prep.). Changes in the Sahel during the past three decades. Findings of the SOS Sahel Oral History Programme on the changes in the vegetation, crop and livestock production, and plant use.
Wilson, R.T. (1983). Fuelwood consumption in a central Malian town and its effects on browse availability. In Le Houérou H.N. (Ed.), pp. 473-476.
Young, T.P. (1987). Increased thorn length in Acacia drepanolobium - an induced response to browsing. Oecologia 71:436-438.
Zohary, M. (1972). Flora Palaestina. Part 2, Text, Plantaginaceae to Umbelliferae. Israel Academy of Sciences and Humanities, Jerusalem.
<section>e</section>
Tables
Table 1.1 The benefits from Acacia in the rural economy (after Seif el Din 1991)
Wood products
Non-wood products
Services
Domestic
Commercial
Domestic
Commercial
firewood
firewood
browse
soil fertility
charcoal
charcoal
traditional
environment
medicines
protection
domestic utensils
gum
gum
game refuge
tool handles
tannin
tannin
ornamental
construction poles
construction timber
fibre
handicrafts
bee forage
fish poison
Table 2.1.1 Acacia species used for firewood and charcoal (Boudy, 1950; Palmer and Pitman, 1972, Kinyanjui, 1985; Maydell, 1986; Riley and Brokensha, 1988; Bird and Shepherd, 1989; Bhandari, 1990; Guinko, 1991; Hines and Eckman, 1993; Nahal, 1993)
Species
Properties
AFRICA
A. amythethophylla
occasionally used for firewood in the Sahel
A. ataxacantha
preferred wet season firewood by the Mbere since wood does not readily absorb water and will maintain flammability; occasionally used in the Sahel
A. brevispica
preferred wet season firewood by the Mbere since wood does not readily absorb water and will maintain flammability
A. caffra
provides a good fuel for brick kilns
A. drepanolobium
Mbeere women use the dry branches to ignite 'trot' kindling for a steady burn of charcoal when firing pottery
A. dudgeoni
occasionally used for firewood and charcoal in the Sahel
A. ehrenbergiana
occasionally used for firewood in the Sahel
A. erioloba
widely used for fuel, especially in the Kimberley area of South Africa
A. erubescens
a very hot fuel source
A. erythrocalyx.
occasionally used for firewood in the Sahel
A. gerrardii
a preferred firewood in Tanzania high quality charcoal
A. gourmaensis
occasionally used for firewood in the Sahel
A. grandicornuta
used for fuel in southern Africa
A. gummifera
used for firewood and charcoal in southern Morocco
A. hockii
used for firewood and charcoal in Kenya
A. karroo
used for firewood and charcoal in southern Africa
A. laeta
an important source of firewood and high quality charcoal in the Sahel
A. lahai
a preferred species for firewood and charcoal in Tanzania
A. macrostachya
occasionally used for firewood in the Sahel
A. mellifera sensu lato
slow-burning firewood valued by the Mbeere for cooking; a preferred firewood in Tanzania, excellent charcoal
A. nigrescens
favoured fuel for tobacco barns and charcoal in N Kenya
A. nilotica sensu lato
an important source of firewood and charcoal in the Sahel. Bark preferred by Mbeere for firing pottery; a preferred source of firewood and good quality charcoal in Tanzania; calorific value of heartwood 4950 kcal/kg, sapwood 4800 kcal/kg.
subsp. adstrigens
an important source of firewood and charcoal in the Sahel
subsp. nilotica
an important source of firewood and charcoal in the Sahel
subsp. tomentosa
an important source of firewood and charcoal in the Sahel
A. polyacantha
subsp. campylacantha
occasionally used for firewood and charcoal in the Sahel; a preferred firewood in Tanzania
A. reficiens
subsp. misera
preferred fuelwood for breadmaking in Somalia
A. robusta
little value for fuel
A. senegal
an important source of firewood and charcoal in the Sahel
A. seyal
var. fistula
good charcoal
var. seyal
an important source of firewood {firewood susceptible to insect attack if not used soon after cutting}and an occasional to important source of good quality charcoal in the Sahel
A. sieberiana
an occasional source of firewood and charcoal in the Sahel; a preferred firewood in Tanzania
A. tortilis sensu lato
an important source of firewood and charcoal in the Sahel; a preferred source of firewood and good quality charcoal in Tanzania; calorific value 4400 kcal/kg
subsp. heterocantha
firewood
subsp. raddiana
a preferred fuelwood in the Sahel
subsp. spirocarpa
firewood and charcoal
A. xanthophloea
a preferred firewood in Tanzania; makes good charcoal
F. albida
an occasional source of firewood and charcoal in the Sahel; a preferred source of firewood and charcoal in Tanzania; calorific value 4700 kcal/kg
INDIA
A. jacquemontii
firewood and charcoal; charcoal of high calorific value, favoured by gold-, silver- and iron-smiths. charcoal suitable for gunpowder
A. leucophloea
used for fuel
A. modesta
used for fuel
A. nilotica
subsp. indica
used for fuel
Continue
<section>f</section>
Table 2.1.2 The timber properties of Acacia species and their uses (Broun and Massey, 1929; Manjunath, 1948, Boudy, 1950; Sahni, 1968; Palmer and Pitman, 1972; Zohary 1972; Ali 1973; Coats Palgrave, 1977; Zohary, 1977; Goldsmith & Carter, 1981; Maydell, 1986; Riley and Brokensha, 1988; Bhandari, 1990; Bird and Shepherd, 1992; Erkkilä and Siislonen, 1992; Haines and Eckman, 1993; Medley, 1993; Nahal, 1993)
Species
Timber properties
Uses
AFRICA
A. abyssinica
a preferred species for timber, building materials and furniture in Tanzania
A. amythethophylla
sapwood yellow-white with orange streaks, heartwood reddish with black streaks, heavy, 1170 kg/m3, hard, strong, easy to split; durable
carving, turnery, inlay work
A. ataxacantha
sapwood white to creamy white, pink tinge, heartwood deep brown-red, texture medium, heavy, 9304 kg/m3, tough, durable, with abundant gum patches, flexible, saws cleanly and finishes well; sapwood susceptible to borers, termites and blue fungus
hut lathes, tool and implement handles, walking sticks, bows, poles, fences
A. brevispica
tough, durable, flexible
digging sticks, hut lathes, bows, walking sticks
A. burkei
wood dark brown, heavy, tough, good grain when polished
fence posts, formerly used for works well,
A. bussei
building poles, tool handles in Somalia
A. caffra
sapwood whitish, heartwood nearly black, very hard, heavy, close-grained, very attractive, not termite resistant, termite and borer-proof
good fence posts
A. circummarginata
wood strong, splinters badly; termite resistant
not used for implement handles because it splinters badly, may be used for construction purposes
A. davyi
wood soft, brittle
A. drepanolobium
hard, heavy; durable, termite resistant
agricultural implements, tool handles, Y-poles to support granaries; a preferred species for building material and fence posts in Tanzania
A. dudgeoni
occasionally used for tool handles
A. erioloba
sapwood wide, pinkish, heartwood dark or reddish brown, hard and heavy, 1230kg/m^3, difficult to saw, finishes well; durable, borer and termite resistant
formerly used for machine bearings, considered better than brass if kept very well oiled; heartwood only now used, pit props, wagons, fence poles, firewood. Used in Namibia for knobkerries (clubs)
A. erubescens
wood hard, durable
ox yoke-skeys
A. erythrocalyx
straight stems occasionally cut for walking sticks
A. galpinii
sapwood pale brown, heartwood darker, heavy, 800 kg/m^3, coarse grained, difficult to work
good furniture, formerly for wagons, joinery, general purpose timber
A. gerrardii
wood variable, heavy, 900 kg/m^3, moderate durability. Subject to beetle and fungal attack
preferred species for building material and fence posts in Tanzania. Small furniture, shelves, cupboards, wood wool
A. goetzii
sapwood white, heartwood chocolate brown, even texture, heavy, 1025 kg/m^3, saws and works well, durable. Susceptible to fungi
furniture, carving, turnery
A. gummifera
tool handles, domestic articles
A. haematoxylon
heartwood hard, red
wind instruments
A. hebeclada
wood strong
hoe and axe handles
A. hereroensis
yoke- skeys
A. hockii
susceptible to termites and decay
not favoured for hut construction because of its poor durability
A. karroo
sapwood wide, creamy brown, heartwood radish-brown, often seen as small streaks, heavy, 800 kg/m^3, hard, tough, works well, durable; susceptible to borer and fungi
interior work, furniture, wagon wheels, yokes, rural implements, turnery, fence posts, coffins, wood wool
A. laeta
poles for local construction purposes, fence posts
A. lahai
a preferred species for building material fence posts and walking sticks in Tanzania
A. leucophloea
sapwood yellowish-white, heartwood brick red turning reddish-brown with darker streaks, coarse textured, grain irregularly interlocked, density 0.71, seasons well, difficult to saw, planes and good polish; not durable, susceptible to borer attack
agricultural implements, carts, cartwheels, turnery
A. luederitzii
heartwood dark, heavy, tough, water- and fire-resistant
well lining, fence posts
A. mellifera
subsp. detiens
sapwood thick, whitish heartwood dark brown to greenish black, almost black when oiled, very tough and durable, does not split readily, heartwood borer- and termite-proof
excellent for pick and axe handles, bows, fence posts. Regarded in Namibia as suitable raw material for chipboard and wood cement blocks but unacceptably weak for wood-cement panels
subsp. mellifera
heartwood black, very heavy, 1100 kg/m^3, very hard, strong; durable, borer, termite and fungi resistant
poles for huts and fencing, tool handles; a preferred species for building material in Tanzania
A. modesta
sapwood white, heartwood russet with greenish cast often with darker streaks, strong, extremely hard, straight grained, density 0.97, difficult to saw; durable
cane crushers, Persian wheels, agricultural implements, cartwheels
A. nigrescens
sapwood narrow, off-white, heartwood dark golden reddish-brown, medium to coarse texture, very heavy, 1120 kg/m^3, strong, difficult to saw, finishes well; resistant to borers, termites and fungi
carving, turnery, furniture, wagon work, mine props
A. nilotica sensu lato
heartwood redbrown, sometimes with dark striations, hard, heavy, 1170 kg/m^3, dries and works (except for knots) well but high silica content blunts tools
hut construction, boat building, oil, sugar and cane presses, railway sleepers, poles for granaries, digging sticks
subsp. adstringens
hard, heavy, density 0.945(heartwood), 0.827 (sapwood), durable, short fibred, somewhat fencing, tool handles, etc. brittle. Resistant to water and termites.
Construction work, boat building, hut construction,
subsp. kraussiana
wood dark red, hard
carving, domestic utensils, saddles, bed frames, fencing
subsp. nilotica
sapwood yellowish-white, heartwood pinkish-red to reddish-brown, hard, heavy, tough, density 0. 80. Resistant to water and termites
sleepers, boat building, pit props, wagons, tool handles, carving, construction timbers, floor blocks, etc.
subsp. subalata
wood reddish, hard, durable.
Turnery, pit props, fence posts
Termite resistant
subsp. tomentosa
dark, hard, heavy, tough. Resistant to water and termites
sleepers, boat building, pit props, wagons, tool handles, carving, construction timbers, floor blocks, etc.
A. oerfota
wood with obnoxious smell when cut
hut construction
A. polyacantha subsp. campylacantha
sapwood white, heartwood red with blackish streaks and high in resin content, heavy, 705 km/m^3, hard, coarse grained, difficult to plane or saw but polishes well, poor durability; susceptible to fungi
building construction, sleepers, ploughs in the Sudan agricultural implements, poles, handles, wheels, crates, shelves, wood-wool. Little used in southern Africa
A. reficiens
subsp. misera
thorny fence poles
A. robusta
sapwood light, heartwood dark, heavy, 850 kg/m^3, tough, does not split readily, warps easily; attacked by borers unless water-seasoned, old trees often affected by dry rot and borers
good yokes but little value as timber, although sometimes used for poles if long enough, kitchen furniture
A. senegal
wood dark, hard. Termite resistant
construction timber, tool and implement handles, fence posts, weavers' shuttles
A. seyal
var. fistula
wood very susceptible to insect attack
little used
var. seyal
wood white, hard, shock resistant, seasons reasonably well, not durable, especially if cut green; not rot resistant; susceptible to insects
not favoured for hut construction because of its poor durability but can be improved by water treatment
A. sieberiana sensu lato
wood yellow ochre or white; medium heavy, 655 kg/m^3, hard to soft. Sapwood readily attacked by insects and termites unless water-seasoned for 6 months
packing cases, light furniture, shelves, implements, tool handles, wagons, mortars, wood-wool, sleepers if preserved; a preferred species for building materials and mortars in Tanzania
A. tanganyikensis
used for drums in Tanzania
A. tortilis sensu lato
fence posts; tool handles a preferred species for furniture in Tanzania
subsp. heteracantha
sapwood whitish, soft, heartwood red, warps on drying unless cut when sap down and water seasoned; often riddled by borers heartwood small, dark brown,
poles, yokes
subsp. raddiana
local construction
subsp. spirocarpa
sapwood moderately dark or brown; fairly hard and heavy. Susceptible to borer insects
boat ribs, pulley blocks, kitchen furniture, shelves; a preferred species for building material and fence posts in Tanzania
subsp. tortilis
local construction
A. xanthophloea
undifferentiated creamy brown with pinkish tinge, in large boles heartwood brown, heavy, 880 kg/m^3, hard, works and finishes well, requires thorough seasoning otherwise cracks; moderately durable, moderately resistant to borers and insects. Host of the root parasite Sarcophyte sanguina (Balanophoraceae)
general purpose timber
F. albida
sapwood and heartwood not clearly differentiated, bright yellow to white, light, at 12% moisture content 560 kg/m^3, fairly dense, coarse grained relatively soft, easy to work; although not particularly suitable for building purposes or furniture, its large dimensions encourages its use by rural populations. Susceptible to fungi, insects and termites but easily preserved
boat building; hut construction, furniture, oil presses, mortars, bowls and domestic utensils, drums, boxes, light carpentry, saddles, drinking troughs, dugouts, fencing, etc. and wood wool
INDIA
A. leucophloea
wod hard, strong and light
agricultural implements, oil mills, carts, wheels, turnery
A. nilotica
subsp. indica
building purposes, agricultural implements, spokes, wheels, oil presses, tent pegs,
Continue
<section>g</section>
Table 2.2.1 List of Acacia species and their browsing livestock and wild herbivores (Lawrie. 1954, Dougall et al., 1964; Sahni, 1968, Palmers and Pitman, 1972; Le Houérou, 1983a, Le Houérou, and Corra, 1983; Toutain, 1983; Ibrahim, 1986; Maydell, 1986; Riley and Brokensha, 1988; Skirman et al., 1988; Dicko and Sikena, 1992; Fagg, 1991; Peters et al., 1992; Gutterman, Hines and Eckman, 1993)
Species
Herbivore and parts eaten
AFRICA
A. abyssinica
foliage and pod eaten by camels and sheep in Ethiopia
A. amythethophylla
young shoots palatable and readily browsed by livestock
A. asak
foliage and pods eaten by cattle, sheep and camels in Ethiopia
A. ataxacantha
palatable but not browsed much by livestock
A. brevispica
browsed by goats but seldom by cattle because of the thorny branches; also browsed by giraffe, impala and other ruminants. Green pods eaten by livestock and wildlife
A. burkei
foliage and pods eaten by giraffe, gum by monkeys
A. bussei
browsed by cattle, sheep and goats in Ethiopia and Somalia
A. caffra
the earlies Acacia species in southern Africa to sprout at the start of the rainy season, browsed by black rhino, antelope; rhino eat stem and bark; baboons eat flowers and seed
A. davyi
foliage and bark eaten by black rhino
A drepanolobium
browsed by giraffe
A. dudgeoni
palatable, young pods and leaves eaten by small ruminants, especially goats
A. edgeworthii
browsed by goats in Ethiopia
A. ehrenbergiana
pollarded during the dry season and browsed by camels, sheep and goats
A. elatior
browse and bark eaten by elephant
A. erioloba
browsed by giraffe; pods eagerly eaten by livestock (nutritional value equivalent to legume hay), also by elephant, giraffe, rhino, gemsbok and eland, while baboons eat the young pods; giant bustard eats the gum; the tree rat in the Kalahari feeds almost exclusively on the foliage, seeds and gum. Presence of HCN but livestock safe provided they do not eat large quantities too quickly
A. erubescens
browsed by cattle and wild animals
A. erythrocalyx
browsed by cattle and goats
A. etbaica
foliage and pods eaten by cattle, sheep and camels in Ethiopia and Somalia; immature pods eaten by baboons in Somalia
A. gerrardii
lopped branches fed to cattle and goats when other feed not available; browsed by giraffe, duiker and steenbok; foliage and bark eaten by elephant and black rhino; young shoots and pods eaten by baboons
A. gourmaensis
young shoots, foliage and pods eaten by camels, sheep and goats
A. gummifera
Moroccan endemic, browsed by camels, sheep and goats and horses
A. hebeclada
foliage and pods eaten by livestock; leaves sometimes toxic
A. hockii
foliage and pods eaten by goats; shoots, flower buds and flowers eaten by baboons, seed eaten by chimpanzees
A. horrida
browsed although sometimes refused due to its unpleasant odour
A. iraqensis
pods eaten by goats and gazelle in the Negev and Sinai Deserts
A. karroo
foliage, flowers and pods eaten by livestock and antelope; gum and seed eaten by chimpanzees, shoots, flower buds and flowers eaten by baboons, seed eaten by birds
A. laeta
foliage and pods browsed by livestock
A. macrostachya
shoots and foliage considered a poor fodder
A. mellifera
subsp. detiens
young shoots, foliage, pods eaten by livestock, especially sheep and goats, also kudu. Small branches ground in hammer mill and mixed with mollasses for stock feed in times of drought
subsp. mellifera
browsed by goats and camels, the former also thrive on the fallen leaves. Considered too spiny for cattle; the clay soils in which it often grows are also a deterrent during the rainy season. Browsed by gerenuk and other ruminants. A preferred fodder species in Tanzania
A. moggii
gum exudate eaten by animals in Somalia
A. negrii
browsed by goats and camels in Ethiopia
A. nigrescens
readily browsed by goats; flower buds, flowers and seed eaten by baboons
A. nilotica sensu lato
shoots, foliage and pods eaten by wildlife and livestock, especially camels, sheep and goats. A preferred fodder species in Tanzania
subsp. adstringens
foliage and pods eaten by goats.
subsp. indica
foliage lopped and fed to livestock; pods best fed dry, also used to supplement poultry rations
subsp. kraussiana
browsed by cattle, sheep and goats in Ethiopia,
subsp. subulata
foliage eaten by cattle, sheep, goats and other ruminants; pods eaten by livestock, rhino, baboons, antelope, especially nyala
A. oerfota
foliage and pods an important browse for ruminants in northern enya and eagerly sought after by camels and goats in Ethiopia; he obnoxious odour of the crushed leaves deters browsing in ordofan Province, Sudan; flowers and pods eaten by baboons
A. oliveri
browsed by cattle, sheep, goats and camels
A. polyacantha
subsp. campylacantha
browsed by livestock. A preferred fodder species in Tanzania
A. reficiens
subsp. misera
browsed by camels and goats in Somalia
A. robusta
foliage and pods sometimes eaten by livestock; young shoots, flowers and gum eatenby baboons; roots, leaves and gum eaten by monkeys; bark eaten by rhino
A. senegal
foliage, pods and gum exudate eaten by camels and goats (livestock excluded from gum gardens in the Sudan as browsing reduces yield of gum), also browsed by giraffe and impala; young foliage, flower buds and flowers eaten by baboons
A. seyal
var. fistula
leaves and flowers browsed by livestock
var. seyal
in dry season more or less leafless branches lopped and fed to livestock, who also eat the bark; bark also eaten by elephant and other ruminants. Shoots browsed by goats, elephant, giraffe and other ruminants. The clay soils on which it often ocurs may deter browsing by domestic livestock during the rainy season. In N. Africa browsed by camels and goats and occasionally by sheep and cattle
A. sieberiana
browsing limited due to the long thorns; fallen pods eaten by livestock (especially sheep), elephant, rhinosorus and other ruminants; believed to taint milk. Foliage contains HCN, especially when wilted. A preferred fodder species in Tanzania; gum, flowers and seed eaten by baboons
A. stuhlmannii
browsed by giraffe
A. tortilis sensu lato
young trees browsed by sheep and goats; pods eagerly eaten by all livestock and game. A preferred fodder species in Tanzania
subsp. heteracantha
browsed by cattle, antelope, giraffe; pods eagerly eaten by cattle, antelope, giraffe, monkeys and baboons in S. Africa.
Subsp. raddiana
browsed by camels, sheep and goats and occasionally by cattle in N. Africa; pods eaten by goats and gazelle in the Negev and Siani Deserts
subsp. spirocarpa
foliage and pods eaten by cattle, sheep and goats; browsed by giraffe and baboons; pods eaten by ruminants and baboons; bark by elephants.
Subsp. tortilis
foliage and pods eaten by cattle, sheep and goats; pods eaten by gazelle in the Negev and Siani Deserts
A. xanthophloea
young branches, young leaves and roots eaten by elephant, who also eat the bark; foliage and pods eaten by giraffe; young leaves, flowers and young pods eaten by velvet monkey; gum, bark and pods eaten by baboons. A preferred fodder species in Tanzania
F. albida
lopped branches browsed by domestic livestock; pods relished by camels, cattle, game and baboons. A preferred fodder species in Tanzania
INDIA
A. jaquemontii
browsed by livestock
A. nilotica
subsp. indica
browsed by goats and camels
Continue
<section>h</section>
Table 2.2.1.1 Dry season feed values of grazing (standing hay) and browse (Le Houérou, 1980c).
Net energy
Digestable protein
P
Ca
Carotene
Kcal/kg DM
g/k DM
p/kg DM
g/kg DM
mg/kg
Dry grass
c.1
c.1
c.1
Browse
Maintenance needs
Table 2.2.1.2 Acacia species used as a source of bee food (Crane et al., 1984; Maydell, 1986; Riley and Brokensha, 1988; Hines and Eckman, 1993)
Species
Bee food
A. caffra
an important honey source in southern Africa
A. erythrocalyx
flowers a good bee forage
A. gourmaensis
flowers a good bee forage
A. hockii
flowers a good bee forage
A. mellifera sensu lato
an important honey source; honey water coloured, granulates slowly (over a year)
A. modesta
flowers a good bee forage
A. senegal
flowers a good bee forage; honey amber coloured, very mild aroma, granulates rapidly, within 2 weeks
A. seyal sensu lato
regarded by the Mbeere as a major bee forage; barrel hives hung in the tree and afforded protection by the very thorny branches from predation by the nratel or honey badger
var. seyal
an important honey source; honey-white, very mild aroma
A. sieberiana
flowers a good bee forage; hives often placed in the trees
A. thomasii
regarded by the Mbeere as a major bee forage; barrel hives hives hung in the tree and afforded protection by the very thorny branches from predation by the nratel or honey badger
A. tortilis sensu lato
an important honey source
subsp. spirocarpa
an important honey source
F. albida
flowers a good bee forage
Table 2.2.2 Gum producing species of Acacia (Broun and Massey, 1929; UNESCO, 1960; Sahni, 1968; Palmer and Pitman, 1972; Anderson, 1978; Maydell, 1986; Riley and Brokensha, 1988; Anderson and Wang Weiping, 1990; Bhandari, 1990; Peters et al., 1992; Anderson, 1993; Hines and Eckman, 1993)
Species
Gum characteristics and uses
AFRICA
A. abyssinica
gum marketed in Somalia
A. asak
gum with negative optical rotation; edible; gum marketed in Somalia
A. burkei
gum eaten by man and monkeys
A. cheilanthifolia
gum with negative optical rotation, methoxyl content high, viscisity extremely low
A. drepanolobium
gum with positive optical rotation; gum used as an adhesive
A. dudgeoni
does not produce a commercial gum
A. ehrenbergiana
gum translucent, reddish with positive optical rotation; marketed as African gum arable; used as an emollient in local medicine
A. erioloba
gum edible
A. erubescens
gum yellow, very sweet, eaten by children
A. fleckii
gum edible
A. gerrardii
a source of gum in Tanzania
A. gummifera
gum dark brown, forming little fissured tears; known as Magadore gum; used in local medicine
A. haematoxylon
gum edible
A. hockii
gum translucent, reddish; marketed as African gum arable; used by the Mbeere as an adhesive
A. horrida
gum very brittle with low adhesive mucilage; marketed as Cape gum
A. karroo
gum with positive optical rotation; formerly exported as gomme de Cap, used in southern Africa in confectionery and as an adhesive; eaten by children and baboons
A. laeta
gum with negative optical rotation; known commercially as kittir azarack; in Chad reputed inferior in quality and quantity to gum arabic but possibly this is due more to provenances than the species. Gum edible
A. lahai
a source of gum in Tanzania
A. leucospira
gum with positive optical rotation with comparatively high methoxyl, nitrogen and uronic acid and negligible rhamnose content
A. luederitzii
gum edible
A. macrostachya
gum edible
A. mellifera sensu lato
gum with negative optical rotation, edible
subsp. detiens
gum edible; sometimes mixed with clay for flooring
A. nebrownii
gum edible
A. nilotica sensu lato
gum with positive optical rotation; gum used by the Mbeere as an adhesive; a source of gum in Tanzania
subsp. adstringens
source of gum
subsp. indica
darker samples of gum contain tanin; used medicinally, for calico printing, in paints and as a substitute for gum arable. Maximum yield of trees 0.9 kg.
Subsp. nilotica
source of gum
subsp. subulata
gum edible, used in southern Africa for confectionery
A. oerfota
gum with positive optical rotation
A. paolii
gum with positive optical rotation
A. polyacantha
gum with negative optical rotation
subsp. campylacantha
gum edible, used as an adhesive and treatment of new textile fabrics; a source of gum in Tanzania
A. reficiens sensu lato
gum edible
subsp. misera
gum edible
A. robusta
subsp. robusta
gum eaten by man and baboons
subsp. usambarensis
gum eaten by man and baboons
A. senegal
gum translucent, reddish with negative optical rotation;
var. kerensis
gum
var. leiorhachis
gum
var. rostrata
gum
var. senegal
gum arabic of commerce; used as a food additive, pharmaceutically and in industry
A. seyal
var. seyal
gum with ropy mucilage, greenish tinge and positive optical rotation; known commercially as gum tahl. Used in the Sahel to form a syrup with the pulped fruit of Balanites aegyptiaca and in local medicine; gum used by the Mbeere as an adhesive
A. sieberana sensu lato
gum with positive optical rotation; gum used in the Sahel in local medicine and manufacture of ink; eaten by baboons
A. tortilis sensu lato
gum with positive optical rotation; a source of gum in Tanzania
subsp. heteracantha
gum edible
subsp. spirocarpa
gum edible
A. xanthophloea
gum with positive optical rotation
F. albida
a source of gum in Tanzania; gum eaten by baboons
INDIA
A. leucophloea
gum used in local medicine
A. modesta
gum used in local medicine
A. nilotica
subsp. indica
gum used in local medicine
A. senegal
gum marketed, often mixed with other gums
Table 2.2.3 Tannins from Acacia species (Broun and Massey, 1929; Howes, 1953; Sahni, 1968; Palmer and Pitman, 1972; Maydell, 1986; Bhandari, 1990; Fagg 1992; Hines and Eckman, 1993)
Species
Tannins
AFRICA
A. bussei
bark contains 17-21% tannin
A. etbaica
bark used for tanning in the Sudan
A. karroo
bark contains 13-19% tannin; gives reddish colour to leather
A. nilotica sensu lato
bark contains >20%; green pods contain c. 30% tannin but not more than 15% when mature, the seeds must be removed from the pods for high quality leather. An important source of tannin in Tanzania
subsp. adstringens
bark and pods used for tanning
subsp. indica
bark used for tanning, contains 12-20%; deseeded pods 18-27% tannin
subsp. nilotica
pods in the Sudan contain 25-33.8% tannin; deseeded pods up to 50% tannin
subsp. subulata
pods used for tanning
subsp. tomentosa
deseeded pods up to 50% tannin
A. oerfota
bark used for tanning in the Sudan
A. polyacantha
bark and pods contain tannin; heartwood chips used in the Sahel
subsp. campylacantha
for tanning. An important source of tannin in Tanzania
A. seyal sensu lato
bark and pods contain c. 20% tannin
var. fistula
bark used for tanning in the Sudan
var. seyal
bark contains 18-20% tannin; used for tanning in the Sudan
A. tortilis sensu lato
an important source of tannin in Tanzania
F. albida
bark contains 20-28% tannin; an important source of tannin in Tanzania
INDIA
A. jaquemontii
bark used for tanning, giving brown or black colour to leather; with tannin to tannin ration of 1:7
A. leucophloea
bark used for tanning, good substitute for wattle bark from Senna auriculata, with a tannin to non-tannin ration of 17:7
A. nilotica
subsp. indica
bark and pods used for tanning
Continue
<section>i</section>
Table 2.2.4 Fibres from Acacia species and their uses (Broun and Massey, 1929; Sahni, 1968; Palmer and Pitman, 1972; Maydell, 1986, Riley and Brokensha, 1988; Bird and Shepherd, 1989; Bhandari, 1990; Hines and Eckman, 1993).
Species
Uses
AFRICA
A. ataxacantha
bark fibre used in the Sahel to make a strong rope
A. brevispica
Mbeere use the bark fibres from young branches twisted to make a strong rope
A. bussei
bark fibre used in Somalia for making rope
A. dudgeoni
a resistant best fibre obtained from the long lateral roots
A. ehrenbergiana
bark fibre used in the Sahel to make ropes
A. galpinii
inner bark fibres used to make winnowing trays
A. gerrardii
a preferred species for fibre in Tanzania
A. gourmaensis
fibres from roots and inner bark used in the Sahel for various forms of wickerwork
A. karroo
bark fibre for cordage
A. laeta
Mbeere use the bark fibre for building ties and torches
A. mellifera sensu lato
root fibre formerly used in the Sudan for sacks to hold gum; best fibres used for wickerwork
A. nilotica sensu lato
bark fibre used in Somalia for making rope; preferred species for fibre in Tanzania
A. oerfota
roots and best fibre used for making rope
A. reficiens
subsp. misera
Mbeere use the bark fibres for basketry
A. senegal sensu lato
root bark fibres woven into ropes in the Sahel, those of the lateral roots making the strongest ropes suitable for well ropes and fishing nets
A. seyal
var. fistula
best yields fibre
var. seyal
best yields fibre
A. sieberiana sensu lato
bark fibre used in the Sahel for cordage
A. tortilis sensu lato
inner bark fibres used in the Sahel and Somalia for cordage; a preferred species for fibre in Tanzania
subsp. spirocarpa
best yields a strong fibre, used by the Mbeere for hut ties
INDIA
A. leucophloea
bark fibre used for fishing nets and coarse fibre
Table 2.2.5 The use of Acacia species in local medicine (Broun and Massey 1929^1; UNESCO, 1960^2; Palmer and Pitman, 1972^3; Sita, 1977^4; Boulos, 1983^5; Wickens, 1983^6; Agarwal, 1984^15, Thoyer, 1986^7; Maydell, 1986^8; Riley and Brokensha, 1986^9; Guinko, 1991^10; Audru et al., 1992^11; Hines and Eckman, 1993^12, Ghazanfar and Al-Sabahi, 1993^13; Nahal, 1993^14)
Species
Parts used
Action
Complaint
TROPICAL AFRICA
A. abyssinica
unspecified
an important medicinal plant in Tanzania^13
A. amythethophylla
roots
laxative^8
diarrhoea^8
wood extracts
wounds^8, skin infections^8
A. ataxantha
root bark
astringent
toothache^9
unspecified
syphiis^8, boils^8, helminthiasis^8, wounds^8, toothache^8, headache^8, respiratory diseases^8
A. caffra
roots
blood disorders^3
A. drepanolobium
unspecified
an important medicinal plant in Tanzania^12
A. dungeoni
bark
astringent
diarrhoea^10, dysentery^10
A. ehrenbergiana
gum
emollient^8
bark
flatulence^10
A. erioloba
roots
wound dressing^6
bark
headache^3
gum
emollient^6
pod
discharging ears^3
A. erythrocalyx
root
aphrodisiac^10
leaves
emetic^8,
orchitis^8, herpes^8, blotch^8
febrifuge^8
unspecified
rheumatism^8, dermatitis^8, chest complaints^8, stomach disorders^8; snakebites^8
A. gerrardii
bark
emetic^6
coughs^9, asthma^9
unspecified
an important medicinal plant in Tanzania^12
A. gourmaensis
bark
jaundice^10
unspecified
coughs^8, malaria^8, kidneys^8
A. karroo
roots
emetic^6,
lumbago^6, gonorrhoea^6, colic^6
aphrodisiac^6
bark
leaves
gargle^3, splints^3, cattle - tulp (?Moraea) poisoning^3, insanity^6, bathing babies^6
A. laeta
bark
coughs^9, asthma^9
A. macrostachya
roots
aphrodisiac^9
gastrointestinal disorders^8,s
leafy twigs
flatulence^8 anthelmintic^8, toothache^8, snakebite^8
A. mellifera
subsp. detiens
roots
stomach pains^3
bark
stomach problems^12, pneumonia^12, malaria^12, sterility^12, syphilis^12
subsp. mellifera
unspecified
gastro-urinary^8
A. nilotica sensu. Lato
roots
chest and stomach problems^12, toothache^12, gonorrhoea^12
root bark
coughs^9
bark
dysentery^1,^12, diarrhoea^6,^12, opthalmia^6, haemorrhage^6, colds^6,^12, coughs^9, aching bones^9
phloem sap
sore throats^12
leaves
chest pains^12, pneumania^12, colds ^12, diarrhoea^12, dysentery^12
gum
emollient
diarrhoea^6, opthalmia^6, haemorrhage^6, colds^6
unspecified
wounds^9; an important medicinal plant in Tanzania^12
subsp. adstringens
roots
diuretic^8
toothache^8, dysentery^8, syphilis^8
bark
haemostatic^8,^10
dysentery^8, syphilis^8
leaves
astringent^8
diarrhoea^10,^12
pods
coughs^10
seeds
dysentery^8, syphilis^8, haemorrhoids^10, gingivitis^10
unspecified
opthalmia^8, oral and throat infections^8
subsp. indica
gum
demulcent^2,
diarrhoea^2, dysentery^2, diabetes
astringent^2,
mellitus^2
emollient^2
bark
intoxicant^8
subsp. kraussiana
roots
aphrodisiac^6
bark
intoxicant^6,
aphrodisiac^6
coughs
leaves
pneumonia^6
subsp. leiocarpa
not specified
uses probably similar to other subspecies
subsp. nilotica
bark
leaves
haemostatic^10
diarrhoea^10
pods
coughs^10
seeds
haemorrhoids^10, gingivitis^10
subsp. subulata
roots
coughs^3
subsp. tomentosa
bark
astringent^7,
teeth^7, angina^7, mouth wash^7,
haemostatic^10
burns^7, wounds^7, eyes^7
gum
emollient
angina^7, mouth wash^7, wounds^7, ulcers^7
gum + bark
burns^7, teeth^7, eyes^7 diarrhoea^7, diabetes^11,
bark + leaves
ulcers^11
leaves
astringent^10
eyes^7, diarrhoe^a10
pods
diarrhoea^7, coughs^10
seeds
haemorrhoids^10, gingivitis^10
A. polyacantha
subsp. polyacantha
root
snakebite^8,venereal diseases^8,
bark
tonic^8
unspecified
dysentery^8, gastro-intestinal disorders^8 an important medicinal plant in Tanzania^12
A. senegal sensu lato
bark
astringent
diarrhoea^8, colds^8, opthalmia^8, haemorrhage^8
leaves
astringent
colds^8,opthalmia^8, diarrhoea^8, haemorrhage^8
gum
emollient^2,
inflammation^7, angin^a7,
demulcent^2,
opthalmia,^7,8, whitlow^7, cold^s8,
bechnic^2,
diarrhoea^8, otitis^7, aphrodisiac,
diuretic^7,
haemorrhage^8
emulcifying
agent^2
gum + bark
angina^7, inflammation^7
A. seyal sensu lato
root bark
astringent
burns^7
bark
astringent
blepharitis^7, opthalmia^7,8, diarrhoea^8, haemorrhage^8, colds^8, gastro-intestinal disorders^8 jaundice^8, biliary diseases^8,
leaves
astringent
syphilis^8, headaches^8, burns^8 opthalmia^8, diarrhoea^8, haemorrhage^8, colds^8, gastro-intestinal disorders^7,
gum
emollient
jaundice^7, biliary diseases^7, syphilis^7, headaches^7, burns^7 inflammation^7, angina^7, opthalmia^8, diarrhoea^8, haemorrhage^8, colds^8,gastro-intestinal disorders^8, jaundice^8, biliary diseases^8, syphilis^8, headaches^8, burns^8
A. sieberana sensu lato
root
vermifuge^8
worms^7, tapewor^m7, liver^7, stomach complaints^7, acne^8, urethral troubles^8, oedema^8,
root bark
astringent^6,
dropsy
vermifuge^1
bark
astringent^8,
colds^8, opthalmia^8, diarrhoea^8,
vermifuge^3
haemorrhage^8, schistosomiasis^8, orchitis^8, gonorrhoca^8, syphilis^8, kidney complaints^8, rheumatism^8, circulatory system^8
leaves
astringent^8,
jaundice^4, colic^4, colds^7,8,
vermifuge^3
opthalmia^8, haemorrhage^8, schistosomiasis^8, diarrhoea^8, orchitis^8, gonorrhoea^8, syphilis^8, kidney complaints^8, rheumatism^8, circulatory system^8
gum
emolient,
inflammation^7, angina^7, colic^7,
vermifuge^8
colds^8, opthalmia^8, diarrhoea^8, haemorrhage^8, schistosomiasis^8, orchitis^8, gonorrhoea^8, syphilis^8, kidney complaints^8, rheumatism^8,
pods
emollient^9
circulatory system^8
unspecified
bladder complaints^6 an important medicinal plant in Tanzania^11
A. tortilis sensu lato
gum
emollient^11
aching bones^9, coughs^9, asthma^9
bark
an important medicinal plant in Tanzania^11
unspecified
subsp. raddiana
bark
vermifuge^6
dermatitis and skin infections^8
leaves
vermifuge^6
dermatitis and skin infections^8
leaves + leaves of Vigna unguiculata^8
oedema^8, allergic dermatitis^8
F. albida
root
febrifuge
coughs^12, fevers^12, diarrhoea^12
gum
emollient
inflammation^7, haemorrhage^8, diarrhoea^8, opthalmia^8
gum + bark
ears^7, diarrhoea^12
bark
astringent,
bronchitis^7, vomitin^g7, liver^7,
febrifuge^7
wounds^7, ulcers^7, fever^7,^12, malaria^7, psyychological disorders^8, vomiting^8, diarrhoea^8,^12, kidney diseases^8, post-partum complications^8, haemorrhage^8, opthalmia^8, pneumonia^8, coughs^8,^12 colds^10,^12 gripe^10 clean
leaves
astringent
teeth (believed to contain flourine) ^12
pods
astringent
opthalmia^8, diarrhoea^8,^12, haemorrhage^8,^12, colds^12 diarrhoea^12
NORTH AFRICA AND NEAR EAST
A. abyssinica
unspecified
demulcent^14,
unspecified
emulsifier^14
A. asak
unspecified
emollient^14,
unspecified
emulsifier^14
A. ehrenberaiana
wood
paralysis^13
unspecified
antiflammatory^14
unspecified
diuretic^14
A. gummifera
gum
emollient
unspecified
A. iraqensis
gum
emollient
sore gums^13, loose teeth^13, burns^13,
pods
astringent
fever^13
unspecified
emetic^14
unspecified
A. hockii
unspecified
emollient^14
unspecified
A. modesta
gum
emollient
unspecified^14
A. nilotica sensu lato
gum
antidiarrhoea^5
diarrhoea^5,13, eye^13
bark
antiamoebic^5,
dysentery^5
antispasmodic^5,
hypotensive^5
leaves
diarhoea^13, cataract^13
fruit
antidiarrhoea^14,
fever^5 sore gums^5, loose teeth^5,
expectoratn^14,
diabetes^5
unspecified
stimulant^14,
antidiabetic^14
antihaemorrhagic^14
A. senegal
unspecified
haemostatic^14,
antidiarrhea^14,
emollient^14,
antitussive^14
A. seyal
wood
rhematic pains^5
bark + leaves
gastric ulcers^5
gum
emollient
rheumatism^5, inflammation of respiratory system^5
unspecified
stimulant^14,
unspecified
demulcent^14
A. tortilis
subsp. raddiana
gum
emollient
opthalmia^5,^14, jaundice^5,^14 pulmonary diseases^5,^14
bark
astringent,
wounds^5
seeds
disinfectant^5
antidiarrhoeic^5,^14
F. albida
bark
leprosy^5
Continue
<section>j</section>
Table 2.2.6.1 Acacia species eaten for food (Dalziel, 1939; Pardy, 1953; Lawrie, 1954; Fanshawe, 1962; Sahni, 1968; Uphof, 1968; Palmer and Pitman, 1972; Tanaka, 1976; Baumer, 1983; Amold et al., 1985; FAO, 1986; Maydell, 1986; Booth and Wickens, 1988; Riley and Brokensha, 1988; Bhandari, 19990; Peters et al., 1992; Hines and Eckman, 1993; Nahal, 1993
Species
Parts consumed
AFRICA
A. amythethophylla
leaves eaten in Malawi
A. asak
gum eaten
A. brevispica
fresh gum eaten by the Mbeere children
A. burkei
gum eaten
A. bussei
young thorns eaten by the Somali
A. drepanolobium
green pods eaten in East Africa
A. edgeworthii
seeds large, eaten when nearly ripe, either raw or cooked in Somalia
A. ehrenbergiana
seeds and pods edible
A. erioloba
gum astringent, edible; seeds eaten, used by the Korenas as a coffee substitute
A. erubescens
gum very sweet, eaten by children
A. fleckii
gum edible
A. gerrardii
bark eaten in soup in East Africa
A. haematoxylon
gum and fruit eaten
A. hamulosa
pods and leaves edible
A. hebeclada sensu lato
gum edible
subsp. hebeclada
gum edible
A. hockii
fresh gum eaten by the Mbeere children; bark very sweet, chewed by children
A. karroo
seeds and pods edible; gum eaten by children, also sometimes used in confectionery; fibrous inner bark beneath the coarse outer bark chewed to alleviate thirst
A. kirkii
subsp. kirkii
bark used to prepare a tea-like beverage
A. laeta
gum edible, pleasant flavour
A. luedieritzii
gum and raw seed eaten in southern Africa
A. macrostachya
gum edible. In some areas of the Sahel the seeds are boiled and eaten
A. mellifera sensu lato
gum eaten, pods eaten as a famine food in the Turkana
subsp. detiens
gum and leaves eaten
A. mogii
gum edible
A. nebrownii
gum eaten
A. nigrescens
leaves eaten as a spinach
A. nilotica sensu lato
tender young pods eaten as a vegetable; roasted seed serve as a spice. Seeds eaten by the Mbeere as a famine food; seeds roasted and used as a favourer; seeds femmented to an alcoholic beverage. Boiled bark provides a coffee-like beverage in Tanzania
subsp. nilotica
gum eaten in southern Africa
subsp. subulata
gum edible, sometimes used in confectionery
A. polyacantha
subsp. campylacantha
wood ashes used as a salt substitute; gum eaten
A. reficiens sensu lato
gum edible
subsp. misera
gum eaten
A. rehmanniana
branches edible when soft
A. robusta
subsp. robusta
gum eaten
subsp. usambarensis
gum eaten
A. senegal
seeds dried and preserved for human consumption; gum edible
A. seyal
var. seyal
gum edible when fresh and fresh gum eaten by the Mbeere children; bark used to prepare a tea-like beverage
A. tortilis sensu lato
green and dry pods and gum edible
subsp. heteracantha
gum, leaves and pods (without the seeds) eaten; fibres beneath the coarse outer bark chewed to alleviate thirst
subsp. spirocarpa
gum, leaves and pods (without the seeds) eaten; fibres beneath the coarse outer bark chewed to alleviate thirst
F. albida
seeds widley used as a famine food - seeds boilded in Zimbabwe, boiled and reboiled and skins removed before eating elsewhere in southern Africa; pods high in starch and sometimes eaten; pods used as a condiment in Tanzania.
INDIA
A. leucophloea
ground bark and seeds mixed with flour and eaten; young pods also eaten
A. senegal
seeds eaten as a vegetable
Table 2.2.6.2 Macronutrient composition (g/100g) and inorganic constituents (mg/100g) of Acacia species eaten for food (Arnold et al., 1985; Brand and Maggiore, 1992)
A. erioloba
A. karroo
A. tortilis
F. albida
A. holosericea
seed
pod
gum
green pod
seed
seed
Moisture
Ash
Protein
Fat
Fibre
Carbohydrate
Energy kJ/100 g
Ca
Mg
Fe
Na
K
Cu
Zn
P
Thiamin
Riboflavin
Nicotinic acid
Vitamin C
^1Acacia holosericea sens. lat.
Continue
<section>k</section>
Table 2.2.7 Acacia species used in handicrafts (Broun and Massey, 1929; Palmer and Pitman, 1972; Maydell, 1986; Hines and Eckman, 1993)
Species
Uses
A. abyssinica
wood used for carving in Tanzania
A. ataxacantha
stems split to paper-thin, red, white with dark streaks or white strips for weaving and baskety
A. caffra
Xhosa use the root wood for making long-stemmed tobacco pipes and the long, whippy branches for basketry
A. erioloba
wood used by the Bechuana making domestic utensils, spoons and knife handles. When reeds are unavailable the Namas make flutes from the roots; Botswana bushmen peel straight roots for making quivers
A. erythrocalyx
long branches twisted and used for wickerwork
A. gourmaensis
root and inner bark fibres used in the Sahel for various forms of wickerwork
A. karroo
Zulus use the thorns for needles, pins and pegs
A. lahai
bark source of a red dye
A. mellifera sensu lato
best fibres used in the Sahel for wickerwork
A. nilotica sensu lato
bark source of a red or black dye; pods yield a black, red or yellow dye
subsp. adstringens
pods source of a dye
subsp. subulata
pods used for making ink
A. polyacantha
subsp. campylacantha
heartwood source of a dye
A. seyal
var. seyal
source of a dye, paint and ink
A. tortilis sensu lato
bark and roots source of a yellow and brown dye
subsp. spirocarpa
bark fibres woven by the Mbeere women into baskets
F. albida
bark used in Namibia for huts
Table 2.2.8 Domestic use of Acacia species (Broun and Massey, 1929; Palmer and Pitman, 1972; Maydell, 1986; Riley and Brokensha, 1988; Bird and Shepherd, 1988; Hines and Eckman, 1993).
Species
Utilization
AFRICA
A. brevispica
peeled stems used by the Mbeere for toothpicks
A. bussei
roots formerly used in Somalia for making sorghum storage sacks and string doors
A. erythrocalyx
peeled sticks used in the Sahel for toothbrushes/chewing sticks; prickles used for fish hooks and leaves for a fish poison; long branches twisted into ropes and used for wickerwork
A. karroo
Zulus use the thorns for needles, pins and pegs
A. laeta
Mbeere honey hunters and bee keepers use the twisted, resinous fibres as torches
A. nilotica sensu lato
pods yield black, red or yellow dyes; ink is made from the pods, Mbeere use the tree sap and shreds of bark to deter bed bugs; sap produces a black, anti-rust coating on iron; sharp spines used to remove jiggers from feet and in circumcision of boys; soft flexible spines used to plug insect holes in gourds
A. polyacantha
subsp. campylacantha
heartwood chips used for dyeing
A reficiens
var. misera
Mbeere use the bark fibres for basketry
A. seyal
var. seyal
Sudanese women fumigate themselves with the wood smoke; smoke reputed to be insect-repellent.
A. tortilis sensu lato
Mbeere honey hunters and bee keepers use the twisted, resinous fibres as torches; spines used for needles in Tanzania
subsp. spirocarpa
spines used by the Mbeere in circumcision ceremonies
A. xanthophloea
small side shoots for toothsticks
F. albida
unspecified use for soap in Tanzania
INDIA
A. leucophloea
bark used to clarify and flavour spirits made from sugar and palm sap
A. modesta
twigs used for cleaning teeth
Table 2.3.1 The use of Acacia species for environmental protection (Palmer and Pitman, 1972; Maydell, 1986; Bhandari, 1990; Hines and Eckman, 1993)
Species
Use
AFRICA
A. edgeworthii
the low, almost contiguous crowns offer soil protection over large areas of Somalia
A. karroo
cut branches used for gully control; tree regarded as an indicator of surface or underground water
A. mellifera
a dense, thicket-forming species
A. nilotica sensu lato
good germination and rapid growth makes this a useful species for afforestation and enrichment planting
A. polyacantha
subsp. campylacantha
grown for land reclamation in Tanzania
A. tanganyikensis
grown for soil and water conservation in Tanzania
INDIA
A. jaquemontii
good sand stabilizing species
Table 2.3.2 The use of Acacia species for soil fertility (Allen and Allen, 1981; Hines and Eckman, 1993)
Species
Use
A. abyssinica
subsp. calophylla
nodulation observed
A. amythethophylla
nodulation observed
A. arenaria
nodulation observed
A. ataxacantha
nodulation observed
A. borleae
nodulation observed
A. burkei
nodulation observed
A. caffra
nodulation observed
A. chariessa
nodulation observed
A. davyi
nodulation observed
A. ehrenbergiana
nodulation observed
A. erubescens
nodulation observed
A. exuvialis
nodulation observed
A. fleckii
nodulation observed
A. galpini
nodulation observed
A. gerrardii
nodulation observed
A. goetzii
nodulation observed
A. haematoxylon
nodulation observed
A. hebeclada
subsp. hebeclada
nodulation observed
A. hereroensis
nodulation observed
A. karroo
nodulation observed
A. kirkii
subsp. kirkii
nodulation observed
A. kraussiana
nodulation observed
A. lahai
nitrogen-fixing species in Tanzania
A. leucophaea
nodulation observed
A. luederitzii
nodulation observed
A. mellifera
subsp. detiens
nitrogen-fixing species in Tanzania
subsp. mellifera
nodulation observed
A. nebrownii
nodulation observed
A. nigrescens
nodulation observed
A. nilotica
subsp. kraussiana
nodulation observed
A. oerfota
nodulation observed
A. permixta
nodulation observed
A. polyacantha
subsp. campylacantha
nitrogen-fixing and soil reclamation species in Tanzania
A. reficiens
subsp. reficiens
nodulation observed
A. rehmanniana
nodulation observed
A. robusta
subsp. clavigera
nodulation observed
subsp. robusta
nodulation observed
A. senegal
var. leiorhachis
nodulation observed
var. rostrata
nodulation observed
var. senegal
nodulation observed
A. seyal
nodulation observed
A. sieberiana
nodulation observed
A. stuhlmannii
nodulation observed
A. swazica
nodulation observed
A. tanganyikensis
grown for soil and water conservation in Tanzania
A. tenuispina
nodulation observed
A. tortilis
subsp. heteracantha
nodulation observed
subsp. spirocarpa
nodulation observed
A. welwitschii
nodulation observed
A. xanthophloea
nitrogen-fixing species in Tanzania
F. albida
nitrogen-fixing species in Tanzania
Continue
<section>l</section>
Table 2.3.3 The use of Acacia species for hedges, shade and shelter (Macmillan, 1954; Sahni, 1968; Palmer and Pitman, 1972; Hadidi and Boulos, 1979; Maydell, 1986; Riley and Brolensha, 1988; Hines and Eckman, 1993)
Species
Uses
A. ataxacantha
live hedges and brush fences (zaribas/bomas)
A. drepanolobium
thorny branches used by the Mbeere for livestock pens (zaribas/bomas)
A. erioloba
grown for shade and shelter
A. hockii
thorny branches used by the Mbeere for livestock pens (zaribas/bomas)
A. karroo
thorny branches used by the Mbeere for livestock pens (zaribas/bomas); grown for shade and shelter
A. laeta
brush fences (zaribas/bomas)
A. macrostachya
live hedges and brush fences (zaribas/bomas)
A. mellifera sensu lato
thorny branches used by the Mbeere for livestock pens (zaribas/bomas). Widely grown for stockproof live hedges
A. modesta
much grown for hedges in India
A. nilotica sensu lato
thorny branches used by the Mbeere for livestock pens (zaribas/bomas)
subsp. adstringens
occasionally planted as a shade tree
subsp. nilotica
grown as a street tree in Cairo
subsp. tomentosa
occasionally planted as a shade tree in the Sahel
A. ruficiens
thorny branches used by the Mbeere for livestock pens
subsp. misera
(zaribas/bomas)
A. seyal
subsp. seyal
thorny branches used by the Mbeere for livestock pens (zaribas/bomas). Occasionally planted as a shade tree in the Sahel
A. sieberiana sensu lato
live hedges, brush fences (zaribas/bomas), shade and windbreaks
A. tanganyikensis
grown as a shade tree in Tanzania
A. tortilis sensu lato
subs spirocarpa
live hedges, brush fences (zaribas/bomas) and shade tree thorny branches used by the Mbeere for livestock pens (zaribas/bomas)
A. xanthophloea
grown as live hedges in Tanzania
F. albida
thorny branches used for livestock pens (zaribas/bomas). Grown for live hedges, windbreaks and as a shade tree
Table 2.3.4 The use of Acacia species for wildlife resources (Palmer and Pitman, 1972; Riley and Brokensha, 1988)
Species
Uses
A. erioloba
in the Kalahari the tree rat lives almost entirely on the gum, leaves and seeds. Favoured for the communal nests of the sociable weaver
A. hebeclada
possibly the host of the desert truffle
A. hockii
tree a valuable source of bee food
A. karroo
tree attractive to certain insects and therefore their predator birds, which in turn attract lizards, snakes and mammals
A. mellifera sensu lato
Mbeere Pollard large trees to reduce perching and nesting roots for flocks of the seed-eating crop pests, weaver birds and Sudan dioche. A valuable source of bee food
A. nilotica sensu lato
the often gregarious nature of the trees and the attractiveness of the pods to wildlife aids the Mbeere hunters to locate antelope A valuable source of bee food
A. polyacantha
subsp. campylacantha
host of the large, green, spiny caterpillar or the moth Gynanisa maia and bristly pupa of the moth Gonometa postia, both of which are regarded by the Afriicans of southern Africa as a great delicacy
A. senegal
tree a valuable source of bee food
A. seyal
var. seyal
tree a valuable source of bee food
A. sieberana sensu lato
a valuable source of bee food
A. thomasii
tree a valuable source of bee food; thorns offer protection to the Mbeere's barrel bee hives hanging in the trees against the ravages of the honey badger (rater)
A. tortilis sensu lato
tree a valuable source of bee food
subsp. spirocarpa
tree a valuable source of bee food; thorns offer protection to the Mbeere's barrel bee hives hanging in the trees against the ravages of the honey badger; Mbeere Pollard large trees to reduce perching and nesting roots for flocks of the seed-eating crop pests, weaver birds and Sudan dioche
F. albida
tree a valuable source of bee food
Table 2.3.5 The use of Acacia species for amenity and ornament (Palmer and Pitman, 1972; Hadidi and Boulos, 1979; Maydell, 1986)
Species
Use
A. caffra
may be grown as an ornamental
A. erioloba
rarely grown in southern Africa as a street tree
A. galpinii
may be grown as an ornamental
A. haematoxylon
may be grown on sandy soils as an ornamental
A. karroo
may be grown as an ornamental
A. montis-usti
graceful tree with potential as an ornamental
A. nilotica
subsp. adstringens
occasionally planted as an amenity and roadside tree in the Sahel
subsp. nilotica
grown as a street tree in Cairo
subsp. tomentosa
occasionally planted as an amenity and riverside tree in the Sahel
A. sieberiana sensu lato
occasionally planted as an amenity tree in the Sahel
A. tanganykensis
planted as a street tree in Tanzania
A. xanthophloea
grown as an ornamental
F. albida
occasionally planted as amenity and roadside tree in the Sahel
Table 3.1 The use of Acacia species in the Sahel (Broun and Massey, 1929; Guinko, 1991).
Species and distribution
Use
A. ataxacantha (Senegal to Cameroon and eastwards to the Sudan and south to Namibia, South Africa)
Foliage and pods eaten by antelope. The Gourmantchés of Burkina Faso use the macerated root bark as a gargle for toothache.
A. dudgeoni (Senegal, Ivory Coast, Ghana, Togo, Benin, Nigeria, Cameroon, Mali, Niger, Burkina Faso)
Wood used for handles of agricultural implements; dead wood is used for fuel. Leaves and dried pods greatly appreciated by antelope and horses. A bark decoction used by the Gourmantchés to treat diarrhoea and dysentery in children. Flowers a source of pollen for bees.
A. ehrenbergiana (Western Sahara, Algeria, Egypt, Mauritania, Mali, Niger, Chad, Sudan, Ethiopia, Djibouti; Middle East)
Wood utilized by the nomads for fuel, etc. Foliage and pods eagerly eaten by cattle, sheep and camels. The Tamachek use a bark decoction to treat flatulence. Flowers a source of pollen for bees.
A. etbaica
subsp. etbaica (Sudan, Ethiopia, Somalia; Saudi Arabia)
bark used in Sudan for tanning
A. goumaensis (Ivory Coast, Ghana, Togo, Benin, Nigeria, Niger)
Wood used for implement handles; dead wood used for fuel. Foliage and dry pods eagerly eaten by wild animals, especially elephants. Gourmantché use a bark decoction to treat jaundice. Flowers a source of pollen and nectar for bees.
A. hockii (Gambia to Nigeria, east to the Sudan and Ethiopia and south to Zimbabwe and Angola)
The leaves remaining after bush fires and the dry pods are eaten by antelope and especially elephants.
A. laeta (Egypt, Mali eastwards Somalia, Kenya, Tanzania; Middle East)
Wood used by the nomads for firewood, charcoal and tent poles. Gum exudate is edible, also harvested in Niger and marketed in Chad to Sudan. Ethiopia, as 'kittir azarack'; regarded as inferior to that from A. Senegal. Foliage and pods are browsed by livestock. May be planted for shelter belts
A. macrostachya (Senegal to Nigeria, Mali. Burkina Faso, Niger, Chad and Sudan)
The wood is little used for fuel. The raw or cooked seeds are sold in the market and eaten in the Mossi area of Burkina Faso. The dry pods are readily eaten by cattle. The Peuhl of Burkina Faso prescribe a decoction of the leafy branches against flatulence. The Mossi consider the macerated roots taken in water with honey as an aphrodisiac. The flowers are a valuable source of pollen and nectar for bees.
A. mellifera
subsp. melliferan (Egypt, Sudan south through East Africa to South Africa)
Pole timber for bed frames, fuelwood and charcoal. Root fibres for basketry. Grown for live hedges,
A. nilotica
subsp. adstringens (Algeria, Senegal, Gambia, Guinea Bissau, Liberia, Ghana, Togo, Nigeria, Mali, Niger, Chad, Sudan)
The hard, dense wood is used for construction work, fuel, charcoal and objets d'art. Young bark a source of timbre. The foliage and pods are eaten by camels, sheep and horses. The grilled seeds are pounded and eaten mixed with millet flour. The pods from this subspecies are preferred by shoemakers for tanning leather, also a source of dye. The gum exudate is used for making ink for the local schools. In Burkina Faso the leaves are used against diarrhoea; the grilled and crushed seed for the treatment of haemorrhoids and gingivitis; the powdered bark as a local Hemostatic. A decoction of the pods is regarded as an efficacious remedy for coughs, while wallowing the juice from chewed pods alleviates the rawness of a dry cough. The flowers are a source of pollen and nectar for bees.
Subsp. nilotica (Egypt, Senegal, Nigeria, Mali, Niger, Chad, Sudan, Ethiopia)
Wood used in Sudan for sleepers and water wheels. Uses in Burkina Faso similar to those for subsp. adstringens.
Subsp. tomentosa (Ghana, Nigeria, Mali, Chad, Sudan, Ethiopia, Djibouti)
Uses in Burkina Faso similar to those for subsp. adstringens.
A. erythrocalyx (Togo, Nigeria, Mali, Burkina Faso, Niger)
Browsed by cattle and horses. The long branches used to make baskets and beds. A root decoction is used by the Mossi as an aphrodisiac. The flowers a source of pollen for bees.
A. oerfota (Egypt, Sudan, Ethiopia, Somalia, Djibouti, East Africa; Arabia)
Bark used in Sudan for tanning; roots used for cordage
A. polyacantha
subsp. campylacantha (Senegal to Cameroon, east to Sudan and Ethiopia and south to Zimbabwe and South Africa)
Wood used for agricultural tool handles. The large branches used for charcoal. A decoction of the tannin-rich bark used by the Gourmantché for dysentery and haemorrhoids. Pods eaten by cattle game animals, especially buffalo and elephant.
A. senegal (Mauritania, Senegal, Ivory Coast, Gambia, Nigeria, Cameroon, Mali, Niger, Chad, Sudan, Ethiopia, Somalia to Namibia, South Africa; MiddleEast)
Foliage and pods appreciated by sheep and goats. The gum arable marketed commercially in Niger. The dead wood used for fuel. The inner bark of trunk or roots used by the Hausa to treat jaundice. The flowers a source of pollen and nectar for bees.
A. seyal
var. fistula
Uses as for var. seyal
(Sudan, Somalia, East Africa to Malawi and Zambia)
var. seyal (Egypt, Mauritania, Senegal, Ghana, Togo, Nigeria, Cameroon, Mali, Burkina Faso, Chad, Sudan south to Zambia)
Wood light, used for parking cases. light furniture, mortars and impliments; used by nomads for fuel, saddle frames and tent poles. The bark used for tanning, also furnishes a red dye used to dye clothes; best yields a fibre. Foliage, pods and some bark eaten by animals. Roots used for basketry. Bark used for stuffing saddles. Gum exudate friable, harvested but inferior to that from A. Senegal. Bark decoction used as a purgative by the Peuhl for both man and cattle; root decoction used in Sudan as vermifuge, women also use wood smoke as a fumigant. A good source of bee food.
A. sieberiana (Senegal to Nigeria, east to Sudan, Ethiopia south to Namibia and South Africa)
The wood is easy to work and used for tool handles. Dead wood used for cooking. Foliage browsed by sheep and horses, pods eaten by cattle, buffalo and elephants. Gum harvested for local use. The Mossi use a decoction of the root bark as a vermifuge and for coughs.
A. tortilis
subsp. raddiana (Western Sahara, Algeria, Libya, Egypt, Senegal, Nigeria, Mali, Niger, Chad, Sudan)
Wood used by the nomads for firewood, charcoal and tool handles and tent poles. Bark used for cordage. Folliage and pods eagerly eaten by cattle, horses, sheep and camels. Gum harvested in Niger. Leaf decoction regarded by the Touregs as antimalarial. The scented flowers a source of pollen and nectar for the bees.
Subsp. spirocarpa (Sudan southwards to South Africa; Middle East)
Strong fibre obtained from bast
subsp. tortilis (Sudan, Somalia; Middle East)
Wood used by Red Sea for boat ribs, pulleys and blocks
F. albida (Western Sahara, Algeria, Egypt, Mauritania, Senegal, Gambia, Guinea Bissau, Ghana, Togo, Nigeria, Cameroon, Mali, Niger, Burkina Faso, Chad, Sudan, Ethiopia south to Namibia, South Africa; Near East)
Timber used for bed frames, mortars, platters, saddles. Valued for its beneficial effects on crop yields. Foliage and pods excellent forage for animals. Pods marketed in the Kayal area, Burkina Faso. Powdered, macerated or decoctions of bark administered for colds, gripe, toothache and as a tonic; a bark decoction taken for children's coughs. The wood ash is used for making soap. A valuable source of pollen and nectar for bees. Grown for live hedges in the Nuba Mountains of the Sudan.
Continue
<section>m</section>
Table 3.2 The use of Acacia species in the Horn of Africa (Lawrie, 1954; Trump, 1986).
Species and distribution
Use
A. bussei (Ethiopia, Somalia, Kenya, Tanzania)
Stem for central pole (undub), roots for hoops (digo), bark for covering mats (harrar) and chewed inner bark for thread to stitch mats of nomadic Somali huts. Branches cut for axe and hoe handles. Heavy clubs usually made from thicker part of the root. Roots also used for the wide mesh baskets used to protect large water or milk vessels. Unspecified part but presumably the root used for the revesting of wells on account of its resistance to rot and termites, also for wattle and daub walls. A preferred species for fuelwood; almost the sole species used for charcoal and lime burning. Foliage and pods eaten by livestock; flowers, which appear before the leaves at the end of the rains, an important part of the camel's diet. The soft and succulent young thorns eaten by the Somali and their livestock. Bark and root bark used for making cordage. An infusion of the lightly beaten inner side of the outer bark used for preparing a tea-like beverage. Bark used for tanning skins used
for carrying water (see under A thebaica) for method of tanning).
A. edgeworthii (Ethiopia, Somalia, Kenya, Socotra; Middle East)
Nearly ripe seeds eaten either cooked or raw. Tree browsed by goats and camels
A. etbaica (Sudan, Ethiopia, Djibouti, Somalia, Uganda, Kenya, Tanzania)
Bark for covering mats (harrar) and chewed inner bark for thread to stitch mats of nomadic Somali huts. Branches for axe and hoe handles. Not liked for firewood because the bark does not readily fall off and consequently makes a smoky fire. Browsed by livestock. Bark used for making cordage. Bark also used for tanning skins used for carrying water. About 0.7 kg (1.5 lb) of outer bark plus a little inner bark pounded until soft and then placed in a bowl containing 1.4 litres (2.5 pints) of water. The liquid is then thoroughly rubbed into the skin, left soaking for an hour and then rubbed again for 15 minutes, and finally left to soak again.
A. mellifera
Stem for central pole (undab) of nomadic Somali huts. Browsed by livestock.
Subsp. mellifera (Egypt, Sudan, Ethiopia, Djibouti, Somalia, Kenya, Tanzania, Angola, Namibia; Middle East)
A. moggii (Somalia)
Natural gum exudate eaten by the Somali and animals
A. nilotica
subsp. indica (Iran, North and South Yemen, Qater, Pakistan India; introduced Egypt, Ethiopia, Somalia, Tanzania, Angola)
Roots used for the wide mesh baskets used to protect the large water and milk vessels. Green and dry pods eaten by both people and livestock. An excellent shade tree, regarded as suitable for planting in villages and at watering places.
A reficiens
subsp. misera (Sudan, Ethiopia, Somalia, Uganda, Kenya)
Roots for hoops (digo) of nomadic Somali huts. Browsed by livestock. Bark used for making cordage.
A. Senegal (Mauritania to Sudan, Egypt, Ethiopia, Somalia, Uganda, Kenya, Tanzania south to Botswana, Namibia, South Africa, Middle East)
Stem for central pole (undab) of nomadic Somali huts. Branches for axe and hoe handles and heavy clubs. A preferred species for firewood. Foliage and pods eaten by livestock. Natural gum exudate eaten by the Somali and animals; the trees are not tapped although the natural exudate is collected and sold. Gum also used medicinally, mixed with milk and kept for a few days and then taken for back pains
A. tortilis
subsp. spirocarpa (Sudan, Ethiopia, Dijouti, Kenya, Tanzania south to Namibia and South Africa)
Roots used for hoops (digo), bark for covering mats and chewed inner bark for string to stitch mats of nomadic Somali huts. Branches for axe and hoe handles. Preferred browse for livestock because the green flush is the first available at the end of the dry season. Green and dry pods also eaten by both people and livestock. Bark used for making cordage. An excellent shade tree regarded as suitable for planting in villages and at watering points.
Acacia species
Branches, tree tops and main limbs for brush-wood thorn fences (hero or mus) to protect camp sites and livestock; the thorny branches are handled using a stick (handol) with a hook at one end for pulling and a "V" at the other end for pushing.
Table 3.3 The uses of Acacia species in northern Kenya (Riley and Brokensha, 1988; Medley, 1993).
Species and distribution
Uses
A. ataxacantha (Liberia to Sudan and south through Kenya to Angola and South Africa)
Green, pared and dried branches used for granary lathes, hut walls and rafters under thatch; bundles of short torches used as night torches by honey collectors because of their resinous sap; preferred wet season firewood since the wood does not readily absorb moisture and will maintain flammability; gummy exudate from pounded leaves used to repair holes in gourd utensils; a pest in land clearance because it readily produces coppice regrowth
A. brevispica
subsp. brevispica (Central African Republic, Sudan, Ethiopia, Somalia, Uganda, Kenya, Tanzania, Burundi, Rwanda, Zaire, Angola)
Dry branches used by women to ignite hot kindling for a steady burn of charcoal for firing pottery; fibres from bark of young branches make a strong rope. Peeled branches for toothsticks; green, pared and dried branches used for granary lathes, hut walls and rafters under thatch; thicker branches used for digging sticks, bows and walking sticks bundles of short branches used as night torches by honey collectors because of their resinous sap; preferred wet season firewood since the wood does not readily absorb moisture and will maintain flammability; gummy exudate from pounded leaves used to repair holes in gourd utensils; sticky, sweet sap from young branches eaten by children; a pest in land clearance because it readily produces coppice regrowth.
A. drepanolobium (Sudan, Ethiopia, Somalia, Uganda, Kenya, Tanzania, Zaire)
Short, forked boles used as Y-poles to suport granaries; stakes formerly used in pit-traps, now used for implement and tool handles; pegs made from heatwood used to climb baobab trees to gain access to bee hives, also to peg down hides while curing and drying; thorny branches for fencing and temporary cattle and goat pens; larger stems used for construction purposes; bee hives hung in the tree.
A. gerrardii (Nigeria, Central African Republic, Sudan, Ethiopia, Uganda, Kenya, Tanzania, south to Botswana, South Africa)
Wood used for hut construction, firewood for tobacco barns and high quality charcoal; inner bark chewed for the resinous sap which is reputed to relieve coughing; flowers a source of bee food
A. hockii (Guinea to Sudan, Ethiopia, Uganda, Kenya, Tanzania south to Zimbabwe and Angola)
Browsed by goats, pods also eaten; wood not favoured for hut construction because of susceptibility to termites and rot; thorny branches used for cattle pens and fencing cultivated land; fibres of inner bark used for basketry; resinous sap edible, also used as an adhesive; flowers a good bee food
A. laeta (Egypt, Mali, Burkina Faso, Nigeria, Niger, Chad, Sudan, Ethiopia, Somalia, Kenya, Tanzania; Middle East
Wood used for high quality charcoal; bark fibre used for building ties and for twisting into resinous torches for honey hunters and bee keepers; inner bark chewed for the resinous sap which is reputed to relieve coughing; flowers a source of bee food
A. mellifera subsp. mellifera (Egypt, Sudan, Ethiopia, Djibouti, Somalia, Kenya, Tanzania, Angola, Namibia)
Wood a highly prized pole timber, excellent slow-burning firewood and charcoal; branches used for cattle kraals; flowers for making beer, also source of bee food; inner bark used medicinally in the treatment of joint pains, malaria, fevers and coughs
A. nigrescens (Tanzania, Zambia, Mozambique, Malawi, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Namibia, South Africa
Wood used for hut construction, firewood for tobacco barns and charcoal
A nilotica
subsp. subalata (Sudan, Ethiopia, Uganda, Kenya, Tanzania)
Pods eaten by wild life and livestock, especially goats; also eaten in times of famine; timber used for granary poles smaller limbs for digging sticks; excellent charcoal; bark preferred fuel for firing pottery; thorny branches for cattle pens; bark and inner bark make a stimulating tisane; fibres of inner bark used for basketry; sap rubbed on metal gives a rust-preventing black paint.; gum from stem or ripe pods used for attaching feathers to arrows; sap and shreds of bark act as a deterrent to bed bugs; the sharp thorns used for removing jiggers and during boys' circumcision, and when tough, thick and elastic, used for plugging insect holes in gourds; root bark used for treating coughs
A. polyacantha
subsp. campylacantha (Ghana to Sudan, Ethiopia, Uganda, Kenya, Tanzania south to South Africa)
wood used for hut construction, firewood for tobacco barns and charcoal
A. reficiens
subsp. misera (Sudan, Ethiopia, Somalia, Uganda, Kenya)
thorny branches used for livestock pens and protecting cultivated land; bark fibres used for clothing and basketry; sap sweet, potable
A robusta
subsp. usambarensis (Ethiopia, Kenya, Tanzania, Mozambique)
poles
A. senegal (Mauritania to Sudan, Ethiopia, Uganda, Kenya, Tanzania south to Botswana, Namibia, South Africa; Asia)
Wood used for hut construction but not used for implement handles as it splinters badly; an important bee food; bee hives hung in the trees to escape the ravages of the rater or honey badger
A. seyal var. seyal (Mauritania to Sudan, Egypt, Ethiopia, Djibouti, Somalia, Uganda, Kenya, Tanzania, Zambia, Malawi, Mozambique)
Browsed by goats, pods also eaten; wood not favoured for hut construction because of susceptibility to termites and rot; thorny branches used for cattle pens and fencing cultivated land; fibres of inner bark used for basketry; resinous sap edible, also used as an adhesive; flowers a good bee food
A. thomsasii (Kenya, Tanzania)
An important bee food; bee hives hung in the trees to escape the ravages of the rater (honey badger)
A. tortilis
subsp. spirocarpa (Sudan, Ethiopia, Djibouti, Kenya, Tanzania Namibia and South Africa)
pods eaten by wildlife and livestock; timbres of inner bark used for basketry, hut ties and for twisting into resinous torches for honey south to hunters and bee keepers; thorny branches used for cattle pens; flowers a source of bee food; hives hung in thorny branches as thorns deter raiding of the hives by the ratal (honey badger); inner bark chewed to alleviate coughing; trees near cultivated land sometimes pollarded to reduce perches of seed-eating birds; branches placed on graves to indicate deceased will see no more life.
Table 3.4 Uses of Acacia species in southern Africa (Story, 1958; Wickens, 1969; Coates Palgrave, 1977)
Species and distribution
Uses
A. caffra (Mozambique, Botswana, Swaziland, South Africa)
Leaves and pods eaten by livestock but sometimes toxic. Excellent fencing posts and fuel. Bark infusion used by Zulus for blood disorders
A. erioloba (Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Angola, Namibia)
Gum slightly astringent, eaten by bushmen when clear and fresh, less palatable when discoloured. Pods avidly eaten by livestock, reported to improve lactation in cows but reputed to be toxic in some seasons. Wood used for pit props, wagons and fuelwood. Bark ash used for treating headaches.
A. erubescens (Tanzania, Zaire, Zambia, Mozambique, Malawi, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Angola; Namibia)
Gum eaten by bushmen
A. fleckii (Zaire, Zambia, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Angola; Namibia)
Gum eaten by bushmen
A. galpinii (Tanzania, Zambia, Mozambique, Malawi, Zimbabwe, Botswana, South Africa)
Wood used for furniture
A. karroo (Mozambique, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Angola, Lesotho, South Africa)
Gum edible, used in confectionery, also as an adhesive. Leaves, flowers and pods eaten by livestock. Wood a general purpose timber, no longer commercially exploited, used for furniture, fencing posts and fuel. Bark used for tanning and gives a red leather. Inner bark used for cordage. Infusion of bark given as antidote to cattle poisoned by Moraea.
A. luederitzii (Zambia, Mozambique, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Angola, Namibia, Swaziland)
Gum eaten by bushmen. Cortex of lateral roots used for quivers.
A. mellifera
subsp. detinens (Tanzania, Zambia, Mozambique, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Angola, Namibia)
Gum eaten by bushmen. Shoots, flowers and pods eagerly eaten by livestock. Wood used for fuel.
A. nebrownii (Zimbabwe, Botswana, South Africa)
Regarded as an indicator of underground water.
A. nilotica
subsp. kraussiana (Ethiopia, Tanzania, Zambia, Mozambique, Malawi, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Angola, South Africa)
Gum edible used in local confectionery. Wood used for fencing posts and fuel. Ink made from the pods. Decoction of the bark taken for coughs.
A. polyacantha
subsp. campylacantha (Ghana to Ethiopia south to South Africa)
Gum edible, used in local confectionery; also as an adhesive.
A. sieberana (Mali and Ivory Coast to Ethiopia and south to South Africa)
Pods eaten by livestock, green pods sometimes toxic. Wood of little value
A. tortilis
subsp. heteracantha (Zambia, Mozambique, Zimbabwe, Botswana, Angola; Namibia, Swaziland)
Gum eaten by bushmen. Leaves and pods eaten by livestock
subsp. spirocarpa (Sudan, Ethiopia, Djibouti and Somalia south to Zimbabwe, Botswana, Angola, Namibia)
Leaves and pods eaten by livestock.
A. xanthophloea (Kenya, Tanzania, Mozambique, Malawi. Zimbabwe, Swaziland, South Africa)
Wood a general purpose timber
F. albida (North Africa to South Africa; Near East)
A decoction of the bark used in Namibia for treating diarrhoea.
Table 3.5 The uses of Acacia species in North Africa (Boudy, 1950; Boulos, 1983; White, 1983; El Hadidi and Boulos, 1989; Boulos, 1989)
Species and their distribution
Uses
A. gummifera (endemic to Morocco)
Browsed by horses and sheep. A source of fuelwood, charcoal, tool handles and other domestic uses. Yields an abundant gum, known as gomme ammoniaque, which is marketed locally.
A. karroo (introduced in Libya; southern Africa)
Grown for hedges.
A. laeta (Egypt; tropical Africa, Near and Middle East)
Yields a gum.
A. nilotica
subsp. nilotica (Egypt; tropical Africa; Near and Middle East)
Foliage and young pods eaten by livestock. Wood used for boat building, water wheels and lifts, water pipes, fuelwood and charcoal. Pods and bark used for tanning, especially goat skins. grown as a street tree. Gum exudate, bark, pods used in local medicine.
A. seyal (Egypt; tropical Africa, Near East)
Pods eaten by livestock. Gum exudate, wood, bark, leaves used in local medicine.
A. tortilis
Heartwood of high calorific value, excellent fuelwood and charcoal.
Subsp. raddiana (Western Sahara, Algeria, Libya, Egypt; tropical Africa)
Gum exudate, bark and seeds used in local medicine.
F. albida (Western Sahara, Algeria, Egypt; tropical Africa, Near and Middle East)
Browsed by livestock. Fruit edible. Timber used for furniture, joinery, etc. Bark used in local medicine.
Table 3.6 The uses of Acacia in the Near and Middle East and India (Singh 1909; Manjunath, 1948; Dickson, 1955; Parsa 1958; All, 1973; Townsend, 1974; Chakravarty 1976; Anderson, 1978; Danin 1983; Ayoub et al. 1984; Miller and Morris, 1988; Bhandari, 1990; Fagg, 1992)
Species and distribution
Uses
ARABIA
A. abyssinica subsp. abyssinica (Yemen, Saudi Arabia; Africa)
Browsed by livestock
A. etbaica subsp. etbaica (Saudi Arabia; Africa)
Uses probably similar to subsp. uncinata.
Subsp. uncinata (Yemen, Oman, Saudi Arabia; Africa)
Little valued for browse, the foliage being regarded as too 'hot'. Wood provides excellent, slowly burning fuelwood giving great heat and little smoke. Ash from dead wood used as snuff or added to tobacco to increase acridity. Regarded as the best tanning agent in Dhofar for waterproofing domestic leather articles; the dried cut branches beaten for leaves, pods, growing tips and twiglets, which are collected and stored. Finely ground, a leaf paste is smeared over the depilated skin and vigorously rubbed in; mixed with the dried leaves and stems of Loranthus schimperi for tanning butter-making skins. The red guns exudate not eaten and of no medical significance.
A. iraqensis (Iraq, Kuwait, Yemen, Saudi Arabia, Oman, Jordan, Sinai)
Foliage and pods eaten by camels and goats. A source of excellent fuelwood and good charcoal but quality inferior to that of A. senegal and A. tortilis. Underbark twisted into threads for emergency repairs and patching and, when dyed black, by women for binding plaits of hair. Resin edible but of no medical significance.
A. karroo (introduced in Iraq; Africa)
Grown for impenetrable hedges.
A. laeta (Yemen, Oman, Saudi Arabia, Israel. Syria, introduced Iran; Africa)
Leaves and pods are browsed by livestock.
A. nilotica sensu lato (Iran, Iraq, Yemen, Oman, Saudi Arabia, Israel, Syria, India; Africa)
Foliage and pods eaten by camels, sheep and goats in times of scarcity. Timber for beams, agricultural implements, cart wheels, Persian wheels, boats, sleepers, brake blocks, etc. Bark and pods for tanning. Branches used for brushwood fences. Browsed only by hungry livestock, pods ignored.
Subsp. kraussiana (Iraq, Yemen, Oman; Africa)
Crushed pods gives a rich mahogany-red colour to leather as well as apparently enhancing its suppleness and tensile strength. Wood used in lime kilns, carvings, bed frames, domestic articles, etc. also fire-hardened and oiled for spears and arrows. Paste of crushed and pounded fresh leaves used to poultice boils and swellings, to relieve inflamation and draw pus.
Subsp. nilotica (Iran, Iraq, Oman, Saudi Arabia, Yemen; Africa)
The fruit can be used to control aquatic algal growth; 400 kg of the fruit in a 50,000 m^3 completely suppressed a massive algal growth in 4 days, neither the fish, amphibians or insects were affected.
Subsp. tomentosa (Iran, Saudi Arabia; Africa)
Browsed by livestock.
A. oerfota (Iran, Yemen, Oman, Saudi Arabia; Africa)
Avoided by livestock except in times of exceptional hunger. Paste of crushed and ground new shoot tips used as a depilatory before tanning, occasionally in conjunction with leaves of Pergularia spp.; crushed leaves and twigs also rubbed into skin with plenty of salt and buttermilk, skin then buried for 1-2 days before being dug up and hairs scraped off. Gum inedible, of no medicinal value
A. senegal (Oman, India, Pakistan; Africa)
Browsed by livestock, especially goats and camels, reputed to fatten livestock and enrich milk. Pods fed to sick, delicate or parturient livestock, increasing milk yield. A good source of bee food. Wood excellent for construction purposes, especially livestock pens, also for weavers' shuttles. Woven branches formerly used for fish traps. An excellent slow-burning fuelwood giving intense heat and little smoke, also for charcoal. Dried and crumbled inner dead wood an important source of tinder. Strips of underbark used to tan leather, often strengthed with material from A. etbaica. Dried, crushed and powdered bark used to pack and infected wound to disinfect and ward off further infection and gangrene. Powdered, reddish-brown gum exudate mixed with fat or grease used to annoint body. The fresh gum exudate being used as a depilatory. Solution of gum drunk on an empty stomach used to relieve chest pains. Eating gum reputed to strengthen stomach muscles; excessive eating of gum
can cause flatulence and some discomfort. Gum highly nutritious, 175 g sufficient to support an adult for 24 hours.
A. seyal (Yemen, Saudi Arabia; Africa)
Cut for fuelwood and charcoal around Riyadh.
A. tortilis
Edible seeds, browse, wood, fuel, medicine, etc.
subsp. raddiana (Saudi Arabia; Africa)
Browsed bt livestock. Bark fibres twisted into cordage. Other uses probably same as for subsp. tortilis
subsp. spirocarpa (Yemen, Oman, Saudi Arabia, Israel, Syria; Africa)
Uses probably same as for subsp. tortilis
subsp. tortilis (Yemen, Oman, Qater, Saudi Arabia, United Arab Emirates; Africa)
An important source of shade and browse for camels and goats. Green branches lopped; pods stored and fed to lactating, young, weak or sick livestock. An attractive bee food; honey hunters trace bees returning from the tree to their hives. Wood unsuitable for utensils as it rots from the inside out; used for fuelwood and charcoal, burning with great heat and little smoke. Ash used for snuff. Slithers of the heartwood from dead branches may be dried, stored and used as tinder. Thorny branches used for pens. Short lengths of threads twisted from the underbark for emergency repairs and patching The resin is regarded as inedible and of no medicinal value. New shoots ground to a paste, added to frehly drawn milk and boilded down to make a poultice for mastitis.
F. albida (Iran, Yemen, Saudi Arabia, Israel, Lebanon, Syria; Africa)
A valuable dry season browse. Wood used for fuel.
INDIA
A. hydnaspica (Iran, Pakistan, India)
Browsed by camels and goats. Wood used for fuel.
A. jaquemontii (Iraq, Pakistan, India)
Branches lopped, threshed and leaves stored for fodder. Charcoal gives intense heat, used by gold-, silver- and black-smiths. Bark used for tanning leather, giving black or brown colour. Root bark used in the distillation of spirits. Tree a good sand binder.
A. leucophloea (Pakistan, India, Sri Lanka, Burma, Thailand, Indonesia, Java)
The whitish bark and seeds ground and mixed with flour in times of scarcity; the young pods may also be eaten. The pods are also used for fodder. The wood used for agricultural implements, oil mills, carts, wheels, turnery and fuel. Bark fibre may be used for making fishing nets and coarse cordage. The bark is a good substitute for wattle bark from Senna auriculata (syn. Cassia auriculata) and C. fistula for tanning leather; the bark also has the property of clarifying and flavouring spirits made from sugar and palm sap. The bark is bitter, astringent and cooling. The gum exudate is used in local medicines.
A. modesta (Afghanistan, Pakistan, India)
Wood used for cane crushers, Persian wheels, agricultural implements and fuelwood. Gum used in local medicine, fresh twigs for cleaning teeth. Widely planted for hedges.
A. nilotica sensu lato (Iran, Iraq, Yemen, Oman, Saudi Arabia, Israel, Syria, India; Africa)
Foliage and pods eaten by camels, sheep and goats in times of scarcity. Timber for beams, agricultural implements, cart wheels, Persian wheels, boats, sleepers, brake blocks, etc. Bark and pods for tanning. Gum used as a substitute for gum arable. Branches used for brushwood fences. Cultivated for hedges and as ornamental.
Subsp. cupressiformis (Pakistan, India)
Planted for agroforestry and windbreaks around fields.
Subsp. indica (Iran, Yemen, Oman, Qatar, India, Pakistan)
Wood used for building purposes, spokes, wheels, oil presses, tent pegs, agricultural implements and fuel, Bark and deseeded pods used for tanning. Gum exudate used in calico printing, paints and medicines. Branches lopped for fodder; pods best fed dry as a supplement rather than eaten green. Dried pods used to supplement poultry rations. Planted for agroforestry and windbreaks around fields, rehabilitation of degraded saline and alkaline soils, coal mine waste heaps; also under irrigatation with tannery effluents; a good host of Santalum album (Indian sandalwood). An important host of the lac insect Tachardia lacca in the Sind, the source of shellac.
A. senegal (Oman, India, Pakistan; Africa)
Seeds eaten as a vegetable. Source of commercial gum arable.
<section>n</section>
Annexes
Annex A: Accepted names (bold) of Acacia species mentioned in the text and their synonyms (italics) Cited in the Consulted Literature
Annex B: Vegetation map of Africa (White, 1983)
Annex C: Proximate analysis of browse, bark and pods of various Acacia species (Dougal et al., 1964; Ghöl, 1981)
Annex D: Important Acacia species, their distribution (lock, 1989, 1991) and reported uses (Tables in text)
Annex E: Illustrations
Annex A: Accepted names (bold) of Acacia species mentioned in the text and their synonyms (italics) Cited in the Consulted Literature
Accepted names
Indigenous species
A. abyssinica Benth.
subsp. calophylla Brenan
A. adansonii Guill. & Perr = A. nilotica subsp. adstringens
A. albida Del. = Faidherbia albida
A. amythethophylla A. Rich.
A. arabica (L.) Willd. = A. nilotica subsp. indica
A. arabica (L.) Willd. var. adansonii Guill. & Perr. = A. nilotica subsp. adansonii
A. arenaria Schinz
A. asak (Forssk.) Willd.
A. ataxacantha DC.
A. benthamii Rochebr. = A. nilotica subsp. kraussiana
A. borlea Burtt Davy
A. brevispica Harms
A. burkei Benth.
A. bussei Sjost.
A. caffra (Thunb.) Willd.
A. charissa Milne-Redh.
A. cheilanthifolia Chiov.
A. circummarginata Chiov. status uncertain, sometimes considered a synonym of A. senegal
A. davyi N.E.Br.
A. drepanolobium Sjost.
A. dulcis Marloth & Engl. = A. erubescens
A. dungeoni Holland
A. edgeworthii T. Anderson
A. ehrenbergiana Hayne
A. elatior Brenan
A. erioloba E. Meyer
A. erubescens Oliver
A. erythrocalyx Brenan
A. etbaica Schweinf.
subsp. etbaica
subsp. uncinata Brenan
A. exuvialis Verdc.
A. fleckii Harms
A. galpinii Burtt Davy
A. gerrardii Benth.
subsp. negevensis Zoh. = A. iraqensis
A. giraffae Willd. = A. erioloba
A. glaucophylla A. Rich. = A. asak
A. goetzii Harms
subsp. goetzii
subsp. microphylla Brenan
A. goumaensis A.Chev.
A. grandicornuta Gerstner
A. gummifera Willd.
A. haematoxylon Willd.
A. hamulosa Benth.
A. hebeclada DC.
subsp. hebeclada
A. hereroensis Engl.
A. hockii De Willd.
A. hydnaspica R.Parker
A. iraqensis Rech.f.
A. jaquemontii Benth.
A. karroo Hayne
A. kirkii Oliver
subsp. kirkii
A. kraussiana Benth.
A. laeta R.Br.
A. lahai Benth.
A. leucophlaea Willd.
A. leucospira Brenan
A. litakunensis Burchell = A. tortilis subsp. heteracantha
A. luederitzii Engl.
var. retinens (Sim) J.Ross & Brenan = A. luederitzii
var. luederitzii = A. luederitzii
A. macrostachya DC.
A. macrothyrsa Harms = A. amythethophylla
A. mellifera (Vahl) Benth.
subsp. detiens (Burchell) Brenan
subsp. mellifera
A. misera Vatke = A. reficiens subsp. misera
A. modesta Wall.
A. moggii Thulin & Tandelli
A. montis-usti Merxm. & Schreiber
A. nebrownii Burtt Davy
A. negri Pichi-Sem.
A. nigrescens Oliver
A. nilotica (L.) Del.
subsp. adstringens (Schum. & Thonn.) Brenan
subsp. indica (Benth.) Brenan
subsp. kraussiana (Benth.) Brenan
subsp. leiocarpa Brenan
subsp. nilotica
subsp. subulata (Vatke) Brenan
subs, tomentosa (Benth.) Brenan
var. adansonii (Guill. & Perr.) Kuntze = subsp. adstringens
var. nilotica= subsp. nilotica
var. tomentosa (Benth.) A.F.Hill = subsp. tomentosa
A. nubica Benth. = A. oerfota
A. oerfota (Forssk.) Schweinf.
A. oliveri Vatke
A. paolii Chiov.
A. pennata sensu auctt. non (L.) Willd. = A. erythrocalyx
A. pennivenia Balf.f.
A. permixta Burtt Davy
A. persiciflora Pax
A. polyacantha Willd.
subsp. campylacantha (A.Rich.) Brenan
A. raddiana Savi = A. tortilis subsp. raddiana
A. reficiens Wawa
subsp. misera (Vatke) Brenan
subsp. reficiens
A. rehmanniana Schinz
A. robusta Burchell
subsp. clavigera (E.Meyer) Brenan
subsp. robusta
A. robynsiana Merxm. & Schreiber
A. scorpioides (L.) F.W.Wright var. nilotica (L.) A.Chev. = A. nilotica subsp. nilotica
A. senegal (L.) Willd
var. leiorhachis Brenan
var. rostrata Brenan
var. senegal
A. seyal Del.
var. fistula (Schweinf.) Oliv.
var. seyal.
A. sieberiana DC.
var. vermoesenii (De Wild.) Keay & Brenan = A. sieberiana
var. woodii (Burst Davy) Keay & Brenan = A. sieberiana
A. socotrana Balf. f. = A. edgeworthii
A. spirocarpa [Hochst. ex]A.Rich. = A. tortilis subsp. spirocarpa
A. stenocarpa sensu Hochst. = A. hockii
A. stenocarpa A.Rich. = A. seyal
A. stolonifera Burchell = A. hebeclada subsp. hebeclada
A. stuhlmannii Taub.
A. suma Kurz = A. polyacantha subsp. campylacantha
A. swazica Burtt Davy
A. tanganyikensis Brenan
A. tenuispina Verdc.
A. thomasii Harms
A. tortilis (Forssk.) Hayne
subsp. heteracantha (Burchell) Brenan
subsp. raddiana (Savi) Brenan
subsp. spirocarpa (A.Rich.) Brenan
subsp. tortilis
A. unciniata sensu auct. = A. luederitzii
A. unispinosa sensu Chiov. non (Fiori) Chiov. = A. moggii
A. verek Guill. & Perr. = A. senegal
A. verugera Schweinf. = A. sieberiana
A. welwitschii Oliver
subsp. delagoensis (Harms) J.Ross & Brenan
A. xanthophloea Benth.
Faidherbia albida (Del.) A.Chev.
Exotic species
A. adsurgens Maiden & Blakely
A. ampliceps Maslin
A. aneura F.Muell.
A. colei Maslin & Thomson
A. coriacea DC.
A. cowleana Tate
A. eriopoda Maiden & Blakely
A. farnesiana Domin
A. holosericea A.Cunn. ex G.Don
A. kempeana F.Muell.
A. ligulata Cunn. ex Benth.
A. neurocarpa A.Cunn. ex Hook.
A. salicina Lindley
A. saligna (Labill). Wendl.
A. sclerocarpa F.Muell
A. sclerosperma F.Muell.
A. trachycarpa E.Pritzel
A. tumida F.Muell. ex Benth.
A. victoriae Benth.
Annex B: Vegetation map of Africa (White, 1983)
Vegetation map of Africa
<section>o</section>
Annex C: Proximate analysis of browse, bark and pods of various Acacia species (Dougal et al., 1964; Ghöl, 1981)
Species
As % of dry matter
Digestibility (%)
DM
CP
CF
Ash
EE
NFE
Ca
P
Animal
CP
CF
EE
NFE
ME
A. brevispica
New browse, November, Kenya
Young browse, November, Kenya
Young browse, December, Kenya
Leaves, early fruiting stage, August, Kenya
Pods, early fruiting stage, August, Kenya
A. drepanolobium
Shoots and leaves, November, Kenya
A. elatior
Bark, December, Kenya,
Leaves, December, Kenya
A. erioloba
Pods, Zimbabwe
Pods, young
Sheep
Pods, mature, S. Africa
Sheep
Pod husks, S. Africa
A. galpinii
Pods, South Africa
A. gerardii
Bark, February, Kenya
Young browse, February, Kenya
Fallen pods, Mozambique
Species
As % of dry matter
Digestibility (%)
DM
CP
CF
Ash
EE
NFE
Ca
P
Animal
CP
CF
EE
NFE
ME
A. tortillis susp. raddiana
Fresh leaves, Niger
Young branches, Niger
Green pods, Niger
Fallen pods, Niger
A. tortillis subsp. spirocarpa
Bark, March, Kenya
Fresh leaves, Sudan
Browse, November, Kenya
Pods, January, Kenya
Pods, Tanzania
Cattle
A. xanthophloea
Bark, November, Kenya
Leaves, November, Kenya
Faidherbia albida
Fresh, flowers, Sudan
Fresh, whole leaves, Niger
Fresh, leaflets, Sudan
Pods, Tanzania
Cattle
Pods, Niger
DM = dry matter, CP = crude protein, CF = crude fibre, EE = ether extract (oils and fats, fatty acids, resins, chlorophyll, etc.), NFE = nitrogen free extract, ME = metabolizable energy (Mkal/kg).
Continue
<section>p</section>
Species
As % of dry matter
Digestibility (%)
DM
CP
CF
Ash
EE
NFE
Ca
P
Animal
CP
CF
EE
NFE
ME
A. karoo
Fresh leaves, S. Africa
A. laeta
Fresh leaves, Niger
A. mellifera subsp. Mellifera
Leaves, very young, February, Kenya
Fresh leaves, Sudan
Browse, December, Kenya
A. nilotica sensu lato
Top browse + flowers, February, Kenya
Pods, India
Pods, Tanzania
Sheep
Fallen pods, Mozambique
A. nilotica subsp. subulata
Top browse, February, Kenya
Young browse, January, Kenya
Pods, February, Kenya
Pods, July, Kenya
Pods, December, Kenya
Seeds, Zimbabwe
Cattle
A. oerfota
Fresh mature leaves, November, Kenya
Pods, mature, November, Kenya
Continue
<section>q</section>
Species
As % of dry matter
Digestibility (%)
DM
CP
CF
Ash
EE
NFE
Ca
P
Animal
CP
CF
EE
NFE
ME
A. senegal
Browse, October, Kenya
Browse, November, Kenya
Dry leaves, Senegal
Pods, Uganda
Seeds, Senegal
A. seyal
Bark, dry season, August, Kenya
Bark, November, Kenya
Bark early wet season, February, Kenya
Browse, November, Kenya
Browse, November, Kenya
Leaves, November, Kenya
Fresh leaves, Sudan
Pods, immature, Sudan
Pods, mature, dry, Sudan
Pods, November, Kenya
A. sieberiana
Fresh leaves, Senegal
Pods, Nigeria
Pods, October, Kenya
Pods, Zimbabwe
Cattle
A. stuhlmanii
Young browse, October, Kenya
A. tortilis subsp. heteracantha
Fresh leaves, S. Africa
Pods, S. Africa
Seeds, S. Africa
Pod husks, S. Africa
<section>r</section>
Annex D: Important Acacia species, their distribution (lock, 1989, 1991) and reported uses (Tables in text)
Legend of (Annex D):
West
Central
North East
East
Southern
North
Asia
firewood
charcoal
timber
handicrafts
tool handles
domestic
food
forage
bee food
gum
tannin
fibre
dye
medicine
piscicide
environment
nitrogen
shade
hedges
game
amenity
Regions
Uses
Species
Africa
Wood
NWP
Services
A. abyssinica
A. amythethophylla
A. arenaria
A. asak
A. ataxachanta
A. borleae
A. brevispica
A. burkei
A. bussei
A. caffra
A. chariessa
A. cheilanthifolia
A. circummarginata
A. davyi
A. drepanolobium
A. dudgeoni
A. edgeworthii
A. ehrenbergiana
A. elatior
A. erubescens
A. erythrocalyx
A. etbaica
A. exuvalis
A. fleckii
A. galpinii
A. gerrardii
A. goetzii
A. gourmaensis
A. grandicornuta
A. gummifera
A. haematoxylon
A. hamulosa
A. hebeclada
A. hereroensis
A. hockii
A. horrida
A. iraquensis
A. jaquemontii
A. karro
A. kirkii
A. kraussiana
A. laeta
A. lahai
A. leucophloea
Continue
<section>s</section>
Regions
Uses
Species
Africa
Wood
NWP
Services
A. leucospira
A. luederitzii
A. macrostachya
A. mellifera
subsp. detiens
subsp. mellifera
A. modesta
A. moggii
A. montis-usti
A. nebrownii
A. negri
A. nigrescens
A. nilotica
subsp. adstringens
i
i
i
i
subsp. indica
subsp. kraussiana
subsp. leiocarpa
subsp. nilotica
subsp. subalata
subsp. tomentosa
A. oerfota
A. oliveri
A. paoli
A. pennivenia
A. permixta
A. persiciflora
A. polyacantha
subsp. campylacantha
A. reficiens
subsp. misera
subsp. reficiens
A. rehmanniana
A. robusta
A. senegal
A. seyal
subsp. fistula
subsp. seyal
A. sieberana
A. stuhlmannii
A. swazica
A. tanganyikensis
A. tenuispina
A. thomasii
A. tortilis
subsp. heteracantha
subsp. raddiana
subsp. spirocarpa
subsp. tortilis
A. welwitschii
A. xanthophloea
F. albida
Countries by regions:
West Africa: Benin, Burkina Fasso, Cameroun, Cape Verde Islands, Ghana, Guinea, Guinea Bissau, Ivory Coast, Liberia, Mali, Mauritania, Niger, Nigeria, Sao Tome & Principe, Sierra Leone, Senegal, Togo
Central Africa: Central African Republic, Chad, Congo, Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, Zaire
North East Africa: Djibouti, Ethiopia, Somalia, Sudan
East Africa: Burundi, Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania, Uganda
Southern Africa: Angola, Botswana, Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, South Africa, Swaziland, Zambia, Zimbabwe
North Africa: Algeria, Egypt, Libya, Morocco, Tunisia, Western Sahara
West Asia: Afghganistan, Bahrain, India, Iran, Iraq, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Oman, Pakistan, Qatar, Saudi Arabia, Sinai, Syria, United Arab Emirates, Yemen
introduced species - i
<section>t</section>
Annex E: Illustrations
Acacia in the Ecosystem... some of the 134 species of Acacia native of Africa
Charcoal Depot at El Geldaref (Sudan) from Acacia Seyal stands
Cattle passing through an Acacia seyal stand
Arabic gum from Acacia Senegal
Acacia albida: providing shade, protection against heat and dust
Young Acacia nilotica windbreak
Feed and Shade for Wildlife
Acacia landscape (Credit Unesco)
EAST AFRICA, Acacia Xanthophloea
Silted up Acacia nilotica (Banks of the Atbara River, Sudan)
Root System of Acacia Senegal
Faidherbia albida on the fields (Kano, Northern Nigeria)
A mature stand of Faidherbia albida growing on the upper terrace soils of the Wadi Aribo, Sudan
Root System of Acacia albida
Among recently introduced Australian species, Acacia holosericea is very popular in Niger
Among recently introduced Australian species, Acacia holosericea is very popular and Cape Verde
A Managed Acacia seyal forest (Rawashda forest, Sudan)
<section>u</section>
FAO technical papers
FAO CONSERVATION GUIDES
1. Guidelines for watershed management, 1977 (E F)
2. Hydrological techniques for upstream conservation, 1976 (E F)
3. Conservation in arid and semi-arid zones, 1976 (Ar C E F)
4. Special readings in conservation, 1978 (C E F S)
5. Avalanche control, 1985 (E F)
6. Torrent control terminology, 1981 (E/F/S)
7. Environmental impact of forestry, 1982 (E S)
8. Management of upland watersheds: participation of the mountain communities, 1983 (E F S)
9. Operations manual for a protected area system, 1984 (E F S)
10. Sand dune stabilization, shelterbelts and afforestation in dry zones, 1985 (C E)
11. Management of vicuña: its contribution to rural development in the High Andes of Peru, 1985 (E S)
12. Incentives for community involvement in conservation programmes, 1987 (C E F S)
13/1. FAO watershed management field manual - Vegetative and soil treatment measures, 1985 (E F S)
13/2. FAO watershed management field manual - Gully control, 1986 (E)
13/3. Watershed management field manual - Slope treatment measures and practices, 1988 (E F S)
13/4. FAO watershed management field manual - Landslide prevention measures, 1988 (E)
13/5. Watershed management field manual - Road design and construction in sensitive watersheds, 1989 (E S)
13/6. Watershed management field manual - Watershed survey and planning, 1990 (E F S)
14. Strategies, approaches and systems in integrated watershed management, 1986 (E)
15. Brise-vent et rideaux abris avec référence particulière aux zones sèches, 1986 (F)
16. Guidelines for economic appraisal of watershed management projects, 1987 (E F S)
17. National parks planning: a manual with annotated examples, 1988 (E F)
18. Manuel de fixation des dunes, 1988 (F)
19. Non-timber uses of selected arid zone trees and shrubs in Africa, 1988 (E)
20. Arid zone forestry - A guide for field technicians, 1989 (E F Ar)
21. Role of forestry in combating desertification, 1989 (E)
22. The management of crocodiles in captivity, 1989 (E F)
23. Debt-for-nature swaps to promote natural resource conservation, 1993 (E S)
24. Monitoreo y evaluación de logros en proyectos de ordenación de cuencas hidrográficas, 1993 (S)
25. Utilización de la fauna silvestre en América Latina, 1993 (S)
26. Domestication and husbandry of the paca (Agouti paca), 1995 (E S)
27. Role of Acacia species in the rural economy of dry Africa and the Near East, 1995 (E)
Availability: March 1995
Ar - Arabic
C - Chinese
E - English
F - French
P - Portuguese
S - Spanish
Multil - Multilingual
* - Out of print
** - In preparation
The FAO Technical Papers are available through the authorized FAO Sales Agents or directly from Distribution and Sales Section, FAO, Vialle delle Terme di Caracalla, 00100 Rome, Italy.
The importance of Acacia species and formations in the rural economy of dry Africa and the Near East cannot be overemphasized; Acacia species are present in all communities for food production, energy supply, the establishment of human settlements and other aspects of economic and cultural development. This document recognizes the multipurpose role of the genus and reviews available information on the presence and distribution of Acacia species and formations, their uses and their role in environmental conservation. The publication also focuses on some key species. The last part explores the multipurpose management of Acacia stands and their strategic importance and suggests some research requirements for further and more sustainable use and conservation of Acacia species and formations.
