<title>Report of the Twenty-Second Session of the Joint FAO/WHO Codex Alimentarius Commission</title>
<section>1</section>
Summary and Conclusions
CODEX ALIMENTARIUS COMMISSION
Twenty-second Session, Geneva, 23-28 June 1997
The Commission:
· Noted with satisfaction that in the proposed budget for the biennium 1998/1999, US$ 400 000 had been restored mainly to strengthen the documentation service and provide additional expert support to the Commission, but felt that the implications of the proposed reduction in the overall Codex budget should be carefully evaluated and that the budgetary reduction as currently proposed should not lead to inefficiency in Codex document distribution nor in its other important activity areas (paragraphs 16, 17);
· Raised concern that reducing the duration of Codex sessions would not allow sufficient time for the consideration of the matters in question and limiting the length of Codex meeting reports would make them less useful for understanding how positions were reached (paragraph 18);
· Approved certain amendments to the Procedural Manual of the Codex Alimentarius Commission, including the establishment of an Appendix containing the General Decisions of the Commission, Statements of Principle relating to the Role of Food Safety Risk Assessment, and Definitions of Risk Analysis Terms relating to Food Safety (paragraphs 19-31);
· Adopted maximum residue limits for 45 pesticides and 7 veterinary drugs in various commodities; 6 new or revised Codex standards, amendments and additions to a variety of existing standards including the General Standard for Food Additives; and a variety of other texts including a major revision of the General Principles of Food Hygiene and other codes of practice (paragraphs 32-103 and Appendix II);
· Adopted a variety of draft standards and related texts at Step 5 (paragraphs 104-121 and Appendix III);
· endorsed proposals to elaborate new standards and other texts (paragraphs 122-130 and Appendix IV);
· revoked a number of existing standards considered to be obsolete or not of significance to international trade including over 300 obsolete maximum residue limits for pesticides and the Standard for Edible Ices (paragraphs 131-132);
· abolished the Codex Committee on Edible Ices (paragraph 131);
· requested FAO and WHO to convene an international expert advisory body similar to JECFA and JMPR on the microbiological aspects of food safety to address particularly microbiological risk assessments (paragraph 139);
· requested the Codex Committee on General Principles to consider the application of "other legitimate factors" than science in relation to the adoption of maximum residue limits for bovine and porcine somatotropins (paragraphs 68 and 124), to address the question of improving procedures aimed at obtaining a better consensus of opinion at Commission and Committee session (paragraph 125), and consider the issue of providing special or differential treatment to developing countries in the application of Codex standards (paragraph 126) and to develop guidelines on procedures for granting observer status to non-governmental international organizations (paragraph 159);
· adopted an Action Plan for the development and application of risk analysis principles and guidelines (paragraphs 160-167);
· requested the WTO Committee on Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures to clarify how it would differentiate between Codex "standards, guidelines and other recommendations" in relation to the implementation of the SPS Agreement by WTO Members, and discussed other matters relating to follow-up to the Uruguay Round (paragraphs 168-176);
· approved the general direction of the proposed Medium-Term Plan 1998-2002 (paragraphs 177-180);
· expressed concern about possible implications of abolishing committees adjourned sine die and expressed interest in the "alternative mechanisms", stating that there should be clear rules for their establishment and operation and that such mechanisms should be as inclusive, transparent and responsive as the current system (paragraphs 185-188)
<section>2</section>
INTRODUCTION
ALINORM 97/37
July, 97
1. The Codex Alimentarius Commission held its Twenty-second Session in Geneva, from 23 to 28 June 1997. The Session was attended by 444 Delegates and advisors representing 84 Member countries and Observers from 1 Non-Member country, 7 intergovernmental organizations and 36 international non-governmental organizations. A complete list of participants is given in Appendix 1 to this report.
2. The Session was opened by Dr. Hiroshi Nakajima, Director-General of WHO and by Dr. Hartwig de Haen, Assistant Director-General, FAO. The Session was presided over by its Chairperson, Professor Pakdee Pothisiri (Thailand) and by its three Vice-Chairpersons for certain items of the Agenda.
<section>3</section>
ADOPTION OF THE AGENDA (Agenda Item 1)^1
^1 ALINORM 97/1
3. The Commission adopted the Provisional Agenda as its Agenda for the Session. It agreed to discuss the following matters under "Other Business":
· Review of Codex Subsidiary Bodies
· Problems concerning distribution of working documents.
It also agreed to discuss a draft Code of Practice for Good Animal Feeding under Item 8 of the Agenda.
4. The Delegation of India requested that consideration of the Draft Standards for Sugars and Honey and the Maximum Residue Limits emanating from the 29th Session of the Committee on Pesticide Residues be deleted from the Agenda in view of the late arrival of the documents. The Commission, however, decided to discuss these matters under Agenda Item 7, without prejudice to any decision which might be taken on whether or not to discuss them in detail at that time.
<section>4</section>
ELECTION OF OFFICERS OF THE COMMISSION AND APPOINTMENT OF REGIONAL COORDINATORS (Agenda Item 2)^2
^2 ALINORM 97/2 and ALINORM 97/2, Addendum 1
5. During the Session the Commission re-elected Prof. P. Pothisiri (Thailand) as its Chairperson to serve from the end of the Twenty-second to the end of the Session. The Commission also elected Mrs María E. Chacón (Costa Rica)^3, Mr. Thomas Billy (USA), and re-elected Mr. S. van Hoogstraten (The Netherlands), as Vice-Chairpersons of the Commission for the same period.
^3 The Delegation of Uruguay noted that a candidate from Africa, Dr. J.A. Abalaka (Nigeria), had withdrawn in favour of the candidate from Latin America and the Caribbean, in the spirit of facilitating consensus in Codex.
6. The following persons were appointed as Regional Coordinators:
Africa:
Mr. David Nhari (Zimbabwe)
Asia:
Ms. Kanya Sinsakul (Thailand)
Latin America and the Caribbean:
Dr. Galdós Ugarte (Uruguay)
Europe:
Mr. Felipe Mittelbrunn García (Spain)
North America and South-West Pacific:
Mr. Thomas Billy (USA)
7. In view of the election of Mr. Thomas Billy as Vice-Chairperson, the USA resigned as Regional Representative for North America and the Commission elected Canada to fill the vacancy for the remainder of the current term of office.
<section>5</section>
REPORT BY THE CHAIRPERSON ON THE FORTY-THIRD AND FORTY-FOURTH SESSIONS OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE (Agenda Item 3)^4
^4 ALINORM 97/3 and ALINORM 97/4, respectively.
8. The reports were provided in accordance with Rule III.5 of the Commission's Rules of Procedure. Except for a revised version of the document on The Application of Risk Analysis Principles in Codex^5, all items arising from the Executive Committee sessions had been addressed by Codex Committees or were included in the Commission's present Agenda.
^5 See ALINORM 97/9-Revised (CAC/LIM 21), agenda item 10.
<section>6</section>
REPORTS BY COORDINATORS ON REGIONAL ACTIVITIES (Agenda Item 4)
CODEX COORDINATING COMMITTEE FOR ASIA
CODEX COORDINATING COMMITTEE FOR EUROPE
CODEX COORDINATING COMMITTEE FOR AFRICA
CODEX COORDINATING COMMITTEE FOR LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN
CODEX COORDINATING COMMITTEE FOR NORTH AMERICA AND THE SOUTH WEST PACIFIC
CODEX COORDINATING COMMITTEE FOR ASIA^6
^6 ALINORM 97/15
9. The Delegation of Japan, on behalf of Dr. Yuzo Hayashi, Coordinator for Asia, presented a brief summary of the activities of the Committee. He highlighted the following:
· identification of standards having a potential major trade impact in the Region;
· the development of Proposed Draft Guidelines for National Codex Contact Points and Codex Committees;
· discussions on micronutrient malnutrition and a need for food fortification regulations; and
· discussions on risk assessment, especially exposure assessment taking into account dietary habits in the region.
10. The Delegation noted that a new regional initiative on food intake surveys led by Japan, was being undertaken in response to the discussions at the Session. The Delegation of India stressed difficulties experienced by developing countries in applying low maximum limits for residues and contaminants.
CODEX COORDINATING COMMITTEE FOR EUROPE^7
^7 ALINORM 97/19
11. The Coordinator for Europe, Dr. Stuart Slorach (Sweden) reported that the Committee had focused its attention on proposals for extending the Acceptance Procedure to all Codex texts; prioritising standards and related texts on the basis of the list drawn up by the SPS Committee; transparency in the decision making process; the importance of consumer participation; harmonisation and regional cooperation as well as technical assistance in food related activities within the European region.
CODEX COORDINATING COMMITTEE FOR AFRICA^8
^8 ALINORM 97/28
12. The Coordinator for Africa, Mr David Nhari (Zimbabwe) pointed out that the Coordinating Committee for Africa had placed emphasis on the following problems of particular importance to the Region: strengthening the food control systems, improving the work of the national Codex structures, and inter-regional coordination. Improving and updating the work of food import/export inspection and certification systems, harmonization of food standards and legislation were also high on the agenda of the Coordinating Committee. Regional Draft Guidelines on the Design of Control Measures of Street Vended Foods were also elaborated by the Committee (see Item 7).
CODEX COORDINATING COMMITTEE FOR LATIN AMERICA AND THE CARIBBEAN^9
^9 ALINORM 97/36
13. Dr. Galdós Ugarte (Uruguay), Coordinator for Latin American and the Caribbean informed the Commission that the Committee had:
· agreed to initiate the revision of the Regional Code of Practice for the Preparation and Sale of Street-Vended Foods and to incorporate the new approach reflected in the revised General Principles of Food Hygiene and the HACCP Guidelines;
· recommended that in view of the importance of the "Four Statements of Principle" they should be included in the General Principles of Codex in the body of the Procedural Manual (see Item 6);
· agreed that the late reception of documents was an obstacle to effective participation in Codex's work and recommended to make a wider use of modern means of communication and to strengthen the Codex Secretariat;
· agreed on the necessity to review the present acceptance procedure and to study a revised system of notification and/or acceptance, which should be simple and the least bureaucratic possible;
· noted the progress of harmonization of food legislation and the extensive use of Codex standards and MRLs as reference in the framework of economic integration organizations and at the national level;
· agreed to continue working on food contamination by Salmonella, as well as food safety in tourist areas;
· agreed that the Draft Regional Guidelines for Codex Contact Points and National Codex Committees prepared by the Coordinating Committee for Asia could not be adopted in the Region;
· endorsed the recommendations of a Workshop on the Harmonization of Food Law.
CODEX COORDINATING COMMITTEE FOR NORTH AMERICA AND THE SOUTH WEST PACIFIC^10
^10 ALINORM 97/32
14. The Delegation of New Zealand, on the behalf of Dr. P. O'Hara, Coordinator for North America and the South West Pacific, reported the results of the Committee's 4th Session. The following issues were highlighted:
· a special focus was given to risk analysis and related aspects, and their impact on Codex;
· efforts to increase the coordination and participation of the countries of the South West Pacific region, with particular reference to facilitating greater participation of the Pacific Island countries;
· closer cooperation between Codex and Asia-Pacific Economic Cooperation (APEC) was strongly supported;
· a working group which was convened to identify Codex Standards and related texts which had a major impact on trade concluded that there was little benefit in continuing this work; and
· problems in the timeliness of distribution of reports and working papers.
Status of Regional Standards and Related Texts
15. The Delegation of the United Kingdom noted the important work underway in relation to the elaboration of regional standards and related texts and stated that the use which might be made of these texts under the WTO Agreements needed to be clarified (See also paras. 45 and 172).
<section>7</section>
REPORT OF THE FINANCIAL SITUATION OF THE JOINT FAO/WHO FOOD STANDARDS PROGRAMME FOR 1996/1997 AND 1998/1999 (Agenda Item 5)^11
^11 ALINORM 97/5 and ALINORM 97/5 Corrigendum.
16. The Commission noted the budget and expenditure for the last and present biennium as well as the estimated magnitude of the host government support for individual Codex Committees. As regards the proposed budget for the next biennium 1998/1999, the Commission noted with satisfaction that US$ 400 000 had been restored mainly to strengthen the documentation service and provide additional expert support to the Commission, subsequent to the strong support in favour of the Codex programme by Member Countries at the 112th Session of the FAO Council which had met early in June 1997.
17. The Commission however felt that the implications of the proposed reduction in the overall Codex budget should be carefully evaluated and it was stressed that the budgetary reduction as currently proposed should not lead to inefficiency in Codex document distribution nor in its other important activity areas. Delegations expressed concern that the level of the budget, being the minimum necessary to provide adequate support to the Commission should not be further reduced in the final review of the budget-setting process. Several delegations stated that the budgetary implications of the on-going exercise of the review of Codex subsidiary bodies initiated by FAO^12 should be closely examined.
^12 See Agenda Item 14.
18. The Commission also raised concern that reducing the duration of Codex sessions would not allow sufficient time for the consideration of the matters in question and limiting the length of Codex meeting reports would make them less useful for understanding how positions were reached (especially for those of the commodity committees). This might result in false economy and could eventually decrease the transparency and efficiency of the work of Codex.
<section>8</section>
CONSIDERATION OF AMENDMENTS TO THE PROCEDURAL MANUAL OF THE CODEX ALIMENTARIUS COMMISSION (Agenda Item 6)^13
^13 ALINORM 97/33 (Appendices II, III and IV); ALINORM 97/10
PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE RULES OF PROCEDURE (RULES II AND IX)
GUIDELINES FOR CODEX COMMITTEES
PROPOSED AMENDMENTS TO THE RULES OF PROCEDURE (RULES II AND IX)
19. As the quorum specified in Rule IV.6 for the amendment of the Rules of Procedure was not attained, the Commission was unable to adopt the proposed amendments and it was agreed that they would be considered again at the next session of the Commission.
GUIDELINES FOR CODEX COMMITTEES
Observers
20. The Commission expressed the view that further clarification was needed regarding the definition of "recognized international organizations" as the definition included in the current draft was too broad, and did not adopt the proposed amendment. It agreed to refer this question to the Committee on General Principles with a view to defining the modalities for the participation of international organizations and noted that related issues would be further discussed under Agenda Item 9 (see also para. 159).
Preparation and distribution of papers
21. The Commission expressed its disagreement with the proposal for a deadline for the reproduction of Member and Observer comments. It agreed to defer consideration of the proposed amendment and to consider all issues related to the distribution of documents and comments from an overall perspective under Agenda Item 14 - Other Business (see also paras. 191 - 195).
Guidelines on the Elaboration and/or Revision of Codes of Hygienic Practice for Specific Commodities
22. The Commission recalled that the Committee on Food Hygiene, while discussing the revision of the Codes, had agreed that exclusive stress on food safety could limit their usefulness and that some flexibility was needed to provide guidance on certain non-safety factors such as incipient deterioration in fish and fishery products. It agreed that this should be reflected in a preliminary statement to this section as follows:
The establishment of additional food hygiene requirements for specific food items or food groups should be limited to the extent necessary to meet the defined objectives of individual codes.
23. The Commission adopted the Guidelines with this amendment. It noted the views of the Delegations of Germany and Austria that this statement was not essential and should not be included in the Procedural Manual.
24. The Commission adopted all other amendments to Sections H, J and K of the Procedural Manual proposed. These are included in Appendix II of this report.
General Decisions of the Commission
25. The Commission agreed to include in the Procedural Manual a new Appendix incorporating all general policy decisions of the Commission, which provide essential guidance from the Commission to its subsidiary bodies and in particular the Four Statements of Principles Concerning the Role of Science in the Codex Decision-Making Process and the Extent to which Other Factors are Taken into Account. The Commission recalled that all such decisions had the same status, irrespective of the section of the Manual which included them.
Statements of Principle relating to the Role of Food Safety Risk Assessment
26. Several delegations proposed to add a fifth principle to reflect the concept that "different processes and procedures may achieve the same objectives", as had been recognized by the Committee on General Principles. Other delegations expressed the view that the inclusion of this principle was premature at this stage as food safety objectives were not clearly defined and that this was an important issue which required further discussion in the Committee on General Principles.
27. The Delegation of India, while not objecting to the principles themselves, stressed the difficulties of developing countries in the application of risk assessment methodology. The Commission noted that the principles under discussion were not directed to governments but were intended to provide orientations for the work of Codex Committees.
28. The Commission adopted the Statements of Principle as currently drafted, with the understanding that the Committee on General Principles would further consider issues related to equivalence and food safety objectives, and recognized that adequate flexibility should exist to take into account the needs of developing countries. It was also agreed that the Statements of Principle would be included in the new Appendix of the Procedural Manual containing general decisions of the Commission (see para. 25 above).
Definitions of Risk Analysis Terms Related to Food Safety
29. Some delegations proposed specific amendments to the current text and expressed the view that some inconsistencies existed between certain definitions. The Commission however recalled that the definitions originated from a Joint FAO/WHO Expert Consultation and had been discussed at the 21st Session of the Commission, the Executive Committee and the Committee on General Principles; the latter Committee proposed the adoption of the definitions on an interim basis.
30. The Commission adopted the definitions as currently drafted, for inclusion in the Definitions Section of the Procedural Manual, with the understanding that they would be subject to regular review and that Member countries would have the opportunity to provide comments for further consideration by the Committee on General Principles.
31. The general decisions and definitions for inclusion in the Procedural Manual are attached as Appendix II to this report.
<section>9</section>
CONSIDERATION OF DRAFT STANDARDS AND RELATED TEXTS (Agenda Item 7)^14
^14 ALINORM 97/21, Part I; ALINORM 97/21, Part I, Supplement 1; ALINORM 97/12, Appendix IV; ALINORM 97/25.
FOOD HYGIENE
FOOD IMPORT AND EXPORT INSPECTION AND CERTIFICATION SYSTEMS
FOOD LABELLING/NUTRITION AND FOODS FOR SPECIAL DIETARY USES
NUTRITION AND FOODS FOR SPECIAL DIETARY USES
FOOD LABELLING
FOOD ADDITIVES AND CONTAMINANTS
METHODS OF ANALYSIS AND SAMPLING
PESTICIDE RESIDUES
RESIDUES OF VETERINARY DRUGS IN FOODS
COORDINATING COMMITTEE FOR AFRICA
FATS AND OILS
FRESH FRUITS AND VEGETABLES
NATURAL MINERAL WATERS
MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS
SUGARS (AND HONEY)
32. Appendix III to this report contains a list of Draft and Proposed Draft Standards and Related Texts for Specific Commodities adopted by the Commission at Steps 8 and 5 respectively. Decisions of the Commission in regard to the adoption of the texts are tabulated in this Appendix. The remainder of this part of the report contains certain specific observations on the texts under consideration.
FOOD HYGIENE^15
^15 ALINORM 97/25, Part 14 (FH); ALINORM 97/25, Part 14 (FH) Add. 1 (comments from Mexico).
Draft Revised Recommended International Code of Practice: General Principles of Food Hygiene (at Step 8)^16
^16 ALINORM 97/13, Appendix II; ALINORM 97/25, Part 14 (comments from UK).
33. Some delegations noted that reference to rinsing after disinfection should be made in Section 6 of the Code and that supply of both hot and cold water for personal hygiene facilities as mentioned in Section 4.4.4 was not necessary in certain situations. The Commission requested the Committee to consider these proposals as a possible amendment to the Code, but adopted the Draft Revised International Code of Practice at Step 8.
Draft Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point (HACCP) System and Guidelines for its Application (at Step 8)^17
^17 ALINORM 97/13A, Appendix II; ALINORM 97/25, Part 14 (comments from Hungary and UK); CAC/LIM 31 (Corrigendum in Spanish only - prepared by the Delegation of Spain).
34. Indonesia and some other delegations expressed their concern that difficulties might be encountered in applying the HACCP system in smaller businesses and in developing countries. The Commission was informed that the Committee on Food Hygiene was proposing to initiate new work on a guidance document for the use of HACCP-like systems in small businesses, with special reference to developing countries, to address this concern. It also noted the importance of providing technical assistance to those countries in need, to facilitate the progressive implementation of the HACCP-based system.
Draft Revised Principles for the Establishment and Application of Microbiological Criteria for Foods (at Step 8)^18
^18 ALINORM 97/13A, Appendix III; ALINORM 97/25, Part 14 (comments from Hungary and UK).
35. The Commission adopted the Revised Principles at Step 8.
Additional Remarks
36. The Delegation of India stated that the three aforementioned texts on food hygiene constituted additional quality criteria and should only be applied by commercial partners on a voluntary basis.
37. The Chairperson of the Committee on Food Hygiene pointed out that the three texts referred above all to food safety and that they addressed food safety issues throughout the food chain; they were not exclusive to any one food sector.
FOOD IMPORT AND EXPORT INSPECTION AND CERTIFICATION SYSTEMS
Draft Guidelines for the Exchange of Information between Countries on Rejections of Imported Food^19
^19 ALINORM 97/30, Appendix II.
38. The Commission amended paragraph 4 of the text to make reference to "appropriate" information being provided to the exporter and included references to WHO in addition to the references to FAO in paragraph 10.
39. The Commission adopted the Guidelines as amended.
Draft Guidelines for the Design, Operation, Assessment and Accreditation of Food Import and Export Inspection and Certification Systems^20
^20 ALINORM 97/30A, Appendix II.
40. The Commission was split into two opinions: (1) in favour of adopting the Guidelines without delay; and, (2) in favour of postponing adoption.
41. Delegations supporting the postponed adoption of the Guidelines expressed the opinion that the text required further examination, review and comment by countries to further clarify its long term consequences. Concerns were expressed as to its status under the World Trade Organization (WTO) Agreements on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (SPS) and Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT). It was also noted that the Guidelines did not include a procedure for the determination of equivalence.
42. Delegations supporting the immediate adoption of the Guidelines noted that the text had been discussed and developed over many years and that the text allowed certain flexibility for governments in their efforts to apply these guidelines. In this regard it was also noted that the CCFICS would be examining a discussion paper related to the process of determining equivalence at its next session. Some delegations proposed a different title to avoid any unexpected WTO consequences.
43. The Representative of the WTO clarified that nuances in titles given to Codex texts would probably not be relevant in the application of the SPS and TBT Agreements. Governments applying stricter measures than Codex texts could be called upon to justify the deviations if challenged. The Representative also noted that even in the absence of relevant Codex texts governments could still be requested to provide justification for their national measures under current WTO procedures when international trade disputes arose.
44. As a result of a vote by show of hands, the Commission adopted the Guidelines (46 votes in favour of adoption, 16 votes against adoption and 7 abstentions) as presented.
45. The United States, supported by Chile, India, the Philippines and the United Arab Emirates, stated that it was highly inappropriate for such broad based and significant Guidelines to be adopted before member countries had the opportunity to consider their legal impact on national legislation in the light of the WTO Agreements. Concerns were also raised because the Executive Committee of the Codex Alimentarius Commission had just proposed that the Commission, through the Secretariat, consult with the WTO on the status of Codex guidelines and recommendations under the SPS Agreement, and that the Commission should await the outcome of these discussions before proceeding further.^21
^21 ALINORM 97/4, paras. 15-18.
FOOD LABELLING/NUTRITION AND FOODS FOR SPECIAL DIETARY USES^22
^22 ALINORM 97/22, Appendix II, ALINORM 97/26, Appendix II, ALINORM 97725 Part 4, CAC/LIM 14 and 25
Draft Guidelines on Use of Nutrition Claims
46. The view was expressed that the conditions for the claim "free" did not actually ensure that the food was free from the nutrient.
47. The inclusion of definitions relating to nutrient function claims and healthy diets was also questioned. One delegation expressed its disagreement with the footnote concerning trans-fatty acids in the Table. The Delegation of Spain stated that the section of the Table concerning fibre, protein and certain nutrient reference values required further scientific evaluation.
48. It was proposed by some delegations and observers that an exception be made to allow a "low fat" claim for products with a naturally high fat content, especially milk products, when a significant reduction in fat content was made; on the basis that commodity committees should be able to establish provisions deviating from general requirements. Several delegations and the Observer from Consumers International were strongly opposed to any such exceptions.
49. The Commission noted that commodity committees had the possibility to propose specific labelling and/or nutrition provisions in commodity standards which might deviate from the general provisions, provided they were submitted with adequate justification to the general committees for endorsement.
50. The Commission adopted the Guidelines for Use of Nutrition Claims (including Part A of the Table) at Step 8 with the understanding that additional work was needed on the expression of claims per serving and further consideration should be given to the issues raised in government comments when finalizing the Table of Conditions.
NUTRITION AND FOODS FOR SPECIAL DIETARY USES^23
^23 ALINORM 97/26, Appendices IV and III, ALINORM 97/25 Part 6, CAC/LIM 3 and 13
Proposed Draft Amendment to the Standard for Infant Formula (Vitamin B[12]) (Step 5 of the Accelerated Procedure)
51. The Commission adopted the Proposed Draft Amendment at Step 5 of the Accelerated Procedure.
Proposed Draft Revised Standard for Food Grade Salt (Salt Iodization) (Steps 5 and 8)
52. The Commission noted comments concerning food additives and, while recalling that the additives section had not been changed as the amendment concerned only iodization, agreed that it should be forwarded to the Committee on Additives and Contaminants for further consideration.
53. In reply to a question on salt iodization technology, the Commission noted that relevant information could be found in the report of the FAO Technical Consultation on Food Fortification.^24
^24 FAO Food and Nutrition Paper No. 60
54. The Commission agreed to omit Steps 6 and 7 of the Procedure and to adopt the Proposed Draft Revised Standard at Step 8.
FOOD LABELLING^25
^25 ALINORM 97/22, Appendix III; ALINORM 97/22A, Appendix II
Draft General Guidelines for the Use of the Term "Halal"
55. The Commission adopted the Draft General Guidelines at Step 8 as proposed.
Proposed Draft Amendment to the Labelling Section of the Standard for Quick Frozen Fish Sticks (Fish Fingers), Fish Portions and Fish Fillets, Breaded or in Batter (Step 5 of the Accelerated Procedure)
56. The Commission agreed that the Accelerated Procedure should not be confirmed and that the Proposed Draft Amendment should be considered at Step 5 of the Procedure.^26
^26 The Commission subsequently advanced this text to Step 6: see Appendix IV.
FOOD ADDITIVES AND CONTAMINANTS
General Standard for Food Additives: Draft Schedule of Additives Permitted for Use in Foods in General, Unless Otherwise Specified, in Accordance with Good Manufacturing Practice^27
^27 ALINORM 97/12A, Appendix IV
57. The Commission adopted the above Appendix at Step 8 with the understanding that the Schedule be kept under constant review by the Committee on Food Additives and Contaminants to ensure that the information was always based on the latest scientific data.
58. Because of the late receipt of the draft, the Delegation of India objected to the adoption of the Appendix.
Food Categories or Individual Food Items Where the Use of Food Additives with Good Manufacturing Practice Limitations on Use are Not Allowed or Restricted^28
^28 ALINORM 97/12A, Annex to Appendix IV.
59. The Commission adopted the Annex at Step 8 on an interim basis, noting that a number of countries had not had the opportunity to review the proposal in detail. It requested the Committee on Food Additives and Contaminants to review the Annex at its next session in light of comments and report its findings to the Commission.
60. Because of the late receipt of the draft, the Delegation of India objected to the adoption of the Annex.
METHODS OF ANALYSIS AND SAMPLING^29
^29 ALINORM 97/23, paras. 37-40 & Appendix II; ALINORM 97/23A, paras. 20-24 & Appendix II; ALINORM 97/21, Part I, Table 1; ALINORM 97/21, Part I Supplement 1, Table 2; ALINORM 97/25 Part 2; and CAC/LIM 7.
Proposed Draft Guidelines for the Assessment of the Competence of Testing Laboratories Involved in the Import and Export Control of Foods
61. The Commission adopted the Proposed Draft Guidelines with deletion of reference to "determining equivalency" pending the development of the definition of "equivalency" by the relevant Codex Committee.
PESTICIDE RESIDUES^30
^30 ALINORM 97/24, Annex II; ALINORM 97/24A, Annex II; and CAC/LIM 25.
Maximum Residue Limits and Extraneous Maximum Residue Limits
62. The Commission adopted the limits as presented at Step 8 of the Procedure, omitting Steps 6 and 7 where necessary. The Delegation of Germany expressed general reservations on the adoption of MRLs/EMRLs.
63. The Commission requested FAO and WHO to publish the Reports and Evaluations of the Joint FAO/WHO Meetings on Pesticide Residues (JMPR) in a timely manner in order not to hinder deliberations of MRLs; and urged better coordination on the elaboration of MRLs for compounds used both as pesticides and veterinary drugs. The Delegation of the United Kingdom requested an examination of potential implications of large variability of residue levels in certain commodities to intake, especially in relation to extreme consumers, stating, however, that even high level residues did not necessarily imply greater health risk.
RESIDUES OF VETERINARY DRUGS IN FOODS
Draft Maximum Residue Limits for Bovine Somatotropin (BST)^31
^31 ALINORM 95/31, Appendix II; comments from Consumers International (ALINORM 97/25-Part 10) and from the European Community (CAC/LIM 17).
64. The 21st Session of the Commission had adjourned debate on the adoption of maximum residue limits for bovine somatotropin until the present Session.^32
^32 ALINORM 95/37, paras. 47-48.
65. The Commission was split into two opinions: (1) in favour of adopting the draft MRLs at Step 8 without delay; and, (2) in favour of postponing their adoption.
66. Delegations favouring the adoption of the MRLs without delay stated that the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives and Contaminants (JECFA) and the Committee on Residues of Veterinary Drugs in Foods (CCRVDF) had performed a thorough scientific evaluation of the compound and, as additional scientific information had not been provided, a re-evaluation was unnecessary. It was stressed that if new scientific data became available, the JECFA and CCRVDF, as opposed to the Commission, were the appropriate bodies to undertake a new evaluation of the compound. It was noted that BST was used in several countries and that the adoption of the MRLs would confirm the work of JECFA and the CCRVDF while preventing the application of non tariff barriers to international trade.
67. Delegations and the Observer from Consumers International in favour of postponing the adoption of MRLs for BST stressed that new information had become available indicating that the administration of BST could reduce livestock immune defences which could make those animals more susceptible to viral and bacterial infection and an increased incidence of mastitis. This might lead to increased use of antibiotics. Other safety concerns were raised by the Observer from Consumers International. It was noted by the Delegation of the Netherlands expressing the views within the European Union, supported by other delegations and the Observer from Consumers International that the use of BST was opposed by consumers and had no benefit for them, and would not improve milk quality or safety. The importance of taking other legitimate factors than sound scientific analysis and evidence as stated in the Statements of Principle on the Role of Science into consideration was also emphasized.
68. The Delegation of the Netherlands expressing the views within the European Union, presented a proposal to suspend the consideration of the adoption of the MRLs for BST pending the re-evaluation of scientific data by JECFA and the CCRVDF and the examination of the application of the "other legitimate factors" in relation to BST by the Committee on General Principles.
69. A roll-call vote was called with the following results:
Countries in favour of the proposal:
Austria; Belgium; Burundi; Cameroon; Croatia; Cyprus; Denmark; Egypt; Estonia; Finland; France; Germany; Greece; Hungary; India; Ireland; Italy; Kenya; Lebanon; Lithuania; Luxembourg; Mozambique; Netherlands; Norway; Poland; Portugal; Romania; Saudi Arabia; Singapore; Slovak Republic; Spain; Sudan; Sweden; Switzerland; Turkey; Uganda; United Arab Emirates; United Kingdom.
Countries opposed to the proposal:
Australia; Canada; Chile; Costa Rica; Dominican Republic; Guatemala; Honduras; Indonesia; Japan; Malaysia; Mexico; New Zealand; Nicaragua; Nigeria; Pakistan; Philippines; Republic of Korea; South Africa; Thailand; United States of America; Viet Nam.
Countries abstaining:
Algeria; Argentina; Bolivia; Botswana; Brazil; China; Cuba; El Salvador; Morocco; Peru; Russian Federation; Tunisia; Zimbabwe.
Tally: 38 votes in favour; 21 votes against; 13 abstentions.
Result: The motion passed.
70. The Chairperson of the Committee on Residues of Veterinary Drugs in Foods requested those delegations and observers who indicated that new information existed relevant to the protection of public health resulting from the use of BST in dairy cows to submit such information to the JECFA Secretariat by 30 September 1997 so that such information could be evaluated by the 50th JECFA session in February 1998.
Draft and Proposed Draft Maximum Residue Limits for Veterinary Drugs at Steps 8 and 5/8, respectively^33
^33 ALINORM 97/31 A, Appendices II and IV; comments from the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committee on Food Additives (CAC/LIM 5).
71. The draft and proposed draft MRLs for diminazine, doramectin, levamisole, moxidectin, oxytetracycline (only), spiramycin and triclabendazole were adopted at Step 8. The Commission approved the MRL for spiramycin in cattle milk at 200 m g/litre, based on the advice of JECFA.
72. The MRLs for carazolol were returned to Step 7 because of concerns that the concentration of residues at the injection site may exceed the Acceptable Daily Intake.
COORDINATING COMMITTEE FOR AFRICA
Draft Guidelines for the Design of Control Measures for Street Vended Foods in Africa^34
^34 ALINORM 97/28, Appendix II
73. Some delegations questioned the title of the guidelines, especially the use of the term "design". The Commission clarified the term in explaining that those guidelines could be understood as a help in designing a national system of control.
74. Concerning the geographic scope of application of these guidelines, the Commission amended the Scope Section of the Guidelines to indicate that they were intended for use in the African Region.
75. The Guidelines were adopted by the Commission, with the amendment as noted above. The Coordinating Committee for Africa was requested to review this text in order to ensure conformity with the revised General Principles of Food Hygiene adopted by the Commission, so that inconsistency between the two texts would be avoided.
FATS AND OILS^35
^35 ALINORM 97/17, Appendices II, III and IV; ALINORM 97725 - Part 8, CAC/LIM 2
Draft Revised Standard for Named Animal Fats
76. Several countries stated that the proposed peroxide value (5 meq/kg) should be replaced with 10 meq/kg as the lower value had been arrived at without scientific justification and would adversely affect the economic interest of producing countries. It was also proposed to delete the reference to a temperature of 60°C for Premier Jus as this value was not adequate from a safety point of view and such quality requirements should not be included in the standards.
77. The use of colours, BHT, and TBHQ was objected to, but the Commission noted that all provisions for additives in the revised draft standards for fats and oils had been endorsed by the Committee on Food Additives and Contaminants.
78. The Commission returned the Draft Standard to Step 6 for government comments and for further consideration by the Committee on Fats and Oils.
Draft Revised Standard for Fats and Oils not Covered by Individual Standards
79. The Commission noted that similar objections were made concerning peroxide value and additives as in the case of Animal Fats and agreed to return the Draft Standard to Step 6.
Draft Revised Recommended Code of Practice for the Storage and Transport of Fats and Oils in Bulk
80. Several delegations objected to the adoption of the Code as they felt that a number of issues were not addressed, in particular the possibility that installations may diverge from its provisions and the reference to minimum requirements. They also expressed concern that the use of Thermal Heating Fluids was not generally allowed, which represented a serious problem to many exporting countries.
81. Other delegations pointed out that thermal heating fluids were not allowed in their countries and they had accepted a compromise in the Committee on Fats and Oils in order to facilitate international trade, with the understanding that further discussion could take place later in the Committee on this issue.
82. Although several countries supported the adoption of the Code with an amendment to delete the section concerning thermal heating fluids, other countries opposed it as they felt that in view of the implications for international trade and the economic interests of developing countries further discussion was needed on the text as a whole. The Commission agreed to return the Draft Revised Recommended Code of Practice for the Storage and Transport of Fats and Oils in Bulk at Step 6 for further comments and consideration by the Committee.
FRESH FRUITS AND VEGETABLES^36
^36 ALINORM 97/35
Bananas
83. The Commission adopted the Standard at Step 8 as proposed. The Delegation of Spain stated that the drafting of the text should be improved in order to avoid incompatibilities, especially relating to Section 1 and the Annex of this Standard. Other delegations questioned the sizing provisions of the Standard, especially in relation to small fruit varieties.
Mangosteens
84. The Commission adopted the Standard at Step 8 as proposed.
NATURAL MINERAL WATERS
Draft Revised Standard for Natural Mineral Waters^37
^37 ALINORM 97/20
85. The Delegation of Switzerland, as Host Government for the Committee, reported on the main issues discussed at the 5th Session of the Codex Committee on Natural Mineral Waters held in Thun, October 1996. It was reported that the Committee had recommended to the Commission the adoption of the Draft Standard for Natural Mineral Water at Step 8 of the Procedure. Furthermore, the Committee had proposed to the Commission the development of a general standard applicable to bottled or packaged waters other than "natural mineral waters". The Revised Draft Standard had been forwarded to the Commission for adoption after an intense discussion by the Codex Committee on Natural Mineral Waters.
86. The Commission was split into two opinions: (1) in favour of adopting this standard at Step 8; and (2) in favour of returning it to the Codex Committee on Natural Mineral Waters at Step 6.
87. Many delegations favouring the adoption of the Draft Revised Standard stated that the provisions of the standard were in conformity of the long history of production of natural mineral waters in Europe. They emphasized that the European Regional Standard had existed for several years and that it had been decided at the 19th Session of the Commission to convert it to a world-wide one; the draft had proceeded through all of the regular Steps of the Elaboration Procedures. It was pointed out that specific requirements to protect microbiological purity of the products had to be met including the bottling at the emergence of the source without transportation. Under these conditions the use of antimicrobial treatment was not necessary. These requirements indicated that "natural mineral water" was a specific product. They had no objection to the development of a standard for bottled or packaged waters excluding natural mineral water. Some delegations favoured the adoption of
the Standard with the understanding that the provisions concerning health requirements should still be considered by the Codex Committee on Food Additives and Contaminants.
88. Japan and other delegations opposed to the adoption of the Draft Revised Standard stated that they did so because the draft standard did not permit antimicrobial treatments and transportation of water in bulk containers which are required to ensure Codex aims taking into consideration various conditions in the world. The Delegation of Japan also stated that there was no consensus at the 5th Session of the Codex Committee on Natural Mineral Waters. Several delegation asked the denomination "natural" should be deleted and that natural mineral waters should be incorporated into a standard encompassing a larger category of bottled water. It was also mentioned that the draft standard did not contain a reference to minimum and/or maximum levels of total dissolved mineral content. Several delegations were opposed to the adoption of the standard because of the process by which the revision was undertaken. All of these delegations proposed to return the draft revised standard to
Step 6.
89. A roll-call vote was called for the adoption of the Draft Revised Standard by one Delegation and Japan proposed the use of a secret ballot. The Commission decided, by show of hands, (in favour of the secret ballot - 22, roll-call - 39 countries), to resolve the matter by roll-call vote. The Delegation of Egypt emphasized that on matters such as the one under discussion, issues should be resolved by consensus rather than by a voting procedure.
90. Result of the roll-call vote was:
Countries in favour of adoption
Austria, Belgium, Burundi, Cameroon, Côte d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cyprus, Denmark, Estonia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mozambique, Netherlands, Norway, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Tunisia, Turkey, United Kingdom, Uruguay
Countries opposed to the adoption
Argentina, Australia, Botswana, Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, Costa Rica, Dominican Republic, Egypt, Guatemala, India, Indonesia, Japan, Kenya, Malaysia, Mexico, Morocco, New Zealand, Nigeria, Philippines, Republic of Korea, Russian Federation, Saudi Arabia, Singapore, South Africa, Thailand, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, United States of America, Viet Nam
Countries abstaining
Algeria, Cuba, El Salvador, Lebanon, Mauritius, Nicaragua, Senegal, Sudan, Swaziland, Zimbabwe
Tally: 33 votes in favour of adoption of the Standard; 31 votes against; 10 abstentions.
Result: The Standard was adopted at Step 8.
91. The delegation of the United States of America pointed out that it was regrettable that such a decision has been taken by voting and made a statement: "With respect to the decision of the Commission, the US cannot support this Commission action because we object to several provisions of the adopted standard. The standard ignores public health protection by prohibiting any antimicrobial treatments and creates a barrier to international trade by including unnecessary and inappropriately restrictive requirements which are contrary to the General Principles of Codex Alimentarius, adopted by the Commission to protect public health and facilitate international trade".
92. The Delegations of Australia, Botswana, Brazil, Canada, China, Egypt, Guatemala, Indonesia, Japan, Mexico, Nigeria, Philippines, South Africa, Thailand, Uganda also expressed their reservation to this decision.
93. Several delegations expressed concern at the means by which the Commission had reached a conclusion on this matter and stressed that the Commission should try by all appropriate means to attempt to take such important decisions on the basis of consensus.
94. Several delegations raised their concern that the Health-Related Limits for Certain Substances contain in the Standard had not been reviewed by the Codex Committee on Food Additives and Contaminants. It was also noted that the Spanish and French versions of the Table on Microbiological Requirements needed to be aligned with the English version.
95. The Commission noted that many countries favoured the timely development of a standard for bottled/packaged waters other than natural mineral water (see Item 8). The Commission noted that the Committee on Natural Mineral Waters had now completed the task assigned to it by the 19th Session of the Commission, and decided to allocate the elaboration of the proposed draft standard for bottled/packaged waters other than natural mineral water as defined in the adopted Standard for Natural Mineral Water to this Committee in accordance with its powers under Step 1 of the Codex Elaboration Procedure.
MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS
Draft Revised Standards for Butter, Milk-fat Products, Evaporated Milks, Sweetened Condensed Milks, Milk and Cream Powders, Cheese, and Whey Cheese and Draft Standard for Cheeses in Brine^38
^38 ALINORM 97/11, Appendices II-IX; ALINORM 97/11, Part I, Table 1; ALINORM 97/25, Part 3-1; ALINORM 97/25, Part 3-2; CAC/LIM 9; CAC/LIM 27; and CAC/LIM28.
96. In his presentation of the Draft Standards, the Delegation of New Zealand representing the Chairperson of the Codex Committee on Milk and Milk Products, stated that the existing standards were not suitable for the new trading environment and needed updating. It was noted that the labelling provisions had not been endorsed by the relevant committee. It was also noted that the hygiene provisions were consistent with the recommendations as contained in the Procedural Manual. It was further noted that the 29th session of the Committee on Food Hygiene considered the issue of pasteurization or alternative measures but decided to forward the common hygiene provisions to the Commission without making further additions to them. The Delegation proposed adoption of the Draft Standards for Butter, Milk-fat Products, Evaporated Milks, Sweetened Condensed Milks, and Milk and Cream Powders and to return to Step 5 the Draft Standards for Cheese, Whey Cheese, and Cheeses in Brine, which
involved more contentious issues on hygiene and labelling. The Delegation stated that the provisions relating to food hygiene and food labelling could be dealt with in a horizontal manner taking into consideration the work which would be initiated by the Committee on Food Hygiene on the Code of Hygienic Practice for Milk and Milk Products and the Committee on Milk and Milk Products in relation to the review of the Code of Principles concerning Milk and Milk Products.
97. The Commission discussed whether or not to include reference to "pasteurization or alternative measures which provide equivalent consumer protection" in the hygiene provisions of the standards under discussion. Several countries reported that in their countries milk needed to be pasteurized except for manufacturing cheeses of certain ripeness. The Delegation of France and other delegations were, however, strongly opposed to the inclusion of reference to pasteurization in these standards.
98. In light of the widely divergent opinions on this matter and recognizing the need for further deliberations on the food labelling provisions, the Commission decided to return all Draft Standards to Step 6 with a view towards considering them at the next Session of the Commission awaiting developments of the relevant issues by the Committees on Food Hygiene, Food Labelling and Milk and Milk Products.
99. Several delegations and observers expressed disappointment. Sharing the view of the Delegation of New Zealand, they stated that the decision was not consistent with other decisions made at this Session, and stressed the need for greater cooperation between the various Codex Committees to facilitate each other's work. The Commission urged the Committees on Food Hygiene and Food Labelling to give high priority to the finalization of the relevant provisions. The Chairperson of the Committee on Food Hygiene undertook to give high priority to progressing the hygiene issues relating to these standards.
SUGARS (AND HONEY)
Draft Revised Standards for Sugar^39 and Honey^40,41
^39 ALINORM 97/27 App. I
^40 ALINORM 97/27 App. II
^41 CAC/LIM 10 (ALINORM 97/25 Part 15(S)-Add. 1) Government Comments
100. The Commission recalled that at its 21st Session it had agreed that further revision by the Host Government (United Kingdom) would be carried out through correspondence^42.
^42 ALINORM 95/37 para. 82
101. The Commission noted that although the Draft Revised Standard for Sugar was a substantial improvement over the old ones there still remained a number of problems with both the sugar and honey standards and agreed to return the draft standards (to Step 6) for a new round of comments.
102. The Commission recognized that there were serious problems related to handling comments through correspondence and concurred that the revision should, if necessary, be addressed through a meeting of the Committee on Sugars or an alternative meeting with the understanding that all interested parties should participate in order to resolve the technical issues before submitting the revised standard to the next Session of the Commission.
103. The Commission noted the statement of the Host Government (UK) that they could not guarantee the convening of a meeting of the Committee on Sugars before the next Session of the Commission and agreed to discuss alternative hosting arrangements under Agenda Item 13.
<section>a</section>
PROPOSED DRAFT STANDARDS AND RELATED TEXTS AT STEP 5
FISH AND FISHERY PRODUCTS
MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS
NUTRITION AND FOODS FOR SPECIAL DIETARY USES
RESIDUES OF VETERINARY DRUGS IN FOODS
FOOD ADDITIVES AND CONTAMINANTS
PESTICIDE RESIDUES
FOOD LABELLING
FISH AND FISHERY PRODUCTS
Proposed Draft Guidelines for the Sensory Evaluation of Fish and Shellfish^43
^43 ALINORM 97/18, Appendix II; ALINORM 97/25 - Part 7
104. The Commission recommended that the sensory evaluation of cephalopods should be considered in view of their importance in trade. The Commission adopted the Proposed Draft Guidelines at Step 5.
MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS
Proposed Draft Revised Code of Principles Concerning Milk and Milk Products^44
^44 ALINORM 97/11, paras. 7-20; ALINORM 97/21, Part I, Table 4; ALINORM 97/25, Part 3-2.
105. The Commission noted that the Committee on General Principles had considered the Proposed Draft Revised Code of Principles and had recommended that it be redrafted in the form of a standard, with the deletion of the general provisions (viz.; Preamble, Article 1 & Article 8) covered by other general Codex texts. With regard to Article 8, the Committee on General Principles had recommended its deletion unless the Committee on Milk and Milk Products could demonstrate that there were specific reasons for its inclusion. This recommendation would not affect the status of the Proposed Draft Code, forwarded for adoption at Step 5.
106. It was pointed out that there was an immediate need for an updated version of the Code to include more modern definitions of milk and milk products to facilitate fair trade.
107. The Commission decided to adopt the Proposed Draft Code at Step 6 with the understanding that the recommendations of the Committee on General Principles would be taken into consideration during the further elaboration and that the Code would be submitted to the Committee on Food Labelling for endorsement of the relevant provisions.
NUTRITION AND FOODS FOR SPECIAL DIETARY USES^45
^45 ALINORM 97/26, Appendices V and VI, ALINORM 97/25/Part 6, CAC/LIM 13 and 25
Proposed Draft Standard for Gluten-Free Foods
108. The view was expressed that the level of gluten of 200 ppm proposed for some types of gluten-free foods did not adequately protect sensitive consumers and that the value of 20 ppm should be generally applied to all such foods. The problems related to the methods of analysis for the detection of gluten were also stressed.
109. The Commission adopted the Proposed Draft Standard for Gluten-Free Foods at Step 5, while recommending that all relevant comments be taken into account when finalizing the standard.
Proposed Draft Guidelines for Vitamin and Mineral Supplements
110. The Delegations of Canada and the United States, supported by Australia and Japan, expressed their objection to the development of the Guidelines in the framework of Codex as this matter should be left to national authorities to regulate, in view of the wide differences between countries concerning the regulatory status and consumption habits of vitamin and mineral supplements. The development of international guidelines in this area would negatively affect the right of consumers to use these products, and there was no scientific basis for such restriction. It was also pointed out that many sections of the text were in square brackets and there may not be sufficient consensus at this stage to advance it to Step 6.
111. Several delegations pointed out that these products were traded internationally and their unregulated development posed a problem to control authorities, it was therefore essential that work on this issue should continue within the Committee on Nutrition and Foods for Special Dietary Uses.
112. The Commission agreed to return the Proposed Draft Guidelines for Vitamin and Mineral Supplements to Step 3 for further comments and consideration by the Committee, including a fundamental reconsideration of the need for the Guidelines.
RESIDUES OF VETERINARY DRUGS IN FOODS
Proposed Draft Maximum Residue Limits for Veterinary Drugs^46
^46 ALINORM 97/31A, Appendix V.
113. The Commission adopted the proposed draft maximum residue limits as presented, with the understanding that the Committees on Residues of Veterinary Drugs in Foods and on Pesticide Residues and the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committees on Food Additives and on Pesticide Residues would co-ordinate their efforts when evaluating compounds administered as both veterinary drugs and pesticides (e.g., abamectin, cypermethrin, alpha-cypermethrin).
FOOD ADDITIVES AND CONTAMINANTS
Proposed Draft Schedules of Food Additives (Antioxidants, Preservatives, Stabilizers, Thickeners and Sweeteners) Specifically Permitted in Foods^47
^47 ALINORM 97/12A, Appendix V.
114. The Commission adopted the proposed draft Schedules of Food Additives Specifically Permitted for Use in Foods as presented. The Delegations of Denmark, France, Norway and Sweden noted the importance of the consideration of technological justification and need when establishing maximum levels for food additives.
Proposed Draft Maximum Levels for Lead^48
^48 ALINORM 97/12A, Appendix X.
115. The Commission adopted the proposed draft levels as presented. The Commission noted the importance of taking account of source directed measures, good agricultural and manufacturing practice, and methods of analysis when elaborating maximum levels for lead in foods. It was stated that in efforts to reduce lead levels in foods, particular emphasis should be placed on susceptible populations such as infants, children and women of child-bearing age.
PESTICIDE RESIDUES
Proposed Draft Maximum Residue Limits for Pesticides (MRLs)^49
^49 ALINORM 97/24A, ANNEX II; ALINORM 97/21, Part I Supplement I, Table 2; and CAC/LIM 25.
116. The Observer from the EU, supported by the Delegation of Spain, expressed concerns about the MRL for fenthion in virgin olive oil at 3 mg/kg, stating that this high level could lead to acute intake risks and requested that acute dietary exposure assessment be carried out. The Observer also stated that animal transfer studies were needed for parathion-methyl to estimate residue levels in animal products arising from residues in or on feedingstuffs.
117. The Commission noted that the Committee on Pesticide Residues was aware of these problems; that an acute reference dose had been recommended for fenthion by the JMPR and that the matter regarding animal transfer studies had been referred to the JMPR.
118. The Commission adopted the MRLs with the understanding that the above comments be taken into account in further deliberation of the relevant MRLs.
FOOD LABELLING
Proposed Draft Amendment to the General Standard for the Labelling of Prepackaged Foods (Recommendations for the Labelling of Foods that can Cause Hypersensitivity)^50
^50 ALINORM 97/22, Appendix IV.
119. In reply to a question on the inclusion of additional substances in the list of foods that can cause hypersensitivity, the Commission noted that the Committee on Food Labelling had recognized that further scientific advice was required in order to determine the foods to be included in the list and the criteria to do so. The Committee had therefore recommended that the Commission ask FAO and WHO to consider urgently how this issue should be better addressed in order to evaluate available scientific data on hypersensitivity.
120. The Commission was informed that the WHO Secretary of JECFA had agreed in principle that it would be possible to address this issue in the framework of JECFA, and that the Commission would be kept informed of how such new work would be carried out. The Commission expressed its appreciation to FAO and WHO for taking action to address this important and urgent issue.
121. The Commission adopted the Proposed Draft Amendment to the General Standard at Step 5 as proposed.
<section>b</section>
CONSIDERATION OF PROPOSALS TO ELABORATE STANDARDS AND/OR RELATED TEXTS AND OTHER MATTERS ARISING FROM REPORTS OF CODEX COMMITTEES (Agenda Item 8)^51
^51 ALINORM 97/21, Part 11
PROPOSALS TO ELABORATE NEW STANDARDS AND RELATED TEXTS
REVOCATION OF EXISTING STANDARDS AND PROPOSALS FOR DELETION OF WORK ITEMS
PROPOSALS TO ELABORATE NEW STANDARDS AND RELATED TEXTS^52
^52 Proposals were summarized in Appendix I of ALINORM 97/21, Part II.
122. The Commission agreed that in the matter of "Sports" or "Energy" drinks, the primary problem might relate to the claims being made for such products and assigned the work to the Committee on Food Labelling. It noted that certain aspects of the composition of these products would be taken up by the Committee on Food Additives and Contaminants in the context of the General Standard for Food Additives, and that elements relating to nutrition might need to be considered by the Committee on Nutrition and Foods for Special Dietary Uses. It requested the Committee on Food Labelling to coordinate its work with these Committees as required.
123. A proposal on the elaboration of guidelines for the determination of equivalence was withdrawn from the list in view of the preparatory studies which were being undertaken by the Committee on Food Import and Export Inspection and Certification Systems to establish whether or not to make a firm proposal in this area.
124. The Commission noted the proposal to elaborate Maximum Residue Limits for Porcine Somatotropin (PST). Without prejudice to the timely scientific evaluation of this substance by JECFA, the Commission requested that the matter be taken up by the Committee on Residues of Veterinary Drugs in Foods concurrently with the discussion by the Committee on General Principles of the matter of Bovine Somatotropins (BST) and PST as a related substance within the context of the four Statements of Principle concerning the Role of Science in the Codex Decision-making Process and the Extent to which Other Factors are Taken into Account.
125. The Commission agreed with a proposal that the Committee on General Principles should address the question of improving procedures aimed at obtaining a better consensus of opinion at Commission and Committee sessions. The Delegation of Chile noted that such a matter was closely linked to the need to guarantee effective participation of me full membership of the Commission. It was noted that the Chairpersons of Codex Committees, in an informal meeting, had agreed to meet again immediately before the Committee on General Principles in an effort to facilitate discussion on these, and related, matters.
126. The Commission agreed that the Committee on General Principles should consider the issue of providing special or differential treatment to developing countries in the application of Codex standards and make recommendations as appropriate.
127. The Commission agreed to request the Committee on Fish and Fishery Products to give consideration to the elaboration of standards for tropical fresh water fish and fishery products.
128. The Commission requested the Committee on Soups and Broths to commence work revising the Standard for Bouillons and Consommés.
129. The Commission noted the outcome of the FAO Consultation on Animal Feeding and Food Safety, and agreed to consider the Draft Code of Practice on Good Animal Feeding. It assigned this work to the Committees on Food Hygiene, Food Additives and Contaminants, Pesticide Residues, and Residues of Veterinary Drugs in Foods, with the co-ordinating role to be taken by the Executive Committee.
130. The list of approved new work is contained in Appendix IV to this report.
REVOCATION OF EXISTING STANDARDS AND PROPOSALS FOR DELETION OF WORK ITEMS^53
^53 ALINORM 97/21, Part II, Appendix II
Revocation of the Standard for Edible Ices and Abolition of the Codex Committee on Edible Ices
131. The Commission agreed to revoke the Standard for Edible Ices, recognizing that it was not needed for international trade, and to abolish formally the Committee on Edible Ices. The Commission expressed its appreciation to the government of Sweden for hosting the Committee since its creation and for its work on the revision of the standard.
Guidelines on the Inclusion of Provisions on Nutritional Quality in Food Standards and Other Texts
132. The Commission concurred with the proposal of the Committee on Nutrition and Foods for Special Dietary Uses to formally withdraw the Guidelines currently included in the Procedural Manual.
Revocation of Certain Obsolete Maximum Residue Limits for Pesticides
133. The Commission revoked certain obsolete MRLs as proposed by the Committee on Pesticide Residues following its regular review of MRLs.
Discontinuation of Work on Dioxins and Other Contaminants
134. The Observer from Consumers International expressed opposition to the discontinuation of work on PCB's, dioxins, polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, and hydrogen cyanide.
Standard for Specified Vegetable Fat Products and Standard for Specified Mixed Animal and Vegetable Fat Products
135. The Commission concurred with the proposal of the Committee on Fats and Oils to revoke both standards as these products were not traded internationally.
Individual Cheese Standards
136. The Commission agreed to revoke the following individual standards:
· Individual Cheese Standard for Danablu (C-2)
· Individual Cheese Standard for Gruyere (C-10)
· Individual Cheese Standard for Gudbrandsdalsost (C-19)
· Individual Cheese Standard for Norvegia (C-23)
· Individual Cheese Standard for Esrom (C-26).
The Commission deleted Danablu and Adelost from the General Standard for Blue-Veined Cheeses (C-32). The Delegation of France pointed out that Blue Cheese should not be deleted from the General Standard for Blue-Veined Cheeses as proposed. The Commission agreed that the Committee on Milk and Milk Products should consider this question at its next session.
<section>c</section>
OTHER MATTERS ARISING FROM REPORTS OF CODEX COMMITTEES
CODEX COMMITTEE ON GENERAL PRINCIPLES
CODEX COMMITTEE ON FOOD HYGIENE
CODEX COMMITTEE ON FOOD IMPORT AND EXPORT INSPECTION AND CERTIFICATION SYSTEMS
CODEX COMMITTEE ON FOOD LABELLING
CODEX COMMITTEE ON METHODS OF ANALYSIS AND SAMPLING
CODEX COMMITTEE ON PESTICIDE RESIDUES
CODEX COMMITTEE ON RESIDUES OF VETERINARY DRUGS IN FOODS
NUTRITION AND FOODS FOR SPECIAL DIETARY USES
FATS AND OILS
FOOD INSPECTION AND CERTIFICATION SYSTEMS
CODEX COMMITTEE ON GENERAL PRINCIPLES
Review of the Status of Codes, Guidelines and Related Texts^55
^55 ALINORM 97/7
137. The review of the Status of Codes, Guidelines and Related Texts had been discussed at the 12th Session of the Committee on General Principles^56 on the basis of a request made by the 43rd Session of the Executive Committee^57 for the Secretariat to undertake an analysis of all texts other than standards with a view to clarifying the status of these texts under the WTO Agreements.
^56 ALINORM 97/33, paras. 25-32.
^57 ALINORM 97/3, paras. 51-52.
138. Proposals arising from the Committee on General Principles concerning the status of Codex Advisory Texts were discussed under this item and also under Item 11 (see paras. 168-172 for further discussion).
CODEX COMMITTEE ON FOOD HYGIENE
Microbiological Aspects of Food Safety^58
^58 ALINORM 97/13A, para. 53.
139. The Commission requested FAO and WHO to convene an international expert advisory body similar to JECFA and JMPR on the microbiological aspects of food safety to address particularly microbiological risk assessments.
CODEX COMMITTEE ON FOOD IMPORT AND EXPORT INSPECTION AND CERTIFICATION SYSTEMS
Guidelines and Criteria for a Generic Official Certificate Format^59
^59 ALINORM 97/30A, paras. 35-39 and Appendix III.
140. In view of the diverse opinions expressed, the 5th Session of the Committee on Food Import and Export Inspection and Certification Systems had appended proposed draft Criteria for a Generic Certificate for the Export of Food and Food Products and the Model Certificate to its report in order to facilitate Commission discussions as to the need for further consideration by CCFICS of this matter from the different perspective of Codex commodity committees.
141. In view of the difficulty in developing a generic certificate applicable to a broad range of agricultural commodities, the Commission agreed that the Committee should not undertake the elaboration of such a document per se. However, the Commission requested the Committee to consider a discussion paper addressing general guidelines and criteria for official certificates and to present a proposal for future work to the next session of the Executive Committee.
Guidelines on Food Import Control Systems^60
^60 ALINORM 97/30A, paras. 40-44.
142. The Commission requested Mexico, in collaboration with the Secretariat, to revise its discussion paper on the development of guidelines for food import control systems for consideration at the next session of the Committee on Food Import and Export Inspection and Certification Systems.
CODEX COMMITTEE ON FOOD LABELLING
Foods That Can Cause Hypersensitivity^61
^61 ALINORM 97/22a, paras. 44-45; and ALINORM 97/21, Part II, Section 3.4.1.
143. See paras. 119-121.
CODEX COMMITTEE ON METHODS OF ANALYSIS AND SAMPLING
Analytical Terminology for Codex Use^62
^62 ALINORM 97/23A, paras. 27-28 & Appendix III; ALINORM 97/21, Part II, Section 3.5.1; and CAC/LIM 8.
144. The Commission endorsed the list of Analytical Terminology for Codex Use with the deletion of the last sentence of Note 1 in the definition of "Laboratory-Performance (Proficiency) Study" to improve the technical accuracy. The list would be contained in the Procedural Manual.
Other Matters^63
^63 ALINORM 97/23A, paras. 55, 44, 45-47 & Appendices IV & V; ALINORM 97/23, paras. 51-55 & Appendix IV; ALINORM 97/21, Part II, Sections 3.5.2-4; and CAC/LIM 8.
145. The Commission approved the amended Terms of Reference of the Committee. It agreed to the abolition of the CAC/RM Numbering System as recommended by the Committee^64. The Commission also confirmed the endorsement of methods of analysis for food additives and contaminants and a number of commodity standards.
^64 ALINORM 97/23A, para. 44.
CODEX COMMITTEE ON PESTICIDE RESIDUES
Periodic Review Procedure^65
^65 ALINORM 97/24, Appendix III; and ALINORM 97/21, Part II, Section 3.6.1.
146. The Commission endorsed the Procedure to be included as an annex to the relevant Codex Alimentarius volume.
Response to Matters Referred by the Commission^66
^66 ALINORM 97/24, paras. 8 & 10; ALINORM 97/24A, paras 5-7; and ALINORM 97/21, Part II, Section 3.6.2.
147. The Commission concurred to the Committee's opinion that the elaboration of MRLs for honey, low-fat meat and fish was of low priority. The Delegation of Germany stated that residues of pesticides in fish was a growing problem, especially in relation to increasing amount of organochlorine compounds in water. The Commission requested the Committee to monitor the gravity of the problem for necessary action.
CODEX COMMITTEE ON RESIDUES OF VETERINARY DRUGS IN FOODS
Methods Validation for Food Control Purposes^67
^67 ALINORM 97/31A, para. 60; ALINORM 97/23A, para. 18; ALINORM 97/24A, para. 88; ALINORM 97/21, Part II, section 3.7.1.
148. The Commission noted that FAO was planning to hold a joint FAO/IAEA Expert Consultation on Methods Validation for Food Control Purposes later this year.
Risk Assessment in the Codex Committee on Residues of Veterinary Drugs in Foods^68
^68 ALINORM 97/31A, paras. 11-12; ALINORM 97/21, Part II, section 3.7.2.
149. The Commission noted the activities on risk assessment in the Committee as contained in ALINORM 97/21, Part I, section 3.7.2. The Chairperson of the Committee added that the Committee's deliberation on this issue was still at its early stage and a substantial time would be needed to clearly separate risk assessment and risk management components of its work, which had been combined at present. He invited delegations to send comments on the paper to the Delegation of France as soon as possible.
NUTRITION AND FOODS FOR SPECIAL DIETARY USES
Terms of Reference of the Committee on Nutrition and Foods for Special Dietary Uses ^69
^69 ALINORM 97/26, para. 6
150. The Commission approved the amended Terms of Reference as proposed, noting that they reflected the emphasis on the horizontal aspects of the Committee's work.
Potentially Harmful Herbs and Botanical Preparations sold as Foods
151. The Commission concurred with the view of the Committee on Nutrition and Foods for Special Dietary Uses that no further action was needed concerning these products as this was a matter for national authorities to address, especially as regulations and practices in this area greatly differed from one country to another. The matter was deleted from the Commission's Work Programme.
FATS AND OILS
Draft Standard for Mayonnaise
152. The Commission considered a question of the Committee on Fats and Oils on the need to convert the Regional European Standard into a world-wide standard. It agreed to discontinue this work.
FOOD INSPECTION AND CERTIFICATION SYSTEMS
153. The Observer from CIAA, noting the discontinuation of work on the application of ISO 9000, indicated that this system was widely used in European industry and could also be used by control services. The Observer offered to make a presentation on this subject at the next session of the Committee on Food Import and Export Inspection and Certification Systems. Many delegations reasserted their objections to further work on such Guidelines as it was not within the mandate of a Codex Committee to endorse a system intended for voluntary application in the industry.
154. The Chairperson of the Committee recalled that it had been agreed to discontinue work on the Guidelines as no consensus could be reached but that an information document was being circulated by France on this matter. The Commission confirmed that this work was deleted from its Programme.
<section>d</section>
INVOLVEMENT OF NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS IN THE WORK OF THE CODEX ALIMENTARIUS COMMISSION (Agenda Item 9)^70
^70 ALINORM 97/8 and Addendum (Selection of Criteria for Experts of Joint FAO/WHO Expert Committees).
155. The 21st Session of the Commission had agreed, among other recommendations, that a paper on consumer involvement in Codex should be considered at its present session.^71 The 43rd Session of the Executive Committee had agreed that the paper should be strengthened to include references to developing country Members and other interest groups' involvement in Codex work.^72 The 44th Session of the Executive Committee had supported the recommendations contained in a paper prepared by the Secretariat as contained in ALINORM 97/8.
^71 ALINORM 95/37, para. 90.
^72 ALINORM 97/3, para. 41.
156. The Observer of Consumers International supported most of the recommendations included in ALINORM 97/8. It particularly supported the convening of seminars and workshops, especially in developing countries, to explain the activities of the Commission and offered through its offices in developing countries to support this. The Observer recommended improvement of transparency through the involvement of independent NGO consumer organizations and the strengthening of NGO participation in National Codex Committees and in national delegations to Codex meetings; the inclusion of consumer representatives as observers in the Executive Committee and JECFA, JMPR and other FAO/WHO expert consultations; the continued dissemination of Codex publications on the Internet and the possible establishment of a trust fund to improve consumer participation in Codex activities. The Observer from the European Food Law Association supported the statement of Consumers International and suggested
that the Committee on General Principles review Rule VII of the Rules of Procedure of the Codex Alimentarius Commission.
157. The Commission noted a proposal raised at the 44th Session of the Executive Committee concerning the selection process for ad hoc expert consultations^73.
^73 ALINORM 97/4, para. 9.
158. Many delegations and the Observer from the European Community supported the strengthening of consumer participation in Codex work with the possibility to submit suggestions for experts for expert bodies through established FAO and WHO procedures. Some delegations suggested that the timetables and lists of experts selected to participate in expert meetings should be widely disseminated through the Internet and by other means. The Delegations of the United Kingdom and Norway stated that the role of consumers was different from that of industry bodies. In view of the changing status of Codex documents, it was important to avoid any perception of Codex being unduly influenced by commercial interests. Other delegations stated that the role to be played by all INGOs, including consumer organizations, should be fully considered. It was suggested to widely share experience on successful cases of NGO participation in Codex work at the national, regional and international levels.
159. The Commission reached the following conclusions:
· The Committee on General Principles should develop guidelines on the procedures for granting observer status to international non-governmental organizations, outlining the rights and obligations of such organizations based on the applicable policies and rules of FAO and WHO, for inclusion in the Procedural Manual;
· Governments should be encouraged to facilitate the participation of NGOs, particularly independent consumer NGOs in National Codex Committees, especially in developing countries, in preparing for Codex meetings, formulating national positions on Codex issues and in participating in Codex work in general;
· FAO and WHO should be encouraged to consider the participation of qualified experts, put forward by INGOs, in expert consultations and meetings on the basis of FAO/WHO rules and procedures, subject to the final approval of the Directors-General of the organizations;
· The Secretariat should continue to draw the attention of potential donors to trust funds through extra-budgetary means to facilitate the participation of INGOs and developing countries in Codex meetings, while ensuring that Codex work is not placed under undue influences; and
· A paper should be prepared by the Secretariat in consultation with independent non-governmental consumers' organizations on enhancing the role of such organizations in the Codex process for consideration at the next session of the Commission.
<section>e</section>
THE APPLICATION OF RISK ANALYSIS PRINCIPLES IN CODEX (Agenda Item 10)^74
^74 CAC/LIM 21 (ALINORM 97/9-Rev. 1); and ALINORM 97/4, paras. 10-14.
ACTION PLAN FOR CODEX-WIDE DEVELOPMENT AND APPLICATION OF RISK ANALYSIS PRINCIPLES AND GUIDELINES
160. The Commission noted that since its 20th Session it had been considering matters regarding risk analysis in Codex. So far in the area of risk analysis, expert consultations had been held on the application of risk analysis to food standard issues, risk management and food safety, and food consumption and exposure assessment of chemicals. At present risk analysis was considered to be an integral part of the decision-making process of Codex. The Commission recalled that it agreed earlier in this Session to include risk analysis definitions in the Procedural Manual^75.
^75 See paras. 29-31.
161. The original paper, ALINORM 97/9, had been prepared with an objective to develop an action plan to be taken by Codex to apply risk analysis more consistently and uniformly with a particular emphasis on risk management. The paper included the recommendations made by the Joint Expert Consultation on Risk Management and Food Safety^76 for consideration by the Commission. The Executive Committee held immediately before this Session, after considering ALINORM 97/9, amended the proposed action plan for Codex-wide development and application of risk analysis principles and guidelines. Based on this decision, CAC/LIM 21 was subsequently published.
^76 Annex 1 of CAC/LIM 21.
ACTION PLAN FOR CODEX-WIDE DEVELOPMENT AND APPLICATION OF RISK ANALYSIS PRINCIPLES AND GUIDELINES
162. The Commission focused its discussions on the proposed action plan as amended by the Executive Committee^77. The Commission unanimously agreed on the importance of risk analysis in Codex work and to show positive responses to the recommendations in the paper. However, some delegations stated that due to the late availability of the original and amended papers, there needed to be sufficient time provided to consider thoroughly both the content of the paper and its implications.
^77 ALINORM 97/4, para. 14; and CAC/LIM 21, para. 32.
163. In developing a strategy and action plan for development and application of risk analysis principles and guidelines in all Codex activities where appropriate, the Codex Alimentarius Commission:
· took note of recommendations 2 to 6 addressed to it by the Joint FAO/WHO Expert Consultation on Risk Management, and requested the relevant Codex Committees to consider the recommendations and to propose action as necessary;
· welcomed recommendations 7^78, 9 and 11 of the Expert Consultation addressed to FAO and WHO and, in particular, commended recommendation 9 to provide assistance to developing countries in the application of risk management, and noted recommendation 8;
^78 Concerning Recommendation 7, see paragraph 139.
· noted that it might not be possible or appropriate to apply risk management policies based on a single risk management strategy for the different classes of hazards which needed to be addressed: different policies might need to be applied under the same generic principles to the management of different classes of hazards^79.
^79 It was explained that different risk management policies had been applied within the Codex system, e.g., ADI-based models representing notional "zero-risk" policies for chemicals; microbiological criteria representing notional "zero-risk" for specific pathogens in cooked foods; ALARA policies for non-threshold chemical contaminants such as genotoxic carcinogens and some environmental contaminants; and ALARA policies for risks associated with biological hazards in raw foods.
Action Plan
164. The Commission will:
(i) Circulate the proposed Definitions for Risk assessment policy and Risk profile to governments, Codex committees and interested international organizations for comment, and request the Codex Committee on General Principles to consider these comments with a view to making firm recommendations for adoption of these definitions to the 23rd Session of the Commission;
(ii) Request the Codex Committee on General Principles to elaborate integrated principles for risk management and risk assessment policy setting, risk communication and documentation for inclusion in the Procedural Manual. Proposed "working principles" are contained in Annex 2 to ALINORM 97/9 -Rev. 1;
(iii) Once principles have been established, prepare specific guidelines as required to aid in the uniform application of the principles. The Codex Committee on General Principles should be requested to co-ordinate this exercise and all relevant Codex Committees should be involved;^80
^80 This would include requiring that Codex Committees involved in any aspect of risk analysis formally describe their implementation of the Codex principles and guidelines, using a standardised summary format, for publication in their respective reports and recommend that advisory bodies such as JECFA and JMPR do the same. It would also require that that Codex Committees develop standards using these principles and guidelines as a checklist, and in doing so adhere closely to their documented risk assessment/risk management policies.
(iv) As the principles and guidelines have been established, include them in the Procedural Manual, with the addition of an introductory narrative on risk analysis in the Codex system and identification of the responsibilities of Committees in implementation of the principles and guidelines;
(v) Recognise that the judgement of equivalence of food control systems in different countries is a critical issue, and that Codex principles and guidelines associated with determination of equivalence will facilitate this process;
(vi) Until such time as the principles are adopted by the Commission, request JECFA, JMPR and other advisory bodies and Codex Committees to continue evaluating and improving the application of the elements of risk assessment and risk management that they have prioritised for attention;
(vii) Encourage further development of qualitative risk assessment approaches so as to achieve early improvements in elaboration of food standards.
Discussion on Matters other than the Action Plan
165. The Commission agreed that the Codex Working Principles for Risk Analysis would be elaborated through the step-wise procedure, with the possibility of omission of steps should the Committee on General Principles so recommend.
166. As regards the recommendation on maximum accessibility of published documents, the Delegation of the United States stated that in addition to make all process of risk analysis transparent, it was extremely important that results of risk assessment be published to be available for others to obtain information and/or to confirm their own evaluations. The Observer from the Consumers International also expressed interest in reference to interactive communication with consumers in the Proposed Codex Working Principles. The Observer from Consumers International commended the reference to interactive communication with consumers in all aspects of the risk analysis process in the Proposed Working Principles for Risk Analysis but noted inconsistencies in the application of this principle by Codex and stressed the need for Codex to address risk management as a democratic policy-making process in which openness, transparency and effective participation are central.
167. It was requested that assistance of FAO and WHO to developing countries in the application of risk management be extended to the risk assessment area. The Delegation of India supported by some other delegations strongly expressed the view that the risk analysis needs of the developing countries should be specifically identified and addressed, and that adequate and flexibility should be provided where appropriate to meet any special needs of developing countries.
<section>f</section>
MATTERS RELATING TO THE IMPLEMENTATION OF THE WTO AGREEMENTS ON THE APPLICATION OF SANITARY AND PHYTOSANITARY MEASURES AND THE AGREEMENT ON TECHNICAL BARRIERS TO TRADE (Agenda Item 11)^81
^81 ALINORM 97/7; ALINORM 97/4, paragraphs 15-20.
REVIEW OF THE STATUS OF CODEX TEXTS UNDER THE WTO AGREEMENTS
ACCEPTANCE PROCEDURE FOR CODEX STANDARDS IN THE PERSPECTIVE OF THE WTO SPS AND TBT AGREEMENTS
IDENTIFICATION OF THOSE STANDARDS, GUIDELINES AND RECOMMENDATIONS HAVING A MAJOR TRADE IMPACT AND THE EXTENT TO WHICH THESE STANDARDS ARE USED BY MEMBER COUNTRIES
REVIEW OF THE STATUS OF CODEX TEXTS UNDER THE WTO AGREEMENTS
168. The Representative of WTO reminded the Commission that the Agreement on Technical Barriers to Trade (TBT Agreement) allowed WTO Members to deviate from international standards for various reasons when Members considered that the international standards were inappropriate to their circumstances. The Agreement on the Application of Sanitary and Phytosanitary Measures (SPS Agreement), on the other hand, made specific reference to Codex texts without providing any clear distinction between standards, guidelines and recommendations. The Representative also expressed a view that those Codex texts that were meant to apply only within a geographic region would not be particularly relevant outside that region and that other Codex texts or provisions not intended for application by governments but by commercial partners would not be relevant under the SPS Agreement either. Neither would guidelines intended for the working procedures of the Codex Alimentarius Commission and its
subsidiary bodies. The Representative however noted that these issues could formally be clarified through two possible ways: either in the form of decisions by WTO Panels resulting from individual dispute cases or by requesting clarification from the SPS Committee.
169. Several delegations stressed that the Commission should preserve its right and authority to pursue its work based upon its own priorities. It was also stated that the Commission should be able to differentiate between different categories of texts, such as standards, guidelines and recommendations, on the basis of the statutory objectives of Codex. The Delegation of the United States and others recommended that the Committee on General Principles initiate work on the type and nature of Codex texts in relation to their intended use by Governments.
170. In regard to the opportunity of deleting those Codex texts not intended to be applied by governments for the purpose of protecting the health of consumers or for ensuring fair practice in the food trade, one delegation noted that the elaboration of such texts should be discouraged in future.
171. The Commission recognized the views expressed in paragraph 9 of the ALINORM 97/7 and endorsed the following recommendations:
· In view of the confusion created by the use of the term "advisory " and as the term cannot be defined satisfactorily and the SPS and TBT Agreements do not appear to distinguish between mandatory and advisory texts, its use within the Codex framework should be discouraged, as well as the use of the term "mandatory";
· All Codex texts specific to the control of food moving in international trade should be elaborated with the same degree of rigour and scientific justification where appropriate as Codex standards;
· Codex standards or any other texts which establish quality criteria for products additional to essential quality factors should clearly indicate that such criteria are intended for voluntary application by commercial partners, as follows: "This text is intended for voluntary application by commercial partners and not for application by governments ".
· The degree of explanatory material contained in Codex texts should be adequate for the interpretation of the text; and
· That Codex Committees review the codes, guidelines and related texts under their responsibility in order to determine to what extent they should be redrafted as standards.
172. The Commission also concurred with the view of the Executive Committee^82 and decided to request the SPS Committee through the Secretariat to clarify how the SPS Committee would differentiate "standards, guidelines and other recommendations" in relation to the implementation of the SPS Agreement by WTO Members.
^82 ALINORM 97/4, paragraph 15.
173. The Representative of the WTO expressed concern that insufficient understanding of the WTO Agreements was apparently hampering the adoption of Codex standards and guidelines at a time when WTO Members, and especially developing countries, had an immediate need for Codex texts to assist them to fulfil their obligations under the WTO. The Representative urged increased involvement of all Commission members in the work of the WTO, in particular, through their participation in the work of the SPS Committee.
ACCEPTANCE PROCEDURE FOR CODEX STANDARDS IN THE PERSPECTIVE OF THE WTO SPS AND TBT AGREEMENTS
174. The Commission decided to proceed with a revision of the acceptance procedures rather than abolishing them and requested the Committee on General Principles to expedite its work along the previously proposed lines.
175. It was suggested that the revision of the acceptance procedures should be considered in conjunction with the revision of the elaboration procedures. It was pointed out that the Committee on General Principles might need to meet more frequently in view of the amount and urgency of its task.
IDENTIFICATION OF THOSE STANDARDS, GUIDELINES AND RECOMMENDATIONS HAVING A MAJOR TRADE IMPACT AND THE EXTENT TO WHICH THESE STANDARDS ARE USED BY MEMBER COUNTRIES
176. The Commission endorsed the recommendations contained in paragraph 25 of the working document and agreed to discontinue the exercise of identifying Codex texts of major trade impact.
<section>g</section>
CONSIDERATION OF THE DRAFT MEDIUM-TERM PLAN FOR 1998 TO 2002 (Agenda Item 12)^83
^83 ALINORM 97/6; CAC/LIM 6 (ALINORM 97/6 - Add. 1)
177. The Commission noted the progress towards achieving the current medium-term objectives (1993-1998). It endorsed the general directions indicated in the Medium-Term Plan 1998-2002 and the proposals of the Secretariat to transmit the outline of the plan to Member Governments for comment, finalization by the Executive Committee at its 45th Session, and approval by the Commission at its 23rd Session in 1999.
178. In endorsing the general direction of the Medium-Term Plan, the Commission requested that consideration should be given to the development of standards or related texts in areas concerning foods derived from biotechnology or traits introduced into foods from biotechnology, where this was scientifically justified. It also requested that reference be made to the needs of developing countries in the acceptance and application of Codex Standards, the problems of small and medium-scale industries in meeting these standards, and the special conditions which might apply in developing countries which would have an impact on the elaboration of standards. The Commission also requested that the issues of transparency and the increased involvement of international non-governmental organizations, especially those representing consumers' interests should be reflected in the plan. The Commission stated that allowance should be made for the continuation of work on commodity-specific
standards, as required.
179. The Commission agreed that consideration should be given to a re-examination of the Terms of Reference of the Committee on Methods of Analysis and Sampling to remove the restrictions which prevented it from acting as a fully horizontal committee.
180. It was noted that the detailed list of work items would be updated by including the decisions of the present session of the Commission.
<section>h</section>
DESIGNATION OF HOST GOVERNMENTS FOR CODEX COMMITTEES (Agenda Item 13)^84
^84 ALINORM 97/16
CONFIRMATION OF CHAIRMANSHIP OF CODEX COMMITTEES
CONFIRMATION OF CHAIRMANSHIP OF CODEX COMMITTEES
181. In accordance with the Rule IX. 10 of the Rules of Procedure, the Commission confirmed the chairmanship of the Codex Committees hosted by Member governments as presented in Appendix V.
182. The United Kingdom, as host government for the Codex Committee on Sugars, stated that this Committee had been adjourned sine die. However, it had been given certain work to perform by correspondence. The United Kingdom would attempt to complete this work by correspondence, supplemented by small ad hoc discussion groups if appropriate. Should it be necessary to reconvene the Committee, the Government of the United Kingdom would then have to confirm whether or not it would be able to continue to act as host government.
183. The Delegations of Argentina, India and others requested that Committee be reactivated and Argentina offered to be the host country if the United Kingdom would be unable to continue in that role.
184. The Delegation of Cuba informed the Commission that discussions had been held with the Government of Canada in relation to Cuba's wish to host the 27th Session of the Committee on Food Labelling in Havana 1999.
<section>i</section>
OTHER BUSINESS (Agenda Item 14)
REVIEW OF CODEX SUBSIDIARY BODIES^85
^85 ALINORM 97/16-Add. 1.
REVIEW OF CODEX SUBSIDIARY BODIES
DISTRIBUTION OF DOCUMENTS
OTHER MATTERS
185. The Commission had been requested by the 112th FAO Council^86 to review its subsidiary body structure. It had been suggested that, for reasons of cost-reduction and efficiency, Codex eliminate a number of committees adjourned sine die and move to more flexible structure, using intergovernmental task forces to handle specific issues. The Executive Committee at its 44th Session also considered this matter and expressed some concerns on these suggestions^87.
^86 2-7 June 1997.
^87 ALINORM 97/4, paras. 23-
186. The Commission expressed concern about possible implications of abolishing committees adjourned sine die as it was felt that this was contrary to the recognized increasing importance of Codex work, for example in WTO. It was pointed out that these committees represented no cost to the Programme and, where necessary, could be revived for a specific task.
187. The Commission also expressed interest in the "alternative mechanisms" but stated that there should be clear rules for their establishment and operation. It emphasised that, if they were to b implemented, they should be as inclusive, transparent and responsive as the current system and use the same Codex stepwise elaboration procedure.
188. The Commission agreed to bring the following to the attention of FAO Council:
The Commission:
· was appreciative and attentive of FAO's concerns and suggestions;
· was carrying out only the work it need to do so, and in the most cost-effective way;
· wished to stress its increasingly important role in the light of WTO's SPS and TBT Agreements;
· wished to point out to FAO Council that the Codex Committees adjourned sine die did not cost FAO but rather were playing an important role of monitoring developments in the relevant areas and would revive when necessary;
· noted that the Committee on Edible Ices had been abolished at the present session;
· had requested guidance on rules for establishment and operation of ad hoc task forces;
· stressed that such task forces would have to have the same attributes of inclusiveness, transparency, cost efficiency and responsiveness as the current arrangement;
· expressed concern at the recommendation to reduce further the length of Commission Sessions in view of the increasing importance and workload of the Commission.
189. Regarding the suggestion of FAO regarding the broadening of the mandate of the Codex Committee on Natural Mineral Waters to include soft drinks, the Delegation of the United States expressed the strongest reservations on this suggestion. The Delegation further stated that a standard for bottled water was to be accelerated following the adoption of the Standard on Natural Mineral Waters at Step 8. The Delegation of the United States stated that it would object if Switzerland were not to hold a meeting for two years to develop a draft standard on bottled waters, especially in light of the interest expressed by 31 countries in this standard, and volunteered to join other countries in preparing a draft for consideration at a meeting next year.
190. Delegation of Switzerland reported that it had committed itself to proceeding with the work on a standard on packaged waters other than natural mineral waters and assured the Commission that Switzerland would proceed as rapidly as possible with this work. Currently Switzerland was creating an informal working group with all interested countries, including the Delegation of the United States which had already contacted, and would request them to send in as quickly as possible their regulations, comments and proposals, after which Switzerland would prepare a draft, circulate it for comments and then hold a session of the Committee on Natural Mineral Waters in 1998.
DISTRIBUTION OF DOCUMENTS
191. The Secretariat informed the Commission that the deadline for distribution of working documents was normally two months, however some Committees had been held shortly before the Commission and the planning might need to be reconsidered in this respect; working documents had been made available on Internet and this practice would continue; transmission of documents via electronic mail to the FAO Representatives at the national and regional level would also contribute to ensure their availability in time to Member countries,' similarly, documents could be distributed through the Permanent Representatives of Member countries to FAO for distribution to Contact Points. The Secretariat also expressed its appreciation to the host countries of Committees for their important contribution to the translation and distribution of documents.
192. Several delegations expressed their support for continued use of Internet to facilitate the diffusion of documents. The Representative of WHO indicated that it would explore the possibilities of facilitating the distribution of Codex documents to the national health authorities using the electronic facilities in WHO offices in the countries.
193. The Delegation of Spain, supported by the Delegations of Argentina, Peru, Cuba and Costa Rica, recognized that significant efforts had been made to improve distribution; however, specific difficulties existed concerning documents in Spanish, which were circulated much later than those in English and they proposed that the papers should be available on Internet in the three languages; in many cases, translation itself was also a problem as it did not correspond to the terminology actually used in Spanish-speaking countries.
194. The Delegation of China, supported by the Delegation of Japan, stressed that it needed enough time to ensure its national translation of documents, and suggested that Codex papers be translated into all FAO and WHO official languages.
195. The Secretariat recognized the difficulties inherent to the reduction in translation services in French and Spanish and the increased volume of documentation, and indicated that additional means of ensuring timely translation were being considered. The use of other languages, however, would not be feasible in view of the very high costs to the Codex Programme, as had appeared in an earlier study^88.
^88 ALINORM 97/3, para. 7
OTHER MATTERS
196. The Delegation of Nigeria recalled that specific consideration had been given in recent years to cooperation with the African Regional Standardization Organization (ARSO) and that this should be pursued in view of its importance to the Region. The Secretariat indicated that continued cooperation was evidenced by the regular attendance of ARSO at the meetings of the Coordinating Committee for Africa, and that it was also entitled to participate in the Commission.
197. The Delegation of Botswana proposed that the Southern African Development Community (SADC), which was promoting food security and food safety issues in the sub-region, be invited to attend the Commission and this was agreed.
<section>j</section>
APPENDIX I - LIST OF PARTICIPANTS
LIST OF PARTICIPANTS
LISTE DES PARTICIPANTS
LISTA DE PARTICIPANTES
CHAIRPERSON/PRESIDENT/PRESIDENTE
Prof Pakdee Pothisiri
Secretary-General
The Food and Drug Administration
Ministry of Public Health
Tiwanond Road
Nonthaburi 11000
Thailand
Phone: +662 591 8441
Fax: +662 591 8636
Email: ppakdee@health.moph.go.th
Heads of Delegation are listed first, followed by alternates and advisors listed in alphabetical order.
Les chefs de délégation figurent en tête et les suppléants et conseillers sont énumérés en ordre alphabétique.
Figuran en primar lugar los Jefes de las delegaciones; los Supleantes y Asesores aparacen par orden alfabético.
MEMBER COUNTRIES
PAYS MEMBRES
PAISES MEMBROS
Algeria
Algérie
Argelia
Ms Ouahiba Ghalem
Sous Directeur de la Normalisation
Direction des productions agricoles
Ministère de l'agriculture et de la pêche
12 Bd. Colonel Amirouche
Alger
Phone: +213 2 711712 poste 2611
Mr Mahiddine Messaoui
308 Route de Lausanne
Genève
Suisse
Phone: +41 22 7741985
Argentina
Argentine
Dr Salomon Krigun
Asesor a la Subsecretaría
Subsecretaría de Alimentación y Mercados
Secretaría de Agricultura, Ganadería, Pesca y Alimentación
Paseo Colón G22
2°P, Of. 232
Buenos Aires
Phone: +54 1 3492054
Fax: +54 1 3492197
Email: codex@sagyp.mecon.ar
Dr Alfredo Jorge Nader
Coordinador
Normas de Calidad y Control de Alimentos
Subsecretaría de Alimentación y Mercados
Secretaría de Agricultura, Ganadería, Pesca y Alimentación
Buenos Aires
Phone: +54 1 3492043
Fax: +54 1 3492197
Email: codex@sagyp.mecon.ar
Dra Analia Cristina Perez
Profesional
Administración Nacional de Medicamentos,
Alimentos y Tecnología Médica
Ministerio de Salud y Acción Social (ANMAT)
Avenida de Mayo 869
Buenos Aires CP 1083
Phone: +54 1 3400800 ext. 1146
Fax: +54 1 3400800
Email: aperez@anmat.gov.ar
Dr Andres R.M. Pinard
Sub-Director-Nacional
Administración Nacional de Medicamentos,
Alimentos y Tecnología Medica
Ministerio de Salud y Acción Social (ANMAT)
Avenida de Mayo 869
Buenos Aires CP 1083
Phone: +54 1 3400886
Fax: +54 1 3400886
Email: apinard@anmat.gov.ar
Australia
Australie
Mr Digby Gascoine
Director
Policy and International Division
Australian Quarantine and Inspection Service
Department of Primary Industries and Energy
GPO Box 858
Canberra, ACT, 2601
Phone: +61 6 2725584
Fax: +61 6 2723399
Email: digby.gascoine@dpie.gov.au
Dr Simon Brooke-Taylor
Program Manager
Food Product Standards
Australia New Zealand Food Authority
P.O. Box 7186
Canberra MC, ACT, 2610
Phone: +61 6 2712225
Fax: +61 6 2712209
Email: simon.brooke-taylor@anzfa.gov.au
Dr Gordon Burch
Chief Scientist
Australia New Zealand Food Authority
P.O. Box 7186
Canberra MC, ACT, 2610
Phone: +61 6 2712215
Fax: +61 6 2712206
Email: gordon.burch@anzfa.gov.au
Mr Andrew Pearson
Counsellor
Agriculture and Minerals
Australian Embassy
Rome
Italy
Phone: +39 6 85272376
Fax: +39 6 85272230
Austria
Autriche
Dr Ernest Bobek
Director-General
Federal Chancellery Dep VI
Radetzkystraße 2
A-1031 Vienna
Phone: +43 1 71172-0
Fax: +43 1 7137952
Dr Arnulf Sattler
Federal Chancellery Dep VI
Radetzkystraße 2
A-1031 Vienna
Phone: +43 1 71172 4805
Fax: +43 1 71172 4681
Ms Hedwig Wögerbauer
Head of Division III/3
Federal Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
Stubenring 1
A-1010 Vienna
Phone: +43 1 71100 2812
Fax: +43 1 71100 2892
Belgium
Belgique
Bélgica
Mr Charles Crémer
Chef de Service
Inspection générale des denrées alimentaires
Ministère de la Santé publique
CA.E. - Esplanade
Boulevard Pachéco, 19 boîte 5
11 ème étage, bureau 11-05
1010 Bruxelles
Phone: +32 2 2104843
Fax: +32 2 2104816
Email: Charles.Cremer@health.fgov.be
Mr Théo Biebaut
Premier Conseiller
Relations Economiques
Ministère des Affaires économiques
Rue Gen. Leman, 60
1040 Bruxelles
Phone: +32 2 2065882
Fax: +32 2 2309565
Email:
Mr Guido Kayaert
European Regulatory Affairs Manager
Nestlé Coordination Center
Birmingham Street 221
1070 Bruxelles
Phone: +32 2 5295330
Fax: +32 2 5295620
Ms Karine Lambert
Secrétaire générale
Fédération des Eaux et des Boissons rafraîchissantes
51, Avenue Général de Gaulle
1050 Bruxelles
Phone: +32 2 6491286
Fax: +32 2 6461339
Bolivia
Bolivie
Mr Fernando Fernandez Poblete
Director Ejecutivo
IBNOGIA - CNCA
Secretario Ejecutivo
Comité Nacional del Codex Alimentarius
Av. Camacho E59 Bueno No. 1488
Bolivia
Phone: +591 2 317262 or 319185
Fax: +591 2 317262
Mr Jaime Quispe C.
Ministro Consejero
Mission Permanente de Bolivia ante las Nationes Unidas
7 bis rue du Valais
1202 Geneva
Switzerland
Phone: +41 22 7312725
Email: jaime.quispe-colligaya@itu.ch
Botswana
Mr Jonie T. Batlhophi
Scientific Officer (Food Control)
Food Control Unit
Ministry of Health
Private Bag 00269
Gaborone
Phone: +267 374351
Fax: +267 374354
Ms Segametsi D. Maruapula
Senior Nutritionist
Food and Nutrition Unit
Ministry of Health
P.O. Box 992
Gaborone
Phone: +267 353561
Fax: +267 302092
Email: smaruapula@bot.healthnet.org
Dr Alexander C. Mosha
Manager
Food Technology Research Service
Botswana Technology Centre
Private Bag 008
Kanye
Phone: +267 340441
Fax: +267 340713
Email: amosha@info.bw
Brazil
Brésil
Brasil
Ms María Eduarda Coelho de Souza
Second Secretary
Permanent Mission of Brazil to the United Nations
17 B Ancienne Route
Grand Saconnex
Geneva
Switzerland
Phone: +41 22 9290900
Fax: +41 22 7882505
Email: brazil@itu.ch
Mr Francisco Bezerra da Silva
Coordenador do Programa de Residuos Biológicos
Secretaria de Defesa Agropecuaria
Ministry of Agriculture and Supply
Esplanada dos Ministerios
Brasilia - DF
Phone: +55 61 2269771 or 2266182
Fax: +55 61 2243995 or 2182316
Ms Lúcia Helena Caldas
Chefe do Serviço
Normas Internacionais
Divisão de Alimentos
Ministry of Health
Esplanada dos Ministérios
Bloco G, 8° Andar, Sala 835
Brasilia - DF
CEP: 70058-900
Phone: +55 61 2268536
Fax: +55 61 3152727
Mr Antonio Mantoan
Brazilian Food Manufacturers Association
Av. Brigadeiro Faria Lima 1478
11° Andar
São Paulo, 01451-913
Phone: +55 11 8165733
Fax: +55 11 8146688
Email: abia@abia.org.br
Ms Maria Angelica Ribeiro de Oliveira
Coordenadora
Coordenaçao de Fiscalizaçao do Productos Veterinarios
Ministry of Agriculture and Supply
Esplanada dos Ministerios
Bloco D, Anexo A
3° Andar, Sala 314
Brasilia - DF
Phone: +55 61 2237073
Fax: +55 61 3235936
Mr Adauto Lima Rodrigues
Coordenador para o Codex Alimentarius
Ministry of Agriculture and Supply
Anexo do Ministério da Agricultura
4° andar S/408
Brasilia - DF
Phone: +55 61 2182314 or 2182315
Fax: +55 61 2182316 or 2243995
Mr Léo Bick
Technical Director
ABIA
Brazilian Food Manufacturers Association
Avenida Brigadeiro Faria Lima
1478, 11° Andar
São Paulo-01451-913
Phone: +55 11 8165733
Fax: +55 11 8146688
Email: abia@abia.org.br
Ms Maria Aparecida Martinelli
Coordinator of Brazilian Codex Committee
National Institute for Metrology,
Standardization and Industrial Quality (INMETRO)
SEPN 511, Bl. B, Ed. Bittar III
4° andar
Brasilia - DF, 70550-527
Phone: +55 61 3402211
Fax: +55 61 3473284
Email: mamartinelli@brasilia.com.br
Mr Júlio Sérgio Mirilli de Souza
Chefe de Gabinete
National Institute for Metrology, Standardization and Industrial Quality (INMETRO)
Rua Santa Alexandrina No. 416 10° andar
Riocomprido
Rio de Janeiro, 20.261-232
Phone: +55 21 2739002
Fax: +55 21 2930954
Email: presi@visualnet.com.br
Burundi
Ms Epiphanie Kabushemeye-Ntamwana
Premier Conseiller
Mission permanente du Burundi auprès des Nations Unies
13, rue du Fort Barreau
1201 Geneva
Switzerland
Phone: +41 22 7402911
Fax: +41 22 7402914
Cameroon
Cameroun
Camerún
Ms Veronique Ngonlep
Secrétaire
Mouvement National des Consommateurs
B.P. 2767
Yaoundé
Phone: +237 315640
Fax: +237 207658
Canada
Canadá
Dr George M. Paterson
Director General
Food Directorate
Health Protection Branch
Health Canada
Ottawa, Ontario K1A 0L2
Phone: +1 613 9571821
Fax: +1 613 9571784
Email: george_paterson@isdtcp3.hwc.ca
Mr Ron B. Burke
Director
Bureau of Food Regulatory, International and Interagency Affairs
Food Directorate, Health Protection Branch
Codex Contact Point for Canada
Health Canada
Room 200, HPB Building
Tunney's pasture
Ottawa, Ontario K1A 0L2 (0702C)
Phone: +1 613 9571748
Fax: +1 613 9413537
Email: ronald_burke@isdtcp3.hwc.ca
Ms Kathrine Greiner
Codex Coordinator
Food Inspection Directorate
Canadian Food Inspection Agency
59 Camelot Drive
Nepean, Ontario K1A 0Y9
Phone: +1 613 2252342 ext. 3784
Fax: +1 613 2286617
Email: kgreiner@em.agr.ca
Mr Robert Ingratta
Chair
Standing Committee on Biotechnology
Canadian Agri-Food Research Council
350-441 Maclaren Avenue
Ottawa, Ontario K2P 2H3
Phone: +1 613 2345121
Fax: +1 613 2342063
Email: bgingr@monsanto.com
Dr Anne A. MacKenzie
Director General
Food Inspection Directorate
Canadian Food Inspection Agency
Room 147
59 Camelot Drive
Nepean, Ontario K1A 0Y9
Phone: +1 613 2252342 (4188)
Fax: +1 613 2286638
Email: amackenzie@em.agr.ca
Mr Robert Mills
Director
Technical Trade and Intergovernmental Liaison
Fish Inspection Directorate
Canadian Food Inspection Agency
200 Kent Street
Ottawa, Ontario K1A 0E2
Phone: +1 613 9905810
Fax: +1 613 9934220
Mr Gerald F. Reasbeck
Director
Food Division
Canadian Food Inspection Agency
59 Camelot Drive
Nepean, Ontario K1A 0Y9
Phone: +1 613 2252342
Fax: +1 613 2286611
Email: greasbeck@em.agr.ca
Mr Dale A. Tulloch
Vice President
National Dairy Council of Canada
221 Laurier Avenue East
Ottawa, Ontario
Canada KIN 6PI
Phone: +1 613 2384116
Fax: +1 613 2386247
Email: datulloch@ndcc.ca
Chile
Chili
Mr Jean-Jacques Duhart
Vice-Ministro
Ministerio de Agricultura
Teatinos 40
9° piso
Santiago
Phone: +41 22 9180080
Mr Pedro Medrano
Embajador de Chile ante la FAO
Representante Permanente de Chile ante la FAO
Via Po 23
00198 Rome
Italy
Phone: +39 6 8417414
Fax: +39 6 85350427
Email: misfao@itn.it
Mr Humberto Molina
Representante Permanente Alterno de Chile ante la FAO
Segundo Secretario
Via Po 23
00198 Roma
Italy
Phone: +39 6 8417414
Fax: +39 6 85350427
Email: misfao@itn.it
Mr Gonzalo Rios
Coordinador
Relaciones Internacionales
Servicio Agricola y Ganadero
Ministerio de Agricultura
Avenida Bulnes 140
Santiago
Phone: +56 2 6723635
Fax: +56 2 6717419
Mr Mario Scheggia
Minister Counsellor for Foreign Affairs
Permanent Mission of Chile to the United Nations
Geneva
Switzerland
Ms Soledad M. Vidal Ogueta
Encargada Asuntos Agropecuarios
Dirección Economica
Ministerio de Relaciones Exteriores
Teatinos 20, 7° piso
Santiago
Phone: +56 2 6960043 ext. 611-605
Fax: +56 2 6987858
China
Chine
Dr Xuegui Kan
Director General
Department of Health Inspection & Supervision
Ministry of Health
No. 44, Houhai Beiyan
Beijing, 100725
Phone: +86 10 64013358
Fax: +86 10 64014341
Email: kanxg@ccs.capm.ac.cn
Mr Ke Liu
Engineer
State Administration Bureau of Commodity
Import and Export Inspection
10-2 Chaowai Street
Chaoyang District
Beijing, 100020
Phone: +86 10 65993896
Fax: +86 10 65993800
Mr Zhi Su
Director
Food Safety and Nutrition
Department of Health Inspection & Supervision
Ministry of Health
No. 44, Houhai Beiyan
Beijing, 100725
Phone: +86 10 64001675
Fax: +86 10 64015609
Mr Yongmao Ye
Deputy Commissioner
Zhejiang Administration
Bureau of Commodity Import and Export Inspection
8 Bao Shi Rd (2)
Hangzhou
Phone: +86 571 5118100
Fax: +86 571 5176900
Ms Danyu Zhao
Research Assistant
Institute of Food Safety Control and Inspection
Ministry of Health
No. 7, Pan Jia Yuan Nan Li
Chaoyang District
Beijing, 100021
Phone: +86 10 67711813
Fax: +8610 67711813
Costa Rica
Mr Róger Irías Campos
Coordinador del Comité Codex de Costa Rica
Apdo. 1736-2050
San José
Phone: +506 2836580
Fax: +506 2835133
Mr Rafael Carrillo-Zürcher
Minister Counsellor
Permanent Mission of Costa Rica
11, Rue Butini
1202 Geneva
Switzerland
Phone: +41 22 7312063
Ms María E. Chacón
Asesora Gobierno
Ministerio Ciencia Tecnología, Industria y Comercio
Apd. 4135 - 1000
San Jose
Phone: +506 2316910
Fax: +506 2316910
Côte d'Ivoire
Mr Hyacinthe Kouassi
Conseiller
Mission permanente de la Côte D'Ivoire auprès des Nations Unies
c.p. 76 - Avenue Blanc 47
1211 Genève 21
Suisse
Phone: +41 22 7150070
Fax: +41 22 7150080
Croatia
Croatie
Croacia
Dr Jaksa Topic
Director-General
State Office for Standardization and Metrology
Ul. Grada Vukovara 78
10000 Zagreb
Phone: +385 1 539934
Fax: +385 1 536598
Dr Srdjan Divjak
Senior Adviser
State Office for Standardization and Metrology
Ul. Grada Vukovara 78
10000 Zagreb
Ms Nada Markovcic
Senior Adviser
State Office for Standardization and Metrology
Head of Contact Point for Codex Alimentarius
Ul. Grada Vukovara 78
10000 Zagreb
Phone: +385 1 536690
Fax: +385 1 536598
Cuba
Mr Lionel Enríquez Rodriquez
Presidente
Oficina Nacional de Normalización
Calle E No. 261 esq. 13
La Habana 10400
Phone: +53 7300879
Fax: +53 7 338048
Mr Carlos Amat
Ambassadeur, Représentant permanent
Mission permanente de la République de Cuba
100 Chemin de Valérie
1292 Chambésy
Genève
Suisse
Phone: +41 22 7589430
Fax: +41 22 7589431
Email: mission-cuba@itu.ch
Ms Doris Hernández Torres
Directora
Aseguramiento de la Calidad
Ministerio de la Industria Pesquera
Edificio No. 1
5ta Avenida y 248
Barlovento, Sta Fé, Playa
La Habana
Phone: +53 7 297294
Fax: +53 7 249168
Dr Raul Jústiz González
Director Nacional
Salud Ambiental
Ministerio de Salud Pública
Calle 23, Esquina N
La Habana 10400
Phone: +53 7 325278 or 326700
Dr Celia Labora
Funcionaria
Ministerio del Comercio Exterior
Infanta 16, Esquina 23
La Habana 10400
Phone: +53 7 700325
Fax: +53 7 793824
Mr Gabriel Lahens Espinosa
Funcionario
Ministerio del Comercio Exterior
Infanta 16, Esquina 23
La Habana 10400
Phone: +53 7 795186
Fax: +53 7 793824
Mr Alberto Marrero Terrero
Director de Relaciones Internacionales
Oficina Nacional de Normalización
Calle E, No. 261, entre 11 y 13
Vedado, La Habana 10400
Phone: +53 7 300022
Fax: +53 7 338048
Cyprus
Chypre
Chipre
Dr Ioannis Karis
Director
Cyprus Organization for Standards and Control of Quality
Ministry of Commerce, Industry & Tourism
1421 Nicosia
Phone: +357 2 300190
Fax: +357 2 375120
Dr Phrosso Hadjiluca
Food Scientist
Assessor IQA IRQA
Cyprus Organization for Standards and Control of Quality
Ministry of Commerce, Industry and Tourism
1421 Nicosia
Phone: +357 2 300173
Fax: +357 2 375120
Denmark
Danemark
Dinamarca
Mr Lars Herborg
Head of Division
Veterinary and Food Directorate
Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Fisheries
Rolighedsvej 25
DK-1958 Frederiksberg C
Phone: +45 31358100
Fax: +45 35361912
Ms Anna Busk-Jensen
Executive Food Adviser
Confederation of Danish Industries
DK-1787 Copenhagen
Phone: +45 33773377
Fax: +45 33773300
Mr Ole Kopp Christensen
Director General
National Food Agency of Denmark
Morkhoj Bygade 19
DK-2860 Søborg
Phone: +45 39696600
Fax: +45 39660100
Mr Joergen Fredsted
Vice Director
National Food Agency
Morkhoj Bygade 19
DK-2860 Søborg
Phone: +45 39696600
Fax: +45 39660100
Ms Kirsten Jacobsen
Head of Department
Confederation of Danish Industries
Dk-1787 Copenhagen V
Phone: +45 33773377
Fax: +45 33773300
Mr Knud Ostergaard
International Coordinator
National Food Agency of Denmark
Morkhoj Bygade 19
DK-2860 Søborg
Phone: +45 39696600
Fax: +45 39660100
Ms Charlotte Rønhof
Head of Section
The Agricultural Council of Denmark
Axeltorv 3
DK-1609 Copenhagen V
Phone: +45 33145672
Ms Annette Toft
Head of Department
The Agricultural Council of Denmark
Axeltorv 3
DK-1609 Copenhagen V
Phone: +54 33145672
Mr Jørgen Hald Christensen
Head of Department
Danish Dairy Board
Frederiks Allé 22
DK-8000 Århus C
Phone: +45 87312000
Fax: +45 87312001
Dominican Republic
République dominicaine
República Dominicana
Ms Angelina Bonetti-Herera
Ambassador
Misión Permanente de la Republica Domenicana
45, rue de Lausanne
1200 Geneva
Switzerland
Phone: +851 7313079
Fax: +851 7410590
Ms Elsa Ferreras
Encargado del Departamento
Normas obligatorias
Dirección General de Normas y Sistemas de Calidad (DIGENOR)
Secretaría de Estado Industria y Comercio
Edificio El Huacal, 11° piso
Phone: +851 6862205
Fax: +851 6883843
Egypt
Egypte
Egipto
Mr Ghamal El-Din Ghaly
Président-directeur général
Arab Medical Packing
Membre du Codex Committee of Egypt
P.O. Box 134
Hadaek El Koba
Cairo
Phone: +20 2 4241616
Fax: +20 2 4241880
Email: flxipack@intouch.com
Dr Zeinab Abd El Halim
Director
Food Control
Ministry of Health
Cairo
Phone: +20 2 5941077
Fax: +20 2 3548152
Dr Ahmed Al-Khamy
Professor
National Research Center
34 Rue Soliman Abaza
12311 Dokki
Cairo
Phone: +20 2 3362956
Fax: +20 2 3602530
Eng Zeinab El-Kashef
Director
RPD
Edfina for Preserved Food Co.
1 Ossman Rafaat
Alexandria, Glym
Phone: +20 3 5331400
Fax: +20 3 5344300
Prof Salah Eldin Hussain Abou-Raya
Faculty of Agriculture
Cairo University
34 Taiba St.
Mahandseen
Giza, Cairo
Phone: +20 2 3493795
Ms Khadiga Khalil
General Manager
Quality Control
Alexandria for Oil & Soap Co.
76 Canal El-Mahomodyah
Alexandria
Phone: +20 3 4922006
Fax: +20 3 4922220
Prof Mohamed Fahmy Saddik
Head
Food Hygiene Department
Institute of Nutrition
16 Kasr El-aini Str.
Cairo
Phone: +20 2 3643522
Fax: +20 2 3647476
Mr Magdi A. Barakat
Director-General
Standards Department
Egyptian Organization for Standardization & Quality Control
2, Latin America St.
Cairo
Phone: +20 2 3549430
Fax: +20 2 3557841
Mr Ahmed Abdel-Aziz Gaballa
Scientific Regulatory Affairs Manager
Atlantic Industries Ltd.
Nasr City, Free Zone
Cairo
Phone: +20 2 2718820
Fax: +20 2 2706903
Dr Mostafa Abdel-Monem Mohamed
Head
Technical Affairs Sector
The Extracted Oils Co.
35, Suisse Canal
Moharam Bek
Alexandria
Phone: +20 3 4223754
Fax: +20 3 4226199
Prof Abdel Aziz Rayan
Managing Director
12 Gameat El Dowal
El Arabia Street
Agouza
Cairo
Phone: +20 2 3477470 or 3037074
El Salvador
Ing Hazel Palomares
Jefe de Comercio Regional
Ministerio de Economía
Av. Juan Pablo II y Calle Gabriela Mistral
Plan Maestro
San Salvador
Phone: +503 2213578
Fax: +503 2213578
Ms Carmen Elena Castillo
Misión Permanente del El Salvador ante las Naciones Unidas
65 Rue de Lausanne
1202 Geneva
Switzerland
Phone: +41 227327036
Fax: +41 22 7384744
Email: carmen.castillo@itu.ch
Estonia
l'Estonie
Ms Jana Vanaveski
First Secretary
Permanent Representation of Estonia to the United Nations European Hqs.
Ch. du Petit Saconnex 28A
Geneva
Switzerland
Phone: +41 22 7334000
Fax: +41 22 7334600
Ms Gerda Mandre
DR Manager
Kalev Ltd. (Confectionary Company)
139 Pärnu Rd.
EE 0013 Tallinn
Phone: +372 6508795
Fax: +372 6508725
Ms Lehti Redel
Secretary
Technical Committee of Food Standardization
Association of Estonian Food Industry
29 Gonsiori st.,
EE 0001 Tallinn
Phone: +372 2421809
Fax: +372 6312718
Finland
Finlande
Finlandia
Mr Kalevi Salminen
Director
National Food Administration
Box 5
00531 Helsinki
Phone: +358 9 77267600
Fax: +358 9 77267666
Email: kalevi.salminen@ev.kuluttejatalo.fi
Mr Matti Aho
Deputy Director General
Veterinary and Food Department
Ministry of Agriculture and Forestry
Box 232
00171 Helsinki
Phone: +358 9 1603380
Fax: +358 91603338
Email: matti.aho@mmm.fi
Mr Veli-Mikko Niemi
Senior Health Official
Ministry of Social Affairs and Health
Box 197
00531 Helsinki
Phone: +358 9 1604121
Fax: +358 9 1604120
Email: veli-mikko.niemi@stm.vn.fi
France
Francia
Mr Jean-Pierre Doussin
Chargé de Mission
Direction Générale de la Concurrence, de la Consommation et de la Répression des Fraudes
Ministère de l'Economie et des Finances
59 Bld Vincent Auriol
7013 Paris Cedex
Phone: +33 1 44973470
Fax: +33 1 44973037
Email: jean-pierre.doussin@dpa.finances.gouv.fr
Mr Jean-Luc Angot
Secrétariat Général du Comité interministériel européen pour les questions de coopération économique
SGCI-CIAA
Carré Austerlitz
2 Bld Diderot
75572 Paris Cedex 12
Phone: +33 1 44871603
Fax: +33 1 44871604
Email: jean-luc.angot@sgci.finances.gouv.fr
Mr Christian Berger
Sous Directeur
Affaires Internationales
Direction de la Production et des Echanges
Ministère de l'Agriculture et de la Pêche
3, Rue Barbet de Jouy
75007 Paris
Phone: +33 1 49554508
Fax: +33 1 45516787
Dr Jacques Boisseau
Directeur
Centre National d'Etudes vétérinaires et alimentaires
Agence Nationale du Médicament Vétérinaire
CNEVA - BP 203
35302 Fougères Cedex
Phone: +33 2 99947872
Fax: +33 2 99947899
Email: vafo30@calvacom.fr
Mr Dominique Burel
Chef de service réglementation
CNIEL
34, Rue de Saint-Pétersbourg
75008 Paris Cedex
Phone: +33 1 49707115
Fax: +33 1 42806345
Ms Carol Buy
Chargée de Mission
Service Relations Internationales
Direction de la Production et des Echanges
Ministère de l'Agriculture et de la Pêche
3, Rue Barbet de Jouy
75007 Paris
Phone: +33 1 49554864
Fax: +33 1 45516787
Mr Bruno Clerc
Premier Secrétaire
Représentation permanente de la France auprès des Nations Unies
36, Route de Prégny
1292 Chambesy
Genève
Suisse
Phone: +41 22 7589111
Mr Hubert Ferry-Wilczek
Sous Directeur
Direction Générale de l'Alimentation
Ministère de l'Agriculture et de la Pêche
175, rue du Chevaleret
75646 Paris cedex 13
Phone: +31 1 49555872
Fax: +31 1 49555106
Mr Thierry Geslain
ANIA
15 5, Bid Haussmann
75008 Paris
Phone: +33 1 53838600
Fax: +33 1 45619664
Mr Antoine Lefranc
Juriste d'entreprise
Société BESNIER
Service Juridique
10 à 20 Rue Adolphe Beck
53000 Laval
Phone: +33 2 43594073
Fax: +33 2 43594208
Ms Jolanta Leone
Responsable réglementation
DIEPAL-NSA
383 rue Philippe Héron
BP 432
69654 Villefranche-sur-Saône Cedex
Phone: +33 4 74626374
Fax: +33 4 74626195
Ms Annie Loch
Affaires Réglementaires
Danone Branche Biscuits
6, Rue E. Vaillant
91201 Athês-Mons
Phone: +33 1 69541230
Fax: +33 1 69541309
Mr Jean-Claude Lumaret
Direction Technico-Légale
Société Roquette Frères
62136 Lestrem
Phone: +33 3 21633600
Fax: +33 3 21633850
M Jean Maurin
Secrétaire Général
Syndicat Interprofessionnel des Laits de Conserve
34, rue Saint-Pétersbourg
75382 Paris Cedex 08
Phone: +33 1 49707265
Fax: +33 1 42806362
Mr Jean-Blaise Rochette de Lempdes
Directeur scientifique
DIEPAL-NSA (Groupe DANONE)
383 rue Philippe Héron
BP 432
69654 Villefranche-sur-Saône Cedex
Phone: +33 4 74 626364
Fax: +33 4 74 606332
Ms Barbara Röstel
Head of Unit
International Affairs
Centre National d'Etudes vétérinaires et alimentaires (CNEVA)
Agence nationale du médicament vétérinaire (ANMV)
PB 203
35302 Fougères Cedex
Phone: +33 299 947895
Fax: +33 299 947899
Email: vafo30@calvacom.fr
Ms Catherine Vigreux
Société Roquette Frères
62136 Lestrem
Phone: +33 3 21633600
Fax: +33 3 21633850
Germany
Allemagne
Alemania
Dr Wolf Hölzel
Deputy Director
Bundesministerium für Gesundheit
Am Propsthof 78a
53121 Bonn
Phone: +49 228 941-0
Fax: +49 228 9414941
H.E. Holger Eberle
Minister
Permanent Representation of the Federal
Republic of
Germany to the U.N.
Geneva
Switzerland
Dr Rainer Engels
Senior Adviser
Germanwatch e.V.
Berliner Platz 23
D-53111 Bonn
Phone: +49 228 6049215
Fax: +49 228 6049219
Email: germanwatch.bn@bonn.comlink.apc.org
Ms Dorothea Kellen
Assistant Head of Unit
Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Forestry
Rochusstr. 1
53123 Bonn
Phone: +49 228 5293388
Fax: +49 228 5294407
Mr Jörg-Helge Kroke
Executive Officer
Federal Ministry of Economics
Villemombler Str. 76
53123 Bonn
Phone: +49 228 6154221
Fax: +49 228 6153468
Dr Rolph Langlais
Director
Scientific Regulatory Affairs
Coca-Cola GmbH
Frankenstrasse 348
D-45133 Essen
Phone: +49 201 8211361
Fax: +49 201 8211773
Dr Gudrun Oetken
Scientific Advisor
Pesticide Action Network
Nernstweg 32-34
D-22765 Hamburg
Phone: +49 40 393978
Fax: +49 40 3907520
Email: pan-germany@umwelt.ecolink.org
Dr Jutta Schaub
Assistant Head of Unit
Federal Ministry of Food, Agriculture and Forestry
Rochusstr. 1
53123 Bonn
Phone: +49 228 5293329
Fax: +49 228 5294404
Prof Arpad Somogyi
Director
Bundesinstitut für gesundheitlichen
Verbraucherschutz und Veterinarmedizin
Thielallee 88-92
14195 Berlin
Phone: +49 308 4123000
Fax: +49 308 4123374
Dr Arno Dopychai
Representative
Verband Deutscher Mineralbrunnen e.V.
Bonn
Phone: +49 228 959900
Fax: +49 228 373453
Mr Thomas Kuetzemeier
General Manager
Verband der deutschen Milchwirschaft
137, Meckenheimer Allee
53115 Bonn
Phone: +49 228 982430
Ms Susanne Langguth
Direktorin
Südzucker AG
Forchheimer Strasse 2
90425 Nürnberg
Phone: +49 911 9344460
Fax: +49 911 9344560
Ms Angelika Mrohs
Managing Director
Bund für Lebensmittelrecht und Lebensmittelkunde e.V.
Godesberger Allee 157
53175 Bonn
Phone: +49 228 819930
Fax: +49 228 375069
Dr Detlef J.G. Müller
Adviser
Procter u. Gamble European Service GmbH
65823 Schwalbach
Phone: +49 6196 894398
Fax: +49 6196 894476
Greece
Grèce
Grecia
Mr Dimitrios Gerakopoulos
Head of Division
Directorate of Processing, Standardization and Control of Food Products of Plant Origin
Codex Contact Point
Ministry of Agriculture
2 Acharnon Str.
101 76 Athens
Phone: +30 1 5246364
Fax: +30 1 5238337
Mr George Golfis
Animal Product Directorate
Ministry of Agriculture
2 Acharnon Str.
101 76 - Athens
Phone: +30 1 5246364
Fax: +30 1 5238337
Guatemala
Dr Antonio Ferraté de la Riva
Médico Veterinario
Jefe de Departamento de Control de Alimentos de Origen Animal para Consumo Umano
Punto Focal de la Comisión del Codex para Guatemala
Ministerio de Agricultura, Ganadería y Alimentación
Edificio Monja Blanca, Zone 13
Guatemala
Phone: +502 2 3624762 or 3323164
Fax: +502 2 5944619
Ms Carolina Rodriguez Fankhauser
Ministro Consejero
Misión Permanente de Guatemala
21 Chemin Sous-Bois
1202 Genève
Suisse
Phone: +41 22 7330850
Fax: +41 22 7331429
Email: carolina.rodriguez@itu.ch
Honduras
Mr Marco Tovar
Encargado Fiscalización Plaguicidas
Secretaria de Agricultura y Ganaderia
Ave. la FAO, Blvd. Mirafloxes
P.O. Box 309
Tegucigalpa M.D.C.
Phone: 32 6213
Hungary
Hongrie
Hungría
Dr Endre Rácz
Head
Quality Policy Unit
Ministry of Agriculture
Kossuth L. tér 11
H-1055 Budapest
Phone: +36 1 3010402
Fax: +36 1 3014808
Prof Peter A. Biacs
General Director
Central Food Research Institute
Ministry of Agriculture
P.O. Box 393
H-1536 Budapest
Phone: +36 1 1558244
Fax: +36 1 1558991
Email: H9740BIA@ella.hu
India
Inde
Mr Babu Jacob
Joint Secretary
Ministry of Agriculture
Krishi Bhawan
Rajendra Prasad Rd.
New Delhi 110001
Phone: +91 11 3387804
Fax: +91 11 3387804
Ms Promilla Issar
Joint Secretary
Ministry of Food Processing Industries
Panchsheel Bhawan
Khel Gaon marg
New Delhi
Phone: +91 11 6492475
Fax: +91 11 6493228
Mr Gupta Mahesh C.
General Manager (Projects)
Sakthi Sugars Ltd
180 Race Course Road
Coimbatore 641018
Phone: +91 422 211551
Fax: +91 422 217329
Mr M.S. Marathe
Managing Director
National Federation of Cooperative Sugar
Factories Ltd.
82-83 Vaikunth Bldg.
3rd Floor
Nehru Place
New Delhi-110019
Phone: +91 11 6475169
Fax: +91 11 6465653
Ms Debi Mukherjee
Assistant Director General (PFA)
Directorate General of Health Services
Liaison Officer National Codex Committee
Ministry of Health & Family Welfare
Nirman Bhowan
Room 558A
New Delhi
Phone: +91 11 3012290
Fax: +91 11 3012193 or 3017924
Mr Kirpal Singh
Deputy Technical Advisor
Department of Women & Child Development
Ministry of Human Resources Development
Krishi Bhawan
New Delhi 110001
Phone: +91 11 3382747
Fax: +91 11 3381800
Mr Rameshwar Prasad Singhal
Chief Director
Directorate of Sugar
Department of Sugar and Edible Oils
Ministry of Food and Consumer Affairs
Krishi Bhawan
New Delhi 110001
Phone: +91 11 3383760
Fax: +91 11 3382373
Mr. J.J. Bhagat
Mission Director
Sugar Technology Mission
Department of Science and Technology
New Mehrauli Road
New Dehli 110016
Phone: +91 11 6964656
Fax: +91 11 6863866
Dr Ravindra Kumar
Executive
(R&D)
National Dairy Development Board
Anand - 388001
Gujarat
Phone: +91 26 9240148/9
Fax: +91 26 9240156
Email: ravindra@anand.nddb.ernet.in
Mr Dattatraya Masurkar
Member of National Codex Committee
Khopoli
Pin 410203
Maharasra
Phone: +91 2192 63100 or 63551
Fax: +91 2192 62799
Mr Indubhai C. Patel
Chairman
Coordination Committee
Indian Sugar & General Industry Export Import
Corporation Ltd (ISGIEIC)
21 Community Centre
East of Kaflash
New Delhi-110065
Phone: +91 11 6432461-2 or 6421892
Mr Shivajirao G. Patil
Chairman
Indian Sugar & General Industry Export Import
Corporation Ltd (ISGIEIC)
21 Community Centre
East of Kailash
New Delhi 110065
Phone: +91 11 6432461/2
Fax: +91 11 6432060
Mr Kanthi K. Sharma
Executive Director
Indian Sugar Mills Association (ISMA)
15, Barakhmba Road
Hansalya, 12th Floor
New Delhi 110001
Phone: +91 11 3310121
Fax: +91 11 3313303
Mr Surendra S. Sirohi
Chief Sugar Technologist
National Federation of Cooperative Sugar
Factories Ltd.
82-83, Vaikunth
3rd Floor
Nehru Place
New Delhi-110019
Phone: +91 11 6412868
Fax: +91 11 6465653
Mr Deepak Tikku
Executive Director
National Dairy Development Board
Safdarjung Enclave
New Delhi 110029
Phone: +91 11 6197064
Fax: +91 11 6183661
Indonesia
Indonésie
Mr Katim Wisnu
Director General
Food and Drug Control
Ministry of Health
Percetakan Negara I
Jakarta
Phone: +62 21 4244688
Fax: +62 21 4250764
Mr Foster Gultom
First Secretary
16, Rue de St. Jean
1203 Geneva
Switzerland
Phone: +41 22 338331
Email: foster.gultom@itu.ch
Mr Teungku A.R. Hanafiah
Center for Standardization & Accreditation
Agency for Agribusiness
Ministry of Agriculture
Jl. Harsono RM No. 3
Gd. A, Lt. 2
Ragunan
Jakarta 12550
Phone: +62 21 7804367
Fax: +62 21 7804367
Mr Suroso Natakusuma
Assistant to the Minister
Ministry of Food Affairs
Jl. Kuningan Timur M2/5
Jakarta Selatan
Phone: +62 21 5210278
Fax: +62 21 5210275
Email: suroso@rad.net.id
Dr Sumpeno Putro
Agriculture Attaché
Indonesian Mission to the European Union
Bd. de la Woluwe, 38
Bruxelles
Belgique
Phone: +32 2 7790915
Fax: +32 2 7728190
Ms Suhartuti Soetopo
Head of Sub-directorate
Standardization and Technology
Directorate for Programming, Directorate General of Agriculture and Forestry
Ministry of Industry and Trade
Jl. Gatot Subroto Kav. 52-53
18th F1.
Jakarta Selatan
Phone: +62 21 5255509 ext. 2652
Fax: +62 21 5255861
Dr Wahyudi Sugiyanto
Director
Center for Standardization and Accreditation
Agency for Agribusiness
Ministry of Agriculture
Jl. Harsono RM No. 3
Ragunan Pasar Minggu
Jakarta 12550
Phone: +62 21 7804367
Fax: +62 21 7804367
Ms Susilawati Sukmadji
Head of Subdivision
Center for Standardization
Ministry of Industry and Trade
Jl. Gatot Subroto Kav 52-53 Jakarta
Phone: +62 21 5252690
Fax: +62 21 5252690
Prof Dr Florentinus G. Winarno
Advisor to the Minister of Food Affairs
Food Technology Development Center
Bogor Agricultural University
P.O. Box 61
Bogor
Phone: +62 251 621031
Fax: +62 251 621031
Prof Dr Aman Wirakartakusumah
Expert to the Minister of Food Affairs
Ministry of Food Affairs
Gedung Bulog II M2/5
Jl. Kuningan Timur
Jakarta Selatan
Phone: +62 251 622635
Fax: +62 251 622635 or 621307
Email: muhaman@indo.net.id
Dr Chaspuri Raymond
Director
Quality Assurance
Aqua Golden Mississippi 8 Aspadin
Jl. Pulo Lentut 3
Kawasan Industry Pulogadung
Jakarta 13920
Phone: +62 21 4603070
Fax: +62 21 4609177
Ireland
Irelande
Irlanda
Dr Tony Smith
Agricultural Inspector
Department of Agriculture, Food and Forestry
Agriculture House
Dublin 2
Phone: +353 1 6072000
Fax: +353 1 6620134
Ms Geraldine Kelly
Food Unit
Department of Health
Hawkins House
Dublin 2
Phone: +353 1 6714711
Fax: +353 1 6713164
Italy
Italie
Italia
Mrs Brunella Lo Turco
Segretario Generale
Comitato Nazionale Codex
Ministero delle Politiche Agricole
Via XX Settembre, 20 Roma
Phone: +39 6 4880273
Fax: +39 6 4880273
Mr Piergiuseppe Facelli
Dirigente Superiore Veterinario
Piazza Marconi, 20
00144 Roma
Phone: +39 6 59943613
Fax: +39 6 59943552
Dr Pierangelo Grippo
Direttore
Mineracqua
Via delle Tre Madonne 12
00167 Roma
Italy
Phone: +39 6 8079950
Fax: +39 6 8079946
Dr Roberta Lodi
Researcher - Biologist
CNR - Centro Studi Latte
Via Celoria, 2
20133 Milano
Phone: +39 2 2666257
Fax: +39 2 2666257
Dr Maria Luzi
Dirigente Superiore Medico
Ministero della Sanità
Via delle Sierra Nevada, 60
Roma
Phone: +39 6 59944273
Dr Ferdinando Menconi
Responsabile Ufficio Giuridico
Federalimentare
Viale Pasteur, 10
Roma
Phone: +39 6 5903450
Fax: +39 6 5903342
Jamaica
Jamaïque
Ms Marcia Thomas
Minister Counsellor
Mission Permanente de Jamaïque auprès des Nations Unies
36 Rue de Lausanne
1201 Genève
Suisse
Phone: +41 22 7315780
Japan
Japon
Japón
Dr Nobumichi Sakai
Director
Food Sanitation Division
Environmental Health Bureau
Ministry of Health and Welfare
1-2-2 Kasumigaseki
Chiyodaku
Tokyo
Phone: +81 3 35952326
Fax: +81 3 35037965
Mr Yoshiaki Hayasaka
Deputy Director
Standards and Labelling Division
Food and Marketing Bureau
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries
2-1 Kasumigaseki 1-chome
Chiyodaku
Tokyo
Phone: +81 3 35014094
Fax: +81 3 35020438
Mr Toshihito Ikeda
Deputy Director
Food Sanitation Division
Environmental Health Bureau
Ministry of Health and Welfare
1-2-2 Kasumigaseki
Chiyodaku
Tokyo
Phone: +81 3 35952326
Fax: +81 3 35037965
Email: TI-JAA@mhw.go.jp
Dr Chieko Ikeda
Deputy Director
Food Sanitation Division
Environmental Health Bureau
Ministry of Health and Welfare
1-2-2 Kasumigaseki
Chiyodaku
Tokyo
Phone: +81 3 35952326
Fax: +81 3 35037965
Mr Akira Inoue
Director for International Standardization
Standards and Labelling Division
Food and Marketing Bureau
Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Fisheries
1-2-2 Kasumigaseki
Chiyodaku
Tokyo
Phone: +81 3 35014094
Fax: +81 3 35020438
Mr Masahiko Fukuda
Technical Adviser
Japan Food Hygiene Association
6-1, Jingumae 2-Chome
Shibuyaku
Tokyo 150
Phone: +81 3 34032112
Fax: +81 3 34780059
Mr Takayuki Hirashima
Technical Adviser
National Association of Food Industries
3-6-18 Kamimeguro
Meguroku
Tokyo
Phone: +81 3 37162639
Fax: +81 3 37162700
Mr Yasuyuki Nagara
Technical Adviser
National Association of Food Industries
6-18 Kamimeguro 3-chome
Meguroku
Tokyo
Phone: +81 3 37162004
Fax: +81 3 37162700
Email: jafic@mb.infoweb.or.jp
Mr Kenichi Nakano
Technical Adviser
National Association of Food Industry
3-6-18 Kamimeguro
Meguroku
Tokyo
Phone: +81 3 37162639
Mr Yoshihiko Tajiri
Technical Adviser
National Association of Food Industry
6-18 Kamimeguro 3-chome
Meguroku
Tokyo
Phone: +81 3 37162892
Fax: +81 3 37162700
Email: jafic@mb.infoweb.or.jp
Kenya
Mr Nelson N. Waweru
Deputy Chief Public Health Officer
Ministry of Health
P.O. Box 30016
Nairobi
Phone: +254 2 717077
Ms Margaret Aleke
Senior Standards Officer
Kenya Bureau of Standards
P.O. Box 54974
Nairobi
Phone: +254 02 502210-19
Fax: +254 02 503293
Ms Tabitha Kimani
Head
Population Unit
Home Economics Branch
P.O. Box 30028
Nairobi
Phone: +254 2 718870
Dr Josephat Otwelo Abwajo
Assistant Director
Veterinary Services
Ministry of Agriculture, Livestock
Development and Marketing
Private Bag
Kabete, Nairobi
Phone: +254 2 632231
Fax: +254 2 631273
Lebanon
Liban
Líbano
H.E. Amine El-Khazen
Ambassadeur, Représentant permanent
Mission permanente du Liban auprès de l'Office des Nations Unies
10, Avenue de Budé
1202 Genève
Suisse
Phone: +41 22 7338140
Fax: +41 22 7401166
Mr Ghassan Moallem
Premier Secrétaire
Mission permanente du Liban auprès de l'Office des Nations Unies
10, Avenue de Budé
1202 Genève
Suisse
Phone: +41 22 7338140
Fax: +41 22 7401166
Lithuania
Lituanie
Lituania
Mr Romas Svedas
Counsellor
Permanent Mission of Lithuania
18, Avenue du Bockchet
1209 Geneva
Switzerland
Phone: +41 22 7345070
Luxemburg
Luxembourg
Luxemburgo
Ms Anne Blau
Chargée de Mission
Mission permanente du Luxembourg auprès des Nations Unies
28A, Chemin du Petit Saconnex
CH-1209 Genève
Suisse
Phone: +41 22 7343380
Fax: +41 22 7330996
Mr Paul Duhr
Representant Permanent Adjoint
Mission Luxembourg
28A Ch. du Petit Saconnex
1209 Geneva
Switzerland
Phone: +352 7343380
Fax: +352 7330996
Madagascar
Dr Booz Godefroy
Secrétaire Général
Ministère du Commerce
32, Avenue Riant Parc
1209 Genève
Suisse
Phone: +41 22 7401650
Fax: +41 22 7401616
Dr Phabien Edafe
Conseiller d'Ambassade
Mission Permanente de Madagascar auprès des Nations Unies
32, Avenue Riant Pare
1209 Genève
Suisse
Phone: +41 22 7401650
Fax: +41 22 7401616
Mr Nadimalala Rabetsimialona
Conseiller
Mission Permanente de Madagascar auprès des Nations Unies
32, Avenue Riant Pare
1209 Genève
Suisse
Phone: +41 22 7401640
Fax: +41 22 7401616
Malaysia
Malaisie
Malasia
Dr Wan Mahmud
Deputy Director-General
Department of Public Health
Ministry of Health
Block E, Office Complex
Jalan Dungun, Bukit Damansara
50490 Kuala Lumpur
Phone: +60 3 2540088
Fax: +60 3 2561566
Ms Mariam Abdul Latif
Assistant Director
Food Quality Control Division
Ministry of Health
4th Floor, Block E, Office Complex
Jalan Dungun, Bukit Damansara
50490 Kuala Lumpur
Phone: +60 3 2540088
Fax: +60 3 2537804
Email: mal@dph.gov.my
Mr Raja Shahrom bin Raja Kamarudin
Director of Division
Quality Control/Enforcement (PORLA)
Palm Oil Registration & Licensing Authority
Ministry of Primary Industries
Lot 6, SS6, Jalan Perbandaran
47301 Kelana Jaya
Selangor Darul Ehsan
Phone: +60 3 7002805 or 7037294
Fax: +60 3 7033914
Email: rajaraja@porla.gov.my
Mr Amha Buang
Under-Secretary
Ministry of Primary Industries
6 - 8th floor Menara Dayabumi
Jalan Sultan Hishamuddin
50654 Kuala Lumpur
Phone: +60 3 2745886
Fax: +60 3 2745014
Ms Yeoh Gim Bee
Principal Assistant Secretary
Commodity Development Division
Ministry of Agriculture
1st Floor, Block C
Jalan Sultan Salahuddin
50624 Kuala Lumpur
Phone: +60 3 2982011
Fax: +60 3 2944008
Email: pk17@smtp.moa.my
Dr Mohd Nordin Haji Mohd Nor
Deputy Director General
Veterinary Services II
Department of Veterinary Services
Ministry of Agriculture
Block A, 8 & 9 Floor, Exchange Square
Off Jalan Semantan
50630 Kuala Lumpur
Phone: +60 3 2540103
Fax: +60 3 2540762
Email: nordin@jph.gov.my
Dr Azriman Rosman
Assistant Director
Food Quality Control Division
Ministry of Health
4th Floor, Block E, Office Complex
Jalan Dungun
Damansara Heights
50490 Kuala Lumpur
Phone: +60 3 2540088-206
Fax: +60 3 2537804
Email: azriman@dph.gov.my
Ms Nor Aini Sudin
Head
Technical Advisory Service
Palm Oil Research Institute of Malaysia (PORIM)
Ministry of Primary Industries
P.O. Box 10620
50720 Kuala Lumpur
Phone: +60 3 8259432
Fax: +60 3 8259446
Email: noraini<porim@gov.my>
Mr Khairuddin Tahir
Agriculture Attaché
Embassy of Malaysia
Via Nomentana, 297
Rome 00162
Italy
Phone: +39 6 8419296
Fax: +39 6 8555110
Email: malagrirm@pronet.it
Mauritius
Maurice
Mauricio
Mr Ah-Yao Lam
First Secretary
Permanent Mission of Mauritius
7 Chemin L. Dunant
1202 Genève
Suisse
Phone: +41 22 7348550
Fax: +41 22 7348630
Email: mission.mauritius@itu.ch
Mexico
Mexique
México
Mr Luis Fernando Hernández Lezama
Director
Asuntos Internacionales
Dirección General de Normas
Secretaría de Comercio y Fomento Industrial
Av. Puente de Tecamachalco, No. 6
Lomas de Tecamachalco
Naucalpan de Juárez, Edo. de Mexico
CP 53950 Mexico D.F.
Phone: +52 5 7299480
Fax: +52 5 7299484
Email: cidgn@secopi.gob.mx
Ms Elvira Espinosa
Standardization Director
Dirección General de Control Sanitario de Bienes y Servicios
Secretaría de Salud
Donceles 39, 1° Piso
Col. Centro
C.P. 06010 Mexico, D.F.
Phone: +52 5 5183696
Fax: +52 5 5129628
Mr Jose Flores
Director
Dirección General de Control Sanitario de Bienes y Servicios
Secretaría de Salud
Donceles 39, 1° Piso
Col. Centro
C.P. 06010 Mexico, D.F.
Phone: +52 5 5100737 or 51299994
Fax: +52 5 5129628
Morocco
Maroc
Marruecos
Dr Adiba Laraqui Housseini
Responsable
Homologation des produits diététiques
Direction du médicament et de la pharmacie
Ministère de la santé publique
Rue Lamfadel Cherkaoui
B.P. 6206
Rabat
Phone: +212 7 681930
Fax: +212 7 681931
Mr Mohamed Bentaja
18A, chemin François Lehmann
1218 Grand-Saconnex
Geneva
Switzerland
Phone: +41 22 7981535
Fax: +41 22 7984702
Mozambique
Dr Rufino Manuel de Melo
Chefe
Departamento de Higiene Ambiental
Punto de Contacto do Codex
Ministerio da Saúde
P.O. Box 264
Maputo
Phone: +258 1 427131/4 or 493444
Ms Isabel Omar
Direcçao Nacional de Pescas
Ministério de Agricultura e Pescas
Rua Consiglier Pedroso
Maputo
Phone: +258 1 431266
Email: isabel@pescas.uem.mz
Myanmar
Dr Thant Syn
Director
Department of Health
Food and Drug Administration
35, Minkyaung Road
Dagon Township
Yangon
Phone: +95 1 245331
Netherlands
Pays-Bas
Países Bajos
Mr Steven van Hoogstraten
Director of Public Health
Ministry of Health, Welfare and Sport
Sir Winston Churchill Laan 368
PO Box 5406
2280 MK Rijswijk
Phone: +31 70 3406884
Fax: +31 70 3405177
Mr Edwin Hecker
Account Manager
Ministry of Agriculture, Nature Management and Fisheries
Bezuidenhoutseweg 73
PO Box 20401
2500 EK The Hague
Phone: +3170 3793686
Fax: +3170347752
Email: E.F.F.Hecker@mkg.agro.nl
Mr Otto Knottnerus
Central Commodity Board for Arable Products
PO Box 29739
2502 LS The Hague
Phone: +31 70 3708343
Fax: +31 70 3708444
Mr Wim H. van Eck
Head
Nutrition and Veterinary Policy
Ministry of Health, Welfare and Sport
PO Box 5406
2280 MK Rijswijk
Phone: +31 70 3406966
Fax: +31 70 3405554
New Zealand
Nouvelle-Zélande
Nueva Zelandia
Mr Sundararaman Rajasekar
Manager WTO/SPS
Codex Coordinator and Contact Point for New Zealand
MAF Policy
Ministry of Agriculture
ASB Bank House
101-103 The Terrace
P.O. Box 2526
Wellington
Phone: +64 4 4744216
Fax: +64 4 4744163
Email: raj@policy.maf.govt.nz
Ms Fiona Duncan
Policy Analyst
Trade Policy, MAF Policy
Ministry of Agriculture
ASB Bank House
101-103 The Terrace
P.O. Box 2526 Wellington
Phone: +64 4 4744100
Fax: +64 4 4744163
Email: duncanf@policy.maf.govt.nz
Mr Philip Fawcet
National Manager
Standards and Systems (Dairy)
MAF Regulatory Authority
P.O. Box 2526
Wellington
Phone: +64 4 4989874
Fax: +64 4 4744239
Email: fawcetp@ra.maf.govt.nz
Dr Steve Hathaway
National Manager
Research and Development
MAF Regulatory Authority (Meat and Seafood)
P.O. Box 646
Gisborne
Phone: +64 6 8671144
Fax: +64 6 8685207
Email: hathaways@mafra.govt.nz
Nicaragua
Dr Jose Ignacio Castillo Zepeda
Director
Control de Alimentos y Zoonosis
Ministerio de Salud
Contiguo a Colonia 1° de Mayo
Managua
Phone: +505 2 2894717
Fax: +505 2 2894605
Nigeria
Nigéria
Prof Joseph Ahmadu Abalaka
Director General/Chief Executive
Standards Organization of Nigeria
Phase 1, 9th Floor
Federal Secretariat
Ikoyi, Lagos
Phone: +234 1 685073
Fax: +234 1 681820
Mr Elijah I. Aina
Assistant Director
National Agency for Food & Drug
Administration and Control
P.M.B. 5023
Wuse, Abuja
Phone: +234 9 2346380
Fax: +234 9 2346382
Ms Jane Nzeoma
Principal Regulatory Officer (Codex)
National Agency for Food & Drug
Administration and Control
2nd Floor, Phase II
Federal Secretariat
Ikoyi - Lagos
Phone: +234 1 2693105
Mr I.J. Oseni
Chief Research Officer
Planning, Research and Statistics Department
Federal Ministry of Industry
P.M.B. 85
Garki, Abuja
Phone: +234 9 2341186
Norway
Norvège
Noruega
Mr Atle Ørbeck Sörheim
Director General
Norwegian Food Control Authority
PO Box 8187 Dep
0034 Oslo
Phone: +47 22 246650
Fax: +47 22 246699
Email: atle.sorheim@snt.dep.telemax.no
Mr Dan Aarsand
Specialist Executive Officer
Directorate of Fisheries
Department of Quality Control
PO Box 185
5002 Bergen
Phone: +47 55 238000
Fax: +47 55 238090
Mr Frode Baumann
Executive Officer
Norwegian Food Control Authority
P.O. Box 8187 Dep
N-0034 Oslo
Phone: +47 22 246650
Fax: +47 22 246699
Email: frode.baumann@snt.dep.telemax.no
Ms Sissel Lyberg Beckmann
Adviser
Ministry of Health and Social Affairs
PO Box 8011 Dep
0030 Oslo
Phone: +47 22 248712
Fax: +47 22 248656
Mr Aksel-Reidar Eikemo
Head of Department
Directorate of Fisheries
Department of Quality Control
PO Box 185
5002 Bergen
Phone: +47 55 238000
Fax: +47 55 238090
Ms Trine Ellefsen
Senior Veterinary Officer
Department of Food Production and Plant and Animal Health
Royal Ministry of Agriculture
PO Box 8007 Dep
0030 Oslo
Phone: +47 22 249431
Fax: +47 22 249559
Email: trine.ellefsen@ld.dep.telemax.no
Ms Brita Drangsholt Jaksjø
Chief Adviser
The Norwegian Office of Agricultural
Cooperatives
PO Box 9347 Grønland
0135 Oslo
Phone: +47 22 054700
Fax: +47 22 172311
Email: bjaksjoe@sn.no
Ms Ragnhild Kjelkevik
Special Adviser
Norwegian Food Control Authority
PO Box 8187-Dep
0034 Oslo
Phone: +47 22 246650
Fax: +47 22 246699
Email: ragnhild.kjelkevik@snt.dep.telemax.no
Mr Per Knudsen
Manager
Norwegian General Standardizing Body
PO Box 360 Skøyen
0212 Oslo
Phone: +47 22 049200
Email: per.knudsen@allmennstandard.no
Mr Anders Oterholm
Professor
Norwegian Dairies' Association
PO Box 9051 Grønland
0133 Oslo
Phone: +47 22 93 8800
Fax: +47 22 172299
Mr Arnfinn Rage
Chief Specialist - Regulatory Affairs
Norwegian Dairies' Association
PO Box 9051 Gronland
0133 Oslo
Phone: +47 22 938895
Fax: +47 22 172299
Email: arnfinn.rage@tine.no
Ms Stine Wohl Sem
Consumer Adviser
The Consumer Council of Norway
P.O. Box 8132-Dep
N-0032 Oslo
Phone: +47 67 599600
Fax: +47 67 536010
Pakistan
Pakistán
Mr Rashid Siddique Kaukab
Counsellor (Economic - II)
Permanent Mission of Pakistan to the United Nations
56, rue de Moillebeau
1211 Geneva 19
Switzerland
Phone: +41 22 7347760
Fax: +41 22 7348085
Mr Mansur Raza
First Secretary
Permanent Mission of Pakistan to the United Nations
56, rue de Maltebeau
1211 Geneva 19
Switzerland
Phone: +41 22 734 7760
Panama
Panamá
Mme Lilia Carrera
Conseillère Economique
72, rue de Lausanne
CH 1202 Geneva
Switzerland
Phone: +41 22 73 80318/88
Fax: +41 22 7380363
Paraguay
Dra María Nicolicchia de Godoy
Directora General
Instituto Nacional de Alimentación y Nutrición
Ministerio de Salud Pública y Bienestar Social
Avda. Stma. Trinidad
c/ITAPÚA
Asunción
Fax: +595 21 206874
Peru
Pérou
Perú
Dr Carlos Pastor Taliedo
Director Ejecutivo
Dirección de Higiene Alimentaria y
Control de Zoonosis
Dirección General de Salud Ambiental
Ministerio de Salud
Las Amapolas No. 350
Lima 14
Phone: +511 4402340 or 4400399
Fax: +511 4426562
Email: pastor@digesa.sld.pe
Ms Carmen Catter de Bueno
International Analytical Services SA
Ministerio Salud - DIGESA
Av. La Marina 3035
Maranga San Miguel
Lima
Phone: +511 5782652 or 5782535
Fax: +511 5782620
Mr Julian Gamero Alania
Ingeniero Industrial
Funcionario Delegado
Ministerio de Industria, Turismo, Integración y Negociaciones Comerciales Internacionales (MITINCI)
Calle Uno Oeste #50 Piso 12
Urb. Corpac - San Isidro
Phone: +511 2243129
Fax: +511 2243241
Email: Gamero@mitinci.gob.pe
Mme Romy Tincopa
Deuxième Secrétaire
Mission du Pérou auprès des Nations Unies
63 Rue de Lausanne
1212 Geneva
Switzerland
Phone: +41 22 73 111 30
Fax: +41 22 7311168
Email: mission.peru@itu.ch
Philippines
Filipinas
Dr Alicia O. Lustre
Director
Food Development Center
National Food Authority
Department of Agriculture
FTI Complex Taguig
Metro Manila
Phone: +63 2 8187110
Fax: +63 2 817 5262
Email: aolustre@mnl.sequel.net
Ms Maria Fe Alberto
Agriculture Attaché
Philippine Mission to the UN and other International Organizations
47 Ave. Blanc
1202 Geneva
Switzerland
Phone: +41 22 7318320
Fax: +41 22 7318526
Email: maria.fe.alberto@itu.ch
Poland
Pologne
Polonia
Ms Anna Skrzynska
Head
Information and Analysis Department
Agricultural and Food Quality Inspection (CIS)
32/34 Zurawia str.
00-515 Warsaw
Phone: +48 22 6216421 or 6252028
Fax: +48 22 6214858
Ms Anna Patkowska
Senior Specialist
Ministry of Agriculture and Food Economy
30 Wspólna str
00-930 Warszawa
Phone: +48 22 6232083
Fax: +48 22 6232300
Mr Andrzej Baranowski
Chief
Department of Technology and Raw Material
National Agreement of Dairy Cooperatives
66/68 Hoza str
00-950 Warsaw
Phone: +48 22 6298120
Fax: +48 22 6298253
Portugal
Dr Carlos Alberto Andrade Fontes
Principal Advisor
Planning Division
Ministry of Agriculture, Rural Development and Fisheries
Lisboa
Phone: +351 1 3464235
Mr António Cabrera
Technical Adviser
Portuguese Federation of Food and Agricultural Industries
Rua Tomás da Fonseca 1-5°C
Phone: +351 1 7272329
Fax: +351 1 7271609
Ms Maria do Carmo Neves
Direction Général de Fiscalisation et Contrôle de la Qualité Alimentaire
Ministère de l'Agriculture, Développement
Rurale et de la Pêche
Av. Conde Valbom 98
1050 Lisboa
Phone: +351 1 7962161/9
Fax: +351 1 7971750
Republic of Republic of Korea
République de Corée
República de Corea
Mr Jeong Sik Rhee
Director
Ministry of Health and Welfare
1, Joong Ang-dong
Gwacheon
Kyung Kido
Phone: +82 2 5037586
Fax: +82 2 5041100
Dr Myung Sub Chung
Chief Researcher
Korean Institute of Food Hygiene
57-1 Noryangjin-dong
Dong Jak-ku
Seoul 156-050
Phone: +82 2 8239547
Fax: +82 2 8241762
Dr Young Ho Kim
Head
Food Standards Lab.
Food Standards Division
Korea Food Research Institute
San 46-1, Baekhyun-Dong
Bundang-Ku
Songnam-Si
Kyonggi-Do, 463-420
Phone: +82 342 7809159
Fax: +82 342 7809264
Mr Byung-Muk Lee
Director
Processing Industry Division
Ministry of Agriculture
1, Jungang-dong Gwacheon-Si
Kyonggi-do
Phone: +82 2 5049414 or 5049418
Fax: +82 2 5073965
Miss Yoo-Kyung Lee
Researcher
Food Standards Division
Korea Food Research Institute
San 46-1, Baekhyun-dong, Bundang-ku
Songnam-Si
Kyonggi-do 463-420
Phone: +82 342 7809156
Fax: +82 342 7809264
Email: soln@nownuri.net.kr
Romania
Roumanie
Rumania
Mr Balta Tudorel
Director
Standards and Food Quality Division
Ministry of Agriculture and Food
Boulevard Carol No. 17
Bucharest
Romania
Phone: +40 1613 5089
Ms Ana Csuma
Laboratory for Quality Control of
Veterinary Drugs
37 Dudului
Bucharest
Phone: +40 1 2200872
Fax: +40 1 2231476
Ms Mariana-Doina Draghici
Expert dans la normalisation des produits alimentaires
Institut roumain de normalisation
Rue Jean Louis Calderon No. 13
Bucharest 2
Phone: +40 1 6155870 or 213296
Fax: +40 1 200833
Mr Ian Regly
Country Manager
Perrier Vittel RO Srl - Groupe Nestlé
Str. Rabat 11, Sector 1
Bucarest
Phone: +40 1 2307242
Fax: +40 1 2300853
Ms Maria Alexandra Graziela Spulber
Institute of Food Research
Str. Gârlei No. 1, Sector 1
Bucarest
Phone: +40 1 2305090
Fax: +40 1 2300311
Ms Emilia Tanasescu
Directeur General
S.C. Excelent S.A.
Sos. Viilor No. 20, Sector 5
Bucarest
Phone: +40 1 3354918
Fax: +40 1 3372710
Russian Federation
Fédération de Russie
Federación de Rusia
Ms Lydmila Goulchenko
Deputy Head of Department
Department of Sanitary and Epidemiological Surveillance
Ministry of Health
18/29 Vadkovsky per.
Moscow 101474
Phone: +7 95 9731647
Fax: +7 95 9731549
Mr Konstantin Eller
Head
Department of Imported Food Hygienic Inspection
Institute of Nutrition of the Russian Academy of Medical Sciences
2/14 Ustinsky Proezd
Moscow 109240
Phone: +7 95 2981879
Fax: +7 95 2981883
Email: keller@bsd.ropnet.ru
Mr Andrei Kizioun
Third Secretary
Russian Permanent Mission to the United Nations
15 Avenue de la Paix
1211 Geneva
Switzerland
Phone: +41 22 7331870
Fax: +41 22 7347074
Mr Alexandre Koulikovskii
Head
WHO Collaborating Centre for Food Hygiene & Veterinary Sanitation
All-Russian Research Institute for Control and Standardization of Veterinary Biologics
Zvenigorodskoe Shoesse 5
Moscow
Phone: +7 95 1670321 or 1676826
Fax: +7 95 9664546
Ms Kira M. Mikhlina
Senior Scientist
Centre Mariculture VNIRO
17, V. Krasnoselskaya
107140 Moscow
Phone: +7 95 2649154
Fax: +7 95 2649187
Ms Svetlana N. Rusanova
Chief
Scientific and Technological Section
Committee of Fisheries of the Russian Federation
12 Rozhdestvenskiy Bul.
103031 Moscow
Phone: +7 95 9218297
Mrs Nina V. Tchoupakhina
Chief
Fish and Fishery Products Standards
VNIRO
17, V. Krasnoselskaya VNIRO
107140 Moscow
Phone: +7 95 2649090
Fax: +7 95 2649187
Mr Michail Volgarev
Director
Institute of Nutrition of the Russian Academy of Medical Sciences
Ustinsky Proezd 2/14
Moscow
Phone: +7 95 2981864
Fax: +7 95 2981872
Saudi Arabia
Arabie saoudite
Arabua Saudita
Mr Sirag Massode
General-Director
Standards Department
SASO
P.O. Box 3437
Riyadh 11471
Phone: +966 1 4520224
Fax: +966 1 4520167
Mr Badr Al Saad
Director
Food Department
P.O. Box 3437
Riyadh 11471
Phone: +966 1 4520166
Fax: +966 1 4520167
Mr Torki Al-Madi
Permanent Mission of Saudi Arabia to the United Nations
Rue de Lausanne 263
Genève
Suisse
Phone: +41 22 7582441
Senegal
Sénégal
Mr Khaly Adama Ndour
Conseiller
Mission permanente du Sénégal auprès des Nations Unies
93, rue de La Servette
Genève
Suisse
Phone: +41 22 9180230
Singapore
Singapour
Singapur
Mr Hong Kuan Chia
Head
Food Control Department
Ministry of the Environment
The Environment Building
40 Scotts Rd.# 11-00
Singapore 228231
Phone: +65 7319819
Fax: +65 7319843 or 7319844
Email: Chia_Hong_Kuan@env.gov.sg
Ms Huay Leng Seah
Deputy Head
Food Control Department
Ministry of the Environment
Environment Building
40 Scotts Road # 11-00
Singapore 228231
Phone: +65 7319884
Fax: +65 7319843 or 7319844
Dr Chua Sin-Bin
Director
Veterinary Public Health and Food Supply
Primary Production Department
Ministry of National Development
5, Maxwell Road #03-00 Tower Block
MND Complex
Singapore 069110
Phone: +65 3257622
Fax: +65 2206068
Email: Chua_Sin_Bin@ppd.gov.sg
Slovakia
Slovaquie
Eslovaquia
Mr Milan Kovác
Director
Food Research Institute
Priemyselná 4
PO Box 25
82006 Bratislava
Phone: +421 7 5264622
Fax: +421 7 5261417
Email: vup@mbox.bts.sk
Ms Katarína Chudiková
Officer
Section of Health Protection
Ministry of Health
Limbova 2
83343 Bratislava
Phone: +421 7 3788215
Fax: +421 7 376142
South Africa
Afrique du Sud
Sudáfrica
Dr Theodore van de Venter
Director
Food Control
Department of Health
Private Bag X 828
0001 Pretoria
Phone: +27 12 3120511
Fax: +27 12 3120811
Email: ventert@hltrsa2.pwv.gov.za
Dr Pieter van Twisk
Chairman
South African Food Composition Data (SAFCOD)
PO Box 74241
0040 Lynnwood Ridge
Pretoria
Phone: +27 12 3483207
Fax: +27 12 3483207
Spain
Espagne
España
Dr José-Ignacio Arranz Recio
Subdirector General
Higiene de los Alimentos
Dirección General de Salud Pública
Ministerio de Sanidad y Consumo
Paseo del Prado 18-20
28071 Madrid
Phone: +34 1 5962070
Fax: +34 1 5961597/5964409
Mr Jose Barreiro
Conseiller Agricole
Misión Permanente de España ante las Naciones Unidas
Avenue Blanc 53
Genève
Suisse
Phone: +41 22 7312324
Ms María Amelia Guzmán Martínez-Valls
Oficina comercial
Misión Permanente de España ante las Naciones Unidas
Av. Blanc, 49
1202 Geneva
Switzerland
Phone: +41 22 7328593
Fax: +41 22 7386476
Dr Felipe Mittelbrunn Garcia
Consejero Técnico
Secretaría de la Comisión Interministerial para la Ordenación Alimentaria
Subdirección General de Higiene de los Alimentos
Ministerio de Sanidad y Consumo
Paseo del Prado 18-20
28071 Madrid
Phone: +34 1 5961346
Fax: +34 1 5961597 or 5964409
Ms Irene Zafra
Secretaire Générale
Asociación Nacional Aguas Envasadas (ANEABE)
Serano 76
Phone: 34 1 5758276
Fax: 34 1 5781816
Sudan
Soudan
Sudán
Dr Mohamed Abdelgadir
Director-General
Sudanese Standards and Metrology
Organization
P.O. Box 13573
Khartoum
Phone: +249 11 775247
Fax: +249 11 774852
Prof Suad Hassan Satti
Associate Professor
Director
National Chemical Laboratories
Federal Ministry of Health
P.O. Box 287
Khartoum
Phone: +249 11 772991 or 779789
Swaziland
Swazilandia
Ms Christabel Motsa
Principal Home Economics Officer
Ministry of Agriculture
P.O. Box 162
Mbabane
Phone: +268 42731
Fax: +268 44700
Sweden
Suède
Suecia
Dr Stuart Slorach
Deputy Director-General
National Food Administration
PO Box 622
75126 Uppsala
Phone: +46 18 175594
Fax: +46 18 105848
Email: stuart.slorach@slv.se
Ms Agneta Andersson
Administrative Officer
Codex Contact Point
National Food Administration
PO Box 622
75126 Uppsala
Phone: +46 18 175506
Fax: +46 18 105848
Email: agneta.andersson@slv.se
Ms Åsa Breding
Head
Legal Division
National Food Administration
PO Box 622
75126 Uppsala
Phone: +46 18 175505
Fax: +46 18 105848
Email: asa.breding@slv.se
Mr Nils Farnert
Consultant
Stureparken 3 NB
11426 Stockholm
Sweden
Phone: +46 8 4111906
Fax: +46 8 4111906
Email: Nils.Farnert@se
Ms Anita Janelm
Acting Head
Food Standards Division
National Food Administration
PO Box 622
75126 Uppsala
Phone: +46 18 175603
Fax: +46 18 105848
Email: anja@slv.se
Ms Eva Lönberg
Codex Coordinator for Sweden
National Food Administration
PO Box 622
75126 Uppsala
Phone: +46 18 175500
Fax: +46 18 105848
Email: Eva.Lonberg@slv.se
Switzerland
Suisse
Suiza
Ms Eva Zbinden
Head
Codex Section
Swiss Federal Office of Public Health
Haslerstrasse 27
3003 Berne
Phone: +41 31 3229572
Fax: +41 31 3229574
Email: eva.zbinden@bag.admin.ch
Mr Frédéric Brand
Collaborateur scientifique
Office fédéral de l'agriculture OFAG
Mattenhofstrasse 5
3003 Berne
Phone: +41 31 3222629
Fax: +41 31 3222634
Email: frederic.brand@blw.admin.ch
Ms Irina du Bois
Nestec Ltd
1800 Vevey
Phone: +41 21 9242261
Fax: +41 21 9244547
Mr Marquard Imfeld
Director External Affairs
F. Hoffmann-La Roche
4000 Basel
Phone: +41 61 6885607
Fax: +41 61 6881635
Email: marquard.imfeld@roche.com
Mr Urs Klemm
Swiss Federal Office of Public Health
Haslerstrasse 27
3001 Berne
Phone: +41 31 3229503
Fax: +41 31 3229574
Email: urs.klemm@bag.admin.ch
Dr. Anton Kohler
Head
Swiss FAO Secretariat
Mattenhofstrasse 5
3003 Berne
Phone: +41 31 3222562
Thailand
Thaïlande
Tailandia
Ms Kanya Sinsakul
Secretary-General
Thai Industrial Standards Institute
Ministry of Industry
Rama VI Street
Ratchathewi
Bangkok 10400
Phone: +66 2 20234001
Fax: +66 2 2464085
Email: kanya@tisi.go.th
Mr Pholasin Arkhawakom
Commodity Standard Technical Officer
Commodity Standard Division
Department of Foreign Trade
Ministry of Commerce
Ratchadamnoen Ave.
Bangkok 10200
Phone: +66 2 2822111-3 ext. 148
Fax: +66 2 2813032
Ms Wattana Malithong
Trade Technical Officer 6
Commodity Division 1
Department of Foreign Trade
Ministry of Commerce
Ratchadamnoen Ave.
Bangkok 10200
Phone: +66 2 6291675
Mr Pisit Rangsaritwutikul
Standards Officer 7
Thai Industrial Standards Institute
Ministry of Industry
Rama VI Rd.
Ratchathewi
Bangkok 10400
Phone: +66 2 2023438
Fax: +66 2 2487981
Email: pisitr@th.go
Mr Chumnarn Sirigugsa
Senior Economist
Office of Agricultural Standard
Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives
Rachadamnern Road
Bangkok 10200
Phone: +66 2 6299041
Fax: +66 2 2804670
Ms Metanee Sukontarug
Director
Office of the National Codex Alimentarius Committee
Thai Industrial Standards Institute
Ministry of Industry
Rama VI St.
Ratchathiwi
Bangkok 10400
Phone: +66 2 2023435
Fax: +66 2 2487987
Email: metanee@tisi.go.th
Ms Sasithorn Sunthrarak
Advisor in International Standardization
Thai Industrial Standards Institute
Ministry of Industry
Rama VI St.
Ratchathiwi
Bangkok 10400
Phone: +66 2 2458038
Fax: +66 2 2478741
Email: sasitorn@tisi.go.th
Ms Marasee Surakul
Secretary-General
National FAO Committee of Thailand
Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives
Bangkok
Phone: +66 2 2816996
Fax: +66 2 2816996
Ms Ratana Thanomsakyuth
Chief
Foreign Relations, Section 1
Division of Foreign Agricultural Relations
Ministry of Agriculture and Cooperatives
Rayadamnern Ave.
Bangkok 10200
Phone: +66 2 2819313
Fax: +66 2 2819312
Ms Kusumaln Trivitayanurak
Food Industries Grp.
Federal Thai Industries
39-90 Moo-8 Paholyothin Rd.
Ladpraw
Bangkok 10320
Phone: +66 2 3932286 ext. 195
Fax: +66 2 3983140
Mr Wanchai Somchit
Executive Manager
Thai Food Processors Association
170/22 Ocean Tower 1 Bldg.
9th Floor
New-Rachadapisek Rd.
Klongteoy
Bangkok 10110
Phone: +66 2 2612684-6
Fax: +66 2 2612996-7
Mr Poonkeite Thangsombat
Vice President & Chairman
Seafood Packers Group
Thai Food Processors Association
170/22 9th Floor Ocean Tower 1 Bldg.
New - Rachadapisek Rd.
Klong Toey
Bangkok
Phone: +66 2 2612684-6
Fax: +66 2 2612996-7
Tunisia
Tunisie
Túnez
Mr Meftah Amara
Directeur Général de l'Agro-Alimentaire
Ministère de l'Industrie
30 rue Alain Savary
1002 Belvedere
Tunis
Phone: +216 1 289562
Fax: +216 1 789159
Turkey
Turquie
Turquía
Dr Ismail Mert
Deputy General Director
General Directorate of Protection and Control
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs
Tarim ve Kóyisleri Bakanligi
Koruma ve Kontrol Genel Mudurlugu
Akay Cad. No. 3 Bakanliklar
Ankara
Phone: +90 312 418 2341
Fax: +90 312 418 6318
Dr Kemal Sandik
Division Director
Food Codex and Nutrition
General Directorate of Protection and Control
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs
Tarim ve Köyisleri Bakanligi
Koruma ve Kontrol Genel Mudurlugu
Akay Cad. No. 3 Bakanliklar
Ankara
Phone: +90 312 418 5834
Fax: +90 312 418 9395
Uganda
Ouganda
Dr Eve Kasirye-Alemu
Executive Director
Uganda National Bureau of Standards
PO Box 6329
Kampala
Phone: +256 42 222367/9
Fax: +256 42 222657
United Arab Emirates
Emirats arabes unies
Emirates Arabes Unidos
Dr Abdel-Wahab El-Khidir Ahmed
Director
Central Food Control and Consultancy
Laboratory
Sharjah Municipality
P.O. Box 22
Sharjah
Phone: +971 6 524017
Fax: +971 6 523612
United Kingdom
Royaume-Uni
Reino Unido
Mr Grant Meekings
Head
Food Labelling and Standards Division
Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food
Ergon House c/o Noble House
17 Smith Square
London SW1P 3JR
Phone: +44 171 2386278
Fax: +44 171 2386763
Dr Greg Hodson
Principal Scientific Officer
Food Labelling and Standards Division
Ministry of Agriculture, Fisheries and Food
Ergon House c/o Nobel House
17 Smith Square
Room B 16 Ergon
London SW1P 3JR
Phone: +44 171 2386214
Fax: +44 171 2385782
Mr Simon Renn
Executive Officer
Food Labelling and Standards Division
Ministry of Agriculture Fisheries and Food
Egon House c/o Nobel House
17 Smith Square
Room 325b Ergon
London SW1P 3JR
Phone: +44 171 2386480
Fax: +44 171 2386763
Dr Roger Skinner
Health Aspects of Food and Environment
Division
Department of Health
Skipton House
80 London Road
London SE1 6LW
Phone: +44 171 9725361
Fax: +44 171 9725141
United Republic of Tanzania
République-Unie de Tanzanie
República Unida de Tanzania
Ms Angelina E.A. Madete
Acting Head of Section
Pollution Control
Division of Environment
P.O. Box 5380
Dar es Salaam
Phone: +255 51 118416-7
Fax: +255 51 113856 or 113082
United States of America
Etats-Unis d'Amérique
Estados Unidos de América
Mr Thomas J. Billy
Administrator
Food Safety and Inspection Service
US Department of Agriculture
1400 Jefferson Dr., S.W.
Washington, DC 20250
Phone: +1 202 7207025
Fax: +1 202 2050158
Email: tom.billy@usda.gov
Mr Roy Barrett
Office of Food Safety
Foreign Agricultural Service
US Department of Agriculture
1400 Independence Avenue, S.W.
Washington, DC 20250
Phone: +1 202 7207054
Fax: +1 202 6900677
Email: barrettr@fas.usda.gov
Ms Rhonda S. Bond
Executive Officer for Codex
Food Safety and Inspection Service
US Department of Agriculture
Rm 311, West End Court
Washington DC 20250-3700
Phone: +1 202 4188841
Fax: +1 202 4188865
Email: u.s.codex@aol.com
Dr Catherine Carnevale
Director
Office of International and Constituent Operations
Department of Health and Human Services
Food and Drug Administration
Room 5807
200 C Street, SW (HFS-550)
Washington DC 20204
Phone: +1 202 2055032
Fax: +1 202 2050165
Email: ccarnevale@bangate.fda.gov
Mr Patrick Clerkin
Director
U.S. Codex Office
Food Safety and Inspection Service
US Department of Agriculture
1255 22nd Street. N.W.
Washington DC 20250-3700
Phone: +1 202 4188847
Fax: +1 202 4188865
Email: patrick.clerkin@usda.gov
Ms Maritza Colón-Pullano
Special Assistant
International Regulatory Issues
Office of Regulatory Affairs
Food and Drug Administration
Room 14-90 Parklawn Building
5600 Fishers Lane HFC-2
Rockville, MD 20857
Phone: +1 301 8274553
Fax: +1 301 8270963
Email: mpullano@ora.fda.gov
Mr E. Spencer Garrett
Director
National Seafood Inspection Laboratory
National Marine Fisheries Service
705 Convent Street
Pascagoulla, MS 39568-1207
Phone: +1 601 7698964
Fax: +1 601 7627144
Email: usccfh@aol.com
Ms Linda Horton
Director
International Policy, HF-23
Department of Health and Human Services
US Food and Drug Administration
5600 Fishers Lane
Rockville, MD 20857
Phone: +1 301 8273344
Fax: +1 301 4436906
Email: lhorton@oc.fda.gov
Mr Richard Ronk
Food Safety Advisor
Office of Food Safety
Foreign Agricultural Service
U.S. Food and Drug Administration
Room 5545, South Building
14th & Independence Avenue
Ag. Box 1027
Washington DC 20250
Phone: +1 202 6900677 or 703 3236661
Fax: +1 202 6900677
Email: rronk97420@aol.com
Dr Alan M. Rulis
Director
Office of Pre-Market Approval
Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition
US Food and Drug Administration
200 C Street, SW (HFS-200)
Washington, DC 20204
Phone: +1 202 4183100
Fax: +1 202 4183131
Email: arulis@bangate.fda.gov
Dr F. Edward Scarbrough
Director
Office of Food Labelling
Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition
Food and Drug Administration
200 C Street, SW (HFS-150)
Room 1832
Washington, DC 20204
Phone: +1 202 2054561
Fax: +1 202 2054594
Email: fes@bangate.fda.gov
Dr Fred R. Shank
Director
Center for Food Safety and Applied Nutrition
US Food and Drug Administration
200 C Street SW
Washington DC 20204
Phone: +1 202 2054850
Fax: +1 202 2055025
Mr Bruce Silverglade
Director of Legal Affairs
Center of Science in the Public Interest CSPI
1875 Connecticut Ave. N.W.
Suite 300
Washington, DC 20009
Phone: +1 202 3329110 ext. 337
Fax: +1 202 2654954
Email: brucesilvergate@compuserve.com
Dr Stephen F. Sundlof
Director
Center for Veterinary Medicine
Food and Drug Administration
7500 Standish Place
Rockville, MD 20855
Phone: +1 301 5941740
Fax: +1 301 5941830
Email: ssundlof@bangate.fda.gov
Mr Francis I. Vacca
Agricultural Attaché
U.S. Mission to the U.N. Agencies in Rome
Via Sardegna, 49
Rome
Italy
Phone: +39 6 46743507
Fax: +39 6 47887047
Email: vaccaf@fas.usda.gov
Dr Kaye Wachsmuth
Deputy Administrator
Office of Public Health and Science
US Department of Agriculture
Room 341-E Jamie Whitten Building
1400 Independence Avenue, SW
Washington DC 20250-3700
Phone: +1 202 7202644
Fax: +1 202 6902980
Email: kaye.wachsmuth@usda.gov
Mr Gregg Young
Food Safety & Technical Services Division
Foreign Agricultural Service
U.S. Department of Agriculture
Room 5545, South Building
1400 Independence Ave.
Washington, DC 20250
Phone: +1 202 6903334
Fax: +1 202 6900677
Email: young.g.@fas.usda.gov
Mr John Cordaro
President and Chief Executive Officer
Council for Responsible Nutrition
1300 19th Street, NW
Suite 310
Washington, DC 20036
Phone: +1 202 8721488
Fax: +1 202 8729594
Email: crnusa.org
Mr Marvin Dixon
Manager
Institutional Nutrition and Scientific Regulatory Affairs
Nabisco Foods Group
200 De Forest Avenue
East Hanover, NJ 07936
Phone: +1 201 5033025
Fax: +1 202 5032471
Email: dixonm@navisco.com
Ms Marsha A. Echols
Washington Counsel
National Association for the Specialty Food Trade, Inc.
1529 Wisconsin Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20007 2739
Phone: +1 202 6251451
Fax: +1 202 6259126
Email: me@maechols.com
Dr Anthony Hepton
Vice President
Quality Assurance
Dole Food Company
5795 Lindero Canyon Road
Westlake Village
California 91362
Phone: +1 818 8744685
Fax: +1 818 8744804
Ms Julia Howell
Director
Regulatory Submissions
Scientific and Regulatory Affairs
The Coca Cola Company
PO Box 1734
Atlanta, GA 30301
Phone: +1 404 6764224
Fax: +1 404 6767166
Email: jhowell@nat.com
Dr Gordon Kemp
Director
Science Policy Affairs
Pfizer Central Research
Eastern Point Road
Groton, CT 06340
Phone: +1 860 4414958
Fax: +1 860 4414101
Mr Eddie Kimbrell
Consultant
13209 Moss Ranch Lane
Fairfax, VA 22033
Phone: +1 703 6319187
Fax: +1 703 6313866
Mr Rodney Leonard
Executive Director
Community Nutrition Institute
Room 413
910 17th Street, NW S413
Washington, DC 20814
Phone: +1 202 7760595
Fax: +1 202 7760599
Email: cnii@igc.apc.org
Dr Allen Matthys
Vice President
Technical Regulatory Affairs
National Food Processors Association
1401 New York Avenue, NW
Washington, DC 20005
Phone: +1 202 6395960
Fax: +1 202 6378068
Email: amatthy@nfpa-food.org
Mr C.W. McMillan
Consultant
4003 Pine Brook Road
Alexandria, VA 22310
Phone: +1 703 9601982
Fax: +1 703 9604976
Mr Karl Riedel
Chair
International Committee
National Nutritional Foods Association
3931 MacArthur Boulevard
Suite 101
Newport Beach, CA 93660
Phone: +1 714 9666632
Fax: +1 714 3796501
Email: nnfa@aol.com
Dr H. Michael Wehr
Director
Dairy Product Standards
National Milk Producers Federation
1840 Wilson Boulevard
Arlington, VA 22201
Phone: +1 703 2436111
Fax: +1 703 8419328
Email: wehrhere@aol.com
Uruguay
Dr Arturo Navarro Arana
Director General de Secretaría
Ministerio de Industria, Energía y Minería
Rincon 747
Montevideo
Phone: +598 2 922216
Dra Ana Aber
Asesor
Dirección Nacional de Medio Ambiente
Ministerio de Vivienda, Ordenamiento
Territorial y Medio Ambiente
25 de Mayo 402
Montevideo
Phone: +598 2 965132-3
Fax: +598 2 965132/3
Prof Delvey Anchieri
Director
Departamento Higiene Alimentos
Ministerio de Salud Pública
18 de Julio 1892
4to Piso, Anexo B
Montevideo
Phone: +598 2 498302
Fax: +598 2 498302
Ing Ana María Berti
Directora
Ministerio de Ganadería, Agricultura y Pesca
Avda. Millán 4703
Montevideo
Phone: +598 2 393069
Fax: +598 2 393069
Lic Federico Perazza
Segundo Secretario
Representación Permanente de la República del Uruguay ante los Organismos Int. en Ginebra
Ginebra
Suiza
Esc Beatriz Ramos
Directora del Area Defensa del Consumidor
Ministerio de Economía y Finanzas
25 de Mayo 402
Montevideo
Phone: +598 2 904106
Fax: +598 2 921043
Dr Juan Angel Rodriguez Servetti
Punto Focal del Codex Alimentarius
Laboratorio Tecnológico del Uruguay (LATU)
Avenida Italia 6201
Montevideo
Phone: +598 2 613724
Fax: +598 2 602290
Ing Galdós Ugarte
Director
Asuntos Internacionales
Ministerio de Ganadería, Agricultura y Pesca
Constituyente 1476
Montevideo
Phone: +598 2 426358
Fax: +598 2 426331
Email: mgapuai@adimet.com.uy
Lie Pamela Vivas
Consejero
Misión Permanente de l'Uruguay en Ginebra
65, Rue de Lausanne
1202 Genève
Suisse
Phone: +41 22 7328366
Fax: +41 22 7315650
Venezuela
Mme Iole Touron
Attaché
Misión Permanente de Venezuela
18A, Chemin Francis Lehman
1218 Grand-Saconnex
Geneva
Switzerland
Phone: +41 22 7982621
Viet Nam
Dr Thien Luan Nguyen
Vice Minister
Chairman of Vietnam Codex Alimentarius Commission
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development
Bach Thao
Hanoi
Phone: +84 4 8459672 or 8457788
Fax: +84 4 8457319
Mr Quoc Dat Nguyen
Senior Officer
Economist
Department of International Cooperation
Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development
Bach Thao
Hanoi
Phone: +84 48459672
Fax: +84 4 8454319
Zimbabwe
Mr David Bramwell Nhari
Government Analyst
Government Analyst Laboratory
Ministry of Health and Child Welfare
P.O. Box CY231
Causeway
Harare
Phone: +263 4 708527
Fax: +263 4 708527
OBSERVER COUNTRIES
Namibia
Namibie
Mr Jeremiah Khaiseb
Health Inspector
Environmental Health Officer
Ministry of Health and Social Services
Private Bag 13198
Windhoek
Phone: +264 61 2032218
Fax: +264 61 2032307
INTERNATIONAL GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS
Alliance des Pays Producteurs de Cacao (COPAL)
Mr Ake Silas
Agro Economiste
Alliance des Pays Producteurs de Cacao (COPAL)
8/10 Broad Street, 11th Floor
Western House
P.O. Box 1718
Lagos
Nigeria
Phone: +234 1 2635574
Fax: +234 1 2635684
Commission of the European Community
Mr Egon Gaerner
Head of Unit
Directorate General III - Industry
Rue de la Loi 200
B 1049 Bruxelles
Belgique
Phone: +32 2 295 31 26
Fax: +32 2 296 09 51
Ms Marie-Ange Balbinot
Administrator - Codex Coordinator
Directorate General III - Industry
Rond Point Schumann 11, 3/30
1049 Bruxelles
Belgique
Phone: +32 2 295 07 63
Fax: +32 2 296 09 51
Email: Marie-Ange.Balbinot@dg3.cec.be
Mr Henri Belvèze
Acting Head of Unit
DG XXIV/01
Directorate General "Consumer Policy and Health Protection"
Rue de la Loi 200
B-1049 Bruxelles
Belgique
Phone: +32 2 2962812
Fax: +32 2 9966793
Email: henri.belveze@dg24.cec.be
Mr Andrew Wilson
Head of Section
International Veterinary Affairs
DGVI/B/II-2
Rue de la Loi 200
1049 Bruxelles
Belgique
Phone: +32 2 295 8412
Fax: +32 2 295 31 44
Email: Andrew.Wilson@dg6.cec.be
Council of Ministers of the European Union
Mr Paul Culley
Secretariat of the Council of Ministers of the EU
Council of Ministers of the European Union
175 Rue de la Loi
1048 Brussels
Belgium
Phone: +32 2 285 6197
Fax: +32 2 285 7928
Mrs Christina Ståhle
Secretariat of the Council of Ministers of the EU
175 Rue de la Loi
1048 Brussels
Belgium
Phone: +32 2 285 8357
Fax: +32 2 285 7928
European Free Trade Association
Ms Berit Wilsher
Senior Officer
Goods Unit
EFTA
74 rue de Trèves
1040 Bruxelles
Belgique
Phone: +32 2 2861738
Fax: +32 2 2861750
Email: berit.wilsher@secrbru.efta.be
International Trade Centre UNCTAD/WTO
Mr Enrique Sierra
Senior Adviser on Export Quality
Functional Advisory Services Section
Division on Trade Support Services ITC
54-56 rue de Montbrillant
1202 Genève
Suisse
Phone: +41 22 7300396
Fax: +41 22 7334439
Email: sierra@intracen.org
Office International de la Vigne et du Vin
Mr Yann Juban
Unité Réglementation & Droit
OIV
18 rue d'Aguesseau
75008 Paris
France
Phone: +33 1 44948095
Fax: +33 1 42669063
Email: oiv101675.2013@compuserve.com
World Trade Organization
Mrs Majda Petschen
Economic Affairs Officer
World Trade Organization
Centre William Rappard
Geneva
Switzerland
Phone: +41 22 7395389
Fax: +41 22 7395760
Email: Majda.Petschen@wto.org
Mrs Gretchen Stanton
Counsellor
World Trade Organization
Centre William Rappard
Geneva
Switzerland
Phone: +41 22 7395086
Fax: +41 22 7395760
Email: Gretchen.Stanton@wto.org
Mr João Magalhães
Consellor
World Trade Organization
Centre William Rappard
Geneva
Switzerland
Phone: +41 22 7395010
Fax: +41 22 7395010
Email: Joao.Magalhaes@wto.org
INTERNATIONAL NON-GOVERNMENTAL ORGANIZATIONS
APIMONDIA
Mr Raymond Borneck
President
APIMONDIA
2 Rue du Creux
F 39380 Montbarrey
France
Phone: +33 3 84815007
Fax: +33 3 84815007
Email: apiborneck@compuserve.com
Dr Stefan Bogdanov
APIMONDIA
Federal Dairy Research Station
3003 Bern
Switzerland
Phone: +41 22 323 8208
Fax: +41 22 323 8011
Email: stefan.bogdanov@fam.admin.ch
Association Internationale de l'Industrie des Bouillons et Potages
Dr Hans-Joachim Mürau
General Secretary
Association Internationale de l'Industrie des Bouillons et Potages (AIIBP)
Reuterstraße 151
D-53113 Bonn
Germany
Phone: +49 228 212017
Fax: +49 228 219460
Mr Ernst G. Rapp
Director
Association Internationale de l'Industrie des Bouillons et Potages
Ernest Claes Laan 4
B-3080 Tervuren
Brussels
Belgium
Phone: +32 2 7610948
Fax: +32 2 7610918
Association of European Coeliac Societies
Ms Hertha Deutsch
Director
Association of European Coeliac Societies
Anton Baumgartner Str. 44/C5/2302
A 1230 Vienna
Austria
Phone: +43 1 6671887
Fax: +43 1 66718874
Comité des Industries des Mayonnaises et Sauces Condimentaires de la Communauté Economique Européenne
Mr Michel Coenen
Secrétaire Général
CIMSCEE
Avenue de Roodebeek, 30
1030 Bruxelles
Belgium
Phone: +32 2 7438730
Fax: +32 2 7368175
Mr Dan Dils
Président de la Commission Technique
CIMSCEE c/o C.P.C. MONDA
St. Pietersvliet 7/4
2000 Anvers
Belgium
Phone: +32 3 2224511
Fax: +32 3 2319319
Confédération des Industries Agro-Alimentaires de l'UE
Dr Dominique Taeymans
Director
Scientific & Regulatory Affairs
CIAA
Avenue des Arts 43
B-1040 Bruxelles
Belgium
Phone: +32 2 5141111
Fax: +32 2 5112905
Email: ciaareg@hebel.net
Confédération internationale du commerce et des industries des légumes secs
Mr Jacques L. Gauthier
Conseiller Technique
Confédération internationale du commerce et des industries des légumes secs
286 Bourse de commerce (Bureau 282)
2 rue de Viarmes
F75040 Paris Cedex 01
France
Phone: +33 1 42368435
Fax: +33 1 42 36 44 93
Confédération Mondiale de l'Industrie de la Santé Animale (COMISA)
Dr Christian Verschueren
Secretary-General
COMISA
Rue Defacqz 1
1000 Brussels
Belgium
Phone: +32 2 5437567
Fax: +32 2 5370049
Email: fpardo@fedesa.be
Dr Peter Altreuther
Bayer AG
Animal Health, R & D
D-51368 Leverkusen
Germany
Phone: +49 2173 38 4174
Fax: +49 2173 38 4896
Dr Richard A. Carnevale
Vice President
Regulatory, Scientific and International Affairs
AHI
501 Wythe St.
Alexandria, VA 22314
USA
Phone: +1 703 6840011
Fax: +1 703 6840125
Dr Raul Guerrero
Senior Regulatory Consultant
Elanco
2001 West Main Street
Greenfield, Indiana 46140
USA
Phone: +1 317 2774434
Fax: +1 317 2774755
Email: r.guerrero@lilly.com
Dr Michael McGowan
Director, Regulatory Affairs
Pfizer Inc
Central Research
Eastern Point Road
Groton, CT 06340
USA
Phone: +1 860 4414947
Fax: +1 860 4415779
Email: Michael_J_McGowan@groton.pfizer.com
Dr Warren M. Strauss
Agriculture Regulation Director
Monsanto Company
Suite 1100
700 14th Street NW
Washington, DC
USA
Phone: +1 202 3832859
Fax: +1 202 7832468
Mr Ricardo Wyse
Director
CAPROVE
H. Yrigoyen 850 of. 128
13 77 Buenos Aires
Argentina
Phone: +54 1 3319896
Fax: +54 1 3319896
Confederation of International Soft Drinks Association
Mr Alain Beaumont
General Secretary
Unesda-Cisda
Boulevard Louis Schmidt 35/14
B-1040 Brussels
Belgium
Phone: +32 2 7353749
Fax: +32 2 7325102
Email: mail@unesda.cisda.org
Dr Ralph Langlais
Director
Scientific Regulatory Affairs
Coca-Cola GmbH
Frankenstrasse 348
D-45133 Essen
Germany
Phone: +49 201 8211361
Fax: +49 201 8211773
Mr F.J. Van der Meer
Coca-Cola Greater Europe
Chaussée de Mons 1424
B-1070 Brussels
Belgium
Phone: +32 2 5291716
Fax: +32 2 5291727
Conseil Interprofessionnel du Cacao et du Café
Mr Tsimi Enouga
CICC
BP 4216
Douala
Cameroun
Phone: +237 420777
Fax: +237 420816
Consumers International
Ms Diane McCrea
Consultant
Consumers' Association, U.K.
17 Vernon Road
London N8 0QD
United Kingdom
Phone: +44 181 8894226
Fax: +44 181 3520564
Ms Lisa Lefferts
Consultant
Consumers' Union
RR1, Box 76
Andes NY 13731
USA
Phone: +1 914 676 3654
Fax: +1 914 676 3929
Email: lefferts@catskill.net
Ms Leen Petré
Global Policy and Campaigns Officer
Consumers International
24 Highbury Crescent
London N5 1RX
United Kingdom
Phone: +44 171 2266663
Fax: +44 171 3540607
Email: lpetre@consint.org
European Dairy Association
Mr Christophe Wolff
Legislation Officer
EDA
14, rue Montoyer
B-1000 Bruxelles
Belgium
Phone: +32 2 5495040
Fax: +32 2 5495049
Email: eda@arcadis.be
European Food and Feed Cultures Association
Mr Jean-Jacques Piot
Adviser
EFFCA
85, Bd Haussmann
75008 Paris
France
Phone: +33 1 4265 4246
Fax: +33 1 4265 0205
European Food Law Association
Ms Barbro Blomberg
Lawyer
EFLA
Mohultsvagen 8 A
71694 Mullhyttan
Sweden
Phone: +46 585 40354
European Vegetable Protein Federation
Mr Johan Hallaert
Secretary General
EUVEPRO
Avenue de Roodebeek 30
Bruxelles 1030
Belgium
Phone: +32 2 7438748
Fax: +32 2 7368175
Groupe International et Union Européenne des Sources d'Eaux Minérales Naturelles et des Eaux de Source (GISEM/UNESEM)
Dr José Bontemps
Conseiller Scientifique
GISEMES/UNESEM
Rue Colonel Bourg, 103
1030 Bruxelles
Belgique
Phone: +32 2 7023811
Fax: +32 2 7023812
Mme Françoise Debuttet
Secrétaire Générale
GISEM-UNESEM
10 Rue de la Trémoille
75008 Paris
France
Phone: +33 1 47203110
Fax: +33 1 4720 2762
Mr Guy J. du Bois
Chairman
Chambre Syndicale des Eaux Minerales et de Source
Avenue Général de Gaulle 51
B-1050 Bruxelles
Belgium
Phone: +32 2 6491226
Mr Vincent Ducasse
Director Qualité - Recherche Eaux Minerales
DANONE
7 rue de Teheran
75008 Paris
France
Phone: +33 1 44 352624
Fax: +33 1 44 352427
Email: ducass.v@danone.geis.com
Institute of Food Technologists
Dr Rosetta Newsome
Senior Food Scientist
IFT
Institute of Food Technologists
221 N. La Salle
Chicago, IL 60601
USA
Phone: +1 312 7828424
Fax: +1 312 7828348
Email: rlnewsome@ift.org
Dr Robert E. Smith
President
IFT
R.E. Smith Consultants, Inc
222 B Eagle Point Road
Newport, Vermont 05855
U.S.A.
Phone: +1 802 3341804
Fax: +1 802 3341846
Email: rsmith2@attmail.com
International Baby Food Action Network
Ms Olga Lenzen
Project Officer
IBFAN
P.O. Box 1693
1000 BR
Amsterdam
Netherlands
Phone: +31 20 4202222
Mrs Nancy-Jo Peck
C/o Gifa
B.P. 157
1211 Geneva 19
Switzerland
Phone: +41 22 7989164
Fax: +41 22 7984443
Email: philipec@iprolink.ch
Ms Trudy van Ommeren
Senior Project Officer
IBFAN
P.O. Box 1693
1000 BR
Amsterdam
Netherlands
Phone: +31 20 4202222
International Co-operative Alliance
Mr Hiroshi Suzuki
Laboratory Manager
Japanese Consumers' Cooperative Union
1-17-18 Nishikicho
Warabi
Saitama
Japan
Phone: +81 48 4338300
Fax: +81 48 4338309
Ms Gwenn Straszburger
Food Officer
EUROCOOP rue Archimède 17-bte 2
B-1000 Bruxelles
Belgium
Phone: +32 2 2850070
Fax: +32 2 2310757
Ms Toshiko Suzuki
Quality Control and Environmental Affairs
Consumers' Cooperative Tokyo
4-1-3 Shakuji-machi
Nerima-ku
Tokyo
Japan
Phone: +81 3 39041352
Fax: +81 3 53935619
International Council of Grocery Manufacturers Associations
Mr Charles Feldberg
Vice President
Health, Safety and Quality Assurance
CPC International, Inc.
Post Office Box 8000
Englewood Cliffs, NJ 07632
USA
Phone: +1 201 8942133
Fax: +1 201 8942192
Dr Steve Ziller
Executive Secretary
ICGMA
1010 Wisconsin Ave NW, Suite 900
Washington, DC 20007
USA
Phone: +1 202 3379400
Fax: +1 202 3374508
Email: Zillermi@aol.com
International Dairy Federation
Mr Claus Heggum
Head of Department
Danish Dairy Board
Frederiks Allé 22
8000 Aarhus C
Denmark
Phone: +45 87312000
Fax: +45 87312001
Email: ch@mejeri.dk
Mr Edward Hopkin
Secretary General
IDF
41 Square Vergote
1030 Brussels
Belgique
Phone: +32 2 7331690
Fax: +32 2 73304113
Email: fil-idf@mail.interpac.be
International Federation of Fruit Juice Producers
Mr Jean Rodesch
Directeur des affaires européennes
Groupe Pernod Ricard
45 rue de Trèyes
B-1040 Bruxelles
Belgium
Phone: +32 2 230 1758
Fax: +32 2 230 0288
International Federation of Glucose Industries
Mr Kyd Brenner
I.F.G.
Corn Refiners Association
1701 Pennsylvania Ave, NW
Washington, DC 20006
USA
Phone: +1 202 3311634
Fax: +1 202 3312054
International Federation of Margarine Associations
Ms Inneke Herreman
Secretary General
IFMA
168 Avenue de Tervueren
PO Box 12
1150 Brussels
Belgique
Phone: +32 2 7723353
Fax: +32 2 7714753
International Federation of Wines and Spirits
Mr Peter Liddle
Bacardi Martini
19 avenue Michelet
F-93400 Saint-Ouen
France
Phone: +33 1 49454873
Fax: +33 1 49454905
International Glutamate Technical Committee
Dr Hiroyuki Ishii
IGTC
c/o Ajinomoto Co., Inc.
European Headquarters
153 rue de Courcelle
75817 Paris, Cedex 17
France
Phone: +33 1 47669883
Fax: +33 1 47669856
International Institute for Applied Systems Analysis
Mr David Victor
Project co-Leader
Implementation and Effectiveness of International Environmental Commitments
IIASA
A-2361 Laxenburg
Austria
Phone: +43 2236 807278
Fax: +43 2236 71313
Email: dgvictor@iiasa.ac.at
International Institute of Refrigeration
Mr Félix Depledt
International Institute of Refrigeration
177, boulevard Malesherbes
F-75017 Paris
France
Phone: +33 1 42273235
Fax: +33 1 47631798
Email: iifiir@ibm.net
International Life Sciences Institute
Ms Paula E. Blatt
ILSI
1126 Sixteenth Street, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20036
U.S.A.
Phone: + 1 202 6590074
Fax: +1 202 6593859
Email: paulab@dc.ilsi.org
Dr Maxime E. Buyckx
The Coca-Cola Company
P.O. Drawer 1734
Atlanta, GA 30301
USA
Phone: +1 404 6767047
Fax: +1 404 5152878
Email: mbuyckx@na.ko.com
Dr Hervé Nordmann
Director Regulatory Affairs
Europe/Africa Middle East
Monsanto
En Crochet
CH 1143 Apples
Switzerland
Phone: +41 21 800 3763
Fax: +41 21 800 4087
International Organization for Standardization
Mr Klaus-Gunter Lingner
Assistant Director
Technical Programme Management
Standards Department
ISO Central Secretariat
1, rue de Varembé
Case postale 56
CH 1211 Geneva 20
Switzerland
Phone: +41 22 749 7275
Fax: + 41 22 749 7349
Email: Lingner@iso.ch
International Organization of the Flavour Industry
Dr Friedrich Grundschober
IOFI
8 rue Charles Humbert
CH-1205 Geneva
Switzerland
Phone: +41 22 3213548
Fax: +41 22 7811860
International Soft Drink Council
Mr Richard D'Aloisio
Group Manager Regulatory Assessments
Pepsi-Cola Scientific and Regulatory Affairs
100 Stevens Avenue
Valhalla, NY 10595
U.S.A.
Phone: +1 914 7424688
Fax: +1 914 7424749
Email: richard.d'aloisio@mtl.pepsi.com
International Toxicology Information Center
Dr Gaston Vettorazzi
Director
International Toxicology Information Center
Paseo Ramón Lilí 1, 4-D
E-20002 San Sebastian
Spain
Phone: +34 43 320455
Fax: +34 43 320487
Ms Cecilia P. Gaston
Manager, International Regulatory Affairs
Novigen Sciences Inc.
1730 Rhode Island Avenue N.W. Suite 1100
Washington DC 20036
U.S.A
Phone: +1 202 2935374
Fax: +1 202 2935377
Email: CeciliaG@novigensci.com
Dr Barbara J. Petersen
President
Novigen Sciences Inc.
1730 Rhode Island Avenue N.W., Suite 1100
Washington DC 20036
USA
Phone: +1 202 2935374
Fax: +1 202 2935377
Email: petersen@novigensci.com
MARINALG International
Mr J.C.I. Attale
President
MARINALG International
85, Bd Haussmann
75008 Paris
France
Phone: +33 1 42654158
Fax: +33 1 42650205
Dr Paul Couchoud
Adviser
MARINALG International
85, Boulevard Haussmann
75008 Paris
France
Phone: +33 1 42654158
Fax: +33 1 42650205
Pesticide Action Network
Dr Gudrun Oetken
Adviser
Pestizid-Aktions-Netzwerk e.V.
Nernstweg 32-34
D-22765 Hamburg
Germany
Phone: +49 40 393978
Fax: +49 40 3907520
Email: pan-germany@umwelt.ecolink.org
SECRETARY, CODEX ALIMENTARIUS COMMISSION
Mr G.D. Orriss
Chief
Food Quality and Standards Service
Food and Nutrition Division
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome
Italy
Phone: +39 6 52252042
Fax: +39 6 52254593
Email: gregory.orriss@fao.org
SESSION SECRETARIES
Dr Alan W. Randell
Senior Officer
Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Programme
Food and Nutrition Division
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome
Italy
Phone: +39 6 52254390
Fax: +39 6 52254593
Email: alan.randell@fao.org
Dr Fritz Käferstein
Director
Programme of Food Safety and Food Aid
World Health Organization
20, Avenue Appia
CH-1211 Geneva 27
Switzerland
Phone: +41 22 7913535
Fax: +41 22 7914807
Email: Kafersteinf@who.ch
LEGAL COUNSEL
Mr Gerald Moore
Legal Counsel
Legal Office
FAO
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome
Italy
Phone: +39 6 52251
Email: Gerald.Moore@fao.org
Mr Tom Topping
Legal Counsel
World Health Organization
20 Avenue Appia
Ch 1211 Geneva 27
Switzerland
Phone: +41 22 7912640
Email: toppingt@who.ch
Mrs Ewa Carlsson Hopperger
Legal Officer
Office of Legal Counsel
World Health Organization
20 Avenue Appia
Ch-1211 Geneva 27
Switzerland
Phone: +41 22 791 2111
Fax: +41 22 791 0746
Email: carlssonhoppergere@who.ch
JOINT FAO/WHO FOOD STANDARDS PROGRAMME PERSONNEL
Ms Gracia Brisco López
Food Standards Officer
Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Programme
Food and Nutrition Division
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Via delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome
Italy
Phone: +39 6 52252700
Fax: +39 6 52254593
Email: gracia.brisco@fao.org
Mr David H. Byron
Food Standards Officer
Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Programme
Food and Nutrition Division
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Via delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome
Italy
Phone: +39 6 52254419
Fax: +39 6 52254593
Email: david.byron@fao.org
Ms Selma H. Doyran
Food Standards Officer
Joint FAO/WHO Food Standard Programme
Food and Nutrition Division
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome
Italy
Phone: +39 6 5225 5826
Fax: +39 6 5225 4593
Email: selma.doyran@fao.org
Dr Jeronimus Maskeliunas
Food Standards Officer
Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Programme
Food and Nutrition Division
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Via delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome
Italy
Phone: +39 6 52253967
Fax: +39 6 52254593
Email: jeronimas.maskeliunas@fao.org
Dr Yukiko Yamada
Food Standards Officer
Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Programme
Food and Nutrition Division
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome
Italy
Phone: +39 6 52255443
Fax: +39 6 52254593
Email: yukiko.yamada@fao.org
FAO PERSONNEL
Mr Hartwig de Haen
Assistant Director-General
Economic and Social Department
FAO
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome
Italy
Phone: +39 6 52253566
Fax: +39 6 52254110
Email: Hartwig.deHaen@fao.org
Mr. John R. Lupien
Director
Food and Nutrition Division
FAO
Via delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome
Italy
Phone: +39 6 52253330
Fax: +39 6 52254593
Mr Eduardo R. Mendez
International Consultant
P.O. Box 60-486
México D.F. 03 810
Phone: +52 5 6874426
Fax: +52 5 5439189
Email: io4164.767@compuserve.com
WHO PERSONNEL
Dr Hiroshi Nakajima
Director-General
WHO
20 Avenue Appia
CH-1211 Geneva 27
Switzerland
Phone: +41 22 7912711
Fax: +41 22 7910746
Dr F.S. Antezana
Deputy Director-General a.i.
WHO
20 Avenue Appia
CH-1211 Geneva 27
Switzerland
Dr Kazuaki Miyagishima
Scientist
Programme of Food Safety and Food Aid
World Health Organization
20 Avenue Appia
CH-1211 Geneva 27
Switzerland
Phone: +41 22 791 4324
Fax: +41 22 791 0746
Email: miyagishimak@who.ch
Dr Y. Motarjemi
Programme of Food Safety and Food Aid
WHO
20 Avenue Appia
CH-1211 Geneva 27
Switzerland
Dr. Gerald Moy
Programme of Food Safety and Food Aid
WHO
20 Avenue Appia
CH-1211 Geneva 27
Switzerland
Mr A. Reilly
Programme of Food Safety and Food Aid
WHO
20 Avenue Appia
CH-1211 Geneva 27
Switzerland
<section>k</section>
APPENDIX II - AMENDMENTS TO THE PROCEDURAL MANUAL OF THE CODEX ALIMENTARIUS COMMISSION
DEFINITIONS FOR THE PURPOSES OF THE CODEX ALIMENTARIUS DEFINITIONS OF RISK ANALYSIS TERMS RELATED TO FOOD SAFETY
APPENDIX TO THE PROCEDURAL MANUAL: GENERAL DECISIONS OF THE COMMISSION
GUIDELINES FOR THE INCLUSION OF SPECIFIC PROVISIONS IN CODEX STANDARDS AND RELATED TEXTS (SECTION H)
PRINCIPLES FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT AND APPLICATION OF MICROBIOLOGICAL CRITERIA TO FOODS
Deleted
GUIDELINES FOR THE USE OF CODEX COMMITTEES ON THE INCLUSION OF PROVISIONS ON NUTRITIONAL QUALITY IN FOOD STANDARDS AND OTHER CODEX TEXTS
Deleted
GUIDELINES ON THE ELABORATION AND/OR REVISION OF CODES OF HYGIENIC PRACTICE FOR SPECIFIC COMMODITIES
(a) The establishment of additional food hygiene requirements for specific food items or food groups should be limited to the extent necessary to meet the defined objectives of individual codes.
(b) Codex Codes of Hygienic Practice should serve the primary purpose of providing advice to governments on the application of food hygiene provisions within the framework of national and international requirements.
(c) The Revised Recommended International Code of Practice - General Principles of Food Hygiene (including the Guidelines for the Application of the Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point (HACCP) System) and the Revised Principles for the Establishment and Application of Microbiological Criteria for Foods are the base documents in the field of food hygiene.
(d) All Codex Codes of Hygienic Practice applicable to specific food items or food groups shall refer to the General Principles of Food Hygiene and shall only contain material additional to the General Principles which is necessary to take into account the particular requirements of the specific food item or food group.
(e) Provisions in Codex Codes of Hygienic Practice should be drafted in a sufficiently clear and transparent manner such that extended explanatory material is not required for their interpretation.
(f) The above considerations should also apply to Codex Codes of Practice which contain provisions relating to food hygiene.
CRITERIA FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF WORK PRIORITIES AND FOR THE ESTABLISHMENT OF SUBSIDIARY BODIES OF THE CODEX ALIMENTARIUS COMMISSION (SECTION J)
NEW WORK TO BE UNDERTAKEN BY EXISTING SUBSIDIARY BODIES
1. When a Codex Committee proposes to elaborate a standard, code of practice or related text within its terms of reference, it should first consider the priorities established by the Commission in the Medium-Term Plan of Work, any specific relevant strategic project currently being undertaken by the Commission and the prospect of completing the work within a reasonable period of time. It should also assess the proposal against the criteria set out in paragraph 4, below.
2. If the proposal falls in an area outside the Committee's terms of reference the proposal should be reported to the Commission in writing together with proposals for such amendments to the Committee's terms of reference as may be required.
NEW WORK WHICH MAY REQUIRE THE ESTABLISHMENT OF A NEW SUBSIDIARY BODY
3. When a Member wishes to propose the elaboration of a standard, code of practice or related text in an area not covered by the terms of reference of any existing subsidiary body, it should accompany its proposal with a written statement to the Commission referring to the Commission's Medium-Term Objectives and containing, as far as practicable, the information required by the appropriate section of paragraph 4, below.
RELATIONS BETWEEN COMMODITY COMMITTEES AND GENERAL SUBJECT COMMITTEES (SECTION K) ^89 FOOD ADDITIVES AND CONTAMINANTS
^89 New texts appears in bold in this section
1) Third paragraph (p. 114)
· In preparing working papers for the Codex Committee on Food Additives and Contaminants, the Secretariat should make a report to the Committee concerning the endorsement of provisions for food additives (including processing aids), on the basis of the General Principles for the Use of Food Additives. Provisions for food additives should indicate the INS number, the ADI, technological justification, proposed level, and whether the additive was previously endorsed (or temporarily endorsed)
· Sections (i), (ii) and (iii) (pages 114-115): deleted and integrated into the General Principles for the Use of Food Additives.
2) First paragraph p. 115 "When commodity standards are sent to governments for comments at Step 3, they should contain a statement that the provisions "in respect of food additives and contaminants are subject to endorsement by the Codex Committee on Food Additives and Contaminants and to incorporation into the General Standard for Food Additives or the General Standard for Contaminants and Toxins in Food
3) Second paragraph and Sections (i) to (v) on page 115-116: delete and replace with
(i) When establishing provisions for food additives, Codex committees should follow the General Principles for the Use of Food Additives and the Preamble of the General Standard for Food Additives. Full explanation should be provided for any departure from the above recommendations.
(ii) When an active commodity committee exists, proposals for the use of additives in any commodity standard under consideration should be prepared by the committee concerned, and forwarded to the Codex Committee on Food Additives and Contaminants for endorsement. When the Codex Committee on Food Additives and Contaminants decides not to endorse specific additives provisions (use of the additive, or level in the end-product), the reason should be clearly stated. The section under consideration should be referred back to the Committee concerned if further information is needed, or for information if the Codex Committee on Food Additives and Contaminants decides to amend the provision.
(iii) When no active commodity committee exists, proposals for new additive provisions or amendment of existing provisions, should be forwarded directly by member countries to the Codex Committee on Food Additives and Contaminants.
DEFINITIONS FOR THE PURPOSES OF THE CODEX ALIMENTARIUS DEFINITIONS OF RISK ANALYSIS TERMS RELATED TO FOOD SAFETY^90
^90 These Definitions are proposed on an interim basis: they are subject to modification in the light of developments in the science of risk analysis and as a result of efforts to harmonize similar definitions across various disciplines
HAZARD: A biological, chemical or physical agent in, or condition of, food with the potential to cause an adverse health effect.
RISK: A function of the probability of an adverse health effect and the severity of that effect, consequential to a hazard(s) in food.
RISK ANALYSIS: A process consisting of three components: risk assessment, risk management and risk communication.
RISK ASSESSMENT: A scientifically based process consisting of the following steps: (i) hazard identification, (ii) hazard characterization, (iii) exposure assessment, and (iv) risk characterization.
HAZARD IDENTIFICATION: The identification of biological, chemical, and physical agents capable of causing adverse health effects and which may be present in a particular food or group of foods.
HAZARD CHARACTERIZATION: The qualitative and/or quantitative evaluation of the nature of the adverse health effects associated with biological, chemical and physical agents which may be present in food. For chemical agents, a dose-response assessment should be performed. For biological or physical agents, a dose-response assessment should be performed if the data are obtainable.
DOSE-RESPONSE ASSESSMENT: The determination of the relationship between the magnitude of exposure (dose) to a chemical, biological or physical agent and the severity and/or frequency of associated adverse health effects (response).
EXPOSURE ASSESSMENT: The qualitative and/or quantitative evaluation of the likely intake of biological, chemical, and physical agents via food as well as exposures from other sources if relevant.
RISK CHARACTERIZATION: The qualitative and/or quantitative estimation, including attendant uncertainties, of the probability of occurrence and severity of known or potential adverse health effects in a given population based on hazard identification, hazard characterization and exposure assessment.
RISK MANAGEMENT: The process of weighing policy alternatives in the light of the results of risk assessment and, if required, selecting and implementing appropriate control options, including regulatory measures.
RISK COMMUNICATION: The interactive exchange of information and opinions concerning risk among risk assessors, risk managers, consumers and other interested parties.
APPENDIX TO THE PROCEDURAL MANUAL: GENERAL DECISIONS OF THE COMMISSION
A. STATEMENTS OF PRINCIPLE CONCERNING THE ROLE OF SCIENCE IN THE CODEX DECISION-MAKING PROCESS AND THE EXTENT TO WHICH OTHER FACTORS ARE TAKEN INTO ACCOUNT RELATING TO THE ROLE OF FOOD SAFETY RISK ASSESSMENT
1. The food standards, guidelines and other recommendations of Codex Alimentarius shall be based on the principle of sound scientific analysis and evidence, involving a thorough review of all relevant information, in order that the standards assure the quality and safety of the food supply.
2. When elaborating and deciding upon food standards Codex Alimentarius will have regard, where appropriate, to other legitimate factors relevant for the health protection of consumers and for the promotion of fair practices in food trade.
3. In this regard it is noted that food labelling plays an important role in furthering both of these objectives.
4. When the situation arises that members of Codex agree on the necessary level of protection of public health but hold differing views about other considerations, members may abstain from acceptance of the relevant standard without necessarily preventing the decision by Codex.
B. STATEMENTS OF PRINCIPLE RELATING TO THE ROLE OF FOOD SAFETY RISK ASSESSMENT
1. Health and safety aspects of Codex decisions and recommendations should be based on a risk assessment, as appropriate to the circumstances.
2. Food safety risk assessment should be soundly based on science, should incorporate the four steps of the risk assessment process, and should be documented in a transparent manner.
3. There should be a functional separation of risk assessment and risk management, while recognizing that some interactions are essential for a pragmatic approach.
4. Risk assessments should use available quantitative information to the greatest extent possible and risk characterizations should be presented in a readily understandable and useful form.
<section>l</section>
APPENDIX III - LIST OF STANDARDS AND RELATED TEXTS ADOPTED BY THE 22ND SESSION OF THE CODEX ALIMENTARIUS COMMISSION^1
PART I. STANDARDS AND RELATED TEXTS ADOPTED AT STEP 8
STANDARD AND RELATED TEXTS
REFERENCE
Status
Methods of Analysis for the Determination of Food Additives and Contaminants in Foods
ALINORM 97/12 Appendix IV
Adopted
Codex Advisory Specifications
ALINORM 97/12, Appendix V and ALINORM 97/12A, Appendix VI
Adopted
Amendments to the International Numbering System
ALINORM 97/12, paras. 52-54
Adopted
Draft Annexes I, II, and III of the General Standard for Contaminants and Toxins in Foods
ALINORM 97/12, Appendix VI
Adopted
Draft Revised Preamble to the Codex General Standard for Food Additives
ALINORM 97/12A, Appendix III
Adopted
General Standard for Food Additives: Proposed Draft Schedule of Additives permitted for Use in Food in General, unless otherwise specified, in accordance with Good Manufacturing Practice and Annex on Food Categories or Individual Food Items where the use of Additives with GMP Limitations are not allowed or restricted
ALINORM 97/12A, Appendix IV and Annex
Adopted
General Standard for Contaminants and Toxins in Foods: Annotated List of Contaminants and Toxins and Food Categorization System (Annexes IV and V)
ALINORM 97/12A, Appendix VII
Adopted
Draft Code of Practice for the Reduction of Aflatoxin B[1] in Raw Materials and Supplemental Feedingstuffs for Milk-Producing Animals
ALINORM 97/12A, Appendix IX
Adopted
Draft Revised Recommended International Code of Practice - General Principles of Food Hygiene
ALINORM 97/13, Appendix II
Adopted with editorial changes, especially in the Spanish version
Draft Revised Guidelines for the Application of the Hazard Analysis and Critical Control Point (HACCP) System
ALINORM 97/13A, Appendix II
Adopted with editorial changes, especially in the Spanish version
Draft Revised Principles for the Establishment and Application of Microbiological Criteria for Foods
ALINORM 97/13A, Appendix III
Adopted
Draft Revised Standard for Natural Mineral Waters
ALINORM 97/20, Appendix II
Adopted
Draft Guidelines for Use of Nutrition Claims including Table of Conditions for Claims for Nutrient Contents
ALINORM 97/22, Appendix II ALINORM 97/26, Appendix II
Adopted
Draft General Guidelines for use of the Term "Halal"
ALINORM 97/22, Appendix III
Adopted
IUPAC/ISO/AOAC Harmonized Guidelines for Internal Quality Control in Analytical Chemistry Laboratories
ALINORM 97/23, para. 40
Adopted
Draft Maximum Residue Limits and Extraneous Maximum Residue Limits for Pesticides
ALINORM 97/24, Annex II, ALINORM 97/24A, Annex II
Adopted
Draft Guidelines for the Design of Control Measures for Street-Vended Foods in Africa
ALINORM 97/28. Appendix II
Adopted with an editorial change
Draft Guidelines for the Exchange of Information between countries on rejections of imported food
ALINORM 97/30, Appendix II
Adopted with amendments
Draft Guidelines for the Design, Operation, Assessment and Accreditation of Food Import and Export Inspection and Certification Systems
ALINORM 97/30A, Appendix II
Adopted
Draft Maximum Residue Limits for:
· Diminazine
· Doramectin
· Levamisole
· Moxidectin
· Spiramycin
· Triclabendazole
ALINORM 97/31A, Appendix II
Adopted
MRL for Spiramycin in cattle milk raised to 200m g/litre
Amendments to Methods of Analysis for Previously Adopted Maximum Residue Limits for Veterinary Drugs
ALINORM 97/31A, Appendix VIII
Adopted
Draft Codex Standard for Mangosteens
ALINORM 97/35, Appendix II
Adopted
Draft Codex Standard for Bananas
ALINORM 97/35, Appendix III
Adopted
Proposed Draft Guidelines for the Assessment of the Competence of Testing Laboratories involved in the Import and Export Control of Foods
ALINORM 97/23A, Appendix II
Adopted at Steps 5 & 8 with omission of Steps 6 & 7
Proposed Draft Maximum Residue Limits and Extraneous Maximum Residue Limits for Pesticides
ALINORM 97/24, Annex II, ALINORM 97/24A, Annex II
Adopted at Steps 5 & 8 with omission of Steps 6 & 7
Proposed Draft Revised Standard for Food Grade Salt
ALINORM 97/26, para. 32 and Appendix III
Adopted at Steps 5 & 8 with omission of Steps 6 & 7
Proposed Draft Maximum Residue Limits for:
· Oxytetracycline
ALINORM 97/31A. Appendix IV
Adopted at Steps 5 & 8 with omission of Steps 6 & 7
Draft Amendment to the Standard for Infant Formula. Vitamin B[12]
ALINORM 97/26, para. 94 and Appendix IV
Adopted at Step 5 of the Accelerated Procedure
PART II. DRAFT STANDARDS AND RELATED TEXTS ADOPTED AT STEP 5
STANDARD AND RELATED TEXTS
REFERENCE
Status
Proposed Draft Revised Code of Principles concerning Milk and Milk Products
ALINORM 97/11 land Appendix X
Adopted at Step 5 and advanced to Step 6
General Standard for Food Additives: Proposed Draft Schedules of Food Additives specifically Permitted in Foods
ALINORM 97/12A, Appendix V
Adopted at Step 5 and advanced to Step 6
Proposed Draft Maximum Levels for Lead
ALINORM 97/12A, Appendix X
Adopted at Step 5 and advanced to Step 6
Proposed Draft Guidelines for the Sensory Evaluation of Fish and Shellfish
ALINORM 97/18, Appendix II
Adopted at Step 5 and advanced to Step 6
General Standard for the Labelling of Prepackaged Foods: Proposed Draft amendment (Foods that can cause hypersensitivity)
ALINORM 97/22A Appendix IV
Adopted at Step 5 and advanced to Step 6
Proposed Draft Maximum Residue Limits for Pesticides (MRLs)
ALINORM 97/24A, Annex II
Adopted at Step 5 and advanced to Step 6
Proposed Draft Revised Methods of Sampling for the Determination of Pesticide Residues for Compliance with MRLs
ALINORM 97/24A, Appendix II
Adopted at Step 5 and advanced to Step 6
Proposed Draft Revised Standard for Gluten-Free Foods
ALINORM 97/26, para. 41 and Appendix V
Adopted at Step 5 and advanced to Step 6
Proposed Draft Maximum Residue Limits for Veterinary Drugs:
· Abamectin
· Azaperone
· Chlorotetracycline/Oxytetracycline/Tetracycline
· Cypermethrin
· a -Cypermethrin
· Dexamethasone
· Diclazuril
· Dihydrostreptomycin/Streptomycin
· Febantel/Febendazole/Oxyfendazole
· Gentamicin
· Neomycin
· Spectinomycin
· Thiamphenicol
· Tilmicosin
ALINORM 97/31A, Appendix V
Adopted at Step 5 and advanced to Step 6
Proposed Draft Amendment to the Labelling Section of the Standard for Quick Frozen Fish Sticks (Fish Fingers), Fish Portions and Fish Fillets, Breaded or in Batter
ALINORM 97/22A, paragraph 50 and Appendix II
Adopted at Step 5 - normal procedure
<section>m</section>
APPENDIX IV - APPROVED NEW WORK
STANDARD AND RELATED TEXTS 4
RESPONSIBLE COMMITTEE
NOTES
Standard for Chocolate and Chocolate Products (Combined Standard Covering Previous Standards for Chocolate, Cocoa Butter Confectionery and for Composite and Filled Chocolate)
CCCPC
Draft Code of Practice on Good Animal Feeding
CCEXEC; CCFH; CCFAC; CCPR; CCRVDF
Code of Practice on Source Directed Measures to Reduce Contamination of Foodstuffs
CCFAC
Fresh Water and Tropical Fish Products
CCFFP
Code of Hygienic Practice for Milk and Milk Products
CCFH
Hygienic Recycling of Processing Water in Food Processing Plants
CCFH
Application of Microbiological Risk Evaluation to International Trade
CCFH
Revision of the Standard Wording for Food Hygiene Provisions (Procedural Manual)
CCFH
Risk-Based Guidance for the Use of HACCP-Like Systems in Small Businesses, with Special Reference to Developing Countries
CCFH
Management of Microbiological Hazards for Foods in International Trade
CCFH
Model Export Certificate for Dairy Products
CCFICS; CCMMP
Revision of the Guidelines on Nutrition Labelling
CCFL
Definition of the Claim "Vegetarian"
CCFL
"Sports Drinks" and "Energy Drinks"
CCFL
Improved procedures for obtaining consensus
CCGP
Special or Differential Treatment for Developing Countries in the Application of Codex Standards
CCGP
Revision of the Code of Hygienic Practice for the Preparation and Sale of Street - Vended Foods
CCLAC
Intra-Laboratory Method Validation
CCMAS
Standard for Dairy Spreads
CCMMP
Standard for Mozzarella
CCMMP
General Standard for Bottled/Packaged Waters Other Than Natural Mineral Waters
CCNMW
Revised Maximum Residue Limits for certain pesticides (priority list)
· Abamectin (177)
· Clethodim (187)
· Dinocap (087)
· Disulfoton (074)
· Glyphosate (158)
· Glufosinate-ammonium (175)
· Hexythiazox (176)
· Kresoxim-methyl
· Myclobutenil (181)
· Tebuconazol (176)
CCPR
National Regulatory Practices to Facilitate the Use of Codex Maximum Residue Limits for Pesticides
CCPR
Bouillons and Consommés (revision of the standard)
CCSB
Maximum Residue Limits for Certain Veterinary Drugs (priority list)
· Cyfluthrin
· Danofloxacin
· Eprinomectin
· Fluazuron
· Imidocarb
· Nicarbazin
· Porcine somatotropin (PST)
· Procaine penicillin
· Sarafloxacin
· Deltamethrin
· Doramectin
· Metrifonate
· Permethrin
· Phoxim
· Temephos
CCRVDF
Without prejudice to the timely scientific evaluation of this substance by JECFA, the Commission requested that the matter be taken up by the Committee on Residues of Veterinary Drugs in Foods concurrently with the discussion by the Committee on General Principles of the matter of Bovine Somatotropins (BST) and PST as a related substance, within the context of the four Statements of Principle concerning the Role of Science in the Codex Decision-making Process and the Extent to which Other Factors are Taken into Account
<section>n</section>
APPENDIX V - CONFIRMATION OF CHAIRMANSHIP OF CODEX COMMITTEES
Committee
Chairmanship
Codex Committee on General Principles
France
Codex Committee on Food Additives and Contaminants
The Netherlands
Codex Committee on Food Hygiene
United States of America
Codex Committee on Food Labelling
Canada
Codex Committee on Methods of Analysis and Sampling
Hungary
Codex Committee on Pesticides Residues
The Netherlands
Codex Committee on Residues of Veterinary Drugs in Food
United States of America
Codex Committee on Food Import and Export Inspection and Certification Systems
Australia
Codex Committee on Nutrition and Food for Special Dietary Uses
Germany
Codex Committee on Cocoa Products and Chocolate
Switzerland
Codex Committee on Sugars
United Kingdom
Codex Committee on Processed Fruits and Vegetables
United States of America
Codex Committee on Fats and Oils
United Kingdom
Codex Committee on Meat Hygiene
New Zealand
Codex Committee on Processed Meat and Poultry Products
Denmark
Codex Committee on Fish and Fishery Products
Norway
Codex Committee on Soups and Broths
Switzerland
Codex Committee on Cereals, Pulses and Legumes
United States of America
Codex Committee on Vegetable Proteins
Canada
Codex Committee on Fresh Fruits and Vegetables
Mexico
Codex Committee on Milk and Milk Products
New Zealand
Codex Committee on Natural Mineral Waters
Switzerland
MEMBERS OF THE CODEX ALIMENTARIUS COMMISSION (1 JULY 1997)
Albania
Algeria
Angola
Antigua and Barbuda
Argentina
Armenia
Australia
Austria
Bahrain
Bangladesh
Barbados
Belgium
Belize
Benin
Bolivia
Botswana
Brazil
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burundi
Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Cape Verde
Central African Republic
Chad
Chile
China
Colombia
Congo, Democratic Republic of
Congo, Republic of
Costa Rica
Côte d'Ivoire
Croatia
Cuba
Cyprus
Czech Republic
Democratic People's Republic of Korea
Denmark
Dominica
Dominican Republic
Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Estonia
Ethiopia
Fiji
Finland
France
Gabon
Gambia
Germany
Ghana
Greece
Grenada
Guatemala
Guinea
Guinea Bissau
Guyana
Haiti
Honduras
Hungary
Iceland
India
Indonesia
Iran (Islamic Republic of)
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy
Jamaica
Japan
Jordan
Kenya
Kiribati
Kuwait
Laos
Latvia
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
Lithuania
Luxembourg
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Malta
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mexico
Micronesia, Federated States of
Mongolia
Morocco
Mozambique
Myanmar
Nepal
Netherlands
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Norway
Oman
Pakistan
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Poland
Portugal
Qatar
Republic of Korea
Romania
Russian Federation
Rwanda
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Samoa
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Slovak Republic
Slovenia
South Africa
Spain
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Suriname
Swaziland
Sweden
Switzerland
Syrian Arab Republic
Thailand
The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
Togo
Trinidad and Tobago
Tunisia
Turkey
Uganda
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United Republic of Tanzania
United States of America
Uruguay
Vanuatu
Venezuela
Viet Nam
Yemen
Yugoslavia
Zambia
Zimbabwe
The Codex Alimentarius Commission is the body that since 1962 has been responsible for the implementation of the Joint FAO/WHO Food Standards Programme. The programme has the stated alms of protecting the health of consumers and ensuring fair practices in the food trade. At 1 July 1997, the Codex Alimentarius Commission had 157 member countries representing over 98 percent of the world's consumers. Its twenty-second session, held in Geneva from 23 to 28 June 1997, was attended by 444 participants representing 86 member countries as well as observers from one non-member country, seven intergovernmental organizations and 36 international non-governmental organizations (NGOs). This report is the formal record of the commission's decisions. It highlights the commission's recommendations on implementation of an action plan for the Codex Alimentarius-wide development and application of risk analysis principles and guidelines; on the commission's relationships with NGOs; and on the
continuing Implementation of Codex standards, guidelines and other recommendations within the context of the Uruguay Round agreements. The commission adopted a wide range of new or revised standards and codes of practice, most notably in the areas of food additives and food hygiene. The commission's decisions in relation to bovine somatotropin (BST), natural mineral waters and the need for standards for potentially dangerous herbs and spices used as foods are also recorded.
