<title>Fao model code of forest harvesting practice</title>
<section>1</section>
Foreword
Considerable progress has been made in recent years in the introduction of environmentally sound forest harvesting practices in many parts of the world. Nonetheless, much remains to be done. There is a continuing need to refine harvesting systems and techniques so that they become fully compatible with the objectives of sustainable forest management, allowing them to contribute in an important way to the economic and social aims of sustainable development. This document is one response to this need. Its primary objective is to promote forest harvesting practices that improve standards of utilization and reduce environmental impacts, thereby contributing to the conservation of forests through their wise use.
The information provided in this model code of forest harvesting practice has been compiled with the intent of highlighting the wide range of environmentally sound harvesting practices that are available to forest managers, especially those requiring only a modest level of investment in training and technology. This will permit policy-makers to develop national, regional or local codes of practice that will best serve the particular needs of government agencies, the private sector, non-governmental organizations and other constituents.
To ensure the feasibility of the forest harvesting practices described in this document, two international workshops were held to critique an earlier draft. Review copies of the draft were also sent to a large number of forestry experts around the world. To the maximum extent possible, comments and suggestions from both the workshops and the individual reviewers have been incorporated into this revised version. The FAO model code of forest harvesting practice, therefore, is a document that has undergone unusually extensive review by experts in FAO member countries, universities, research institutes, non-governmental organizations, and the private sector.
Although it constitutes a potentially important contribution on international forest practices, this document is not meant to stand entire on its own. Rather it is intended to complement other contributions on sustainable forestry that have been published in recent years by the FAO Forestry Department and by organizations such as the International Tropical Timber Organization (ITTO) and the World Conservation Union (IUCN), among others.
A preview edition of the FAO model code of forest harvesting practice was produced in English only as a contribution to the March 1995 meeting of the FAO Committee on Forestry (COFO). This redesigned final edition will also be published in French and Spanish in the near future.
David A. Harcharik
Assistant Director-General
FAO Forestry Department
<section>2</section>
Acknowledgments
Many countries provided national or subnational codes of forest practice for use in preparing this document. Others contributed guidelines on "best practices", which foresters and planners are encouraged to prescribe for commercial timber harvesting operations. Nearly all these codes of practice and best-practice guidelines originated in industrialized countries. A notable exception is the Fiji national code of logging practice, which was a particularly useful reference because it originated in a tropical developing country.
Several international organizations such as INTO and IUCN have developed guidelines on sustainable forest management that contain information on forest harvesting practices and thus were useful in this undertaking. ILO has published extensively on health and safety issues relating to forest harvesting practices and considerable use was made of those publications. We also used published materials from UNDP, Unesco, UNEP and the World Bank.
Numerous non-governmental organizations provided guidelines on sustainable forest management or referred us to relevant publications. We particularly acknowledge contributions made by APA, CIRAD-Forêt, COFE, ETFRN, FSC, FERIC, IIED, ITW, ISTF, IUCN, IUFRO, the Rainforest Alliance, SAF, TFF, WWF International and WWFUK.
A great many individuals contributed to this work. Some of these, the experts who attended the FAO workshops on codes of forest harvesting practice, as well as those who provided detailed review comments on the draft, are listed in an annex to this document. Bernt Strehlke and Peter Blombäck of ILO gave extensive suggestions for the chapter on the forest harvesting workforce. Within FAO, colleagues who provided reference materials or reviewed various drafts of the manuscript include, in alphabetical order, km Ball, C. Chandrasekharan, Mafa Chipeta, William Ciesla, Louis Deherve, Stephen Dembner, Timo Korhonen, Jean-Paul Lanly, Claude Léger, Leo Lintu, Francis Ng, Christel Palmberg-Lerche, J.L. de Pedro, Robert Scharpenberg, Friedrich Schlegel, Karl-Hermann Schmincke, K.D. Singh and Paul Vantomme. From FAO's regional offices, Torsten Frisk (Santiago, Chile), M. Kashio (Bangkok, Thailand) and J.D. Keita (Accra, Ghana) helped us obtain materials relevant to those regions.
Josiane Hababou-Zamperini worked long hours taking care of correspondence and helping to organize the workshops.
Librarians are essential to any compilation project. The FAO Forestry Department is fortunate to have two outstanding and exceptionally helpful forestry librarians, Franca Monti and Annalisa Casponi, whose assistance is gratefully acknowledged. The compilation of information on forest practices in the tropics also involved a week of intensive library research at Oxford University, which is recognized as having one of the top tropical forestry libraries in the world. This research was greatly facilitated by Ms J.S. Howse, tire Reader Services Librarian in the Plant Sciences Library, Oxford Forestry Institute.
Many other individuals contributed to this work in various ways, but unfortunately their number is so great that their names cannot be listed individually. Nevertheless their contributions were essential and we acknowledge their assistance with thanks.
Comments on this model code, toghether with accounts of experience with its use, will be welcome.
They should be sent to:
R.Heinrich
Chief, Forest Harvesting, Trade and Marketing Branch (FOPH)
FAO Forestry Department Viale delle Terme di Caracalla 00100 Rome, Italy
<section>3</section>
Abbreviations
APA
American Pulpwood Association, Washington, DC, United States
CATIE
Tropical Agriculture Research and Training Center, Turrialba, Costa Rica
CIFOR
Centre for International Forestry Research, Bogor, Indonesia
CIRAD-Forêt
Cooperation Centre on Agrarian Research for Development, Forestry Department, Nogent-sur-Marne, France
COFE
Council on Forest Engineering, Corvallis, Oregon, United States
DEC
Department of Environmental Conservation, State of New York, Albany, New York, United States
EMBRAPA
Empresa Brasileira de Pesquisa Agropecuária, Brasilia, Brazil
ETFRN
European Tropical Forest Research Network, Bonn, Germany
FAO
Food and Agriculture Organization of the United Nations, Rome, Italy
FERIC
Forest Engineering Research Institute of Canada, Pointe Claire, Quebec, and Vancouver, British Columbia
FSC
Forest Stewardship Council, Mexico City, Mexico
GTZ
German Agency for Technical Cooperation, Eschborn, Germany
IDRC
International Development Research Centre, Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
IIED
International Institute for Environment and Development, London, UK
ILO
International Labour Organisation, Geneva, Switzerland
ISTF
International Society of Tropical Foresters, Bethesda, Maryland, United States
ITTO
International Tropical Timber Organization, Yokohama, Japan
ITW
Initiative Tropenwald, Berlin, Germany
IUCN
World Conservation Union, Gland, Switzerland
IUFRO
International Union of Forestry Research Organizations, Vienna, Austria
LIRO
Logging Industry Research Organization, Rotorua, New Zealand
NGO
Non-governmental organization
OFIA
Ontario Forest Industries Association, Toronto, Ontario, Canada
OTA
Office of Technology Assessment, United States Congress, Washington, DC, United States
SAF
Society of American Foresters, Bethesda, Maryland, United States
SARH
Secretaria de Agricultura y Recursos Hidraulicos, Mexico City, Mexico
SUDAM
Superintendência do Desenvolvimento da Amazônia, Belém, Brazil
TFF
Tropical Forest Foundation, Alexandria, Virginia, United States
UNDP
United Nations Development Programme, New York, New York, United States
UNEFOR
Unión Nacional de Empresarios Forestales, San Jose, Costa Rica
UNEP
United Nations Environment Programme, Nairobi, Kenya
UNESCO
United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, Paris, France
USAID
United States Agency for International Development, Washington, DC, United States
USDA
United States Department of Agriculture, Washington, DC, United States
WCB
Workers' Compensation Board, Richmond, British Columbia, Canada
World Bank
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, Washington, DC, United States
WRI
World Resources Institute, Washington, DC, United States
WWF
World Wide Fund for Nature, Gland, Switzerland
<section>4</section>
Chapter 1 Introduction
Forest harvesting and multiresource forestry
The legacy of UNCED
Purpose
Scope
Approach
How to write a code of practice
Codes of forest practice are sets of regulations or guidelines developed by governments or other organizations to help foresters and forestry enterprises select practices to be followed when carrying out forest management and utilization operations. Practices that conform to the regulations or guidelines should, at least in theory, achieve a desired outcome such as the harvest of commercial timber from a specified area of forest in a way that meets standards for sustainable forest management.
In some cases, codes of practice are based on legislative mandates. Failure to follow rules specified in such codes of practice may result in fines or other penalties. The administration of mandatory codes of practice is thus relatively simple, at least in concept: rules are written that must be followed, and violations are automatically subject to penalties. The benefit to operators is that, if they correctly apply the required practices, then they are normally released from liability for damages that might occur as a result of those practices. Instead, the government, in specifying the mandatory practices, assumes this liability whenever the practices have been followed correctly.
In other cases, codes of practice may serve as voluntary guidelines. Typically, such guidelines are designed to promote the adoption of practices that should achieve the desired result, without actually mandating those specific practices. Alternative practices achieving the desired result would also normally be considered equally acceptable. Failure to achieve the desired outcome may result in fines or other penalties, however, regardless of whether or not a practice suggested in the guidelines had been followed.
As a general rule, mandatory practices are easier to administer since all that needs to be determined is whether the specified practices were followed. On the other hand, if such practices do not achieve the desired outcome, even when correctly applied, then the government may be liable for resolving the resulting problem. Voluntary guidelines are more difficult to administer because what must be determined is whether or not the desired outcome was actually achieved. But they have the advantage of permitting maximum flexibility so that recommended practices can easily be adapted to fit new knowledge or changing conditions.
Mandatory codes of practice and voluntary guidelines are both intended to achieve certain results. The approach that will work best in a particular country or region depends upon the legal framework within which the rules or guidelines are adopted, the cultural history of the country or region, and even the attitudes of operators toward the results that the rules or guidelines are intended to achieve. Thus it is not possible to make a general statement about which type of code, mandatory or voluntary, is likely to produce better results. Different approaches may be needed in different places and at different times, even within a single country. In the United States, for instance, some states such as Oregon and California have enacted mandatory codes of forest practice, whereas other states such as Alabama and Georgia rely on voluntary guidelines.
In many cases, countries planning to adopt codes of forest practice will probably decide to use a combination of mandatory practices and voluntary guidelines. In situations where certain practices are believed to be absolutely essential or when it is considered difficult or impossible to determine whether a desired outcome has been achieved, then specific practices can be mandated. In other situations a range of practices might be recommended, with the understanding that the responsible agency will monitor operations carefully to determine whether the desired results are being achieved.
Forest harvesting and multiresource forestry
On public lands, and even increasingly in the private sector, forestry no longer focuses exclusively on the production of commercial timber. The importance of forests for biological diversity, non-timber products, cultural values and environmental services is now recognized worldwide, and as a result forestry has become a more complex, more demanding discipline. One consequence of this increased complexity is that it is now more difficult to plan and carry out forest harvesting operations, as these must be designed and implemented in ways that accommodate and, if possible, enhance the multiresource character of the forest. To accomplish this, foresters, planners and logging operators require guidance on the practices that society is willing to accept and on the outcomes that are required in connection with forest harvesting operations. This is an important motive for adopting codes of forest harvesting practice, whether they are mandatory or voluntary. Furthermore, codes of
practice will only be acceptable to society if they recognize and provide for the full complexity of modern, multiresource forestry.
The legacy of UNCED
Rio Declaration
Forest Principles
International Framework Convention on Climate Change
International Framework Convention on Biological Diversity
Agenda 21
In recent years, several major events have drawn the attention of the public to the importance of forestry and the global environment. Perhaps the most important of these was the United Nations Conference on Environment and Development, widely known as UNCED, which was held in Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, in June 1992. Not only was this the most important conference ever to focus on environmental issues, it was also the largest intergovernmental conference of any kind in history. A total of 178 United Nations member countries were represented, 102 of them by their head of state or government. Also represented were international financing institutions, technical cooperation agencies such as FAO, private companies and associations and approximately 1000 non-governmental organizations (NGOs).
A number of important documents were produced by UNCED that will influence forest policies and guide the work of development-assistance agencies for years to come. The following documents are among the most important of these, with respect to the development of codes of forest practice.
Rio Declaration
This declaration consists of 27 guiding principles focusing on the rights and obligations of sovereign states with respect to environment and development. The intention is to further elaborate the principles of this declaration in time for the presentation of an Earth Charter at the fiftieth anniversary of the United Nations in 1995.
Forest Principles
These "non-legally binding" principles are broad statements covering the sustainable management of all forests and recognizing national sovereignty over forest resources as well as the right to develop those resources.
International Framework Convention on Climate Change
This convention was signed by 150 countries as a broad commitment to reducing greenhouse gas emissions.
International Framework Convention on Biological Diversity
This convention, signed by 154 countries, formalizes a commitment to maintaining natural biological diversity, especially through measures designed to protect natural ecosystems and endangered species.
Agenda 21
This document was developed as an "action plan" for the period 1993 to 2000. It includes 115 programme areas described in 40 chapters. Chapter 11, "Combating deforestation", is specifically devoted to forestry, and, in spite of the apparent emphasis on deforestation suggested by its title, describes a balanced programme that covers four priority areas:
- sustaining the multiple roles and functions of all types of forests and woodlands;
- enhancing the protection, sustainable management and conservation of all forests, and the rehabilitation of degraded areas;
- promoting efficient utilization and assessment to recover the full value of the goods and services provided by forests and woodlands;
- establishing or strengthening capacities for assessing and systematically reporting data on forests and forestry activities, including commercial production and trade.
The second and third priorities are particularly relevant to the development of codes of forest practice, and it is largely under the authority of these provisions that the FAO model code of forest harvesting practice has been developed.
The UNCED documents include a number of additional conclusions and statements that are potentially quite important to forestry. Perhaps the most important of these is the explicit, public recognition by policy-makers at the highest levels that forests are essential for sustainable economic development and also for the cultural legacy and physical well-being of current and future generations. Other important recommendations relating to the development of codes of forest practice include the following:
- true resource and environmental costs should be incorporated into all production and consumption decisions;
- environmentally sound harvesting and processing techniques that are economically practical and technically efficient should be developed and implemented;
- concession agreements should be modified as necessary in order to foster sustainable forest practices and to ensure that a greater share of profits is returned to society;
- the needs and wishes of the local and indigenous population must be considered, and these people should participate directly in decisions about forestry activities and benefit from the revenues from those activities.
Purpose
The FAO model code of forest harvesting practice is intended primarily to serve as a reference for FAO member countries considering the adoption or revision of their own codes of forest practice. Its overall purpose is to promote harvesting practices that will improve standards of utilization, reduce environmental impacts, help ensure that forests are sustained for future generations and improve the economic and social contributions of forestry as a component of sustainable development.
It should be emphasized that this publication has not been prepared to serve as a reference on logging techniques or to provide details on how to make proper use of harvesting tools and equipment. Many books and other publications on these subjects already exist, some of which are listed in the bibliography.
Furthermore, this document is also not intended as a catalogue of criteria by which to measure the environmental acceptability of various forest harvesting practices. As important as such a catalogue would be, it is probably not possible to develop comprehensive criteria that would be globally applicable and at the same time economically viable, given the current state of knowledge. The focus here, therefore, is on the practices themselves, rather than on criteria by which to assess the effectiveness of those practices. As information from research becomes available, it may eventually be possible to develop criteria for making such assessments.
The principles outlined in this model code of practice should be useful, at least as a starting-point, for countries at all stages of economic development and in all climatic regions. However, no single code of forest harvesting practice can apply equally well to all forests and all nations. Many of the specific practices recommended in this publication will require modification in order to be relevant for use in a particular country or region. Nevertheless, by outlining the important general principles that govern environmentally sound forest harvesting, and by promoting harvesting practices that are in harmony with those principles, a publication such as this can serve a useful purpose.
Scope
As its name suggests, the FAO model code of forest harvesting practice focuses principally on harvesting activities. More comprehensive codes of forest practice often include guidelines on silvicultural and other forest practices in addition to those on harvesting practices. The intention in preparing this document was to concentrate on harvesting since it is the component of industrial forestry that is most often subject to complaints relating to environmental damage associated with forestry operations, especially in developing countries.
Because of the global nature of FAO's mandate, its model code of practice is not limited exclusively to one particular type of forest or climatic region. However, most industrialized countries either have already adopted comprehensive codes of forest practice or have long established common-law provisions by which their forest practices are regulated. The greatest need for information on environmentally sound forest harvesting practices, at least as expressed by FAO member countries, is thus in the developing countries. As many of the developing countries with large forest endowments are in the tropics, this document emphasizes practices that would be particularly useful in tropical forests. And although many of the guidelines on forest practices included in this document would apply also to plantation forests, the principal focus is on natural forests. These forests are more complex and often lie in more difficult terrain than plantation forests.
Approach
The FAO model code of forest harvesting practice assumes that it is first necessary to establish which practices are technically and economically feasible. Once this is known, political institutions should be used to introduce policies and legislation, in the context of the country's cultural and sociological framework, that will motivate or enforce the adoption of such practices.
A second basic assumption is that it is possible to conduct forest harvesting operations in ways that are consistent with the needs of sustainability. A necessary condition for the sustainable management of forests is that utilization, and the activities associated with it, must not compromise the potential of forests to regenerate properly and to provide products and services that are essential for the well-being of both current and future generations. This condition can be met by following good harvesting practices, although doing so may not be easy. If it were easy, the majority of forest harvesting crews around the world would already be doing it, and they are not.
Insofar as possible, this document attempts to provide flexibility in specifying recommended practices. It is not possible in most cases to know whether a specific harvesting practice will meet requirements for sustainability in all situations. Therefore, users can anticipate that it will be necessary to adapt guidelines on recommended harvesting practices to the local situation and also to changes occurring in both scientific understanding and socioeconomic conditions over time.
In general, four ingredients can be identified as essential in relation to forest harvesting operations if forests are to be managed on a sustainable basis:
- comprehensive harvest planning;
- effective implementation and control of harvesting operations;
- thorough harvesting assessment and communication of results to the planning team and to harvesting personnel;
- development of a competent and properly motivated workforce.
This model code of practice examines each of these ingredients with the intention of providing information on what is known about how to accomplish them in environmentally sound ways that do not require major investments in training and technology. Information is also provided on the potential consequences that might be expected to result from failure to implement these practices.
It should be remembered that it is not the forest harvesting practices themselves that are important, but rather the results that are to be achieved as a consequence of implementing those practices. But in most cases, the goal of sustainable forest management cannot be attained unless improved harvesting practices are widely adopted by logging operators. Thus the emphasis in this document is on the harvesting practices themselves; if these are improved, then it is more likely that the ecological, environmental and cultural value of forests will be retained while simultaneously providing for the sustainable utilization of commercial timber from those forests.
How to write a code of practice
This document is intended to serve as a general model for the preparation of national or regional codes of forest harvesting practice. As such, it utilizes an organizational structure similar to that followed in many actual codes of practice. Sections that should probably be included in most codes of forest harvesting practice are:
- An introduction that briefly explains the purpose of the code of practice, summarizes any relevant legislation or policies and provides information on procedures for satisfying requirements of the code of practice as well as provisions for enforcement and appeals, if relevant.
- A chapter on each of the major categories of practice covered by the code. Each chapter should define the category of practice to which it pertains, summarize the guiding principles that have been followed in developing the recommended set of practices, list objectives that can be achieved if the recommended practices are followed, describe potential consequences of improper practices, and, finally, provide details of the recommended practices.
- A bibliography furnishing information on publications, legal documents and other references that are considered pertinent to the code of practice.
- Annexes that might supply more in-depth information on forest harvesting equipment and methods or that provide locally relevant technical data such as soil stability parameters for various soil types, road-design standards or criteria for selecting drainage structures to be used in stream crossings or cross-drains.
It should be noted that the descriptions of recommended practices in this document are more extensive than would normally be found in an actual code of practice. This is because the model code of practice is intended for use over a wide range of biophysical, socio-economic and political conditions. It is therefore necessary not only to list the recommended practices, but also to explain the conditions under which they apply and the reasons they are considered important. In an actual code of practice, these explanations would not normally be necessary and, in fact, might be distracting to users.
Certain practices have also been included in this model code of practice that will not apply in some countries and could therefore be omitted from a national code of practice. Balloon and helicopter logging, for instance, have relevance only under rather special conditions, and would not need to be covered in the national codes of forest practice that might be developed for many tropical developing countries.
It must be emphasized that effective codes of forest harvesting practice cannot be developed in isolation from potential users and other interested parties. Efforts to develop codes of forest practice should involve government forestry officials, representatives of the forest industry, loggers, leaders of local communities, NGO representatives, technical experts from institutions such as universities or research institutes, and individuals whose livelihood or cultural well-being depends on the sustainability of forest resources.
As a final comment, it should always be borne in mind that laws or policies that are overly prescriptive tend to stifle initiative and make it difficult for practitioners to react to changing conditions. The best codes of forest practice are those that provide a firm foundation for decision making and assessment but also permit sufficient flexibility so that specific guidelines can be amended as more is learned about ecosystem function and silvicultural requirements.
<section>5</section>
Chapter 2 Harvest planning
What it is
Guiding principles
Objectives
Potential consequences of inadequate planning
Recommended practices
What it is
Planning of timber harvests is one part of overall forest management planning, which is itself a component of comprehensive land-use planning.
Harvest plans are of two types: strategic and tactical. The strategic harvest plan, prepared by the forest planning team, is a long-term plan that answers the following questions for the forest or concession area as a whole:
- what type of harvesting must be done;
- why it must be done;
- where it must be done;
- when it should be done.
The strategic harvest plan should demarcate non-harvest areas, divide the harvestable forest into annual operating areas (coupes) and design the main transportation system.
The tactical harvest plan, prepared by the team directly responsible for supervision of harvesting operations, is a short-term plan that answers the following questions for each coupe:
- how the harvesting is to be done, in detail;
- who will carry out the operations;
- when each part of the coupe should be harvested.
Guiding principles
Forest harvesting operations are most likely to meet economic, silvicultural, environmental and social objectives if they are carried out as outlined in a properly prepared harvest plan.
Before harvest planning is initiated, a comprehensive land-use plan should be completed to identify the permanent forest estate and the portions of this estate on which timber harvesting will be permitted. Areas where forest plantations will be established should be identified and quantified. The land-use plan should also show areas of forest, if any, from which the trees are to be removed so that the land can be used for other purposes such as agriculture. Commercial timber harvesting is normally permitted in these areas of conversion forest, but it must be recognized that such harvesting is inherently unsustainable. This model code of practice does not explicitly consider harvesting in conversion forests, although practices similar to those recommended in these guidelines would be appropriate in such situations in order to best preserve the environment during the conversion process.
An essential requirement for strategic harvest planning is the development of a comprehensive forest management plan. It is important to remember that harvest planning by itself is not forest planning; the harvest plan is only one part of a complete forest management plan. It is unquestionably an important part, however, since harvesting generates revenues and provides an opportunity to modify the forest so that it can contribute most effectively to economic, social and environmental objectives. But harvest planning cannot be done in isolation from forest planning; the two are complementary and should be undertaken simultaneously by an interdisciplinary planning team that includes foresters, ecologists, logging specialists, engineers, wildlife biologists and other individuals representing specialities in the social sciences.
Comprehensive harvest planning is essential in order to set the stage properly to enable sustainable harvesting practices to be followed, and also to reconcile the need for greater technical control during harvesting with the need to reduce harvesting costs simultaneously. Many logging operators believe that environmental protection can only be achieved through costly measures that will drive them to the brink of bankruptcy. This is simply not true. The experience of operators who develop thorough harvest plans and then carry out the operations as specified in these plans has demonstrated clearly that these procedures not only improve operational control and reduce environmental impacts, but can also reduce costs and substantially increase profits.
Effective planning is one of the most essential requirements for successful, environmentally sound forest harvesting.
Objectives
Strategic and tactical harvest plans should specify ways of:
- optimizing harvesting production rates;
- minimizing environmental and other impacts associated with harvesting operations;
- accommodating the needs and wishes of local communities and indigenous peoples and making provisions for their participation in making decisions about harvesting operations and in benefiting financially and economically from those operations;
- providing efficient access to the forest for silvicultural, protection and transport purposes;
- minimizing harvesting and transport costs, subject to constraints imposed by environmental, ecological and social considerations;
- identifying opportunities to coordinate timber harvesting with the collection of non-timber forest products;
- avoiding scheduling problems;
- providing for flexibility so that the plans can be changed to take advantage of new information or changing situations;
- protecting the health and safety of workers and the public.
Potential consequences of inadequate planning
Far too many harvesting operations are carried out without the benefit of any kind of formal, written plan. Such operations are difficult to coordinate, impossible to control adequately and in their effects often more closely resemble mining operations than harvesting operations designed for the sustainable utilization of forest products.
Even where harvest plans are required, often only a tactical plan is prepared. This means that the transportation system is developed in a piecemeal way, with roads being planned separately for each coupe rather than a system being designed for the entire forest with roads being constructed when access to an individual coupe is required. Consequently, far more forest area than is necessary is cleared to build roads, resulting in accelerated soil erosion, increased stream sedimentation and higher costs of road construction, maintenance and transportation.
Lack of adequate harvest plans may also result in scheduling problems that greatly increase disruptions and force logging supervisors to manage from crisis to crisis rather than being able to carry out operations in a systematic, organized way.
Recommended practices
Strategic planning
Tactical planning
Strategic planning
This type of harvest planning cannot be separated from management planning, as both must be done simultaneously by an interdisciplinary planning team.
A map and a written plan are elements of a good strategic harvest plan. The map, typically drawn to a scale between 1:10 000 and 1:50000, should show the following features as identified in the forest management plan:
- forest cover types, important topographic features (preferably with elevation contour lines), streams and both existing and planned infrastructure or other artificial features;
- protection areas such as biological reserves, religious or cultural sites or areas near population centres;
- areas where harvesting is to be carried out, divided into annual coupes or similar areas that can be conveniently referenced on the ground;
- areas where major problems exist that must be overcome when developing the transportation system or in carrying out the harvesting operations. These would include rock outcrops, swamps or other areas of wet soils, important stream crossings and other features;
- areas of non-forest land uses;
- locations of communities or indigenous populations that could be affected by harvesting or transport operations.
The written plan should describe in detail the items shown on the map. This plan would typically include the following:
- a description of the planned silvicultural treatment (e.g. individual-tree and group selection, shelterwood and clear-felling) for each harvesting coupe and an explanation as to why each treatment has been selected, including an analysis of the degree to which harvesting is expected to contribute to the attainment of management objectives for the forest;
- a description of the types of harvesting equipment to be used in each coupe (for example, 20 percent of the area to be extracted with cable systems, 60 percent with rubber-tyred skidders, 5 percent with draught animals and 15 percent with helicopters), with an explanation of the selection criteria employed;
- an estimate, based on a proper inventory, of the volume of timber to be removed from each coupe, preferably divided into species or groups of similar species;
- a schedule showing the year in which each coupe is to be harvested;
- descriptions of any special problem areas noted on the map, with suggestions for overcoming the problems;
- a discussion of potential problems relating to local communities or indigenous populations and the way these problems have been addressed in formulating the plan;
- detailed information concerning the forest transportation system, such as road design parameters for different conditions (valley bottoms, ridgetops and climbing roads), locations and specifications for major stream crossings, typical spacing and design specifications for drainage structures and other similar information;
- annual labour requirements for harvesting operations and for construction and maintenance of the forest transportation system;
- provisions for living quarters and other facilities needed to accommodate forest workers, together with general information on health and safety provisions;
- the estimated cost of harvesting operations in each coupe and of construction and annual maintenance of the forest transportation system.
Tactical planning
Short-term tactical plans normally provide details of operations that are to be carried out during a period of one year or some other convenient unit of time, such as a dry season. Thus, a tactical plan is associated with the annual coupe. Sometimes, however, a coupe is not a single, contiguous block, but instead the areas to be harvested within a year are dispersed throughout several separate regions of the forest. The nature of the coupe largely depends upon the type of forest, its stage of maturity and the administrative preferences of the agency responsible for forest management.
The tactical plan, like the strategic plan, should include a written description of the planned operations as well as a detailed, accurately scaled map. The plan should be consistent with environmentally sound harvesting practices such as those recommended in Chapters 3 to 7 of this model code of practice. The following steps are recommended for the development of tactical harvest plans:
- A topographic survey should be conducted, either on the ground or by using low-altitude aerial photography with ground checking, and a large-scale topographic map prepared. The best maps for detailed harvest planning are usually drawn at scales between 1:2 000 and 1:10 000, depending upon the topographical irregularities and the types of harvesting equipment to be used. In some areas, maps with scales as small as 1:20 000 are used for tactical harvest planning, but this scale provides less detail than is desirable for satisfactory planning.
The contour interval selected for the topographic map will depend upon the topographical irregularities and the relationship between the costs of mapping and those of harvest planning errors. In general, additional money spent on preparing good maps will pay off in reduced harvesting and infrastructure costs. A contour interval of 5 m or less usually provides satisfactory detail for planning, as long as the contour lines accurately represent the ground surface.
The topographic map should accurately show the boundaries of the harvest area and the location of water courses, swamps or other areas of wet soils, gullies, rock outcrops, sites of religious or cultural significance and any other feature that may influence harvest planning.
- The annual coupe should be divided into administrative units that can be identified on the ground and used to help control and guide the operation. If these units, referred to here as "cutting units", are contiguous, then planning should be done for all of the units simultaneously. If they are dispersed, then individual plans may need to be developed for each cutting unit or group of cutting units.
An individual cutting unit should be limited to a single extraction method. This is because the planning of harvesting operations for cable systems is significantly different from that for ground-skidding machines or forwarders, and different again from that for skidding with draught animals or extraction with aerial systems such as helicopters. For administrative purposes, operations that use different extraction methods should therefore be allocated to different cutting units.
- On the topographic map, streamside buffer zones should be delineated as well as other special management areas in which cutting is either to be prohibited altogether or will be subject to special restrictions. These might include areas of significant scientific, recreational, cultural or aesthetic value, special reserves for wildlife or for the production of non-timber forest products, water catchments, areas of saturated soils and erosion-prone sites.
- Using the topographic map as a guide, an inventory of the trees in the operating area should be conducted to estimate the timber volume and its distribution over the cutting unit, as well as the number and condition of potential crop trees that are currently immature and should be protected to form a future crop. The kind of inventory needed for this purpose will depend upon the type of forest and the cost of carrying out the inventory. In temperate forests, a sampling inventory is usually sufficient, as the volume to be harvested from each hectare is relatively high and the trees are reasonably uniform in size; it is not necessary for planning purposes to know the location of each individual tree to be harvested. In the mixed broad-leaved forests of the tropics, the volume harvested per hectare is typically quite low, although the value of an individual tree can be substantial. In such forests it is now generally considered essential to make a complete inventory of all
trees that might be harvestable. Each tree should be identified and numbered, its diameter should be measured and the commercial stem quality assessed. If standard volume equations are used, the tree's height should also be measured. These data should be recorded on inventory sheets and the tree's location should be marked accurately on the topographic map.
Part of 1:5000 tactical planning map for a harvesting operation in a tropical forest. The circles indicate trees to be felled, and the arrows show the planned felling direction. Heavy dashed lines represent skid trails, and the two open rectangles are landings. Such a map can be taken into the field when marking trees for felling and laying out skid trails, and later it can also be used by the felling and extraction crews. After the operation has been completed, the map will be useful in post-harvest assessment to compare the actual layout with that specified in the harvest plan.
-The inventory data for the operating area should be tallied, and, for selection harvesting, the trees to be harvested must be determined. This will depend on such considerations as management goals, market acceptance, diameter limits, silvicultural guidelines, operating constraints and estimated harvesting cost.
- A detailed transportation and extraction system for the operation should be laid out, using the topographical map, with those trees to be harvested marked on it. Such a plan will include the haul roads that will connect to the main transportation system, the landings where logs will be concentrated during the extraction process and the skid trails (if ground-skidding systems are to be used) or cableways (if cable systems are to be used). This system must be laid out so that it efficiently accesses the trees to be harvested while accommodating the terrain, circumventing problem areas, avoiding streams and minimizing the total length of roads and skid trails. Where a stream cannot be avoided altogether, the site should be surveyed in the field and a stream crossing designed that will minimize environmental problems.
In steep terrain, it is often desirable to first locate potential landing sites and then see whether or not it is possible to reach them with roads. The full transportation system, including both roads and landings, thus becomes a matter of compromise between the optimal locations for landings and the reality of where it is environmentally, economically and physically possible to build roads.
- In tropical forests or other areas where planning involves decisions about individual trees, the approximate direction of fall for each tree to be harvested should be determined using the transportation plan as a guide. This direction should be marked on the map; it is to be verified in the field and changed if necessary when the tree is actually marked for felling'
-Specific harvesting equipment to be used should be determined and a preliminary operations schedule developed, using appropriate estimated production rates.
-The preliminary schedule must be modified as necessary to accommodate the timing of the normal onset of the rainy season. Contingency plans should be developed for severe storms and other extreme events. The time of seed fall must also be considered in areas where seed is not produced year-round, such as in many deciduous and semi-deciduous forests.
- Whether harvesting operations on some cutting units need to be scheduled to avoid breeding seasons of primates or other sensitive animals or the nesting seasons of rare or endangered bird species that may be present in the area needs to be determined.
- The possible complementarily of harvesting non-timber forest products should be considered (for example, cutting rattan or tapping resins prior to the timber harvest or collecting fuelwood after the harvest). If appropriate, these products should be included in the harvest plan.
- Local communities or indigenous peoples living near the harvesting site should be consulted about the planned harvesting operations, including any potential scheduling problems or opportunities (for instance, ready labour availability during slack agricultural periods).
- Relevant landowners or government authorities should be contacted about any right-of-way easements that might be needed before road building or other construction activities can be initiated.
- Before finalizing the harvesting plan, loggers should be consulted to ensure that the plan is feasible and that the operation can be undertaken safely, efficiently and economically.
- Copies of the harvesting plan and the accompanying topographic map showing the trees to be harvested and the transportation system must be given to the supervisor of the harvesting crew, who will be responsible for ensuring that the plan is carried out and that every member of the crew is familiar with the requirements and working procedures. A thorough understanding of what is to be done and the standard of work expected is perhaps the single most important requirement for a successful operation.
<section>6</section>
Chapter 3 Forest road engineering
What it is
Guiding principles
Objectives
Potential consequences of improper road design, construction and maintenance
Recommended practices
What it is
Road engineering involves the specification of design standards and the actual engineering design, field layout, construction and maintenance of forest roads and subsidiary structures such as bridges and culverts.
Guiding principles
Forest roads are complex engineering structures upon which transport efficiency and reliable access to the forest both depend. They are unquestionably the most problematic features of timber harvesting operations since a major part of the total soil erosion resulting from timber harvesting operations can be attributed directly to roads, often because of design or construction flaws or poor maintenance practices. Nevertheless, except in cases where major waterways can be used, roads are essential, not only for industrial timber extraction, but also because they provide access to forests for management and monitoring purposes. In some cases forest roads may even form part of the planned network of public roads and thus can be an essential component of a country's development infrastructure.
Forest roads should be designed and laid out in the field by competent engineers who understand the need to minimize soil disturbance, maintain proper drainage and avoid stream crossings where possible. Construction and maintenance of forest roads is specialized work that should be supervised by engineers and carried out by specially trained work crews.
Objectives
Forest roads that have been properly designed, constructed according to environmentally sound engineering practices and correctly maintained should:
- provide convenient, low-cost access to the forest for product transport and to serve the needs of forest management and protection while benefiting local communities at the same time;
- minimize soil erosion associated with roads, thereby reducing sedimentation in streams;
- be consistent with good design and maintenance practices, minimizing road and landing areas while providing adequate roadside clearings to permit the roads to dry out quickly after heavy rains;
- utilize natural drainage patterns;
-avoid passing through areas of cultural or religious significance or natural beauty or areas where wildlife or local communities or indigenous peoples may be disturbed by traffic;
- provide for the safety of workers and the general public who may use the roads or be affected by the traffic.
Potential consequences of improper road design, construction and maintenance
Among the potential consequences of improper road design, construction and maintenance are:
-high construction, maintenance and transport costs;
- short road life, with the consequence that new roads will have to be built for subsequent harvesting operations in the same area;
- excessive stream sedimentation, with potentially serious effects on water supplies, aquatic life and wildlife populations;
-excessive soil erosion, with a consequent loss of productivity in forest areas near the roads;
- increased potential for triggering landslides on steep mountain slopes with consequent damage to infrastructure, streams and land;
-disruption of breeding areas or migratory routes of animal species.
Using a tracked excavator to build a forest road in mountainous terrain. Such machines, properly used, can substantially reduce environmental impacts from road construction as compared with the use of bulldozers.
Recommended practices
Building forest roads involves clearing vegetation and moving soil and rock in order to create structures capable of supporting heavy vehicles that may have to operate during periods of adverse environmental conditions. Such actions are almost always accompanied by increased rates of erosion. To minimize the increase in erosion and reduce its destructive effects, the following practices are suggested:
- Utilization of competent engineers to conduct roadline surveys and supervise construction.
- Minimization of the total length of roads. This not only reduces the erosion potential of roads, but it also minimizes deforestation and enhances the profitability of forests by reducing the cost of road construction and maintenance.
- The total length of roads required for ground-skidding operations in a particular forest area is typically two or three times as much as that required for harvesting systems using either forwarders or skyline cable-cranes operating under similar conditions. Aerial systems, such as helicopters, can support even lower road densities. Both cable and aerial logging systems are generally more expensive than ground-skidding systems, however, except in unusually steep or rugged terrain. A trade-off therefore exists between the increased cost of road construction where road density is higher, and the increased cost of extraction where road density is lower.
- Reduction of the total area of disturbance associated with roads. Guidelines developed for tropical rain forests in northern Australia specify that, in gentle terrain where little excavation is needed, the maximum clearing width should be less than 7.5 m for major haul roads and less than 5 m for minor haul roads. Additional clearing is needed in steeper terrain to open cut and fill slopes and in areas of especially high rainfall to allow sunlight to penetrate so that it can dry out the roads after rainstorms. Although practices will vary in different regions, the general principle is that the average width of forest roads should be restricted to the minimum that will permit a properly constructed and maintained road on which hauling can be done efficiently and safely. This will reduce both soil erosion and the area of forest that must be dedicated to infrastructure.
-Avoidance, where possible, of areas of wet soils and high erosion risk. Routing roads through such areas is costly, both in terms of initial construction and the extra maintenance that will be required over the life of the road.
- Minimization of cutting and filling. On steep, erosive slopes, hydraulic excavators should be used to avoid the need to side-cast excavated material. Appropriate blasting techniques are to be used when needed and excavated material deposited in stable disposal areas that are well away from streams.
- Adequate compaction of the road base and allowing the road to dry thoroughly before use. When feasible, roads should be constructed only during the dry season and they should be allowed to go through an entire rainy season before permitting their use by heavy machinery. Suitable local materials should be used to prepare a firm foundation and, when possible, a sealing layer of gravel or similar material applied on the running surface of primary roads.
Road crew excavating a site for emplacement of a culvert on a forest road. Providing for adequate drainage is one of the most important considerations in the engineering of forest roads.
Effective density of forest roads
Regardless of the type of harvesting system, pre-planning of the road system as described in Chapter 2 will almost always result in a substantially lower road density than if harvesting is done without the benefit of a comprehensive harvest plan. The appropriate road density for a particular area will depend upon the type of forest, the cost of road construction and maintenance, the cost of extraction, and other factors. In general, because of the relatively low volume of harvestable timber per hectare, the optimum road density in tropical forests is much lower than it would be in temperate forests. Under European conditions, commonly reported forest: road densities for ground skidding are about 25 m of road per hectare of forest. Expressed in terms of the volume of timber extracted, this corresponds to an effective density of roughly 100 m of road per 1000 m³ of extracted roundwood. In a mixed broad-leaved tropical forest under conditions typical of West Africa, where
harvest volumes average about 10 m³ per hectare, an effective density of 100 m of road per 1000 m³ of extracted roundwood would imply only 1 m of road per hectare of forest. This is many times lower than actual road densities commonly encountered in tropical forests, suggesting that effective road densities may be higher in some tropical forests than in temperate forests in industrialized countries.
- Use of roadside ditches and properly spaced cross-drains to channel water away from the road structure and into the surrounding vegetation. These are relatively simple and inexpensive practices that are often neglected on forest roads. They are absolutely essential if soil erosion associated with roads is to be minimized, especially in areas with intensive rainfall. Furthermore, such practices can pay for themselves many times over through reduced road reconstruction costs as well as reductions in the delays associated with muddy or washed-out roads.
- Ensuring that roadside slopes become revegetated as soon as possible after construction. Low, shrubby vegetation or grass is preferable to fast-growing trees for this purpose since the latter will shade the road surface and prevent it from drying out after rainy periods. In many tropical regions, the fast-growing pioneer tree species that rapidly grow up after clearing may have to be controlled along roadsides in order to permit the roads to dry out properly.
- Keeping roads and disturbed areas away from streams and outside streamside buffer strips. Where a stream crossing is necessary, the crossing structure should be designed on the basis of a detailed site survey and disturbance to the stream minimized during construction.
- When culverts or similar drainage structures are used for cross-drains or stream crossings, determination of their proper size and spacing based on local rainfall intensity and runoff rates.
- Keeping the road grade as low as possible, consistent with the need to provide adequate access to the forest. Maximum grades of 10 to 20 percent (6° to 11°) are recommended in some countries, except for short pitches, where steeper grades are necessary to provide access to higher ground. In mountainous areas, relatively steep roads may be preferable to flatter grades, which require more total construction. However, maintenance costs and erosion problems tend to rise sharply with steeper grades.
- Utilization of stable ridge-top locations for roads, wherever feasible, except when long-distance cable-cranes will be used in combination with valley-bottom roads.
- Proper maintenance of road surfaces, roadside ditches, cross-drains and stream crossings. Secondary roads can be closed off if they will not be used again until the next felling cycle; in this instance, the road surface should be ripped up if necessary and revegetated with grass or shrubs. All roads that are considered essential for the management or protection of the forest should be maintained for continuous use.
<section>7</section>
Chapter 4 Cutting
What it is
Guiding principles
Objectives
Potential consequences of improper cutting operations
Recommended practices
What it is
Cutting includes all activities undertaken to fell standing trees and prepare them for extraction. In some regions this set of activities is referred to as "felling." Cutting activities include felling the standing tree, measuring its length to determine the best log lengths, removing the limbs and crosscutting the stem (and sometimes also large limbs) into logs. Removal of bark from the stem, when done, is also considered part of the cutting operation.
Guiding principles
Cutting is among the most hazardous of all industrial occupations. Trees are large, heavy objects, and fall with a tremendous force that can smash or uproot neighbouring trees. Their limbs may break off and fly in unpredictable directions. The felled tree may roll or slide downhill, and its stem may shatter into pieces that can bounce into the air and roll uncontrollably. In felling operations, therefore, much emphasis must be placed on safety and training.
Since cutting, when properly done, approximately mimics natural tree falls, it is often considered to be a relatively benign operation from an environmental perspective. In mixed broad-leaved forests, however, especially in the tropics where tree canopies tend to intertwine and are often tied together by climbers, damage to residual trees and seedlings caused by felling can be so extensive that it hampers the attainment of the silvicultural objectives associated with harvesting operations.
Cutting operations in developing countries are often performed by poorly equipped and unskilled workers who have had little or no training, are not closely supervised and are given little incentive if any to minimize damage through carefully controlled directional felling. In addition to causing excessive damage to advance regeneration and residual trees, uncontrolled felling can also substantially reduce efficiency in the subsequent extraction operation. In comparison, directional felling can reduce damage to both vegetation and soils, keep trees away from streams and increase the utilizable volume of the tree stem by reducing breakage. It can also help reduce the frequency and severity of accidents associated with felling operations. High priority, therefore, should be given to measures aimed at improving the skills of workers in felling crews and at providing incentives that will promote good practices.
Objectives
Properly conducted cutting operations should:
- ensure the safety of cutting crews and other personnel working in the vicinity of the cutting operation;
- minimize damage to residual trees and seedlings, especially those that are expected to make up the population of future crop trees;
- minimize damage to soils and streams;
- maximize the volume of wood that can be profitably utilized from each felled tree;
- maximize the value of the logs prepared for extraction;
- facilitate extraction activities.
Potential consequences of improper cutting operations
Improper felling operations may result in:
- a poor safety record and high insurance or compensation costs;
- high cutting costs;
- low utilization rates;
- low profitability from improperly crosscut logs;
- inefficient and costly extraction due to the haphazard placement of tree stems rather than their correct alignment with respect to extraction routes;
- excessive damage to residual trees and seedlings;
- excessive damage to soils and streams;
- poor postharvest condition of the forest that does not meet silvicultural objectives;
- infestation of the site by pioneer species or vines.
Felling trees is always difficult and hazardous, but in tropical forests large buttresses, interconnected tree crowns and thick climbing vines often further complicate the feller's work.
Crosscutting a felled tree into logs.
Recommended practices
- In cutting operations, the first consideration must always be safety. This implies that all members of the crew must be in good health and that continuous training and close supervision are essential. Details of safety and health aspects of felling operations and other forest work are provided in publications such as Chainsaws in tropical forests (FAO and ILO, 1980) and Fitting the job to the forest worker (ILO, 1992).
- Cutting must only be done by competent personnel outfitted with appropriate safety gear and using properly maintained equipment. Most cutting worldwide is done with chainsaws. These are inherently dangerous tools that are easily mishandled by persons not thoroughly acquainted with their proper use. By far the largest number of logging accidents occurring annually are associated with chainsaws.
- In some areas, manual tools such as crosscut saws are still commonly used in cutting operations. Properly used and kept in good condition, these are perfectly good tools that can be far more cost-effective in many developing countries than chainsaws. Even such simple tools can be very dangerous, however, and their use requires proper training and supervision.
- There are very few situations in which axes or other chopping tools can be used efficiently for felling or crosscutting trees. Such use causes an enormous waste of wood. Axes are excellent tools for removing limbs and cutting underbrush, but they should not be used for felling or crosscutting. Any perceived savings from such use are purely illusory. Saws, which produce only a thin kerf of sawdust, are always preferable to chopping tools, which inevitably convert a large volume of usable wood into chips.
-Where selection harvesting is being used, trees to be harvested should be marked before cutting begins. The detailed harvesting map prepared during the planning stage should be taken into the field and used to help decide which trees are to be removed. This information should be noted on the map for use by the harvesting crews.
- The recent experience of several organizations working to develop low-impact harvesting systems for tropical forests suggests that damage to residual trees can be reduced by also marking those trees that are expected to form part of the future crop tree population. Doing so provides visual reinforcement for the felling and extraction crews concerning those trees that should be protected whenever possible.
- In forests where climbers tend to bridge across tree crowns, the climbers should be cut well in advance of the cutting operation so that they will die and become brittle. This reduces the chance of a felled tree pulling over neighbouring trees as it falls. Climber cutting can often be done at the same time as the trees are being marked for felling.
- The planned direction of fall should be indicated on the bole of each tree to be harvested. In general, trees should be felled either towards or away from skid trails or cableways, preferably at an oblique angle to the skidding direction (between 30° and 45° is often suggested as the "optimal" angle range unless trees can be felled directly on to the skid trail or cableway). Felling away from the skid trail or cableway will reduce problems for the extraction crew when tree crowns are large, but felling towards the skid trail or cableway can reduce the extraction distance substantially. The decision whether to direct trees towards or away from the skid trail or cableway will depend upon local experience, terrain conditions and the type of logging system being used as well as other factors.
- Where possible, trees should be felled in the direction of existing canopy gaps in order to reduce damage to nearby standing timber. Trees near a skid trail or cableway should be felled so that their crowns fall alongside the skid trail or cableway for easy extraction.
- It is often desirable to direct the tree being felled towards the crown of another tree that has been felled previously. This cushions the impact, reduces the area of forest damaged and helps bunch the logs to improve skidding efficiency.
-On steep slopes, trees should not be felled directly down the slope unless their downhill lean is so great that directional felling techniques are unable to pull the tree into another direction. Felling laterally across the slope or along the contour will reduce the tree's momentum and thus minimize breakage of the felled tree and damage to neighbouring trees. To prevent a tree from rolling downhill after it has been felled, it should be lodged against the uphill side of a nearby tree if possible. This is likely to damage the second tree, but the total damage should be substantially less than the destruction that could be caused by the felled tree's crown if it were to roll or slide down the steep hillside.
- Where social conditions and the size of trees permit, the use of felling or integrated harvesting machines can greatly increase felling productivity and, at the same time, substantially reduce the frequency and severity of accidents. Because of their high cost and the requirement for trees of nearly uniform size, in practice, the use of such machines is currently limited primarily to industrial plantations or to natural stands of smaller trees. They can be used effectively either for clear-cutting or for selection harvesting.
- Whenever possible, trees selected for felling within streamside buffer strips, where this is permitted, should be felled so that their crowns fall outside the buffer strip.
- In general, trees should not be felled across streams. In some countries, in fact, it is prohibited. There are instances where this may be the best option, however, because of terrain and safety considerations. When trees are felled across or into streams, extraction must be undertaken carefully in order to minimize damage to stream banks and streamside vegetation.
- To maximize the volume and value of wood recovered from each tree, cutting crews should be trained to follow proper crosscutting procedures. This requires that the entire bole be measured prior to crosscutting and that log lengths be determined according to mill requirements. The experience of training programmes to improve crosscutting skills suggests that improved utilization of 20 percent or more and increased log values of 10 to 50 percent can be attained by such training.
-Special safety precautions must be taken whenever there is a possibility that members of the public or other persons not directly involved in the felling operations might be endangered. When felling is to be done near roadways, for instance, it is essential that a flag bearer be posted on the road to halt traffic until the tree has been safely brought to the ground.
-A large proportion of tree nutrients, especially in tropical forests, reside in the bark and foliage. Removing the limbs and bark at the felling site will thus leave nutrients in the forest, contributing to improved growth in the new crop of trees. However, it is not always practical to remove the bark at the felling site; this will depend upon labour costs and the ease with which the bark can be separated from the wood. Also, for some species, the bark may be needed to help protect the log from abrasion or the wood from insect and fungal attack, or to prevent the log from splitting as a result of drying out while being stored prior to processing.
<section>8</section>
Chapter 5 Extraction
What it is
Guiding principles
Objectives
Potential consequences of improper extraction operations
Recommended practices for extraction with ground-skidding equipment
Recommended practices for extraction with forwarders
Cable extraction systems
Recommended practices for extraction with cable systems
Aerial extraction systems
Recommended practices for helicopter extraction
Recommended practices for extraction with draught animals
Other extraction systems
What it is
Extraction is the process of moving trees or logs from the cutting site to a landing or roadside where they will be processed into logs or consolidated into larger loads for transport to the processing facility or other final destination. Several classes of extraction systems are commonly recognized, including ground-skidding systems, forwarders, cable systems, aerial systems and draught animals, among others.
In this model code of forest harvesting practice, extraction with ground-skidding equipment is discussed first since it is the most common system and also the one that tends to cause the greatest environmental problems. For the remaining systems, the recommended practices focus principally on those that differ from practices recommended for extraction with ground-skidding equipment.
Guiding principles
Regardless of the type of logging system used, extraction is a difficult, often hazardous operation that can inflict substantial damage on forest ecosystems. Considerable skill is required, on the part of both supervisors and workers, to carry out extraction operations that are efficient and safe, as well as environmentally sound.
The three most common types of damage caused to forest ecosystems during extraction are:
- soil disturbance and soil compaction, which, if excessive, may increase the potential for erosion, retard the growth of residual trees and interfere with regeneration;
- damage to streams, either caused directly, when the skidding machines cross unprotected streams or drag logs through them, or indirectly, through the introduction of sediments or spilled fuel and lubricants into the streams from skid trails and other areas of disturbed soils;
- damage to residual trees and other vegetation, which may slow forest recovery and reduce the volume and value of timber available for the subsequent harvest.
All of these problems can be reduced substantially by comprehensive harvest planning coupled with a system of operational control to ensure that the plan is followed and adapted as necessary in response to changing conditions.
Objectives
A well-organized and properly supervised extraction operation should:
- optimize extraction productivity;
- ensure the safety of extraction crews and other personnel working in the vicinity of the extraction operation;
- minimize the amount of soil compaction and soil disturbance caused by the extraction operation;
- minimize damage to streams within or adjacent to the cutting unit, particularly those that flow year-round or serve as sources of local water supplies;
- minimize damage to residual trees and seedlings, especially those that are expected to make up the population of future crop trees;
- deliver to the landing or roadside all logs prepared for extraction by the cutting crew, without significant loss of volume or deterioration in quality.
Wheeled skidder gathering a load of logs for extraction in a tropical forest plantation. The integral arch will permit the front of the load to be raised off the ground during skidding.
Crawler tractor without arch preparing to skid a large log in a natural forest in the tropics. For such work, crews should be equipped with helmets and other standard safety gear.
Potential consequences of improper extraction operations
The following are some of the potential consequences of improper extraction operations:
- a poor safety record and high insurance or compensation costs;
- low production rates and high extraction costs;
- failure to deliver all logs prepared for extraction to the landing;
- loss of log volume or value as a result of the extraction process;
- excessive damage to soils and streams;
- deterioration of water quality and loss of habitat for aquatic life;
- excessive damage to residual trees and seedlings.
Recommended practices for extraction with ground-skidding equipment
Most logging worldwide is done with ground-skidding equipment. Such equipment includes crawler tractors (bulldozers), wheeled and tracked skidders and farm tractors. The following practices are recommended when such equipment is being used:
Wheeled skidder
- As a general rule, skidders are preferable to crawler tractors for log extraction. Unlike crawlers, which are general-purpose machines especially intended for use in construction and excavation, skidders are designed explicitly for log extraction. Their rubber tyres and high manouverability can reduce soil and tree damage. They are usually narrower than crawler tractors and have smaller blades so that they can pass more easily between residual trees without causing damage. The smaller blades also prevent excessive blading, which can initiate erosion.
Crawler tractor
- Crawler tractors are often used in forestry for road construction and maintenance as well as for skidding. As a result, they have certain economic advantages compared with skidders, which have only one purpose. Because they are equipped with steel tracks and powerful bulldozer blades, crawler tractors can be used on very steep slopes. Also, operators tend to blade skid trails simply because it is easy to do so, rather than limit blading to places where it is required for safety or efficiency. The consequence is that unnecessary soil disturbance and excessive damage to residual trees and advance regeneration are all too common when crawler tractors are used for log extraction. In spite of their problems, however, it must be recognized that in many forest areas, particularly in steep terrain with large trees and high precipitation rates, crawler tractors are likely to remain the most common type of skidding machine used. To minimize problems when such machines are used,
therefore, effective training of the tractor operators and their careful supervision are essential.
Farm tractor
- The use of farm tractors is a reasonable option when trees are relatively small and the terrain is not exceptionally rugged. Because these vehicles are not designed specifically for logging, safety can be a serious problem, and modifications are almost always needed to improve the durability of the machines as well as to make them safe for forest work. With such modifications farm tractors can be an excellent choice for small, private forests or in developing countries where farm machinery is often easier to obtain than specialized forestry equipment. Farm tractors are particularly well suited for work in forest plantations, especially for harvesting smaller stems, as in thinnings.
-Regardless of the type of skidding equipment used, machines with an appropriate size and power configuration for the operation should be selected. The blade width should not exceed about 3 m (2 m is usually sufficient), and the machine should have a powered winch with at least 30 m of wire rope as well as an arch or other support that will suspend the end of the load off the ground to prevent logs from digging into the soil as they are being skidded.
- Where soils are easily compacted, the use of low-ground-pressure skidders should be considered to reduce soil disturbance, rutting, and compaction.
Tracked skidder
These are tracked skidders with torsion suspension systems and a design that moves the load's centre of mass forward on to the skidder for better weight distribution over the tracks. Such skidders are more expensive than wheeled skidders but produce less ground pressure and, because of the torsion suspension system, tend to pass smoothly over such ground cover as logging debris and undergrowth, leaving it largely in place. Wheeled skidders and crawler tractors are more likely to crush ground cover into the soil.
- "High-flotation" tyres or dual tyres mounted on wheeled skidders may be used insted of tracked skidders for damp or easily compacted soils. Both solutions increase the effective width of the tyres where they are in contact with the ground, thus spreading the weight of the machine and its load over a larger surface area, reducing pressure on the soil.
- Skidding operations should be suspended altogether during exceptionally wet weather. Skidding during such periods increases erosion and other damage, reduces operating efficiency, increases accident rates and may double or triple operating costs.
- Steep slopes should be avoided in ground-skidding operations. Although modern skidding machines are often mechanically capable of operating on quite steep slopes, doing so greatly increases soil disturbance, reduces operating efficiency and leads to faster depreciation of the machine. Slope limits will vary from region to region depending on soil conditions, precipitation and other factors. Many countries restrict ground skidding to slopes of less than 30 percent (17°) except for short distances. Steeper slopes that are sustained over long distances should be harvested by cable or aerial systems that have the ability to suspend logs above the soil.
- A system of designated skid trails should be used. Environmentally, skid trails are the most troublesome aspect of ground-skidding operations. In many parts of the world, the conventional approach to log skidding involves the skidding machine wandering through the forest after felling has been completed, searching for logs to drag to the landing. When a log is encountered, the operator hooks it to the machine and then drives to the landing, sometimes along the same path, but other times in a different direction that the operator believes will lead more quickly to the landing. In tropical forests, where undergrowth is often dense, the machine operator may even keep the blade down most of the time, particularly if a crawler tractor is being used, thus creating a path of deeply disturbed soil wherever the machine travels! This can result in an astonishingly dense system of skid trails. Although skid trails commonly represent 20 to 40 percent of a harvested area, several
studies have found that 60 percent or even 80 percent of the harvested area was covered in skid trails after selection harvesting operations had been completed. When a designated skid-trail system is used, skid trail locations are included in the harvest plan. They are first clearly flagged on the ground before the cutting operation begins, using the topographic planning map, a compass and a device to measure slope angles. With the skid trails thus marked, the cutting crew can reduce extraction costs by aligning felled trees along the skid trails and felling damage to future crop trees can be reduced by placing the crowns of the felled trees within or alongside the skid trails whenever possible.
A farm tractor being used to skid logs. Note the protection for the driver and the device for raising the front end of the logs off the ground.
Wheeled skidder equipped with high-flotation tyres (1000-mm wide) to reduce tyre pressure on wet soils.
Excessive skid-trail density in a natural forest in the tropics. Such practices can lead to heavy soil erosion and sedimentation of streams. These problems can be reduced by using a system of designated skid trails and requiring skidders to remain on the designated skid trails at all times.
- Skidding machines should remain on the designated skid trails at all times. Studies in many countries, including several in the tropics, have demonstrated conclusively that it is both unnecessary and uneconomical to drive the skidder to every log; by staying on the skid trail and pulling the winch line out to the log, significant reductions in soil disturbance, soil compaction and damage to residual trees and advance regeneration can be achieved.
- Choker-setters should be trained to preset chokers, locate the best approach to the log and pull the winch line out to the log while the skidder remains on the skid trail in order to facilitate the system of designated skid trails. In conventional operations, the winch line is often wrapped directly around the log to be skidded, rather than using a separate choker cable or chain. This causes a delay during which the skidder sits idle. Pre-setting of chokers not only eliminates this delay, but it also permits easier collection of a number of logs that can be skidded simultaneously.
- Skid-trail construction with the skidder or crawler blade should be minimized. In some countries, including several in the tropics, blading of skid trails has been prohibited altogether except when necessary to ensure safety. Guidelines developed by CIRAD-Forêt and tested in West Africa, South America and Southeast Asia stipulate that skid-trail construction should be limited to hand-cutting of brush and trimming of stumps to ground level. The brush cuttings can then be placed in the skid trail to provide a protective mat over which the skidders will travel. In addition to protecting soils, such procedures can also reduce costs by eliminating the time bulldozers spend unnecessarily blading skid trails.
- Skid trails should generally be as straight as possible, curving where necessary to reach timber marked for cutting or to avoid wet or unstable soils and steep hillsides. On slopes steeper than about 30 percent (17°), skid trails should be angled across the slope rather than running straight up and down it. The skid-trail width should be the minimum feasible; 4.5 m is often recommended as an appropriate maximum width when large, heavy machines are being used. Tight corners should be avoided in order to protect trees and other vegetation standing near the skid trail
- Where feasible, uphill skidding may be preferable to downhill skidding since it tends to disperse runoff water into the surrounding vegetation, whereas downhill skidding tends to concentrate it at the landing. The logs being skidded are easier to control when the skidding direction is uphill, and there is also less of a tendency for operators to attempt slopes that are too steep for safe skidding. On the other hand, pulling uphill requires more power and the vehicles may churn the soil. Operators may also tend to use the blade more frequently to remove topsoil and improve traction. Whether to specify uphill or downhill skidding thus requires an evaluation of tradeoffs, and the decision will usually represent a compromise.
- Skid trails, as well as skidding machines, must be kept out of streamside buffers entirely. Where harvesting of trees from within buffer strips is permitted, the trees should be felled away from the stream and extracted by winching.
- Skid trails should never cross streams or gullies, unless it is absolutely unavoidable. Where this must be done, the crossing should be made at a site where there is a rock base if possible. The streambed should be protected with logs or a temporarily installed culvert.
- Operators should be encouraged to use lubricating oils that are environmentally benign, such as vegetable oil, when feasible.
- Adequate drainage in the form of drainage ditches and cross-drains should be provided for skid trails and other areas where soils have been disturbed after the harvesting operation has been completed. These areas should be left in a state that will facilitate their rapid revegetaion. If necessary, they should be ripped up and sown with grass or other fast-growing plants.
Recommended practices for extraction with forwarders
Forwarders are extraction machines that carry a load of logs completely off the ground, either within their own frame or on a trailer; therefore, they typically cause less soil damage than ground-skidding equipment. Usually they include a mechanism, such as a hydraulic or mechanical crane, for self-loading and unloading of logs. Most forwarders have been designed explicitly to utilize the latest information on ergonomics and to promote safety. They are frequently used in combination with mechanized felling and processing equipment, although this is not essential. Recommended practices for extraction with forwarders include the following:
Forwarder
- Forwarders work best when logs are approximately uniform in size.
- In comparison with ground skidders, the productivity of forwarders is less sensitive to extraction distance. Typically, therefore, the economic extraction distance is two to four times that of ground-skidding equipment. The density of haul roads required in the forest can thus be reduced when forwarders are used instead of skidders.
-Forwarders require a somewhat better track than skidders because the load must be kept relatively level in order to avoid tipping. In hilly terrain, the forwarder tracks should go directly up and down the slope. Stumps and undergrowth in the track should be cut down to ground level, and the cut brush can be thrown in the track to help protect the soil. A modest amount of blading is necessary where forwarders are intended to travel along hillsides. It is generally unsafe to use them on tracks with grades that exceed about 30 to 40 percent (17° to 22°).
- High-flotation tyres should be used to reduce soil compaction in areas of wet or easily compacted soils.
- One justification for the use of forwarders is that the construction of landings is often unnecessary. The forwarder can unload its load of logs directly on to a truck or it can deck the logs alongside the haul road for later pick-up by the trucker.
- As with skid trails, forwarding tracks must be closed and protected from soil erosion when the operation has been completed. Drainage ditches and cross-drains should be constructed to divert water from the tracks, and exposed soil should be revegetated.
Cable extraction systems
Cable extraction systems are fundamentally different from other extraction systems. In cable systems, one or more suspended cables are used to convey logs from the felling site to the landing. The cables are operated by a winching machine (also called a yarder or hauler), which may be installed either at the landing or at the opposite end of the cableway, often on a ridgetop. In partial-cutting operations, a narrow corridor is cleared as a pathway for the operating cables, which are then strung along the corridor and suspended above the ground with a "spar tree" located near the winching machine. The spar tree can be either an actual tree or a steel tower. To obtain additional clearance above the ground, the cables may also be suspended in a "tail tree" located at the opposite end of the cableway. If necessary, intermediate supports for the cables can be provided by additional trees located at intervals along the cableway.
A great many different types of cable extraction systems have been developed in the century or so since the first systems were introduced. Differences among these systems include variations in the configuration of the cables as well as in the methods for conveying logs to the landing and for returning empty chokers to the felling site.
From an environmental point of view, cable systems that are considered to be low-impact systems generally fall into the category of "skyline" systems, also called cable-crane systems. These systems utilize a skyline cable, which serves as a support to elevate the load of logs above the ground. The skyline cable is mounted on the spar tree and runs to an anchor fixed at the opposite end of the cableway. A wheeled carrier mechanism, called a carriage, rides along the skyline cable to carry the load to the landing and to transport empty chokers back to the felling site. The load is attached to the carriage by another cable called the skidding line, and some mechanism is usually provided for increasing the length of the skidding line so that it can be pulled laterally out from the cableway to reach the logs that are to be yarded. The load is then skidded laterally to the cableway by reducing the length of the skidding line (usually by spooling it on to a drum). After the load
reaches the corridor, the carriage is conveyed to the landing. If the landing is uphill from the felling site, this is done by pulling the carriage uphill with a "mainline" cable powered by the winching machine. If the landing is downhill from the felling site, the load is moved to the landing by unspooling the main-line cable so that the load will travel to the landing under the force of gravity.
Although significant variations on this theme exist, in general, cable systems that can be classified as skyline or cable-crane systems have the following characteristics:
- an elevated skyline cable that is used to support the load of logs;
- a carriage riding along the skyline cable that conveys the load of logs to the landing and returns the empty chokers to the felling site;
- some mechanism for pulling line laterally from the cableway to reach the logs to be yarded, and for laterally yarding these logs to the skyline corridor;
- during "main yarding" along the skyline corridor, the load of logs remains either fully or partially suspended in the air, thus reducing or eliminating soil disturbance within the cableway;
- the power source does not travel along the ground as in the case of ground-skidding systems. An important advantage of cable systems in general, this permits cable systems to be used under more extreme conditions, such as steep terrain or in areas with permanently wet soils, where ground-skidding systems would be neither economically feasible nor environmentally acceptable.
One type of "skyline" cable system commonly used for extracting logs in steep terrain. This system has been set up to lower the logs to a landing near the "tail tree" at the bottom of the figure.
A skyline carriage with a fully suspended load of logs.
Two skyline corridors on a steep hillside (left). This is a natural forest in the tropics where selection harvesting has been completed and the logs have been extracted by skyline under full suspension. Skid trails in another part of the forest from which a similar volume per hectare has been removed but where extraction was done with crawler tractors (right). Note the much higher levels of soil disturbance and canopy opening.
Recommended practices for extraction with cable systems
- Cable extraction requires skilled personnel who are qualified to plan and lay out cable systems, as well as those who are capable of supervising and carrying out the actual extraction work. Much of the detailed planning can be done during the tactical harvest planning stage, as long as accurate, large-scale topographic maps are available. Whenever cable systems are to be used, it is essential that sufficient time be allotted to permit the necessary advance planning so that the operation can meet its environmental objectives at a reasonable cost. Managers should also recognize that, if planning is done properly, some areas of the forest will probably not be harvested even though they have been classified as production forest. Where the timber is less dense, the species less valuable or the topography too difficult, the most sensible choice may be to leave the forest un-harvested.
- Only skyline systems are recommended for most situations. Other cable systems, such as the "high-lead" system, which is commonly used in some parts of the world, do not adequately suspend logs above the soil, and because of this they cannot normally reach dogs that are more than a few hundred metres from the landing. Skyline systems, by comparison, can access timber at distances of up to 1 000 m or occasionally even more from the landing. This allows a considerable reduction in the density of haul roads required to serve a specific area of forest.
- Skyline systems, including both single-span and multispan configurations, are the only types of cable systems that are generally recommended for use in selection harvesting. In the past, high-lead systems were used extensively in Southeast Asia for selection harvesting of tropical forests on steep terrain. Occasionally, when the crew was highly skilled and closely supervised, these operations were quite satisfactory. For the most part, however, the damage to the residual stand was so extensive that high-lead logging was judged to be totally incompatible with selection harvesting in tropical forests. Some countries went so far as to ban the use of cable extraction systems altogether. In retrospect, this was a mistake; the damage caused by ground-skidding equipment operating in steep terrain is usually far greater than that caused even by high-lead systems. And when skyline systems are used with proper planning, training and operational control, impacts on soils and on the
residual stand can be as low as or lower than those of any extraction system except perhaps when helicopters are used.
- Winching machines with power capabilities that are appropriate for the terrain and the size of logs being extracted should be selected.
- Cable systems are not only used over steep terrain but also in areas such as swamp forests where ground-skidding equipment would cause environmental damage. In such situations, the yarder is typically mounted on a floating barge. Extreme care must be taken when harvesting operations are carried out in such areas because of the particularly fragile nature of their ecosystems.
- After harvesting has been completed, cross-drains should be constructed at intervals along any cableways or lateral yarding tracks where the soil has become exposed.
Aerial extraction systems
Balloon extraction systems
Helicopter extraction systems
Aerial extraction systems are those that fully suspend logs in the air throughout the entire extraction process. Skyline cable systems do not meet this criterion in general, because they do not normally suspend logs during the lateral phase of yarding, and the logs may also occasionally drag along the ground at intervals during main yarding, even when full suspension is intended, depending upon the length of the logs and the amount of clearance between the ground and the skyline cable.
Two types of aerial log-extraction systems are currently in use: balloon systems and helicopter systems. Several others have been proposed, but thus far they have not got past the experimental stage.
Balloon extraction systems
These are cable systems that use balloons filled with a lighter-than-air gas (usually helium) to provide the lifting force that fully suspends the load of logs during extraction. Cables spooled on to drums that are mounted on a winching machine are used to pull the balloon and its load to the landing and to return the balloon, with the empty chokers, to the felling site. Experience with balloon logging suggests that it is only feasible for clear-felling operations, although new developments currently being tested may change this in the future. Balloon logging also requires cutting units that are large enough to cover the high fixed costs associated with installing the balloon system at a landing. Where these conditions can be met, balloon systems cause very little soil disturbance and can reduce road construction substantially since they are capable of reaching very long distances from the landing. Because of the high initial investment and the specialized equipment and crew
skills required, however, very few balloon extraction systems are currently in use.
Helicopter extraction systems
Conceptually, these are quite similar to ground-skidding systems, except that, because the transport machines are helicopters, logs are flown from the felling site to the landing rather than being skidded along the surface of the ground. Helicopters used for logging can be grouped into three classes: those with rated lifting capacities for external loads of 2.7 tonnes or less are considered "light-lift" helicopters; those that can lift 2.7 to 5.4 tonnes are "medium-lift" helicopters; and those with greater lifting capacities (currently up to 11.3 tonnes for commercially available, nonmilitary aircraft) are "heavy-lift" machines.
Helicopter logging is accomplished by suspending below the aircraft a "tether line" (also called a tag line) of wire rope to which chokers can be attached. In some operations a grapple hook is used rather than chokers. The tether line is typically between 30 and 100 m in length, depending upon topography and the height of any trees above which the helicopter must hover, among other factors. Long chokers are used, and these are pre-set. The ends are then brought together to make up loads that are estimated as being slightly less than the helicopter's lifting capacity.
Typical configuration of a balloon extraction system.
When a load has been prepared, the helicopter flies to the hooking point, lowers the tether line to the ground and hovers while the load is attached to the tether line. Upon receipt of a signal from the loadmaster, the helicopter lifts the load above any residual trees and then flies to the landing. The logs are placed on the landing and the chokers are released by remote control from the aircraft. The helicopter then returns to the felling site for the next load of logs. A round trip between the landing and the felling site typically takes from two to five minutes.
It is widely recognized that direct operating costs for helicopter logging are many times higher than those for other types of extraction systems. Fuel costs alone are enormous - the largest heavy-lift helicopters consume nearly 2000 litres of high-octane fuel per hour! Added to this, the cost of the aircraft itself, replacement parts, maintenance, insurance and crew salaries can make hourly expenditures for a single heavy-lift helicopter higher than those for a medium-sized sawmill. On the other hand, the great range of the helicopter, which can serve an area several kilometres in radius from the landing, makes it possible to eliminate a great deal of road construction and thereby reduce not only costs but also a major source of environmental damage.
In addition, helicopter extraction causes virtually no soil disturbance and no dam age to residual trees other than that which occurs during the cutting operation or that is associated with the landings and transport operations. For some situations, therefore, particularly where high-value timber is to be extracted, the considerable cost of helicopter logging can be justified by the combination of savings from reduced road construction and the ecological value of very low environmental impacts.
Certainly, helicopter logging is practical only in special circumstances, but where those circumstances apply it can be an attractive alternative to other extraction systems.
Recommended practices for helicopter extraction
- Helicopters, especially heavy-lift machines, are capable of production rates that far exceed those associated with most other extraction systems. An aircraft that delivers 5 m³ of logs to the landing every four minutes will produce 400 m³ in eight hours, even allowing 20 minutes per hour for maintenance and refuelling. In good weather and with optimal flying and working conditions, helicopter operations have been reported that have produced as much as 2 000 m³ in a day. Such high production rates put a great deal of stress on haul roads, work crews, transport vehicles and support facilities. Operations involving helicopter extraction must therefore be planned thoroughly from the very beginning, and plans must be flexible enough to adjust to rapidly changing conditions.
Typical configuration of a helicopter extraction system
- Because of the high production rates, the number of workers employed on helicopter operations is necessarily much larger than for most other logging systems. This means, for instance, that a large number of workers may be involved in cutting operations that are being carried out simultaneously over a wide area. Coordination and constant supervision are therefore especially important in order to reduce hazards while at the same time maintaining productivity at the rate needed to avoid costly delays.
- Operations must be planned so that helicopters carrying suspended loads never fly directly above workers on the ground and never follow a route that would put workers in danger from dropped or aborted loads. Helicopter crews must be made aware of the fact that workers using motorized equipment such as chainsaws may not be able to hear the helicopter approaching.
- Crews working on the ground cutting timber and pre-setting chokers are not always visible from the air, especially in partial-cutting operations. Where there is a possibility that such crews may be working near the helicopter's flight path, provision should be made for the crews to report their location to the aircrew at regular intervals or whenever necessary. Usually this is done by providing all crews with two-way radios and teaching them the protocol required for radio communication. This also has the advantage of providing a means of rapid communication in the event of an emergency. Wearing brightly coloured clothing can also help make the field workers visible to the aircrew.
-Although the safety records of helicopter logging operators are better on average than those of ground-skidding operators, serious accidents have occurred in helicopter logging, sometimes even involving multiple fatalities. Also, because of the system's high production rates, pressure to work too swiftly may increase the frequency of accidents among the cutting crews and on the landing. This tendency must be countered by a continual emphasis on safety and good working methods.
- The safety of bystanders and visitors to the logging site must be considered with helicopter logging operations since these operations inevitably attract the attention of the public. A useful precaution is to construct a viewing area some distance from the landing, where visitors can get a good overview of the operation without being endangered.
-The helicopter must never fly over areas of habitation while carrying a load of logs or some other suspended load.
-When the helicopter's flight path is likely to carry it over or near a roadway, flag bearers must be stationed along the road in positions that will permit them to prevent entry into the area of danger until after the helicopter has passed. The operation should be organized in such a way as to minimize delays and inconvenience to the public that may result from such stoppages.
- Landings where logs are to be delivered by helicopters must be of sufficient size to accommodate a large volume of logs and also to permit trucks, log loaders and workers on the landing to stay well away from the drop zone when the helicopter is delivering its load.
- Dust can be a major problem on helicopter landings during dry periods, and may interfere with the safe operation of the helicopter. A water truck may be needed to wet down the landing periodically, especially in the log-drop zone and nearby areas.
- In addition to the landing, one or more graded areas must also be prepared as landing pads for periodic refuelling and maintenance of the helicopter. Vegetation must be cleared away from these areas to permit adequate clearance by the helicopter's rotor blades during landing and take-off. Dust on the pads must be controlled, and the pads must be kept clear of objects that could be knocked loose by the down draft and fly up into the rotor blades. The refuelling pad in particular must be located sufficiently far away from the landing that it will not constitute a hazard to personnel on the landing. Fuel storage must be provided in a way that will minimize the danger of explosion and fire, and dykes must be built around fuel containers to prevent spilled fuel from contaminating streams or groundwater supplies. Where possible, the maintenance pad should be lower in elevation than the landing and, with respect to prevailing winds, its location should facilitate an emergency
landing of the helicopter if required. The flight path into and out of the refuelling and maintenance pads should not pass over roadways or other public areas nor over dwellings.
- Because of the large number of logging trucks, fuel trucks and other vehicles that will enter and depart from helicopter logging areas, road signs must be placed near junctions where vehicles will enter public roads to warn the public that heavy truck traffic may be encountered.
Recommended practices for extraction with draught animals
Log extraction with draught animals continues to be an economically attractive choice in many areas, sometimes even in industrialized countries. As compared with ground-skidding equipment, the use of draught animals, such as elephants, water buffaloes, oxen, horses and mules, has been shown to reduce soil disturbance, soil compaction and damage to residual trees significantly. Direct impacts are generally limited to the extremely narrow skidding paths used by the animals. Animal skidding is particularly advantageous for thinnings or for pulpwood harvesting, where relatively small logs are to be extracted or where products from pit sawing or other onsite processing are to be transported.
- Planning for animal skidding must allow for short extraction distances (typically 200 m or less) and relatively gentle slopes. Depending on the type of animal used, a maximum slope of about 20 to 30 percent (14° to 17°) is often suggested when skidding downhill and 10 to 15 percent (6° to 9°) when skidding uphill.
Head yoke for oxen logging
Elephant logging: hooking chokers to a load of logs.
Elephant logging: pulling a load to the landing.
- Proper harnesses are essential in order to prevent injury to the animals and to avoid cumulative discomfort over long working periods. Head yokes are recommended for ox teams as they avoid chafing of the skin and allow the animals' full pulling power to be employed.
- Devices such as skidding pans, sledges and sulkies can greatly improve productivity in animal skidding because they reduce skidding resistance and thus allow larger loads to be pulled.
- For operations in natural forest it is usually necessary to clear skidding paths for the animals. Undergrowth should be cut close to the ground by hand and thrown clear of the path. Obstacles that could pose a danger to the animals should be removed, and any stumps in the path should be trimmed to ground level.
- Cutting must normally be coordinated with skidding, and both should start at the back of the cutting unit (farthest from the landing) and proceed towards the landing. This avoids the animals having to climb over logging slash left behind by the felling crew.
- Animals must be fed, watered and rested at regular intervals while working or they will refuse to continue. Some animals, such as elephants and water buffaloes, require frequent baths during hot weather in order to dissipate the body heat generated by hard physical activity.
- Depending upon climatic conditions, terrain and other factors, animals may not be able to work every day and they may require relatively short working days. Often, a 20 to 25 percent reserve of animals is recommended in order to ensure that a sufficient number is available to work on any particular day.
- Although horses work quite well for log extraction in temperate climates, they are not generally suited for work in hot, humid climates such as those common to tropical forests.
-Regular veterinary care is essential whenever draught animals are used in forest work, and feeding practices must ensure that the animals' nutritional requirements are being met fully.
- After the skidding operation has been completed, skidding paths should be examined and, where necessary, cross-drains should be constructed to divert water from the paths into the surrounding vegetation.
Other extraction systems
Manual extraction
Pit sawing
Extraction by chute
Extraction by winch truck
Extraction by water
A wide variety of extraction systems have been developed for timber harvesting. Many of these are quite low-impact systems, if only because they are typically used on a small scale and thus their impacts are not widespread. No attempt is made here to recommend practices for all of these systems; there are simply too many of them and, for the most part, their application is limited to specific local regions. A few of the more common ones, however, are described below.
Manual extraction
The movement of logs by human labour is increasingly rare, except on farms where it persists even in industrialized countries. In general, it is practical only where labour costs are low, extraction distances are short and the logs or other pieces of wood being extracted are light enough to be handled easily by humans. Most manual extraction is carried out in connection with fuelwood harvesting, certain types of thinnings in plantation forests, agroforestry operations and in forests where trees seldom attain large sizes, such as most mangrove forests. Efficiency and safety can be improved both by using lifting hooks, levers and other hand tools or by pulling logs with the aid of manual sulkies. In some man grove forests, wheelbarrows have been used to assist in manual extraction. These are pushed along narrow plank roads built in the extraction areas by hand.
Manual extraction of logs from a thinning operation, using a hand sulky to reduce human effort and improve productivity.
Polyethelene chute for extracting small logs from a thinning operation.
Pit sawing
Although technically it cannot be considered "extraction", pit sawing is a manual method of converting logs into sawn wood on-site. The sawn planks are then carried out manually or by animals. Environmental impacts associated with pit sawing are usually very low, although where pits are dug the soil is exposed and erosion can begin. The impact is usually very localized, however, and its effects can be minimized by locating pits well away from streams. A more significant problem with pit sawing is the difficulties of ensuring that the pit sawyers do not overutilize the resource by cutting all of the high-value trees. Because they only work on one tree at a time, usually using hand tools, pit sawyers can be difficult to find in the forest. Ensuring that they are cutting only designated crop trees requires constant surveillance. Equally important is the protection and safety of pit sawyers when preparing and sawing the logs.
Extraction by chute
In steep terrain, gravity can be useful in rolling or sliding logs downhill from the felling site to a haul road. To reduce damage to residual timber and concentrate the logs at intervals along the haul road, chutes may be used to control the path followed by the logs. Commonly these chutes are constructed from timber or made from commercially available polyethelene tubing cut into U-shaped sections and fastened together to form a long pathway. Safety is a potential problem whenever chutes are used. Signs or flag bearers must be posted near the bottom of the chute to warn passing traffic of possible danger.
Extraction by winch truck
A common extraction method in some parts of the tropics uses light trucks with powered winches to load logs for transport right at the cutting site. A low-grade hauling road is usually cleared manually so that the truck can be driven up to the tree. Logs are loaded on to the truck with the winching system, and the truck is then driven to the next cutting site. This process continues until a full load is obtained. The truck is then driven directly to the final destination or to a landing where the logs can be consolidated into larger loads for transport by heavier trucks. Under the right soil and terrain conditions, winch-truck extraction can be a relatively low-impact system. Soil disturbance and damage to residual trees are typically less than when crawler tractors are used, for example. In general, however, the system should not be used in swampy areas or on steep slopes.
<section>9</section>
Extraction by water
In areas where forests are inundated with seasonal rains, as in parts of the Amazon basin, or located in tidal or mangrove areas, water can be used to extract logs from felling sites. Normally, cutting is done during the dry season or at low tide, and the logs are floated out as the water rises. Loss of logs can be high with such systems, so careful control is needed to avoid wasting a large part of the resource. For dense timbers, felling must be done well in advance so that the logs have enough time to dry out and float better as a result. In tidal areas, the trees may need to be killed in advance of the operation, usually by girdling, and then left to dry out for a period before cutting and extraction. Especially dense logs may need to be tied securely on to rafts of more buoyant logs to prevent them from sinking. Environmental impacts with water-extraction systems include those associated with direct felling damage as well as eventual accumulation of bark, scattered
residues on the river banks or woody debris in the waterways. Where tidal flushing occurs or streams are flowing quickly, this accumulation should not pose problems. The decay of bark and woody debris removes free oxygen from the water, however, and this can adversely affect aquatic life, especially in slow-moving streams. Perhaps more significant are environmental problems associated with the extensive cutting of noncommercial trees for use as floaters in rafts. One estimate is that for each commercial tree extracted, another tree was also felled. Soil damage along stream banks also occurs frequently when the logs slide or are rolled into the stream.
<section>a</section>
Chapter 6 Landing operations
What they are
Guiding principles
Objectives
Potential consequences of improper landing operations
Recommended practices
What they are
Landings are collection areas to which logs are delivered during the extraction process. At the landing, these logs may be sorted, possibly stored temporarily in log decks, and then assembled for transport to the processing facility or other final destination.
Guiding principles
Landings are busy, noisy places, with one or more large machines often in motion and several chainsaws working to trim uneven logs or remove limbs that were missed by the cutting crew. They can tee muddy, dusty and littered with debris, and may include decks of logs that have been stacked several metres high. In short, they are places of potentially high risk and must be regarded as such. Proper planning and layout can help reduce the risks and ensure that operations proceed efficiently and safely.
Landings are also potential sources of water pollutants and soil sediments. They are relatively large areas of bare soil that may have been surfaced with rock or gravel. Because they represent the interface between extraction and transport, landings are the site to which fuel and spare parts are normally delivered. Fuel spills and oil contamination are potential hazards, therefore, and must be guarded against.
Objectives
Well-designed, properly constructed and efficiently operated landings should: ensure the safety and protection of personnel and equipment working on the landing or nearby;
- minimize the total cost of landing construction and maintenance;
- minimize the size of the landing and the amount of earthwork required during construction;
- protect streams and groundwater from sediments or pollutants;
- transfer to the transport system all logs delivered to the landing, without significant loss of volume or deterioration in quality.
Potential consequences of improper landing operations
Consequences of improper landing operations may include:
- a poor safety record with high insurance or compensation costs;
- high construction, maintenance or operating costs;
- sedimentation or pollution of nearby streams or groundwater;
- loss of log volume or value.
Recommended practices
- The location and design of landings should be done during harvest planning, at the same time as the roads are being located and designed.
Knuckle-boom loader
Self-loading truck
Front-end loader
- In cases where landings are not needed at all, logs can be decked temporarily at the roadside and loaded on to trucks from there. This reduces costs and the inevitable soil erosion associated with large areas of cleared soil. The use of knuckle-boom loaders or self-loading trucks can facilitate roadside landings as they require less space for man&#156;uvring than do front-end loaders.
Front-end loader placing a large tropical hardwood log on to a truck in preparation for transport. Landings such as this one are major points of activity and must therefore be properly planned and constructed. Safety should also be of paramount importance. In this photograph, two people without helmets or other safety gear are standing in an exposed position. Also, the front-end loader has only a shade canopy rather than a full roll-over protection structure.
- Where possible, landings should be located on slightly sloping ground. A gradient of about 2 percent (1°) is often recommended. The best sites for landings are open areas away from streams. The landings should be well drained, with drainage channels emptying into surrounding vegetation and not directly into streams. They normally should be at least 30 m from any running stream or farther if in steep terrain. Ditches and culverts should be provided on the uphill sides of landings, especially where skid trails enter, to prevent runoff water from accumulating on the landing during rainy periods.
- Landings should be as small as possible, taking into account the need to unhook logs from extraction equipment, sort and store them temporarily and provide for the loading of trucks or other means of transport. Between 500 and 1000 m² is often suggested as a reasonable size for many situations when large logs are being handled. Smaller logs and less mechanized extraction systems require less landing space.
- Helicopters and highly mechanized logging systems will typically require larger landings in order to ensure the safety of landing personnel and to prevent the landing from "plugging up" and disrupting extraction operations.
- Within the landing, specific areas should be clearly designated for various pieces of equipment and types of activity. For safety reasons, access to the landing should be limited to personnel whose presence is essential to the operation.
- Measures should be taken to avoid spillage of fuel and lubricants during refuelling or repair and maintenance work. Refuelling areas should be dyked to prevent pollutants from entering streams or groundwater.
A simple winching system that can be used for loading logs on to trucks: pulley; support cable; log-loading tongs; lifting cable attached to a powered winch.
- When landing operations are to continue after dark, it is essential that adequate lighting systems be installed to ensure safety.
- Periodic dust control is required during dry periods for almost all landings, even in very wet climates. Usually a watering truck is adequate for this. In very dusty areas, personnel should be provided with dust masks, and air filters on motorized equipment must be changed frequently.
- Loaded trucks should be checked prior to departure to ensure that binders are securely fastened, that the load is well positioned on the vehicle and that tyres and brakes are in good condition.
- Landings should be rehabilitated after use. This includes disposing of slash and debris, ripping the soil, if necessary, and establishing vegetation.
<section>b</section>
Chapter 7 Transport operations
What they are
Guiding principles
Objectives
Potential consequences of improper transport operations
Recommended practices
What they are
The most common form of log transport from forest to processing facility is by road, using logging trucks. Water and rail systems are other forms of log transport that are used in some parts of the world. Often where water or rail systems are employed, trucks are used to transport logs from the landing to the point where they will be transferred to the water or rail system.
Guiding principles
Environmentally, the transport of logs from the landing to the processing facility or other final destination is a relatively low-impact operation. Most of the direct damage is caused by the transport infrastructure (usually roads), rather than by transport operations. Nevertheless, certain operating practices can be damaging and a threat to public safety. They can also increase costs and reduce the value of the logs delivered to the final destination. Transport costs often represent one half or more of the total timber harvesting cost.
Objectives
Log-transport operations should:
- ensure the safety of transport workers and the public;
- minimize the cost of transporting logs to the final destination;
- prevent damage to transport infrastructure such as roads and bridges;
- minimize air pollution and prevent spillage of fuel and lubricants;
- deliver all logs to the final destination without significant loss of volume or deterioration in quality.
Potential consequences of improper transport operations
Some potential consequences of improper transport operations include:
- civil or criminal penalties for actions that endanger the public safety;
- high transport costs;
- rapid depreciation of transport machinery;
- excessive costs for repair or reconstruction of infrastructure;
- sedimentation or pollution of streams or groundwater;
- excessive air pollution;
- loss of log volume or value;
- public opposition to log-transport operations.
Recommended practices
- Roads must be properly maintained at all times, and this is especially important when they are being used for transport operations involving heavy trucks. Under the stress of heavy loads, excessive erosion as well as safety problems will result if roads are inadequately maintained.
- All truck transport should be carried out in a manner that will minimize road damage. This requires tailoring the transport operations to the bearing capacity of the road. For example, on roads and landings without adequate gravel or other protective surfacing, truck transport may need to be halted during heavy rains and not resumed until the roads have had a chance to dry. After the road surface has drained, exposure to the sun for as little as one hour can substantially reduce road damage. Even in regions where heavy rainfall is common, the number of dry days, or dry parts of days, is usually sufficient to permit a reasonably regular schedule of operations to be maintained.
- Earth roads and landings should not be used at all during periods of heavy rainfall. Roads that are to be used during the rainy season should be properly drained and provided with a rock base and a surface of gravel or other durable material.
Small logging truck
Tractor and semi-trailer for use with longer logs
- The weight of truck loads should be determined not only according to the capacity of the truck (as determined by its power rating, suspension system, transmission, axle spacing and braking system), but also according to the capacity of the roads and drainage structures over which the loaded truck will pass. This type of information should also be considered when selecting trucks to be used in a particular area.
- When trucking operations must be carried out on roads with low bearing strength, consider decreasing tyre pressure or installing central tyre-inflation systems on trucks. Such systems can greatly reduce damage to the road structure while simultaneously lessening depreciation of the vehicle itself.
- Long-distance transport of logs often includes travel on public roads or through populated areas. Both safety and the public's image of logging traffic are thus of paramount concern. Only trained and properly licensed drivers should be permitted to drive logging trucks, and traffic regulations must be respected at all times.
- Truck loads must be properly balanced and secured by binders that are of sufficient capacity to prevent logs from falling off the truck if the load should shift in transit.
- Trucks must never be overloaded. Where feasible, trucks should be equipped with load cells so that both the total load and the distribution of weight on the various axles can be checked.
- Any vehicle used for transporting logs should be properly maintained, and its brakes and other parts inspected regularly for mechanical soundness.
- Trucks should be equipped with proper mufflers and exhaust systems to reduce noise and air pollution.
- When trucks are refuelled in the forest, the refuelling area should be located well away from streams and dyked to prevent spilled fuel or other contaminants from entering streams or groundwater.
- Roads where logging trucks are being used should always be posted with warning signs, especially at points where trucks will enter public roads.
- Trucks should be fitted with wide mudflaps to prevent stones or other potentially damaging objects from being thrown up into the path of vehicles following behind them.
- During dry periods, dust-control measures must be implemented on forest roads as needed to ensure the safe transit of all vehicles and the comfort and safety of people living nearby.
- When water transport is used, special care must be taken in constructing and maintaining the area where the logs will be dumped into the water or loaded on to barges. If possible, a sealed surface should be used for the dumping or docking area. If this is not feasible, the area should be surfaced with well-graded gravel and compacted thoroughly before use. Mats or ramps can also be used to reduce damage to the ground surface. Sediment traps or diversion ditches should be used to prevent runoff water from flowing directly into the stream. Bark and other debris should be periodically cleared away and moved to a disposal site from where it cannot enter the stream.
Drainage structures need not be expensive; the only requirement is that they be effective.
Water transport of logs.
- Log rafts should be securely bound in order to prevent the loss of logs and to ensure the safety of other traffic using the waterway. Flags and lights for night travel should be used to identify the front and rear points of the raft clearly in order to avoid collisions. Large rafts should be towed or pushed by boats with sufficient power to control safely the speed and direction of the raft.
- To ensure the maximum utilization of harvested timber, logs should be individually branded and tallied in the forest, and the brands and tally sheets should be checked at the landing as well as at the delivery point.
<section>c</section>
Chapter 8 Harvesting assessment
What it is
Guiding principles
Objectives
Potential consequences of inadequate harvesting assessment
Recommended practices
What it is
A harvesting assessment is a systematic check undertaken to determine the degree to which a harvesting operation has followed the harvesting plan and met its stated objectives while complying with established standards of practice. Such assessments may be undertaken while the operation is still under way (in-process assessment) or after its completion (postharvest assessment).
Guiding principles
Harvesting assessments provide feedback about the quality of forest harvesting operations. They may be undertaken regularly for every harvesting operation or for selected operations chosen at random. They are an essential requirement of sustainable forest management.
Harvesting assessments should be carried out by qualified staff in the presence of the managerial and supervisory personnel responsible for the harvesting operation.
In-process assessments permit the observation of workers and equipment in action and allow immediate corrective steps to be taken if needed. Postharvest assessments concentrate on the measurement of impacts and the degree to which standard practices have been followed. Such assessments should result in a written report that is to be provided to the forest management company or agency, relevant government authorities and the logging crews.
Objectives
Harvesting assessments should primarily:
- check the effectiveness of techniques used in directional felling and crosscutting of trees;
- determine whether cutting and extraction operations have followed the harvesting plan;
- quantify timber volume and value losses resulting from poor working practices such as leaving excessive stump heights, ineffective directional felling, poor crosscutting practices and improper extraction methods;
- compare the actual location and standards of roads, landings and skid trails with those in the harvesting plan and determine the reasons for any discrepancies;
- assess the condition of roads, landings and skid trails, especially with respect to drainage and rutting;
- quantify soil disturbance caused by the operation;
- predict the effects of the operation on future crop trees, regeneration, other vegetation and wildlife;
- determine whether protected areas, buffer strips and sites of cultural or landscape significance have remained intact;
- check whether equipment and working techniques have complied with safety regulations;
- determine whether used oil, chemicals and other waste and contaminants were properly disposed of;
- inspect work camps to determine whether health, sanitation and safety regulations were properly implemented.
Potential consequences of inadequate harvesting assessment
As a result of inadequate postharvest assessment:
- managers and government authorities will not know whether the harvesting operation achieved its objectives;
- poor harvesting practices will not be corrected and will result in environmental degradation, economic losses, high accident rates and low morale among the work crews.
Recommended practices
- Carry out the postharvest assessment after the harvesting operation has been completed and sufficient time has elapsed for major impacts to appear. This usually means eight to 12 months after the operation, including a full rainy season. Waiting this length of time will allow for more precise assessments of erosion problems, regeneration and the survival status of damaged trees. The assessment should be completed not more than two years after the end of the operation so that any corrective action needed can be initiated in a timely fashion.
- Compare the actual locations of roads, landings and skid trails with the locations indicated on the harvest plan. Note and explain any differences, possibly by interviewing the construction or operating crews.
- Assess the condition of roads, landings and skid trails. Permanent roads should be maintained in good condition; temporary roads and skid trails should be closed and cross-drains installed. If necessary, earth roads, skid trails and landings should be revegetated with grass or other ground cover.
- Determine the percentage of the operating area disturbed by roads, landings, skid trails and cable corridors. Measure average disturbance widths and compare them with standards specified in the harvest plan. Note any areas where enrichment planting or other rehabilitation is needed.
- Check whether buffer strips remain intact and water courses are free from excessive felling debris.
- Measure stump heights and assess logs that were crosscut from felled trees but left in the forest. Determine whether stumps and abandoned logs could have contributed commercial timber. If so, establish the reasons the timber was left by consulting with the supervisor or the logging crew.
- Identify any trees that were marked for felling but not felled. Determine the reason why such trees were left by interviewing the cutting crew responsible for that area of the operation.
- Locate any trees that were marked for retention but instead were felled or otherwise destroyed or damaged. If damaged, assess their condition and determine whether silvicultural treatments are needed to correct the situation.
- Inspect equipment to determine whether it corresponds to operational requirements and complies with safety regulations.
- Determine whether equipment operators have been certified as qualified to operate the equipment to which they have been assigned.
- Check the availability, suitability and use of personal protective equipment.
- Communicate the results of the harvesting assessment to the relevant authorities and to management, as well as to the harvesting crews. Financial incentives for good work, and penalties for work that does not meet standards, will reinforce the organization's commitment to sustainable harvesting practices.
<section>d</section>
Chapter 9 The forest harvesting workforce
What it is
Guiding principles
Objectives
Potential consequences of an inadequate workforce
Potential consequences of an inadequate workforce
Recommended practices
What it is
Management
Labour
The forest harvesting workforce includes two components: management and labour.
Management
Forest harvesting operations require effective management and administration, just like any other business. Personnel for large-scale industrial forest harvesting operations will normally include managers, administrative and support staff, planners and engineers and supervisors.
Labour
The workers who actually carry out the harvesting operations include field supervisors and foremen, forestry and engineering technicians, machine operators and their assistants, mechanics who repair and maintain machinery and manual workers.
Guiding principles
Although forest harvesting is increasingly machine-intensive, labour remains the most critical element for determining whether harvesting operations achieve the goals described in this model code of forest harvesting practice. If workers are to contribute effectively to these goals, they must be healthy, competent to carry out their jobs as expected and motivated to do the work properly and efficiently.
Effective work units have three important characteristics: they are well organized, the workers are healthy and motivated, and everyone in the organization knows his or her job and how to do it efficiently and safely.
The goals of managers, supervisors and workers should be aligned as much as possible so that they are mutually reinforcing.
All employees should enjoy satisfactory living and working conditions and preferably should be provided with stable employment throughout the year.
Special attention must be paid to safety in view of the potentially high risks inherent in timber harvesting. All operations, whether carried out by government employees or by private companies or contractors, should comply with the national labour standards.
Safety and efficiency can be complementary - the key is to do the job in the best way, rather than always striving for the highest level of output.
Three things are essential if workers are to apply correctly the principles outlined in this model code of forest harvesting practice:
- they must know what is to be done;
- they must know how to do it properly;
- they must be motivated to do it in the proper way.
Financial incentives can be very effective motivators. Where possible, such incentives should reward safe, effective work rather than being based solely on production.
Good work should also be acknowledged with non-financial awards; recognition from a worker's peers, for example, can be highly motivating.
Workers should be made to feel that their contributions are important and that by doing a good job they can contribute to a better environment. One way of accomplishing this is to provide training in the ecological basis of forestry so that workers will understand better the reasons for using practices that reduce environmental impacts.
Poor-quality housing is unhygienic, unattractive to workers with families and unsafe - note the oil drum and other refuse nearby.
Objectives
- Managers should set goals, allocate resources, coordinate work and ensure compliance with the organization's policies.
- Administrative staff should take care of facilities such as housing and offices, maintain records and accounts and perform clerical work.
- Planning staff should carry out the activities that are necessary for the preparation and updating of forest management and harvesting plans.
- Engineers should ensure the smooth operation and maintenance of tools and machines, and should design, construct and maintain roads and other structures.
- Supervisors should oversee the actual harvesting operations and monitor production to meet goals established in the forest management and harvesting plans.
- Under the supervision of the foremen, the labourers are actually responsible for carrying out the harvesting operations. They should carry out the prescribed operations efficiently and effectively; abide by safety regulations and environmental requirements; avoid damage to remaining trees and regeneration; and use and maintain equipment and tools properly.
Potential consequences of an inadequate workforce
An inadequate workforce can result in:
- poor organizational management, as evidenced by poorly set goals, improper allocation of resources, lack of coordination and failure of the work to conform to the organization's policies;
- improperly administered facilities or unreliable records and accounts;
- inadequate or incorrect planning;
- improperly designed and constructed roads and other facilities;
- unsuitable, unsafe and poorly maintained tools and machines;
Potential consequences of an inadequate workforce
An inadequate workforce can result in:
- poor organizational management, as evidenced by poorly set goals, improper allocation of resources, lack of coordination and failure of the work to conform to the organization's policies;
- improperly administered facilities or unreliable records and accounts;
- inadequate or incorrect planning;
- improperly designed and constructed roads and other facilities;
- unsuitable, unsafe and poorly maintained tools and machines;
- lack of supervisory control, with consequent failure to achieve the production goals specified in the management and harvesting plans;
- high levels of timber losses;
- excessive damage to remaining trees, regeneration and environmental values such as soils and streams;
- reduced service life and high repair costs for equipment;
- low labour and machine productivity and high production costs;
- high accident rates;
- a dissatisfied workforce and high labour turnover.
Recommended practices
- All personnel should be adequately trained for the job, and this training should include skill development, health and safety and environmental topics.
- Machine operators and cutters should undergo skill testing and be awarded a certificate of competence.
- Operations should be based on clearly established safety regulations. Workers should be provided with basic first-aid training, and provision should be made for the quick evacuation of workers to medical facilities in the event of serious injury.
- Personal protective equipment should be provided to workers, and they should be taught how to use it, how to maintain it and what it will do for them.
- Safety inspections should be carried out at regular intervals.
- All accidents with injury or equipment damage should be reported in writing on standardized forms. Serious accidents should be investigated immediately and preventive measures taken to avoid similar accidents in the future.
- Basic ergonomic requirements should be considered, including workplace layout, design of machines and tools, working techniques, working time, rest patterns and nutrition.
- Adequate standards of comfort, sanitation, food and welfare are essential. Workers should also be given opportunities for a satisfying social life outside working-hours, especially in situations where company housing or camp facilities are provided.
- In situations where workers have no other access to medical care and social services such as schools for their dependents, these should be provided by the employer.
- Social security should meet the general conditions prevailing in the country. Workers should be adequately compensated in the event of an accident.
- Fair wages should be negotiated with the workers' representatives. If possible, stable employment should be provided, with priority given to members of local communities.
- Relations between labour and management should be based on regular consultation, consensus and fairness on both sides.
<section>e</section>
Appendix: Workshop participants and reviewers
Participants at the Expert Consultation on Environmentally Sound and Sustainable Forest Operations
Participants at the International Meeting of Experts on Forest Practices
Reviewers who provided written comments and suggestions on the draft FAO model code of forest harvesting practice
Participants at the Expert Consultation on Environmentally Sound and Sustainable Forest Operations
Bislig, Surigao del Sur, the Philippines
10-15 October 1994
Eriberto C. Argete, DENR, Diliman Quezon City, the Philippines
Rodrigo Balmocena, DENR, Davao City, the Philippines
Jeanuel Besana, PICOP Resources Inc., Bislig, the Philippines
Rogelio D. Cantuba, DENR, Davao City, the Philippines
Victoria O. Casurra, PICOP Resources Inc., Bislig, the Philippines
Romeo D. Cristobal, Liberty Logging Corp., Santiago City, the Philippines
Constancio L. dela Cruz, Jr, PICOP Resources Inc., Bislig, the Philippines
Roberto A. Dormendo, PICOP Resources Inc., Bislig, the Philippines
Patrick B. Durst, FAO, Bangkok, Thailand
Neolito F. Frondozo, PICOP Resources Inc., Bislig, the Philippines
Rudolf Heinrich, FAO, Rome, Italy
Mike M. Jurvelius, FTP Finland, Helsinki, Finland
Renato L. Lapitan, UPLB College of Forestry, Laguna, the Philippines
Jose A. Lorenzo, Aras-asan Timber Company, Quezon City, the Philippines
Macorro L. Macumbal, DENR, Davao City, the Philippines
Ben D. Malto, Manila Seedling Bank, Diliman Quezon City, the Philippines
Antonio C. Manila, DENR, Diliman Quezon City, the Philippines
Danilo M. Morales, DENR, Diliman Quezon City, the Philippines
Bayani S. Nera, DENR, Diliman Quezon City, the Philippines
Philip Oakley, Stothert Shultz International Inc., Vancouver, British Columbia, Canada
Felixberto A. Orcullo, DENRCENRO, Bislig, the Philippines
Rogelio D. Paler, PICOP Resources Inc., Bislig, the Philippines
John Q. Pascua, Pacific Timber Corp., Manila, the Philippines
Eriberto S. del Pilar, Jr, Ventura Timber Corp., Davao City, the Philippines
Diomedes A. Racelis, UPLB College of Forestry, Laguna, the Philippines
Ricardo G. Santiago, PICOP Resources Inc., Bislig, the Philippines
Jurgen G. Schade, DFS Deutsche Forstservice, Feldkirchen, Germany
Bernardo C. Sinues, Surigao Development, Carmen, the Philippines
Manolito U. Sy, ERDB College, Laguna, the Philippines
Noel L. Tolentino, AGV & Associates Inc., Bislig, the Philippines
Avelino G. Veracion, AGV & Associates, Inc., Bislig, the Philippines
Emmanuel T. Veran, MERALCO, Manila, the Philippines
Participants at the International Meeting of Experts on Forest Practices
Feldafing. Germany
11-15 December 1994
E.A. Abeney, University of Science and Technology, Kumasi, Ghana
Paul Adams, Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon, United States
Robin aus der Beek, CATIECOSUDE, Turrialba, Costa Rica
Peter Blombäck, ILO, Geneva, Switzerland
Leon Bren, University of Melbourne, Creswick, Victoria, Australia
Dennis Dykstra, CIFOR, Bogor, Indonesia
Olli Eeronheimo, Finnish Forest Research Institute, Helsinki, Finland
John Garland, Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon, United States
Don Gasser, University of California, Berkeley, California, United States
Rihko Haarlaa, University of Helsinki, Finland
Roger Hay, Forestry Commission, Edinburgh, Scotland
Rudolf Heinrich, FAO, Rome, Italy
Paul Hof, FORM Ecology Consultants, Kampen, the Netherlands
K.B. Jusoff, University Pertanian Malaysia, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
Ralf Ludwig, DFS Deutsche Forstservice, Feldkirchen, Germany
Robert McCormack, CSIRO, Canberra, Australia
Rob Monster, International Vocational Training Centre, Arnhem, the Netherlands
Brian Murphy, British Columbia Ministry of Forests, Victoria, British Columbia, Canada
Peter Osberg, British Columbia Ministry of Forests, Victoria, British Columbia, Canada
Reinhard Pausch, University of Munich, Freising, Germany
Robert Scharpenberg, FAO, Rome, Italy
Otto Schlumbohm, Societé SOCOBOIS au Congo, Hannover, Germany
Heinrich Schmutzenhofer, IUFRO, Vienna, Austria
Otto Sedlak, Forest Department of Upper Austria, Linz, Austria
Bernt Strehlke, ILO, Geneva, Switzerland
Rien Visser, LIRO, Rotorua, New Zealand
Walter Warkotsch, University of Stellenbosch, South Africa
Reviewers who provided written comments and suggestions on the draft FAO model code of forest harvesting practice
Ed Aulerich, Forest Engineering Inc., Corvallis, Oregon, United States
D. Burger, GTZ, Eschborn, Germany
Cheah Leong Chew, FRIM, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia
Jean Clément, FAO, Rome, Italy
H. Dürrstein, Dendron, Muntelier, Switzerland
Olli Eeronheimo, Finnish Forest Research Institute, Helsinki, Finland
Elias, Bogor Agricultural University, Bogor, Indonesia
Rihko Haarlaa, University of Helsinki, Finland
M. Homola, GTZ, Eschborn, Germany
James O. Howard, USDA Forest Service, Washington, DC, United States
Logging Industry Research Organisation, Rotorua, New Zealand
John Paul McTague, Northern Arizona University, Flagstaff, Arizona, United States
D.I. Nicholson, Atherton, Queensland, Australia
Robert Ong, Forest Research Institute, Sandakan, Sabah, Malaysia
Christel Palmberg-Lerche, FAO, Rome, Italy
J.L. de Pedro, FAO, Rome, Italy
Francis E. Putz, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, United States
Robert B. Rummer, USDA Forest Service, Auburn, Alabama, United States
J.A. Sayer, CIFOR, Bogor, Indonesia
Bryce Stokes, USDA Forest Service, Auburn, Alabama, United States
Bernt Strehlke, ILO, Geneva, Switzerland
Paul Vantomme, FAO, Rome, Italy
Paul Vockert, Bundesamt für Ernährung, Frankfurt, Germany
Iwan Wästerlund, Swedish University of Agricultural Science, Garpenberg, Sweden
John H. Wilhoit, Auburn University, Alabama, United States
<section>f</section>
Glossary
AAC
Annual allowable cut. The volume of timber that may be harvested from a particular area of forest in any one year. From the industrial forestry perspective, the AAC should be set at a level that provides the maximum harvest volume while ensuring that the prospects for future harvests do not deteriorate. When the impact of timber harvest on NWFP is considered, the AAC will be reduced in most cases, in comparison with a situation in which timber production is the sole consideration. This will depend upon the degree to which the timber harvest complements or competes with the production of NWFP, however. Similarly, consideration of the value of the forest's environmental and service functions will tend to reduce the AAC.
Advance regeneration
Small trees (seedlings and saplings) that are already present in the forest at the time a timber harvesting operation is being conducted. Also called advance growth.
Anchor
A stump or tree to which the end of the skyline cable in a cable yarding system is affixed.
Arch
A supporting device towed behind or mounted on a skidding vehicle and used to lift one end of a load of logs in order to reduce sliding resistance.
BA
Basal area. The cross-sectional area of the trees in a forest unit, usually measured at Dbh and expressed in m² per hectare. Commonly used as a measure of tree density in a forest.
Block
A large pulley used in cable logging to change the direction of the cables.
Bole
A tree stem that has grown to substantial thickness, capable of yielding saw logs, veneer logs or large poles.
Bucking
The act or process of transversely cutting the stem or branches of a felled tree into logs. Also called crosscutting.
Buffer strip
An area of forest, usually around streams, lakes, parks, major highways or other protected areas, from which all harvesting equipment and operations are excluded. Also called filter strip.
Buttress
A ridge of wood that develops in the angle between a lateral root and the base of a tree stem to provide lateral stability to the stem. Buttresses develop on many tree species in lowland evergreen rain forest, but occur less commonly in lower montane rain forest and semi-evergreen rain forest; they are comparatively rare in wet deciduous forest.
Cable
A flexible steel rope made up of numerous wire strands that are twisted helically together around a core of wire, wire rope, fibre, plastic or other material.
Cable yarding system
Any of a variety of terrain transport systems in which suspended cables are used to convey logs to the landing.
Cableway
The pathway along which logs are yarded with a cable yarding system. Also referred to as the cable corridor or skyline corridor.
Canopy
The part of the forest formed by the crowns of the dominant trees.
Choker
A noose of wire rope or chain that is wrapped around a log and then attached to a means of conveyance in order to bring the log to a landing.
Choker-setter
A worker employed to attach chokers to logs for extraction to a landing.
Clear-felling
A harvesting system in which all merchantable trees within a specified physical area of land are felled and no significant tree cover remains. Use is generally limited to plantations. See also monocyclic harvesting systems.
Climbers
Vines that either hang freely, are suspended from the forest canopy or adhere to the stems of trees by specialized roots. Free-hanging climbers with woody stems are often called big woody climbers or lianas (also spelled lianes). As they often bridge across several tree crowns, severe damage may result when one of the trees is felled. Climbers may represent important sources of food and habitat for animal species, however, and so should be cut only where necessary to reduce felling damage.
Corridor
See cableway.
Coupe
In English this term is sometimes used to refer to the AAC and sometimes to a specific area of land that is scheduled to be harvested within a specified period of time (often, but not always, one year). May also be referred to as a felling coupe or annual coupe.
Crosscutting
See bucking.
Cross-drain
A culvert, pipe or shallow channel laid diagonally across the surface of a road, skid trail or cableway in order to divert water from the cleared surface or from the roadside ditch.
Cutting
In timber harvesting, a compound term referring to the operations of felling, limbing, debarking and bucking.
Cutting cycle
See felling cycle.
Cutting unit
The area of forest from which timber is removed to a single landing. Also referred to as a setting or set-up.
Dbh
Diameter at breast height. The diameter of a tree measured at a standard reference point, usually 1.3 m above ground level on the uphill side of the tree after accumulated ground litter has been removed. For trees with large buttresses, a point above the main flare of the buttresses is often used to measure diameter; its abbreviation is Dab.
Debranching
See limbing.
Deck
See log deck.
Designated skid trails
A ground-skidding system in which skid trails are pre-planned and marked clearly on the ground, usually before felling commences. During the skidding operation, skidders are required to stay on the skid trails at all times. This means that each skidder must be equipped with a winch and sufficient cable to reach the logs that have been prepared for skidding.
Dominants
Trees whose crowns are in or above the main part of the forest canopy.
Drum
A spool around which cable is wound. Compare winch.
Emergents
Trees whose crowns extend above the general level of the forest canopy.
Erosion
The action of natural atmospheric conditions on any material exposed to them. In this paper, the term refers principally to the wearing away of soil by the physical and chemical action of water. See also sediment.
Extraction
The act or process of transporting logs from the felling site to a landing. Also referred to as terrain transport. Most extraction is done either by skidding or by yarding.
Felling
The act or process of severing a standing tree. Compare cutting.
Felling cycle
In selection (polycyclic) harvesting systems, the planned, recurring number of years between successive harvests on a specific, physical area of land. Compare with rotation. The harvesting activity that occurs at the end of the felling cycle is often referred to as a felling entry.
Filter strip
See buffer strip.
Forest fallow
See shifting cultivation.
Forest harvesting
See harvesting.
Forwarding
Transporting trees or logs by carrying them completely in the air rather than pulling or dragging them along the ground.
Grapple
A hinged mechanism capable of being opened and closed mechanically, which is used to grip logs during extraction or loading. Also referred to as a grapple hook in helicopter logging.
Ground skidding
See skidding.
Harvester
A machine that fells trees, delimbs them and crosscuts them into logs.
Harvesting
The aggregation of all operations, including pre-harvest planning and postharvest assessment, related to the felling of trees and the extraction of their stems or other usable parts from the forest for subsequent processing into industrial products. Also called timber harvesting.
Harvesting technology
The study or use of scientific and engineering principles in harvesting. In this model code of forest harvesting practices, the term refers broadly to the equipment and techniques, planning and control methodologies, scientific knowledge and engineering principles, education and training, and practices that contribute directly or indirectly to the success of harvesting operations.
Hauler
See yarder.
Industrial roundwood
Roundwood that is used for industrial purposes, either in its round form (e.g. as transmission poles or piling) or as raw material to be processed into industrial products such as sawn wood, panel products or pulp. See also roundwood.
Integrated arch
An arch that is securely mounted to the frame of a skidding vehicle.
Landing
A cleared area where logs are collected during extraction in preparation for transport to the processing facility or other final destination. Also called a ramp.
Lianas
See climbers.
Limbing
The act or process of severing the branches from the stem of a felled tree.
Log
Any section of the bole, or of the thicker branches, of a felled tree after limbing and bucking.
Log deck
A pile of logs, usually on a landing.
Logging
The act or process of felling and extracting timber from forests, especially in the form of logs.
Logging truck
A vehicle used to transport logs on roadways. Also referred to as a log truck.
Log transport
Conveyance of logs from the landing to the processing facility or other final destination.
Lumber
See sawn wood.
Manual felling
Felling of trees with non-motorized tools, such as axes and saws.
Mechanized felling
Felling of trees with specialized machines, such as feller-bunchers and harvesters.
Mixed broad-leaved forest
A forest with many different species of broad-leaved trees. Many tropical forests are of this type.
Monocyclic harvesting systems
Harvesting systems in which the crop trees are harvested all at once, at the end of the rotation. Intermediate entries (thinnings) may be made to remove trees that are not intended for the final crop, so that the crop trees will have access to more light and nutrients, and may thus grow to a larger size. Compare polycyclic harvesting systems.
Motor-manual felling
Felling of trees with motorized hand tools, usually chainsaws.
NWFP
Non-wood forest products. Defined in this paper as all biological material, other than industrial roundwood, that may be extracted from natural ecosystems, either for commercial purposes, for use within the household or for social, cultural or religious uses. Also referred to as non-timber forest products (NTFP).
Partial cutting
Any harvesting system in which not all merchantable crop trees are harvested. Compare clear-felling.
PFE
Permanent forest estate. The total area of forest land in a country that has been legally designated for retention as forest in perpetuity.
Pole
Roundwood of a diameter smaller than saw-log size, suitable - without further conversion - for supporting transmission lines or for rough construction.
Polycyclic harvesting systems
Harvesting systems in which crop trees are removed on a cycle of felling entries that occur more frequently than the rotation. In such systems, not all crop trees are removed during a particular felling entry; selection of those to be harvested and those to be retained may be based on Dbh (e.g. only those crop trees larger than 60 cm Dbh are to be removed) or other criteria. For this reason polycyclic systems are often referred to as selection systems. Compare monocyclic harvesting systems.
Processor
A machine that delimbs trees and crosscuts them into logs. Machines that do this and also fell the trees are called harvesters.
Ramp
See landing.
Rattan
A climbing palm of the subfamily Calamoideae. The stems are commonly used in the construction of furniture. Rattans occur both in Africa and in the Asia and the Pacific region and are of major economic importance as NWFP in Southeast Asia.
Residual tree
A tree of a commercial or potentially commercial species that remains after the harvest has been completed. Of particular significance in polycyclic harvesting systems. Also referred to as a remaining tree.
Resource
As used in this paper, any component of the natural environment that is recognized as having value or usefulness.
Rotation
The planned number of years between the formation or regeneration of a crop of trees and the time when the same crop is felled for final harvest. The age at the time of harvest is referred to as the rotation age when it coincides with the rotation and as the removal age when it does not. In selection harvesting systems, the terms mean exploitable age or mean harvesting age are sometimes used in place of rotation age.
Roundwood
Wood in its natural state as felled, with or without bark. It may be round, split, roughly squared or in other forms.
Saw log
A log considered suitable in size and quality for producing sawn wood.
Sawn wood
Sawn products produced from logs. Also called lumber.
Sediment
The material products of erosion (soil, sand, clay, gravel and rocks) brought down watercourses and suspended in the water or deposited in outwash fans or on flood plains.
Selection harvesting
See polycyclic harvesting systems.
Setting
See cutting unit.
Shifting cultivation
A method of cultivation in which a forest area is cleared of trees, burned to release mineral nutrients, farmed for a few years until the soils become too poor to sustain crops, and then abandoned.
Skid trail
The pathway over which logs are skidded in a ground-skidding extraction system. Referred to in some countries as a snig track.
Skidding
Terrain transport in which logs are dragged to the landing, rather than suspended in the air or carried on a vehicle. Also referred to as ground skidding or, in some countries, as snigging.
Skidding pan
A plate of metal, usually rounded in front, which is placed under the front end of logs being skidded to prevent them from digging into the ground.
Skyline carriage
A wheeled device that rides along a skyline and is used to support a load of logs in skyline yarding.
Skyline corridor
See cableway.
Skyline yarding system
A cable yarding system that makes use of a heavy wire rope (the skyline) that is stretched between two spar trees and used as a track for a skyline carriage.
Soil erosion
See erosion.
Spar tree
A tower, mast or tree used to elevate the cables in cable yarding systems.
Stem
The principal axis of a plant, from which buds and shoots develop. The stem of a large tree may also be called the bole.
Stump
The woody base of a tree that remains in the ground after felling.
Sulky
An open framework, mounted on wheels, which is used to suspend the leading ends of logs being extracted manually, with a ground-skidding system or with draught animals.
Tail tree
A spar tree located at the opposite end of the cableway from the yarder.
Terrain transport
See extraction.
Tether line
In helicopter logging, the line that is suspended beneath the helicopter to reach the load of logs. Also referred to as a tag line. Similar terms are used also in balloon logging.
Timber
Trees suitable for conversion into industrial forest products. Sometimes this term is used as a synonym for industrial roundwood, and it may also be used to refer to certain large sawn wood products (e.g. bridge timbers).
Timber harvesting
See harvesting.
Tower
A mast, usually of steel, used with cable extraction systems. Compare spar tree.
Trimming
See limbing.
Volume
The estimated or measured quantity of wood in a log or tree, commonly expressed in m³.
Winch
A powered drum used to reel in or pay out cable for hauling or hoisting.
Winching machine
See yarder.
Wire rope
See cable.
Yarder
A machine on which is mounted a system of winches that are used to convey logs from the felling area to the landing in a cable yarding system. Also referred to as a hauler or a winching machine.
Yarding
Terrain transport in which logs are conveyed to the landing by cable or aerial systems that have the capability of fully or partially suspending logs in the air during transit to the landing. An essential characteristic of yarding systems, as opposed to skidding systems, is that the yarding power source does not travel along the ground as is the case with ground skidding.
<section>g</section>
Bibliography
References on codes of forest practice and similar guidelines
Other references
References on codes of forest practice and similar guidelines
APA. 1993. Best management practices survey. Technical Release 93-R-37. Washington, DC, USA, American Pulpwood Association. 2 pp.
British Columbia Ministry of Forests. 1989. Interim harvesting guidelines for the interior of BC. British Columbia Ministry of Forests, Victoria, BC, Canada. 10 pp. (Unpublished draft)
Cameron, A.L. & Henderson, L.E., eds. 1979. Environmental considerations for forest harvesting. Canberra and Melbourne, Australia, Harvesting Research Group, CSIRO. 71 pp.
Deal, E.L. & Hamilton, R.A. 1990. Pocket guide to the forest practices guidelines related to water quality. Extension Forest Resources, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, USA. 31 pp.
DEC. 1985. Timber harvesting guidelines for New York. Leaflet LF-P185. New York State Department of Environmental Conservation, Albany, NY, USA. 8 pp.
FAO. 1977a. Guidelines for watershed management. Conservation guide I . Rome, FAO. 293 pp.
FAO. 1988a. FAO watershed management field manual: landslide prevention measures. Conservation Guide 13/4. Rome, FAO. 156 pp.
FAO. 1989a. Forest management research and development, Papua New Guinea: project findings and recommendations. Project FO:DP/ PNG /84/ 003, Terminal report. Rome, FAO. 59 pp.
FAO. 1989b. Watershed management field manual: road design and construction in sensitive watersheds. Conservation Guide 13/5. Rome, FAO. 196 pp.
FAO & ILO. 1980. Chainsaws in tropical forests. FAO Training Series No. 2. Published jointly by FAO, Rome, Italy, and the International Labour Organisation, Geneva, Switzerland. 96 pp.
FERIC. 1984. Handbook for ground skidding and road building in British Columbia. Vancouver, BC, Forest Engineering Research Institute of Canada. 41 pp.
Fiji Ministry of Forests. 1990. Fiji national code of logging practice. Ministry of Forests, Suva, Fiji. 58 pp. (Plus 7-page booklet on chainsaw use and safety)
Forest Stewardship Council. 1993. Principles and criteria of natural forest management. Oaxaca, Mexico, Forest Stewardship Council. 13 pp.
Georgia Forestry Association. 1993. Best management practices. Georgia Trend, 8(11): 80.
Ghana Forestry Department. 1992. Logging manual for forest management in Ghana. Forestry Department, Accra, Ghana. 13 pp.
Green, R. & Tagamasau, A.1992. A blueprint for sustainable use of PNG's forests: definitions and indicators of progress. Report of a workshop for Papua New Guinea. Canberra, Australia, CSIRO Division of Wildlife and Ecology. 37 pp.
Hamilton, L.S. & Snedaker, S.C., eds. 1984. Handbook for mangrove area management. Published jointly by the East-West Center, Honolulu, HI, USA; Gland, Switzerland, IUCN; Paris, France, UNESCO; and Nairobi, Kenya, UNEP. 123 pp.
Hogan, B. & Clinch, B. 1991. Montana forestry best management practices: forest stewardship guidelines for water quality. Publication EB0096. Montana State University Extension Service, Bozeman, MT, USA. 33 pp.
Initiative Tropenwald. 1993. Testkriterien zur Erfassung und Bewertung von Waldwirtschaftsbetrieben der Tropen. Berlin, Germany, initiative Tropenwald. 29 pp.
ITTO. 1990. ITTO guidelines for the sustainable management of natural tropical forests. ITTO Technical Series No. 5. Yokohama, Japan, International Tropical Timber Organization. 18 pp.
ITTO. 1992. Criteria for the measurement of sustainable tropical forest management. ITTO Policy Development Series No.3. Yokohama, Japan, International Tropical Timber Organization. 5 pp.
IUCN. 1980. World conservation strategy. Gland, Switzerland, World Conservation Union. (Portfolio of 3 booklets and 5 maps)
IUCN. 1990. The management of tropical moist forest lands: ecological guidelines. 2nd ed. Gland, Switzerland, World Conservation Union. 69 pp.
Jones, G.T. 1993. A guide to logging aesthetics. Publication NRAES-60. Northeast Regional Agricultural Engineering Service, Cooperative Extension. Ithaca, NY, USA. 29 pp.
Kochenderfer, J.N. 1970. Erosion control on logging roads in the Appalachians. Research Paper NE-158. USDA Forest Service, Northeastern Forest Experiment Station, Upper Darby, PA, USA. 28 pp.
Korsgaard, S. 1985. Guidelines for sustained yield management of mixed dipterocarp forests of South East Asia. FAO Project GCP/RAS/106/JPN, Field Document No. 8. Bangkok, Thailand, FAO. 78 pp.
Lewis, T.1991. Developing timber harvesting prescriptions to minimize site degradation. Land Management Report No. 62. British Columbia Ministry of Forests, Victoria, BC, Canada. 64 pp.
Newton, C.M., Brynn, D.J., Capen, D.E., Clausen, J.C., Donnelly, J.R., Shane, J.B., Jr, Thomas, P.A., Turner, T.L. & Vissering, J.E. 1990. Impact assessment of timber harvesting activity in Vermont. University of Vermont, School of Natural Resources, in cooperation with Vermont Department of Forests, Parks and Receation, and Associated Industries of Vermont. Burlington, VT, USA. 138 pp.
OFIA. 1992. Guiding principles and code of forest practices. Toronto, ON, Canada, Ontario Forest Industries Association. 12 pp.
Oregon Department of Forestry. 1992. Forest practice rules. Oregon Department of Forestry, Forest Practices Section, Salem, OR, USA. 72 pp.
OTA. 1984. Technologies to sustain tropical forest resources. OTA-F-214. US Congress, Office of Technology Assessment, Washington, DC, USA. 344 pp.
Packer, P.E. 1967. Criteria for designing and locating logging roads to control sediment. Forest Sci., 13: 2-18.
Pancel, L., ed. 1993. Tropical forestry handbook. Berlin, Germany, Springer-Verlag. 1 738 pp. (Two volumes)
Poore, D. & Sayer, J. 1990. The management of tropical moist forest lands: ecological guidelines. 2nd ed. Gland, Switzerland, World Conservation Union. 69 pp.
Queensland Forest Service. Undated. Guidelines for the selective logging of rainforest areas in north Queensland state forests and timber reserves. Queensland Forest Service, Brisbane, Queensland, Australia. 12 pp.
Rainforest Alliance. 1993. Generic guidelines for assessing natural forest management. New York, NY, USA, Smart Wood Certification Program, Rainforest Alliance. 8 pp.
UNEFOR. 1994. Código de conducta. Unión Nacional de Empresarios Forestales. Revista Forestal Centroamericana, 3(7). 50 pp.
Vaughan, L., Visser, R. & Smith, M. 1993. New Zealand forest code of practice. 2nd ed. Rotorua, New Zealand, Logging Industry Research Organisation (LIRO). 102 pp
Washington State Forest Practices Board. 1982. Washington forest practices: rules and regulations. Public Lands Commission, State of Washington, Olympia, WA, USA. 104 pp.
WCB. 1981. Yarding and loading handbook. Workers' Compensation Board of British Columbia, Richmond, BC, Canada. 182 pp.
WCB.1983. Ground skidding handbook. Workers' Compensation Board of British Columbia, Richmond, BC, Canada. 144 pp.
WCB. 1990. Fallers' E buckers' handbook. Workers' Compensation Board of British Columbia, Richmond, BC, Canada. 132 pp.
WCB. 1990. Helicopter operations i)' the forest industry: a manual of standard practices. Workers' Compensation Board of British Columbia, Richmond, BC, Canada 66 pp
<section>h</section>
Other references
Abeli, W.S. & Dykstra, D.P. 1981. Logging and log transport in miombo woodland forests. Record No. 19. Division of Forestry, University of Dar-es-Salaam, Morogoro, Tanzania. 16 pp.
Abeli, W.S., Issara, D.G., Malilah, P.K. & Mrosso, D.K. 1988. Logging practices in Tanzanian natural forests. Pakistan J. For., 38(3): 133-141.
Adams, D. 1993. Felling techniques for riparian management zones. LIRO Rep., 18(11). 8 pp
Allal, M. & Edmonds, G.A. with Bhalla, A.S. 1977. Manual del uso intensivo de mano de obra en la construcción de carreteras. Geneva, Switzerland, ILO 271 pp.
Appanah, S. & Putz, F.E. 1984. Climber abundance in virgin dipterocarp forest and the effect of pre-felling climber cutting on logging damage. Malays. For., 47(4): 335-342.
Appanah, S., Weinland, G., Bessel, H. & Krieger, H.1990. Are tropical rain forests non-renewable? An enquiry through modelling. I. Trop. For. Sci., 2(4): 331- 348.
Araki, D.1990. Site disturbance training manual. Vancouver, BC, Forest Engineering Research Institute of Canada. 76 pp.
ASA. 1982. Soil erosion and conservation in the tropics. Special Publication No. 43. Madison, Wl, USA, American Society of Agronomy. 149 pp.
Aulerich, D.E.1992. Planning requirements of harvesting tropical forests. Proc. IUFRO Symposium on Harvesting and Silviculture for Sustainable Forestry in the Tropics, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, 5-9 October 1992. 13 pp.
Aulerich, D.E., Aulerich, S.P. & Piedrahita, M. 1990. Applying steep terrain harvesting technology to the forests of Latin America. Proc. XIX World Congress of the International Union of Forestry Research Organizations, Montreal, PQ, Canada, 5-11 August 1990. D3: 187197.
Aulerich, S.P. 1990. Wetland harvesting with cable systems. Paper 90-7574. Paper presented at the International Winter Meeting of the American Society of Agricultural Engineers, Chicago, IL, USA. 10 pp.
Baharuddin Kasran.1988. Effect of logging on sediment yield in a hill dipterocarp forest in Peninsular Malaysia. l. Trop. For. Sci., 1(1): 56-66.
Bertault, J.G., Dupuy, B. & Maître, M.F. Silvicultural research for sustainable management of rain forest. In P.J Wood, J.K. Vanclay & Wan Razali Wan Mohd, eds. The quest for sustainability: 100 years of silviculture and management in the tropics, p. 1-14. Proc. Tropical Silviculture Workshop at the IUFRO Centennial Conference, Berlin, Germany, 1-3 September 1992. Kepong, Kuala Lumpur, FRIM
Blakeney, K.J. 1992 Cable and helicopter logging for reduced damage. Proc. IUFRO Symposium on Harvesting and Silviculture for Sustainable Forestry in the Tropics, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, 5-9 October 1992. 12 pp.
Bol, M.M.G.R. 1988. Economically and environmentally sound harvesting methods. Meddelelser for Norsk Institutt for Skogforskning (Communications of the Norwegian Forest Research Institute), 41.22: 319-330.
Boxman, O., deGraff, N.R., Hendrison, J., Jonkers, W.B.J., Poels, R.L.H., Schmidt, P., Tjon Lim Sang, R. 1985. Towards sustained timber production from tropical rain forests in Suriname. Neth. 7. Agric. Sci., 33: 125-132.
Bradshaw, G. 1979. Preplanned skid trails and winching versus conventional harvesting on a partial cut. Research Note 62. Forest Research Laboratory, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA. 4 pp.
Brown, G.W. & Jemison, G.M. 1988. Timber harvest and environmental protection. Meddelelser fra Norsk Institutt for Skogforskning (Communications of the Norwegian Forest Research Institute), 41.23: 331- 336.
Brown, S. & Lugo, A.E. 1990. Tropical secondary forests. 1. Trop. Ecol., 6: 1-32.
Bruijnzeel, L.A. 1990. Hydrology of moist tropical forests and effects of conversion: a state of knowledge review. Paris, France, UNESCO. 224 pp.
Brünig, E.F. & Poker, J. 1989. Management of tropical rainforests. Baden-Baden, Germany, Nomos Verlagsgesellschaft. 112 pp.
Budowski, G. 1988. Is sustainable harvest possible in the tropics? Am. For., 94(11 & 12): 34-37, 79-80.
Buenaflor, V.D. & Heinrich, R. 1980. FMC tracked skidder logging study in Indonesia. Project FO:INS/78/054. Working Paper No. 7. Bogor, Indonesia, FAO. 103 pp.
Buenaflor, V.D. 1990. Report on improved forest harvesting. UNDP/FAO Project FAO:DP / PNG /86/009. Lae, Papua New Guinea, Forest Research Institute. 36 pp.
Buschbacher, R.J. 1990. Natural forest management in the humid tropics: ecological, social, and economic considerations. Ambio., 19(5): 253-258.
Caldecott, J. 1988. A variable management system for the hill forests of Sarawak, Malaysia. J. Trop. For. Sci., 1(2): 103-113.
Chin, S.C. 1989. Managing Malaysia's forests for sustained production. Wallaceana, 55 & 56:1-11.
Chua, D.K.H. 1986. Forest engineering its role in the management of the mixed dipterocarp forest of Sarawak. Malays. For., 49(3): 306312.
Cordero, W. 1988. Utilizatión del Sulky en Extracción de Madera con Bueyes. Serie Informativa Tecnologia Apropiada 18, Instituto Tecnológico de Costa Rica, Cartago, Costa Rica. 69 pp.
Costa Filho, P.P. 1991. Mechanized logging and the damages caused to tropical forests: case of the Brazilian Amazon. Voluntary contribution prepared for presentation at the 10th World Forestry Congress, Paris, France, 16-27 September 1991. 12 pp.
Costanza, R., ed. 1991. Ecological economics: the science and management of sustainallility. New York, NY, USA, Columbia University Press.
Dada, S.A., Lucas, E.B. & Olorunniwo, F.O.1989. A systems approach to planning and control of tree harvesting operations in the tropical high forests. In M.A. Pritchard, ed. A systems approach to forest operations planning and control. p. 147-153. Forestry Commission Bulletin 82. London, UK, Her Majesty's Stationery Office.
Dawkins, H.C. 1958. The management of tropical high forest, with special reference to Uganda. IFI Paper 34. Oxford, UK, Imperial Forestry Institute.
DeBonis, J.N. 1986. Harvesting tropical forests in Ecuador. J. For., 84(4): 43-46.
Dykstra, D.P. 1976. Cable, balloon, and helicopter yarding compared for partial cutting and clearcutting in old-growth Douglas fir. Research Bulletin 22. Forest Research Laboratory, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA. 44 pp.
Dykstra, D.P. 1993a. Teaching environmentally benign logging methods in the professional and technical-level forestry schools of the Asia-Pacific region. Proc. 17th Session of the FAO Advisory Committee on Forestry Education, Bangkok, Thailand, 13-15 December 1993. Rome, FAO. 10 pp.
Dykstra, D.P. 1993b. Forest harvesting. In K.D. Singh, ed. Forest resources assessment 1990, tropical countries, p. 5]-54 and Annex l, Tables 5a-5c. FAO Forestry Paper 112. Rome, FAO.
Dykstra, D.P. 1993c. Tropical timber harvesting and the forestry profession. FAO For. Harv. Bull., 3(2): 2-4.
Dykstra, D.P. 1994. Timber harvesting and the problem of deforestation. FAO For. Harv. Bull., 4(1): 1-3.
Dykstra, D.P. & Heinrich, R. 1992. Sustaining tropical forests through environmentally sound timber harvesting practices. Unasylva, 169: 9-15.
Dykstra, D.P., Stokes, B.J., Costa Filho, P.P., Malinovski, J.R. & Lockaby, G. 1992. Field study of harvesting technologies in a tropical high forest of the Brazilian Amazon. Plan for collaborative research involving FAO, USDA Forest Service, EMBRAPA, Federal University of Paraná, Auburn University and SUDAM. Rome, FAO. 17 pp. (Also available in Portuguese)
Ellefson, P.V. & Cheng, A.S. 1994. State forest practice programs: regulation of private forestry comes of age. J. For., 92(5): 34-37.
Elliott, C. 1991. Tropical forest conservation. Position Paper 7. Gland, Switzerland, WWF International. 26 pp.
Estève, J. 1983. La destruction du couvert forestier consécutive à l'exploitation forestière de bois d'&#156;uvre en fores dense tropicale humide africaine ou américaine. Bois et Forês des Tropiques, 201: 77-84.
Estève, J. & Lepitre, C.1970. Utilisation du tracteur articulé en exploitation forestiere tropicale. Bois et Forês des Tropiques, 130: 31-50 & 131: 51-68.
Estève, J. & Lepitre, C. 1972. Construction et coût des routes forestières en fores dense tropicale. Bois et Forêts des Tropiques, 144: 33-53 & 145: 49-74.
Faber-Langendoen, D. 1992. Ecological constraints on rain forest management at Bajo Calima, western Colombia. For. Ecol. Manage., 53: 213-244.
FAO. 1974. Logging and log transport in tropical high forest. Publication P-37. Rome, FAO. 90 pp.
FAO. 1977b. Planning forest roads and harvesting systems. FAO Forestry Paper 2. Rome, FAO. 148 pp.
FAO. 1981. Cable logging systems. FAO Forestry Paper 24. Rome, FAO. 105 pp.
FAO. 1982a. Appropriate technology in forestry. FAO Forestry Paper 31. Rome, FAO, in collaboration with the Swedish International Development Authority, Stockholm. 137 pp.
FAO. 1982b. Basic technology in forest operations. FAO Forestry Paper 36. Rome, FAO. 132 pp.
FAO. 1985a. Intensive multiple-use forest management in the tropics. FAO Forestry Paper 55. Rome, FAO. 180 pp.
FAO. 1985b. Logging and transport in steep terrain. FAO Forestry Paper 14, Rev. 1. Rome, FAO. 333 pp.
FAO. 1986. Wood extraction with oxen and agricultural tractors. FAO Forestry Paper 49. Rome, FAO. 96 pp.
FAO. 1987. Appropriate wood harvesting in plantation forests. FAO Forestry Paper 78. Rome, FAO. 266 pp.
FAO. 1988b. Case-study on intermediate technology in forest harvesting: agricultural tractor with winch, Tanzania. Finnish Funds-in-Trust, Project GCP/INT/427 /FIN. FOPH Publication 1988/1. Rome, FAO. 45 pp. (Plus 30 slide transparencies)
FAO. 1988c. Case study on intermediate technology in forest harvesting: agricultural tractor and forest trailer with mechanical crane, Ethiopia. Swedish Fundsin-Trust, Project GCP/INT/343/SWE. FOPH Publication 1988/2. Rome, FAO. 40 pp. (plus 30 slide transparencies)
FAO. 1989c. Raw material procurement for forest industries in developing countries. FOPH Publication 1989/02. Rome, FAO Forest Harvesting and Transport Branch, FAO. 12 pp. (Plus 53 slide transparencies)
FAO. 1989d. Case-study on plastic log chute in steep terrain thinning operations. FOPH Publication 1989/5. Rome, Forest Harvesting and Transport Branch, FAO. 31 pp. (Plus 30 slide transparencies)
FAO. 1989e. Design manual on basic wood harvesting technology. FAO Training Series No. 18 (also issued as FAO Forestry Paper 91). Rome, FAO. 126 pp. (Six booklets)
FAO. 1989f. Small-scale harvesting operations of wood and non-wood forest products involving rural people. FAO Forestry Paper 87. Rome, FAO. 77 pp.
FAO. 1989g. Management of tropical moist forests in Africa. FAO Forestry Paper 88. Rome, FAO. 165 pp.
FAO. 1989h. Review of forest management systems of tropical Asia. FAO Forestry Paper 89. Rome, FAO. 228 pp.
FAO. 1990. Case-study on integrated smallscale forest harvesting and wood processing operation. FOPH Publication 1990/ 3. FAO, Rome, Forest Harvesting and Transport Branch. 27 pp. (Plus 30 slide transparencies)
FAO. 1991. Case study on forest harvesting with small-scale mobile cable system. FOPH Publication 1991/2.Rome, FAO, Forest Harvesting and Transport Branch. 16 pp.
FAO. 1992a. Cost control in forest harvesting and road construction. FAO Forestry Paper 99. Rome, FAO. 106 pp. (with MS-DOS diskette)
FAO. 1992b. Introduction to ergonomics in forestry in developing countries. FAO Forestry Paper 100. Rome, FAO. 200 pp.
FAO. 1993a. Reduction of wood waste by smallscale log production and conversion in tropical high forest. FAO Forest Harvesting Case Study 1. Rome, FAO, Forest Harvesting and Transport Branch. 33 pp.
FAO. 1993b. The challenge of sustainable forest management: what future for the world's forests? Rome, FAO. 128 pp.
FAO. 1993c. Forest resources assessment 1990: tropical countries. FAO Forestry Paper 112. Rome, FAO. 101 pp.
FAO. 1993d. Management and conservation of closed forests in tropical America. FAO Forestry Paper 101. Rome, FAO. 141 PP
Fearnside, P.M. 1989. Forest management in Amazonia: the need for new criteria in evaluating development options. For. Ecol. Manage., 27: 61-79.
Finegan B. 1992. The management potential of neotropical secondary lowland rain forest. For. Ecol. Manage., 47: 295321.
Forest Engineering Inc. 1991. Proc. Symposium on Forest Harvesting in Southeast Asia, Singapore, 17-20 June 1991. Corvallis, OR, USA, Forest Engineering Inc. 140 pp.
Fox, J.E.D. 1968. Logging damage and the influence of climber cutting prior to logging in the lowland dipterocarp forest of Sabah. Malays. For., 31(4): 326-347.
Froehlich, H.A., Aulerich, D.E. & Curtis, R. 1981. Designing skid trail systems to reduce soil impacts from tractive logging machines. Research Paper 44. Forest Research Laboratory, Oregon State University, Corvallis, OR, USA. 15 pp.
Gayoso, l. & Iroumé, A. 1991. Compaction and soil disturbances from logging in southern Chile. Ann. Sci. For., 48: 63-71.
Gomez-Pompa, A., Vásquez-Yanes, C. & Guevara, C. 1972. The tropical rain forest: a non-renewable resource. Science, 177: 762765.
Hamilton, L.S. 1988. Minimizing the adverse impacts of harvesting in humid tropical forests. In A.E. Lugo, J.R. Clark & R.D. Child, eds. Ecological development in the humid tropics, p. 191-235. Morrilton, AR, USA, Winrock International Institute for Agricultural Development.
Hartshorn, G.S. 1989. Gap-phase dynamics and tropical tree species richness. In L.B. Holm-Nielsen, I.C. Nielsen & H. Balslev, eds. Tropical forests: botanical dynamics, speciation and diversity, p. 65-73. London, UK, Academic Press.
Hawthorne, W.D. 1993. Forest regeneration after logging: findings of a study in the Bia South Game Production Reserve, Ghana. ODA Forestry Series No. 3. London, UK, Overseas Development Administration (ODA) and Kent, UK, Natural Resources Institute (INRI). 52 pp.
Heinrich, R. 1992. Environmentally sound forest harvesting to sustain tropical forests. Proc. lUFRO Symposium on Harvesting and Silviculture for Sustainable Forestry in the Tropics, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, 5-9 October 1992. 10 pp.
Hemphill, D.C. 1987. A preliminary description of logging road construction practices for unstable soils used in the U.S. northwest. Project Report 31. Rotorua, New Zealand, Logging Industry Research Organization (LIRO). 42 pp.
Hendrison, J. 1989. Damage-controlled logging in managed tropical rain forests in Suriname. Ecology and Management of Tropical Rain Forests in Suriname Series . Wageningen, the Netherlands, Wageningen Agricultural University. 204 pp
Hill, P.J. 1982. Principles of planning for forest harvesting. LIRO Rep., 7(4): 1-4.
Howard, A.F. 1993. A linear programming model for predicting the sustainable yield of timber from a community forest on the Osa Peninsula of Costa Rica. For. Ecol. Manage., 61(1-2): 29-43.
ILO. 1987. The transfer of basic technology from the ECE region to other regions. Proceedings of an international workshop held in the Federal Republic of Germany, Austria and Switzerland, 23-27 June 1986. Geneva, Switzerland, International Labour Organisation (ILO). 113 pp.
ILO. 1992. Fitting the job to the forest worker: an illustrated training manual on ergonomics. Geneva, Switzerland, International Labour Organisation (ILO). 128 pp.
Jackson, B.D. & Stokes, B.J. 1990. Lowimpact harvesting systems for wet sites. General Technical Report 70, vol. 2, p. 701-709. USDA Forest Service, Southeastern Forest Experiment Station, New Orleans, LA, USA.
Jagels, R. 1990. Is sustainable use feasible? Tropical forest exploitation revisited. 1. For., 88(11): 43-46.
Johns, A.D. 1986. Effects of selective logging on the behavioural ecology of West Malaysian primates. Ecology, 67(3): 684694.
Johns, A.D. 1988. Effects of "selective" timber extraction on rain forest structure and composition and some consequences for frugivores and folivores. Biotropica, 20(1): 31-37.
Jonkers, W.B.J. 1987. Vegetation structure, logging damage and silviculture in a tropical rain forest in Suriname. Ecology and Management of Tropical Rain Forest in Suriname Series No. 3. Wageningen, the Netherlands, Wageningen Agricultural University. 172 pp.
Jonsson, T. & Lindgren, P. 1990. Logging technology for tropical forests: for or against? Kista, Sweden, the Forest Operations Institute "Skogsarbeten." Report from the pre-project, "Improvement of harvesting systems for the sustainable management of tropical rain forests", carried out for ITTO, Yokohama, Japan. 125 pp.
Jusoff, K. 1988. Soil compaction from offroad transportation machine on tropical hill forest land. Pertanika, 11(1): 31- 37.
Jusoff, K. & Majid, N.M. 1986. The impact of skid trails on the physical properties of tropical hill forest soils. Pertanika, 9(3): 311-321.
Kirby, M.W. & J.B. Rupe. 1987. The cost of avoiding sedimentation. J. For., 85(4): 39-40.
Kleine, M. & Heuveldop, J. 1993. A management planning concept for sustained yield of tropical forests in Sabah, Malaysia. For. Ecol. Manage., 61: 277-297.
Laarman, J., Virtanen, K. & Jurvelius, M. 1981. Choice of technology in forestry: a Philippine case study. Geneva, Switzerland, International Labour Organisation (ILO). 115 pp.
Lai, F.S. & Norajiki, A.J.1988. Some stream water quality characteristics of two small logged-over watersheds in Selangor. Pertanika, 11(3): 461-468.
Lamprecht, H. 1989. Silviculture in the tropics. Eschborn, Germany, GTZ. 296 pp.
Leslie, A.J. 1987. The economic feasibility of natural management of tropical forests. In F. Mergen & J.R. Vincent, eds. Natural management of tropical moist forests, p. 177-198. School of Forestry and Environmental Studies, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA.
Löffler, H.D. 1988. Classification of forest terrain according to the risk of soil damage by forest operations. Meddelelser fra Norsk Institutt for Skogforskning (Communications of the Norwegian Forest Research Institute) 41.32: 465-479.
Ludwig, R. 1992. Cable crane yarding, an economical and ecologically suitable system for commercial timber harvesting in logged-over rainforests of the Philippines. Proc. IUFRO Symposium on Harvesting and Silviculture for Sustainable Forestry in the Tropics, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, 5-9 October 1992. 12pp.
Lugo, A.E. 1990. Forest management for ecological stability: a call for leadership. Proc. Society of American Foresters National Convention, 29 July to I August 1990, Washington, DC, USA. p. 27-30.
Lugo, A.E., Clark, J.R. & Child, R.D., eds. 1987. Ecological development in the humid tropics. Morrilton, AR, USA, Winrock International Institute for Agricultural Development. 362 pp.
Lysons, H.H. & Twito, R.H. 1973. Skyline logging: an economical means of reducing environmental impact of logging. J. For., 71: 580-583.
Malaysian Forester. 1986. Editorial: Forest operations and timber industries. Malays. For., 49(3): 206-207.
Malmer, A. & Grip, H. 1990. Soil disturbance and loss of infiltrability caused by mechanized and manual extraction of tropical rainforest in Sabah, Malaysia. For. Ecol. Manage., 38: 112.
Manikam, D. 1983. The skidding component of the mixed peat swamp logging system. Malays. For., 46(3): 327-346.
Marn, H.M. & Jonkers, W. 1982. Logging damage in tropical high forest. In P.B.L. Srivastava et al., eds. Tropical forests: source of energy through optimisation E diversification, p. 27-38. Proceedings of an international conference held 11-15 November 1980 at Penerbit Universiti Pertanian, Serdang, Selangor, Malaysia.
Mazier, D., Baumgartner, L. & Lepitre, C. 1975. Classification des terrains pour l'exploitation forestière tropicale: application au cas du Gabon. Bois et Forêts des Tropiques, 162: 47-67.
McCallum, B. 1993. Equipping the farm tractor for forest operations. Handbook HB-11. Pointe Claire, PQ, Forest Engineering Research Institute of Canada. 73 pp.
Mendoza, G.A. & Ayemou, A.O.1992. Analysis of some forest management strategies in Côte d'lvoire: a regional case study. For. Ecol. Manage., 47: 149-174.
Mendoza, G.A. & Setyarso, A. 1986. A transition matrix forest growth model for evaluating alternative harvesting schemes in Indonesia. For. Ecol. Manage., 15: 219-228.
Mergen, F. & Vincent, J.R, eds. 1987. Natural management of tropical moist forests. School of Forestry and Environmental Studies, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA. 212 pp.
Migunga, G.A. & Dykstra, D.P.1983. Time study on cutting with crosscut saw and chainsaw in a Tanzanian softwood plantation. Record No. 30. Division of Forestry, University of Dar-es-Salaam, Morogoro, Tanzania. 18 pp.
Negreros-Castillo, P. & Mize, C. 1993. Effects of partial overstory removal on the natural regeneration of a tropical forest in Quintana Roo, Mexico. For. Ecol. Manage., 58: 259272.
Newman, A. 1990. Tropical rainforest. New York, NY, USA, Facts on File. 256 pp.
Nicholson, D.I. 1979. The effects of logging and treatment on the mixed dipterocarp forests of Southeast Asia. Report FO:MISC/ 79/8. Rome, FAO. 65 pp.
Ole-Meiludie, R.E.L. & Abeli, W.S. 1990. Comparing two terrain transport means in a tropical high forest. Proc. XIX World Congress of the International Union of Forestry Research Organizations, 5-11 August 1990, Montreal, PQ, Canada. D3: 176186.
Ole-Meiludie, R.E.L. & Dykstra, D.P.1982. Terrain transport by farm tractors at Sao Hill, southern Tanzania. Record No. 24. Division of Forestry, University of Dar-es-Salaam, Morogoro, Tanzania. 18 pp.
Ole-Meiludie, R.E.L. & Njau, W.L.M. 1989 Impact of logging equipment on water infiltration capacity at Olmotonyi, Tanzania. For. Ecol. Manage., 26: 207- 213.
Olsen, E.D. & Seifert, J.C.W. 1984. Machine performance and site disturbance in skidding on designated trails. J. For., 82: 366-369.
Olympic Natural Resources Center. 1994. Ecological objectives for industrial forestlands. 1. For., 92(5): 18-19.
Poore, D. 1989. No timber without trees. London, UK, Earthscan. 252 pp.
Putz, F.E. 1994. Towards a sustainable forest. ITTO Trop. For. Update, 4(3): 7-9.
Putz, F.E. & Pinard, M.A. 1993. Reducedimpact logging as a carbon-offset method. Conserv. Biol., 7(4): 755-757.
Redhead, J.R. 1960. An analysis of logging damage in lowland rain forest in western Nigeria. Nigerian Forestry Information Bulletin (New Series) No. 10, p. 5-16.
Romero, R. & Romero, M. 1989. Estudio sobre la problemática de la extractión y manejo en los bosques tropicales de la amazonia peruana. FAO Project GCP/ RLA/081/JPN. Publication 17. Rome, FAO. 106 pp.
Routledge, R.D. 1987. The impact of soil degradation on the expected present net worth of future timber harvests. For. Sci., 33: 823-834.
Ruth, R.H. 1960. It's time to look at yarding problems on steep slopes. Research Note 185. USDA Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Forest and Range Experiment Station, Portland, OR, USA. 4 pp.
Samset, I. 1985. Winch and cable systems. Dordrecht, the Netherlands, Martinus Nijhof Publishers. 539 pp.
SARH. 1980. Sistema de cable aéreo en la extracción de trocerta y lefias. SARH, Subsecretaría Forestal y de la Fauna, Dirección General pare el Desarrollo Forestal, Mexico. 146 pp.
Sauder, E.A. Techniques that protect understory in mixed-wood stands: summary of harvesting trials. Technical Note TN- 198. Vancouver, BC, Forest Engineering Research Institute of Canada. 12 pp.
Sawyer, J. 1990. Tropical forests. &land, Switzerland, WWF International. 48 pp.
Schmidt, R. 1987. Tropical rain forest management. Unasylva, 156: 2-17.
Schmincke, K.H. & Koumou, A. 1991. Exploitation forestière, industrie du bois et transport; République populaire du Congo plan d'action forestier tropical. Eschborn, Germany, GTZ. 105 pp.
Schmitt, L.1989. Etude des peuplements naturels en fores dense guyanaise: compte rendu de mise en application des traitements sylvicoles sur le dispositif de Paracou. Nogent-sur-Marne, France, CIRAD-Forêt. 51 pp.
Sessions, J., Balcom, I.C. & Boston, K. 1987. Road location and construction practices: effects on landslide frequency and size in the Oregon coast range. W. /. Appl. For., 2: 119124.
Shaffer, R.M. 1990. A logger's guide to harvest planning. Publication 420-088. Blacksburg, Vl, USA, Virginia Cooperative Extension Service. 6 pp.
Shepherd, K.R. & Richter, H.V., eds. 1985. Managing the tropical forest. Proceedings from a workshop held at Gympie, Australia, from 11 July to 12 August 1983. Development Studies Centre, the Australian National University, Canberra. 341 pp.
Silva, J.N.M. 1989. The behaviour of the tropical rain forest of the Brazilian Amazon after logging. University of Oxford, United Kingdom. (Ph.D. dissertation)
Sist, P. 1994. Logging in east Kalimantan: volume assessment and impact on the residual stand. Paper presented at the workshop "From the concept to the field reality: the contribution of R&D activities in the natural forest management", Jakarta, Indonesia, 28-29 June 1994, sponsored by the Agency for Forestry Research and Development, Ministry of Forestry of Indonesia, and CIRAD-Fôret. 31 pp.
Skorupa, J.P. & Kasenene, J.M.1984. Tropical forest management: can rates of natural treefalls help guide us? Oryx, 18(2): 96-101.
Steinblums, I.J., Froehlich, H.A. & Lyons, J.K. 1984. Designing stable buffer strips for stream protection. l. For., 82(1): 49-52.
Stewart, R., Froehlich, H.A. & Olsen, E. 1988. Soil compaction: an economic model. W. 1. Appl. For., 3(1): 20-22.
Stokes, B.J.1988. Wetland logger survey summary and production and costs of selected wetland logging systems. Publication 88A-10. Washington, l)C, USA, APA. 26 pp.
Studier, D.D. & Binkley, V.W. 1978. Cable logging systems. USDA Forest Service, Pacific Northwest Region, Portland, OR, USA. Reprinted by the Oregon State University Bookstore, Corvallis, OR, USA. 205 pp.
Sundberg, U. 1987. Study on the environmental impacts of forest utilization. Project Report TCP/FIJ/6652. Rome, FAO. 37 pp.
Sutton, S.L., Whitmore, T.C. & Chadwick, A.C. 1983. Tropical rain forest: ecology and management. Oxford, UK, Blackwell Scientific Publications. 498 pp.
Thang, H.C. 1987. Forest management systems for tropical high forest, with special reference to peninsular Malaysia. For. Ecol. Manage., 21: 3-20.
Thibau, C.E. 1987. Sustained yield in the Amazon region. In J.C. Figueroa, F.H. Wadsworth & S. Branham, eds. Management of the forests of tropical America: prospects and technologies, p. 199-206. Proceedings of a conference held in San Juan, Puerto Rico, 2227 September 1986. USDA Forest Service, Southern Forest Experiment Station, Institute of Tropical Forestry, Rio Piedras, Puerto Rico.
Tinambunan, D. 1988. Soil compaction in forest operations. Duta Rimba, 14(99100): 10-15.
Touber, L., Smaling, E.M.A., Andriesse, W. & Hakkeling, R.T.A. 1989. Inventory and evaluation of tropical forest land: guidelines for a common methodology. Tropenbos Technical Series 4. Ede, the Netherlands, the Tropenbos Foundation. 170 pp.
Tuttle, A. 1992. Environmental impact assessment for logging in natural forests of peninsular Malaysia. Report No. 134. Malaysian-German Forestry Research Project, Eschborn, Germany, GTZ, and Kepong, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, FRIM. 132 pp.
Vanclay, J.K. 1989. Modelling selection harvesting in tropical rain forests. 1. Trop. For. Sci., 1(3): 280-294.
Verissimo, A., Barreto, P., Mattos, M., Tarifa, R. & Uhl, C. 1992. Logging impacts and prospects for sustainable forest management in an old Amazonian frontier: the case of Paragominas. For. Ecol. Manage., 55: 169199.
Visser, R. & Fenton, T. 1994. Developing streamside management guidelines for New Zealand production forestry. LIRO Rep., 19(7). 16 pp.
Visser, R. & McConchie, M. 1993. The impact of riparian buffer strip characteristics on forest harvesting. LIRO Rep., 18(10). 10 pp.
Wadsworth, F.H.1981. Management of forest lands in the humid tropics under sound ecological principles. In F. Mergen, ed. International symposium on tropical forest utilization and conservation. School of Forestry and Environmental Studies, Yale University, New Haven, CT, USA.
Ward, J.P. & Kanowski, P.J. 1985. Implementing control of harvesting operations in north Queensland rainforests. In K.R. Shepherd & H.V. Richter, eds. Managing the tropical forest, p. 165186. Proceedings from a workshop held at Gympie, Australia, 1I July to 12 August 1983. Development Studies Centre, the Australian National University, Canberra.
Whitmore, T.C. 1990. An introduction to tropical rain forests. Oxford, UK, Clarendon Press. 226 pp.
Wood, P.J., Vanclay, J.K. & Wan Mohd, W.R., eds. The quest for sustainability: 100 years of silviculture and management in the tropics. Proc. Tropical Silviculture Workshop at the IUFRO Centennial Conference, Berlin, Germany, 1-3 September 1992. Kepong, Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia, FRIM. 148 pp.
Wyatt-Smith, J. 1987. The management of tropical moistforestfor the sustained production of timber: some issues. IUCN/IIED Tropical Forest Policy Paper No.4. London, UK, IIED-Earthscan. 20 pp.
WHERE TO PURCHASE FAO PUBLICATIONS LOCALLY
POINTS DE VENTE DES PUBLICATIONS DE LA FAO
PUNTOS DE YENTA DE PLIBLICACIONES DE LA FAO
ANGOLA
Empresa Nacional do Disco e de
Publicações, ENDIPU-U.E.E.
Rua Cirilo da Conceição Silva, N° 7
C.P. N° 131 4-C
Luanda
ARGENTINA
Librería Agropecuaria
Pasteur 743
1028 Buenos Aires
Oficina del Libro Internacional
Alberti 40
1082 Buenos Aires
AUSTRALlA
Hunter Publications
PO Box 404
Abbotsford, Vic. 3067
AUSTRIA
Gerold Buch & Co.
Weihburggasse 26
1010 Vienna
BANGLADESH
Association of Development
Agencies in Bangladesh
House No. 1/3, Block F. Lalmatia
Dhaka 1207
BELGIQUE
M.J. De Lannoy
202, avenue du Roi
1 060 Bruxelles
CCP 000-0808993-13
BOLIVIA
Los Amigos del Libro
Peru 3712, Casilla 450
Cochabamba;
Mercado 1315, La Paz
BOTSWANA
Botsalo Books (Pty) Ltd
P.O. Box 1532
Gaborone
BRAZIL
Fundação Getúlio Vargas
Praia do Botafogo 190, C.P. 9052
Rio de Janeiro
Nucleo Editora da
Universidade Federal Fluminense
Rua Miguel de Frias 9
Icaraí-Niterói
24 220-000 Rio de Janeiro
Editora da Universidade Federal
do Rio Grande do Sul
Av. João Pessoa 415
Bairro Cidade Baixa
90 040-000 Porto Alegre/RS
Book Master Livraria
Rua do Catete 311 Ij. 118/119
20031-001 Catete
Rio de Janeiro
CANADA
Le Diffuseur Gilles Vermette Inc.
C.P. 85,151, av. de Mortagne
Boucherville, Quebec J4B 5E6
UNIPUB
4611/F Assembly Drive
Lanham MD 20706-4391 (USA)
Toll-tree 800 233-0504 (Canada)
CHILE
Librería - Oficina Regional FAO
Calle Bandera 150, 8° Piso
Casilla 10095, Santiago-Centro
Tel. 699 1005
Fax 6961121/696 1124
Universitaria Textolibros Ltda.
Avda. L. Bernardo O'Higgins 1050
Santiago
COLOMBIA
Banco Ganadero
Revista Carta Ganadera
Carrera 9^a N° 72-21, Piso 5
Bogotá D.E.
Tel. 217 0100
CONGO
Office national des librairies populaires
B.P. 577
Brazzaville
COSTA RICA
Librería Lehmann S.A.
Av. Central
Apartado 10011
San Jose
CÔTE D'IVOIRE
CEDA
04 B.P.541
Abidjan 04
CUBA
Ediciones Cubanas, Empresa de
Comercio Exterior de Publicaciones
Obispo 461, Apartado 605
La Habana
CZECH REPUBLIC
Artia Pegas Press Ltd
Import of Periodicals
Palác Metro P.O. Box 825
Národni 25, 11 21 Praha 1
DENMARK
Munksgaard, Book and
Subscription Service
P.O. Box 2148
DK 1016 Copenhagen K.
Tel. 4533128570
Fax 4533129387
DOMINICAN REPUBLIC
CUESTA - Centro del libro
Av. 27 de Febrero, esq. A. Lincoln
Centro Comercial Nacional
Apartado 1241
Santo Domingo
ECUADOR
Libri Mundi, Libreria Internacional
Juan León Mera 851
Apartado Postal 3029
Quito
EGYPT
The Middle East Observer
41 Sherif Street
Cairo
ESPAÑA
Mundi Prensa Libros S.A.
Castelló 37
28001 Madrid
Tel. 431 3399
Fax 575 3998
Librería Agrícola
Fernando VI 2
28004 Madrid
Librería Internacional AEDOS
Consejo de Ciento 391
08009 Barcelona
Tel. 3018615
Fax 317 0141
Llibreria de la Generalitat
de Catalunya
Rambla dels Estudis 118
(Palau Moja)
08002 Barcelona
Tel. (93) 302 6462
Fax (93) 302 1299
FINLAND
Ahateeminen Kiriakauppa
P.O. Box 21a
SF-00381 Helsinki
FRANCE
Lavoisier
14, rue de Provigny
94236 Cachan Cedex
Editions A. Pedone
13, rue Soufflot
75005 Paris
Librairie du Commerce International
24 boulevard de l'Hôpital
75005 Paris
GERMANY
Alexander Horn Internationale
Buchbandlung
Kirchgasse 22, Postfach 3340
D-651 as Wiesbaden
Uno Verlag
Poppelsdorfer Allee 55
D-53115 Bonn t
S. Toeche-Mittier GmbH
Versandbuchhandlung
Hindenburgstrasse 33
D-64295 Darmstadt
GHANA
SEDCO Publishing Ltd
Sedco House, Tabon Street
Off Ring Road Central, North Ridge
P.O. Box 2051
Accra
GUYANA
Guyana National Trading
Corporation Ltd
45-47 Water Street, P O. Box 308
Georgetown
HAÏTI
Librairie "A la Caravelle''
26, rue Bonne Foi, B.P. 111
Port-au-Prince
HONDURAS
Escuela Agrícola Panamericana,
Librería RTAC
El Zamorano, Apartado 93
Tegucigalpa
Oficina de la Escuela Agrícola
Panamericana en Tegucigalpa
Blvd. Morazán, Apts. Glapson
Apartado 93
Tegucigalpa
HUNGARY
Librotrade Kft.
P.O. Box 126
H-1656 Budapest
INDIA
EWP Affiliated East-West Press
PVT, Ltd
G-I/16 Ansari Road, Darya Gany
New Delhi 110 002
Oxford Book and Stationery Co.
Scindia House New Delhi 110 001
17 Park Street Calcutta 700 016
Oxford Subscription Agency
Institute for Development
Education
1 Anasuya Ave., Kilpauk
Madras 600 010
Periodical Expert Book Agency
D-42, Vivek Vihar, Delhi 110095
IRAN
The FAO Bureau, International and
Regional Specialized
Organizations Affairs
Ministry of Agriculture of the Islamic
Republic of Iran
Keshavarz Bld, M.O.A., 17th floor
Teheran
IRELAND
Publications Section
Government Stationery Office
4-5 Harcourt Road
Dublin 2
ISRAEL
R.O.Y. International
P.O. Box 13056
Tel Aviv 61130
ITALY
Libreria Scientifica Dott. Lucio de
Biasio "Aeiou"
Via Coronelli 6
20146 Milano
Libreria Concessionaria Sansoni
S.p.A. "Licosa"
Via Duca di Calabria 1/1
50125 Firenze
FAO Bookshop
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Roma
Tel. 52255688
Fax 52255155
E-mail: publications-sales@fao.org
JAPAN
Far Eastern Booksellers
(Kyokuto Shoten Ltd)
12 Kanda-Jimbocho 2 chome
Chiyoda-ku - P.O. Box 72
Tokyo 101-91
Maruzen Company Ltd
P.O. Box 5050
Tokyo International 100-31
KENYA
Text Book Centre Ltd
Kijabe Street, P.O. Box 47540
Nairobi
LUXEMBOURG
M.J. De Lannoy
202, avenue du Roi
1060 Bruxelles (Belgique)
MALAYSIA
Electronic products only:
Southbound
Sendirian Berhad Publishers
9 College Square
01250 Penang
MALI
Librairie Traore
Rue Soundiata Keita X 115
B.P. 3243
Bamako
MAROC
La Librairie Internationale
70 Rue T'ssoule
B.P. 302 (RP)
Rabat
Tel (07) 75-86-61
MEXICO
Librería, Universidad Autónoma
de Chapingo
56230 Chapingo
Libros y Editoriales S.A.
Av. Progreso N° 202-1° Piso A
Apdo. Postal 18922, Col. Escandón
11800 México D.F.
NETHERLANDS
Roodveldt Import b.v.
Brouwersgracht 288
1013 HG Amsterdam
NEW ZEALAND
Legislation Services
P.O. Box 12418
Thorndon, Wellington
NlCARAGUA
Librería HlSPAMER
Costado Este Univ. Centroamericana
Apdo. Postal A-221
Managua
NIGERIA
University Bookshop (Nigeria) Ltd
University of Ibadan
Ibadan
NORWAY
Narvesen Into Center
Bertrand Narvesens vei 2
P.O. Box 6125, Etterstad
0602 Oslo 6
Tel. (+47) 22-57-33-00
Fax (+47) 22-68-19-01
PAKISTAN
Mirza Book Agency
65 Shahrah-e-Quaid-e-Azam
P.O. Box 729, Lahore 3
PARAGUAY
Librería INTERCONTINENTAL
Editora e Impresora S.R.L.
Caballero 270 c/Mcal Estigarribia
Asunción
PERU
INDEAR
Jirón Apurimac 375, Casilla 4937
Lima 1
PHILIPPINES
International Booksource Center (Phils)
Room 1703, Cityland 10
Condominium Cor. Ayala Avenue &
H.V. de la Costa Extension
Makati, Metro Manila
POLAND
Ars Polona
Krakowskie Przedmiescie 7
00-950 Warsaw
PORTUGAL
Livraria Portugal,
Dias e Andrade Ltda.
Rua do Carmo 70-74, Apartado 2681
1117 Lisboa Codex
SINGAPORE
Select Books Pte Ltd
03-15 Tanglin Shopping Centre
19 Tanglin Road
Singapore 1024
SOMALIA
"Samater's"
P.O. Box 936
Mogadishu
SOUTH AFRICA
David Philip Publishers (Pty) Ltd
P.O. Box 23408
Claremont 7735
South Africa
Tel. Cape Town (021 ) 64-4136
Fax Cape Town (021) 64-3358
SRI LANKA
M.D. Gunasena & Co. Ltd
217 Olcott Mawatha, P.O. Box 246
Colombo 11
SUISSE
Buchhandlung und Antiquariat
Heinimann & Co.
Kirchgasse 17
8001 Zurich
UN Bookshop
Palais des Nations
CH-1211 Genève 1
Van Diermen Editions Techniques
ADECO
Case Postale 465
CH-1211 Geneve 19
SURINAME
Vaco n.v. in Suriname
Domineestraat 26, P.O. Box 1841
Paramaribo
SWEDEN
Books and documents:
C.E. Fritzes
P.O. Box 16356
103 27 Stockholm
Subscriptions:
Vennergren-Williams AB
P.O. Box 30004
104 25 Stockholm
THAILAND
Suksapan Panit
Mansion 9, Rajdamnern Avenue
Bangkok
TOGO
Librairie du Bon Pasteur
B.P. 1164
Lomé
TUNISIE
Société tunisienne de diffusion
S. avenue de Carthage
Tunis
TURKEY
Kultur Yayiniari is Turk Ltd Sti.
Ataturk Bulvan N° 191, Kat. 21
Ankara
Bookshops in Istanbul and Izmir
UNlTED KINGDOM
HMSO Publications Centre
51 Nine Elms Lane
London SW8 5DR
Tel. (071) 873 9090 (orders)
(071)8730011 (inquiries)
Fax (071 ) 873 8463
and through HMSO Bookshops
Electronic products only:
Microinfo Ltd
P.O. Box 3, Omega Road, Alton
Hampshire GU34 2PG
Tel. (0420) 86848
Fax (0420) 89389
URUGUAY
Librería Agropecuaria S.R.L.
Buenos Aires 335
Casilla 1755
Montevideo C.P. 11000
USA
Publications:
UNIPUB
4611/F Assembly Drive
Lanham MD 20706-4391
Toll-free 800 274-4888
Fax 301-4S9-OOS6
Periodicals:
Ebsco Subscription Services
P.O. Box 1431
Birmingham AL 35201 -1431
Tel. (205)991-6600
Telex 78-2661
Fax (205)991-1449
The Faxon Company Inc.
15 Southwest Park
Westwood MA 02090
Tel. 611 7-329-33S0
Telex 95-1980
Cable FW Faxon Wood
VENEZUELA
Tecni-Ciencia Libros S.A.
Torre Phelps-Mezzanina
Plaza Venezuela
Caracas
Tel. 782 8697/781 9945/781 9954
Tamanaco Libros Técnicos S.R.L.
Centro Comercial Ciudad Tamanaco
Nivel C-2
Caracas
Tel. 261 3344/261 3335/959 0016
Tecni-Ciencia Libros, S.A.
Centro Comercial, Shopping Center
Av. Andrés Eloy, Urb. El Prebo
Valencia Ed. Carabobo
Tel. 222 724
Fudeco, Librería
Avenida Libertador-Este
Ed. Fudeco, Apartado 254
Barquisimeto C.P. 3002, Ed. Lara
Tel. (051 ) 538 022
Fax (051) 544 394
Télex (051) 51314 FUDEC VC
Fundación La Era Agricola
Calle 31 Junin Qta
Coromoto 5-49, Apartado 456
Mérida
Librería FAGRO
Universidad Central de Venezuela (UCV)
Maracay
ZIMBABWE
Grassroota Books
100 Jason Moyo Avenue
P.O. Box A 267, Avondale
Harare;
61a Fort Street
Bulawayo
Other countries / Autres pays /Otros paises
Distribution and Sales Section
Publications Division, FAO
Viale delle Terme di Caracalla
00100 Rome, Italy
Tel (39-6) 52251
Fax (39-6) 52253152
Telex 625852/625853/610181 FAO
E-mail: publications-sales@fao.org
