<title>Impact of the Uruguay Round on agriculture</title>
<section>1</section>
Preface
The Uruguay Round marks a significant turning point in world agriculture. For the first time agriculture has featured in a major way in one of GATT's rounds of multilateral trade negotiations. It changes the way in which national agricultural policies will be undertaken by most countries and, though representing only a partial liberalization, its effects will be felt for years to come.
In order to assess the impact of the Uruguay Round on the markets for the principal agricultural commodities, the FAO Secretariat has modified its recent projections to the year 2000 to allow for the effects of the Uruguay Round agreements. These effects include the boost to world income deriving not only from agriculture but also concessions in other sectors as well as the reduction in agricultural tariffs, the establishment of minimum access in some markets and the cut in export subsidies.
The resulting impact on world agricultural markets suggests a positive effect on prices and rather smaller impacts on the quantities produced, consumed and traded. Based on the pattern of agricultural imports and exports as well as the responsiveness of the agricultural sector to these price changes, the study estimates the impact on agricultural trade balances of the main regions.
The study also examines a number of special issues that are of concern to countries. These include an estimate of the loss of potential value from preferential agreements; the impact of taking a much higher (double) income assumption; the effect of the Uruguay Round on world market price stability and the effect on tariff escalation for selected commodities.
While the study is not exhaustive it provides the basis for a number of policy conclusions for countries to consider, in particular the need to review national food policies with a view to profiting from potentially higher world food prices and to offsetting the increase in food import bills that is one of the most likely consequences for most countries.
This is the first of the Secretariat's detailed analyses of the impact of the Uruguay Round on agriculture. It is planned to extend this work to cover other agricultural commodities in the future. We would welcome comments by readers on this study.
R.J. Perkins Director Commodities and Trade Division FAO
<section>2</section>
I. Introduction
After seven years of negotiations the Uruguay Round Multilateral Trade Negotiations were concluded on December 15, 1993. The Final Act of the Uruguay Round, signed at Marrakesh in April 1994, is wider in scope than any of its predecessors. The tariff cuts are deeper; non-tariff barriers are tackled more comprehensively; and for the first time two major sectors, services and agriculture, have been included in the negotiated agreement. While the Final Act covers agreements, decisions and declarations on a wide variety of subjects several of which will be of great economic significance to the world economy and to the economies of the developing countries, this study focuses mainly on the impact of the Agreement on Agriculture on trade flows and prices for the main agricultural commodities.
The approach to the assessment has been to re-run FAO projections for most of the main agricultural commodities to take into account important changes in national policies that have taken place since the projections were last done^1 together with the Uruguay Round changes to be accomplished by the year 2000 (the great bulk of developed countries and over 60 percent of the concessions of the developing countries making reduction commitments). These new projections confirm earlier conclusions that prices in international markets will be 4 to 10 percent higher and point to significant changes in trade patterns. These are analyzed in Section III of the study. Section IV of the paper considers the impact of these changes on the four developing regions. Some special issues are covered in Section V. The methodology is briefly outlined in Annex I.
<section>3</section>
II. A brief review of the agreement on agriculture
The implementation of the Agreement on Agriculture will start in 1995, and the reduction commitments of the developed countries should be completed within six years, i.e. by the year 2000, whereas the commitments of the developing countries should be completed within ten years, i.e. by the year 2004. The least developed countries are not required to make any reductions. The commodities included are most of the products normally considered as part of agriculture (i.e. it excludes fishery and forest products) except that it also excludes rubber, jute, sisal, abaca and coir, which were covered in the normal GATT tariff negotiations on goods.
There are three elements in the commitment on market access: tariffication, tariff reduction and access opportunities. Tariffication means that specific non-tariff barriers (quotas, variable levies, minimum import prices, discretionary licensing, state trading measures, voluntary restraint agreements and similar border measures) need to be abolished and converted into an equivalent tariff. Ordinary tariffs, including those resulting from tariffication, are to be reduced by an average of 36 percent (24 percent by developing countries), with a minimum rate of reduction of 15 percent for each tariff item. Special safeguard provisions allow the imposition of additional duties when there are either import surges or particularly low prices (both compared with 1986-88 levels). Where there are no significant imports, minimum access equal to 3 percent of domestic consumption in 1986-88 will be established for 1995 rising to 5 percent of base year consumption at the end of the
implementation period.
For domestic support policies, subject to reduction commitments, the total support given in 1986-88, measured by the Total Aggregate Measure of Support (Total AMS)^2, should be reduced by about 20 percent in developed countries (13.3 percent in developing countries). Reduction commitments refer to total levels of support and not to individual commodities. Policies which amount to a small percentage transfer value to producers (less than 5 percent of the value of production for developed countries, less than 10 percent for developing countries) are also excluded under the de minimis rule. Policies which meet certain criteria of decoupled support together with production restraint have been excluded. Policies which have minimal or no effect on production or trade distorting effects (Green Box") are excluded. The list of exempted "Green Box" policies includes such policies as general services to agriculture, food security stocks, domestic food aid, and certain decoupled
payments to producers, including direct payments to production-limiting programmes, providing certain conditions are met.
As regards developing countries, which have been given special and differential treatment in the Agreement on Agriculture, purchases for and sales from food security stocks could be at administered prices provided that the subsidy to producers is included in the AMS. As regards domestic food aid, developing countries are allowed untargeted subsidized food distribution to meet requirements of the urban and rural poor on a regular basis. Also excluded for developing countries are investment subsidies that are generally available to agriculture and agricultural input subsidies generally available to poor farmers in these countries. Developing countries were allowed to offer ceiling bindings instead of tariffication.
Perhaps the most important provision is the commitment to reduce export subsidies. The volume of exports benefiting from such subsidies must be reduced by 21 percent and the expenditure on export subsidies by 36 percent. Unlike the reduction commitments in market access and domestic support, reductions in export subsidies will be implemented on a product-specific basis. However, exporters have in certain cases been allowed to maintain a higher level of subsidized exports in the years up to 1999, by availing themselves of a special option (the higher of the subsidized levels of 1991-92 and 1986-90) from which to make reductions to the same final level by the year 2000. The Final Act also has some provisions for prevention of circumvention of export subsidy commitments, including inter alia disciplines on use of export credit and credit guarantees as well as food aid (i.e. food aid should not be tied, it should be carried out in accordance with the FAO Principles of Surplus
Disposal, and it should be provided to the extent possible in fully grant form).
Finally, in addition to the special and differential provisions mentioned above, there are special provisions for developing countries contained in the Decision on Measures Concerning the Possible Negative Effects of the Reform Programme on Least -Developed and Net Food Importing Countries. The idea behind the Decision is that agricultural trade liberalization is likely to lead to higher world prices for food while a reduction in export subsidies will also raise the effective price paid by importers. There is also some concern that the volume of food aid, which historically has been closely linked to the level of surplus stocks, could be more limited in future as the surplus stocks are run down. The Decision recognizes these issues and provides for some redress, via food aid, technical assistance to raise agricultural productivity and possibly short term assistance to help in financing normal commercial imports.
The Agreement on Agriculture, although rather comprehensive and going well beyond tariffs and border measures, still represents only a partial liberalization agreement. The quantitative cuts in support to agriculture are relatively small and spread over a number of years. Overall, a large degree of distortion in the world market of agricultural commodities will still remain even after the complete implementation of the reduction commitments. However, the dimensions of the commitments are still impressive. Aggregate domestic support will be cut from US$198 billion to US$162 billion, export subsidies will be cut from US$21.3 billion to US$13.8 billion. Virtually all agricultural tariffs will in future be bound, i.e. ceiling rates have been established, which adds greater security to trade.
The impact on income growth is hard to estimate as considerable liberalization has occurred in the services sector for which at present it is not possible to quantify the effects, The GATT has made a number of estimates ranging from gains of US$109-510 billion^3. The World Bank/OECD has estimated gains of around US$213 billion^4.
The question of the impetus to world income deriving from the Uruguay Round is of great importance in assessing the impact; for the purposes of this study the World Bank/OECD figure was taken for the main scenario while double this amount was taken for the higher income assumption. However, as the main thrust of this paper is the revised outlook for world agricultural markets in the year 2000, it must be noted that the assumed effect is well below one year's growth in world income.
Before turning to the commodity detail however, a word is in order on some of the methodological assumptions lying behind these projections. In all cases models have been developed which simultaneously determine production, consumption, imports, exports and world prices. All countries are covered. The existing "baseline" projections to the year 2000 are driven by income growth, productivity changes and demographic trends. The prices in each country are linked to world market prices by tariffs and other policy effects and natural forms of protection. For the "Uruguay Round scenario" the reduction in tariffs changes these price linkages. The meddling has been done in terms of the primary commodity (e.g. wheat) so that the tariff changes for the derived products (e.g. wheat flour) have been aggregated into an average wheat-equivalent tariff. It has usually been assumed that tariff changes will reflect changes in the bound, ceiling, tariffs. The reduction in export subsidies has
been reflected in an increase in the consumer price of the recipient country in addition to any change in world prices due to trade liberalization. For exporters that use subsidies for all their exports, a maximum has been introduced on the volume of their exports. For those exporters which only subsidize a part of their exports, no such constraint has been modelled but it is still assumed that this will erode part of their competitiveness and hence influence the volume of their exports. Minimum access has been introduced in all cases where the model did not generate a sufficient volume of imports to meet the national commitments. The value of trade has been calculated by multiplying the volume of trade by an estimated world average export unit value for the year 2000, which in turn was projected as the product of the index of world prices and the base year export unit value. Adjustments were made to take into account the decline in export subsidies and to some extent the
loss of preferential margins.
<section>4</section>
III. Impact on selected agricultural markets
Overview
Wheat
Rice
Coarse grains
Oils and fats and oilmeals
Sugar
Meat
Milk and milk products
Coffee
Cocoa
Tea
Bananas
Hides and skins
Overview
As previously reported, the overall growth in the production of the selected commodities is projected to decline slightly compared with the 1980s (Tables la to 1g). The decrease in growth rates is greatest in rice, meat other than bovine, dairy products, coffee and cocoa. By contrast some increases are envisaged for tea and bananas. The impact of the Uruguay Round is negligible on world agricultural production.
The growth rate for global consumption of the agricultural commodities covered by this study is also projected to decrease, with the exception of bananas. Allowing for population growth at 1. 7 percent a year, per caput consumption is expected to decrease for dairy products, grains, beef and coffee, while per caput consumption of vegetable oils, some meat, tea, bananas, cocoa and rubber should rise. On balance, the Agreement will slightly slow consumption growth in the Low-Income, Food-Deficit Countries.
The Uruguay Round is not seen as arresting the slowdown in the growth rate of world agricultural trade, despite a positive effect on the growth in trade for rice, fats and oils and bovine meat and to a lesser extent most of the other commodities. It is possible that the commodities not covered by this study, accounting for 41 percent of the total value of agricultural trade, will enjoy greater benefits, including cotton and some horticultural products.
For the developing countries, the import growth rate is expected to decline for cereals, the oilseed sector, dairy, some meat and tropical products. The growth rate of their bovine meat and banana imports are seen as accelerating. By contrast the exports of the developing countries are expected to expand more rapidly than in the eighties for rice, coarse grains, dairy, tea, sugar and bananas. Their slight net surplus in 1987-89 for the commodities studied is unlikely to change by 2000.
For the developed countries, the growth rates of both imports and exports are expected to weaken. In the case of imports, there is expected to be a sharp decrease in growth of virtually all the main temperate zone products but export growth is also expected to fade. Overall the developed countries would remain large net exporters of temperate zone commodities in 2000 but close to balance in the main agricultural commodities covered in this study. In all these commodities, however, some countries will gain and others lose, while each commodity has some particular characteristics that cannot be captured in these overall summary statistics. In what follows, therefore, the detailed analysis of the revised projections to the year 2000 are described together with some observations on the impact of the Uruguay Round which, it is worth emphasizing, is usually rather small compared with all the other changes taking place between the base period and the year 2000.
Table 1a - Growth of Production of Selected Agricultural Commodities, Past and Projected
Table 1b - Growth of Consumption of Selected Agricultural Commodities, Past and Projected
Table 1c - Growth of Imports of Selected Agricultural Commodities, Past and Projected
Table 1d - Growth of Exports of Selected Agricultural Commodities, Past and Projected
Table 1e - World: Base period 1987-89 average and Projections to the year 2000, Base-line and GATT simulation
Table 1f - Developing countries: Base period 1987-89 average and Projections to tile year 2000, Base-line and GATT simulation
Table 1g . Developed countries: Base period 1987-89 average and Projections to the year 2000, Base-line and GATT simulation
Wheat
Production. Global wheat production is projected to increase by 1.6 percent annually during the 1990s, reaching 631 million tonnes by the year 2000, compared with a volume of 520 million tonnes during the base period (1987-89). However, these projection results indicate somewhat slower growth in production than would have been the case without the Uruguay Round. The global output of wheat is expected to shrink by 2 million tonnes due to the Uruguay Round, which is the net result of an almost 7 million tonne decline in the developed countries and a 5 million tonne gain in the developing countries.
The growth expected among the developing countries largely stems from yield advances, but higher relative wheat prices are also assumed to improve production incentives in many developing countries. In particular, some 80 percent of the increase in the wheat output due to the Uruguay Round is likely to be accounted for by four countries: Argentina, China, India and Pakistan. The gains for Argentina are driven primarily by export demand as other major wheat exporters are expected to reduce their production and cut subsidized exports. The significant gains in outputs for China, India and Pakistan are largely explained by increased producer prices.
At the same time, restrictions on production support and limits on export subsidies under the Uruguay Round are forecast to reduce the output in most developed countries, in particular in the member countries of the EC and the United States, compared to the base projections. By comparison, output will expand in Australia due to higher prices. Wheat production could also increase by over half a million tonnes in the area of the former USSR. One expected result of the Uruguay Round, therefore, is a partial shift in grain production away from some traditional developed producing countries toward developing countries with the overall net effect of somewhat smaller global wheat output in 2000.
Demand. In both projection scenarios, i.e. with and without the impact of the Uruguay Round, wheat consumption is forecast to grow less during the 1990s compared to the previous decade. Rising real wheat prices, assumed to result from the Uruguay Round, are likely to have an additional dampening effect compared to the baseline projection which showed falling real prices. As a result of the Uruguay Round, aggregate utilization of wheat at the global level is expected to shrink by about 2 million tonnes to 630 million tonnes, most of it occurring in the developing countries, largely in the Far East and Latin America. These reductions in consumption are mainly due to widespread increases in domestic prices of wheat. Most of the slowdown is expected in feed use as wheat is expected to become more expensive compared to alternative grains. The growth in the demand for feed use of wheat is also likely to diminish in those countries which have heavily subsidized such use in the past
but are not likely to do so during the 1990s, in particular in the area of the former USSR and eastern Europe. By contrast, utilization of wheat as feed is likely to expand in the developed countries, mainly in North America, Oceania and the Republic of South Africa. Growth in food consumption of wheat is also forecast to slow under the Uruguay Round. Although per caput food consumption should continue to increase in the developing countries of Africa under the Uruguay Round, it may show little or no change among other developing regions and the developed countries compared to the baseline projections.
The projection results suggest that income gains due to the Uruguay Round may not be adequate to offset the dampening effects of higher prices on the demand for wheat. In the case of the Far East, for example, lower wheat use is associated with increased consumption of rice, whose domestic price is projected to rise on average by less than one percent compared to almost 4 percent for wheat.
Prices. FAO's World Food Model (WFM) shows that the implementation of the Uruguay Round is projected to raise international wheat prices by 7 percent in real terms by the year 2000, compared with a scenario without the Round when prices would have fallen by 3 percent (Table 2). The impact of the Uruguay Round on wheat prices is more than for most other grains due in part to the greater degree of subsidization of wheat in the past. Regional price changes resulting from the Uruguay Round scenario show that the average domestic prices of wheat are expected to be highest in Latin America, the Far East and Oceania, whereas they would be lower for western Europe and North America, where subsidies were the highest. On the other hand, prices of grains are not likely to change much in the Near East, Africa, eastern Europe and the area of the former USSR.
Trade. The projections of production and consumption for world wheat trade point to slower growth during the 1990s, compared to the previous decade. Global wheat trade by the year 2000 is projected to show little change from the average base period (1987-89) volume of 114 million tonnes. However, this volume would still be considerably above the current annual range of 92-94 million tonnes to which trade had fallen in recent years. The greatest effects are expected for the developed countries, in particular the EC, where, following CAP reform, feed demand is expected to increase, thus reducing export availabilities. In the area of the former USSR and eastern Europe, feed use is likely to be reduced sharply, and thus imports, due to lower livestock numbers.
The effect of the Uruguay Round on trade is likely to be a lower volume of wheat imports of about 3 million tonnes when compared the baseline projections. In particular, some countries of Asia and Latin America are likely to produce more grains for their own requirements, leading to a slow-down of growth in their import demand for wheat. Most of the projected reduction in imports is likely to occur in four developing countries, i.e. Brazil, China, India and Pakistan, mainly due to gains in production. On the other hand, most of the projected rise in imports is likely to be accounted for by the EC, Poland and the Republic of South Africa. Furthermore, the increase in the minimum access volume for wheat by the end of the implementation period amounts to some 300 000 tonnes over the initial quota, or 2 percent, with most of the reported increases scheduled for Canada, Hungary and Japan.
Given the increase in prices assumed under the Uruguay Round, the value of the wheat trade would increase by just under US$ 700 million compared to a projection without the Uruguay Round, despite a rather stable trade volume. The bulk of higher import costs would fall on the developed countries whose import value is likely to increase by just over US$ 700 million. The largest share of the higher import bills is predicted for the EC and South Africa. By contrast, the financial burden of importing wheat could diminish slightly under the Uruguay Round for the developing countries in aggregate since their volume of imports are projected to decline sufficiently to offset the higher prices. By far, the most substantial decline in the import costs of wheat should be in the Far East where production gains and restrained demand should contribute to smaller import requirements. Nevertheless, all other developing regions are expected to face higher import expenditures due to the
Uruguay Round, in particular, Africa and the Near East.
Among the major exporters of wheat, shipments are projected to fall markedly from both the EC and the United States (by about 3 million tonnes each), while those from Australia and Argentina would expand. While the commitments to reduce domestic support programmes are not commodity specific, and therefore were not explicitly accounted for in the projections, the commitments to reduce subsidized wheat exports are substantial, amounting to some 19 million tonnes by the end of the implementation period. Total subsidized wheat exports are scheduled to fall from 59 million tonnes in the initial year to 40 million tonnes by 2004 (a drop of 32 percent). Some three-quarters of the volume reductions are accounted for by the three largest exporters, the EC-12 (5.7 million tonnes), the United States (5.7 million tonnes) and Canada (4.7 million tonnes). Other countries making significant subsidy reduction commitments on wheat are Austria, Hungary, the Nordic countries, South Africa and
Turkey and, therefore, are also likely to reduce their export volumes in general.
Table 2 - Change in international food prices between 1987-89 and by the year 2000
Base Run Uruguay Round Effect Total^a
percent
Wheat -3 +7 +4
Rice +7 +7 +15
Maize +3 +4 +7
Millet/Sorghum +6 +4 +10
Other Grains -3 +7 +5
Fats and Oils -4 +4 0
Oilmeal Proteins +3 0 +3
Bovine Meat +6 +8 +14
Pigmeat +3 +10 +13
Sheep Meat +13 +10 +24
Poultry +5 +8 +14
Milk +32 +7 +41
a Total does not necessarily equal the sum of the two effects
Conclusions. The overall impact of the Uruguay Round agreement on global production, utilization and trade of wheat in the year 2000 should be fairly modest, although some significant effects are expected in terms of shifts in the location of production, the direction of trade flows and the share in trade volumes. The Uruguay Round projections confirm widely held expectations that wheat production and exports would shift away from countries with high production support and export subsidies towards less-subsidizing producers, including net importing countries. At the same time, smaller export subsidies could lead to increased international wheat prices, which would contribute to dampening demand.
The impact on trade resulting from the Uruguay Round depends to a large extent on the level of export subsidies that are scheduled to be reduced. The smaller trade subsidies are expected to raise international wheat prices which should stimulate production in some countries and, at the same time, dampen domestic demand, thus reducing overall global wheat imports. The degree to which the higher international prices are transmitted to domestic markets, however, will depend on the actual level of tariffs, which could be at or below the bound rates. In the case of wheat, the full effects of the higher world prices are not expected to be felt in many countries because tariffs will still be high. In addition, the relatively small minimum access commitments for wheat are not likely to offset the effects of the higher prices on imports.
The impact of the Uruguay Round on world wheat trade is attenuated by the fact that a number of the major importing countries are not members of the WTO. This group of countries account for some 22 million tonnes, or 22 percent, of recent world imports. These countries, while not contributing to the change in market conditions, are affected by it and it may be expected that several of these will eventually join the WTO.
Table 3: WHEAT - Commodity Balances, 1987-89 Average, 2000 Baseline and 2000 Uruguay Round Scenarios
Rice
Production. Global output of rice (milled equivalent) is projected to grow at 1.8 percent per annum to reach 404 million tonnes in 2000, a rate of growth and a level of production which is only marginally different from the baseline projections before taking into account the outcome of the Uruguay Round. The future expansion in rice production will hinge on improvements in yields and advances in plant technology. The area under rice is projected to increase only slightly, and mainly in Africa where land is more widely available and where large tracts of upland and swampland could be brought under cultivation. In both the Far East and the Near East, the possibilities for increasing the area under rice are minimal. In Latin America the rate of expansion in rice plantings is expected to slowdown due to the high production costs. In the United States, an increase in total output is likely to occur, largely from improvements in yields due to advances in plant technology.
While at the global level production is not expected to change notably due to the Uruguay Round, moderate changes would occur in some countries. Production of rice in some developing Far Eastern countries is projected to rise marginally as a result of the Round, but output in developed countries, especially Japan and the EC is likely to be significantly smaller. Japan's opening of its market is expected to stimulate exporting countries to raise production to meet the additional demand generated by Japan's commitment to buy rice in the international market.
Demand. The impact of the Round on rice demand is expected to be even less pronounced than on output. Between 198789 and 2000, world demand for milled rice is projected to increase at 1.8 percent annually to reach 402 million tonnes in 2000, a rate of growth and a level of consumption similar to that projected before the effects of the Round were considered. Per caput food consumption of rice during the period is likely to grow at a negligible rate, globally gaining just one kilogramme for the entire decade to reach 58 kilogrammes per head. In the EC and Japan, consumption of rice is unlikely to change significantly, the reduction in domestic output being compensated by increased imports of rice. Likewise, consumer prices for rice will probably be affected little by the introduction of market access. In Japan, for example, the current import mark-up of 292 yen per kilo of rice (US$2 016.2/tonne) if maintained, will keep consumer prices the highest in the world.
Trade. The effect of the Uruguay Round on trade, by contrast, would be substantially more pronounced than for production and consumption, both in terms of its impact on the volume of transactions and on international market prices. Vital to these projected developments, is the assumption of full implementation of the minimum access provisions agreed to at the Round. Under this assumption, world rice imports would increase by 3.8 percent annually, a substantially faster rate of growth than in the previous decade, to reach 18.9 million tonnes in 2000. This would be slightly over one million tonnes more than what could be achieved without the Agreement, and 6.8 million tonnes higher than in the base period.
The impact of the Round on world imports, although substantial, is expected to be highly localised. The impact of the Agreement on imports of Africa, the Near East and Latin America and the Caribbean is expected to be insignificant. Imports into Africa are forecast to rise by 3.3 percent annually to 3.8 million tonnes, which would be 1.2 million tonnes more than in 1987-89, but only marginally higher than the present day level. Although output of rice in Africa is projected to increase by over 4 percent per annum, demand for rice would rise at an almost equal pace. As a result, it is likely to continue to rely on imports to meet over 30 percent of its total demand irrespective of the effects of the Round. Likewise, imports into the Near East, projected to rise by 4.8 percent per annum, would reach 4.3 million tonnes. The Near East's relatively rapid growth as a major importing region would not be so much the result of the Uruguay Round, than of the demand of its immigrant
Asian work force and the limited possibilities for raising production to keep pace with consumption growth. Latin America's imports would increase, to account for nearly 10 percent of the world market largely because of production constraints not connected with the Uruguay Round.
In the Far East, however, the Round is expected to have a more noticeable impact. Imports into the developing countries of the region could expand at a much faster rate than without the Uruguay Round, reaching 3.9 million tonnes, and reversing the decline of the previous decade. This projected acceleration, however, will only materialise if the Republic of Korea, Indonesia and Thailand buy the entire amount of rice stipulated under the minimum access provisions. By 2000, the Republic of Korea, which has opted to deter tariffication, would be importing about 2 percent of its consumption requirements in the base year. Thailand has agreed to allow 245 000 tonnes of rice imports in 2000, subject to a 30 percent import duty and Indonesia has subjected its minimum access of 70 000 tonnes to a 90 percent import duty. Whether these tariffs will be low enough to allow the volume of imports indicated is uncertain. Amongst the Far Eastern importing countries, however, the biggest
concession comes from Japan which is expected to import 758 000 tonnes of rice by 2000.
The imports of the European Community are also expected to be affected substantially by the Uruguay Round. Although total gross imports into the EC may not change very much, the large reduction in its tariff on rice imports from third countries, and more important, the "ceiling duty-paid import price" established for rice, are likely to enable third country exporters to raise their market share in the EC trade.
The export trade in rice by the year 2000 will undergo significant structural changes, especially in the Far East. Many of these changes are, however, not related to the Round. For example, Bangladesh, largely self-sufficient in rice in recent years, is expected to become a small exporter because of higher production. Indonesia, an occasional exporter in the past years, could be exporting small quantities more regularly. Viet Nam's exports are projected to reach 2.6 million tonnes, displacing the United States as the world's second largest exporter. Pakistan's exports would fluctuate around present day levels because competition for land-use by other crops would limit increases in its output of rice. China, an exporter in the base period would emerge as a substantial net importer, as its exports are projected to decline significantly from recent levels. Exports from Myanmar are likely to increase significantly because of a likely expansion in output. For these countries,
differences between the rates of growth projected before and after the Round are small.
However, some important changes will result from the Round. Thailand, currently the world's largest rice exporter, is projected to maintain its dominance in the world market with export volumes reaching 6.8 million tonnes; at least some 0.5 million tonnes of the projected trade being linked to the Uruguay Round stimulated opening of the market for rice in the Far East. China's decline in exports would not be a result of the Round, but the direction of its future export trade would be affected. With domestic prices for rice likely to escalate over the next few years, China, which exported mainly to Africa in the past, may concentrate principally on selling small quantities of Japonica rice to Japan where the high prices offered could prove sufficiently remunerative. Among the Asian exporting countries, India may be the most affected by the Round. Over the next few years, India's exports are projected to expand substantially, benefiting especially from changes in the Uruguay
Round induced EC regulations on rice imports from third countries and especially because Basmati rice from India will be allowed to enter the EC at a reduced rate of import duty.
Outside of Asia, important changes may also occur to export trade. During the five year period 1995-2000, the relative competitiveness of the United States and the EC rice exports may change because of their different schedules of commitments for reducing export subsidies brought about by the use of different base years. For the major part of the period 1995 - 2000, the United States export subsidies on rice could well exceed that of 1986-88 whereas in the case of the EC a definite decline from those years is scheduled. Partly reflecting this, rice exports from the EC are projected to fall in contrast to the moderate projected increase in the baseline scenario. Exports from the United States, however, are likely to be virtually unaffected by the Round.
The opening of the rice market following the Round and the stronger growth in import demand relative to export supplies are expected to boost international rice prices. In real terms, prices are likely to increase by some 15 percent over the base period, compared to a percent rise in the baseline projections without the Uruguay Round effect. The increase in international rice prices and in the volume of trade is likely to boost the value of global rice trade by 15 percent above what it would be without the Round and 80 percent higher than in 1988.
Conclusions. The Agreements reached at the Uruguay Round could have significant implications for world rice trade. By 2000, global rice trade may be boosted by some 6.8 million tonnes (50 percent) from the base period, while international rice prices in real terms may experience a 15 percent rise from 1988. At least 17 percent of the increase in the volume of trade and about 50 percent of the rise in prices may be attributed to the Round. Such a large impact on trade, however, hinges critically on countries importing the full amount under their minimum access provisions, as the international rice market will not be significantly affected by reductions in tariffs. In most countries, import duties on rice will remain very high by 2000 and, hence, continue to constrain the expansion of trade.
A rise in the volume of shipments and prices will increase the value of rice trade and boost export earnings, especially of the developing countries. For the latter, export earnings from rice are projected to be lifted by over 90 percent from the base year, 17 percent more than if the Round had not been concluded. These large increases by the year 2000, would mean that amongst food grain commodities rice will continue to rank as the most important source of foreign exchange earnings for developing countries.
At a projected US$ 5.1 billion, rice export earnings of developing countries will be 3.4 times their earnings from wheat exports; 2.7 times those from maize and nearly 16 times those from millet and sorghum.
At the same time, importers would be confronted with a larger import bill. The bulk of such increase in expenditures, however, would be borne by developed countries, where most of the increase in the volume of imports would occur.
The impact of the Round on production, by contrast, is not expected to be large in the next few years. This is because no major changes in domestic support to rice are expected to result from the Round at the global level, because the political and economic importance of rice as well as its role as a staple food would help ensure continued support to its production. Any significant changes in production support in the future would more likely be on account of Structural Adjustment Programmes embarked upon by countries and/or of the rapid expansion of industrialization pursued by some countries, both tending to result in a contraction in the support to agriculture.
Table 4: RICE - Commodity Balances, 1987-89 Average, 2000 Baseline and 2000 Uruguay Round Scenarios
Coarse grains
Production. Projections of global coarse grain production point to stronger growth during the 1990s (1.7 percent annually) than during the previous decade to reach 971 million tonnes by the year 2000. Over two-thirds of the forecast increase of 176 million tonnes is expected in the developing countries, primarily in the Far East (largely China), Latin America and the Caribbean and Africa. The bulk of the increase (84 percent) is projected for maize, followed by sorghum and other grains. As with wheat, most of the projected increase in output is attributed to higher yields, with most improvement expected in the developing countries.
The implementation of the Uruguay Round is anticipated to result only in a slight expansion of coarse grain production over the baseline projections, primarily in the developed countries. Global output of coarse grains is expected to be higher by 3 million tonnes. Three-quarters would occur in the developed countries, mostly in North America, (by 7 million tonnes) and about one million tonnes each in Oceania and South Africa, whereas production will be lower by 5 million tonnes in western Europe and by one million tonnes in eastern Europe. Output is projected to rise marginally in the area of the former USSR. In the developing countries, production is likely to contract by 3 million tonnes in the Far East compared with the baseline projection. This contraction would be offset almost fully by gains in Latin America, largely accounted for by Argentina and Brazil. In sub-Saharan Africa, the aggregate output gain of close to 800 000 tonnes is expected to be shared widely.
Demand. The global demand for coarse grains is projected to reach 968 million tonnes by the year 2000, for a growth of 1.3 percent annually. Virtually all of the projected expansion of coarse grain utilization during the 1990s, some 140 million tonnes, is forecast for the developing countries. Of the total increase, almost threequarters are forecast to be in feed use (primarily maize) with most of the balance of the increase expected for food consumption, resulting in a slight decline in per caput food use of coarse grains. There would be a strong growth among the developing countries towards livestock feeding, in contrast to an expected decline in the growth of feed use in the developed countries. In particular, Iced use is expected to decline in the area of the former USSR as projected slow income growth and higher prices are likely to reduce further the consumption of livestock products, which had reached very high levels in the base period due to significant consumer
subsidies. The Uruguay Round is not expected to increase significantly global coarse grain utilization, although the projection of more modest growth in coarse grain prices compared to wheat could encourage a shift in feed demand towards coarse grains, especially among the developed countries. As a result of the Uruguay Round, global utilization is expected to expand by about 2 million tonnes, almost entirely as feed in the developed countries. By region, utilization could rise moderately in North America and Oceania, and, to a lesser extent, in the EC, whereas contractions are expected for eastern Europe, Japan and the Republic of South Africa. In eastern Europe, the reduced feed use is mainly due to lower meat production.
Prices. The results of the Uruguay Round are projected to lead to moderate gains for maize and millet/sorghum while prices of other coarse grains (mainly barley) could rise by about 7 percent due to the Uruguay Round. This is largely due to the generally higher, and more widespread, protection provided to the "other" grains in earlier years. According to FAO's World Food Model (WFM), domestic maize prices are expected to increase among the major producing countries in Africa, Latin America and North America and to fall in Europe and the Far East. Average sorghum/millet prices will likely be higher in Africa and Latin America hut lower in North America. Major barley producing countries in the Near East and North America should experience higher prices, while barley prices in the EC, eastern Europe and the area of the former USSR should decline.
Trade. After almost no growth during the latter period of the 1980s, coarse grain trade is projected to expand by about one percent annually during the 1990s to 122 million tonnes. At this level, world trade would be substantially above current volumes of about 85 million tonnes. The bulk of the increase in coarse grain trade is expected to be in maize which normally accounts for two thirds of the global total. The projections show a strong rise in imports among the developing countries, almost 27 million tonnes, which account for all of the growth in coarse grain trade. By contrast, coarse grain imports are expected to decline among the developed countries by about 13 million tonnes, especially in the area of the former USSR and eastern Europe. The net increase in coarse grain trade of 14 million tonnes is projected to be equally shared among exporters in the developing and developed countries.
Only modest additional expansion in coarse grain trade is expected as a result of the Uruguay Round, with most of the increase in imports occurring in the developed countries. The projections point to a modest expansion of coarse grain imports at the global level, by about 2 million tonnes, of which two-thirds would be by the developed countries. The most significant impact is expected for western Europe where imports would be higher by 2 million tonnes. In the developing countries, increased production coupled with virtually no change in demand, would reduce the need to import by all regions, except the Far East. Here, imports would expand by close to 3 million tonnes, mainly for feed in China, and, to a lesser extent, Indonesia and the Philippines. By contrast, imports are expected to fall in Brazil, by almost 2 million tonnes, as a result of higher production. The minimum access commitments for coarse grains show a moderate increase in the quotas during the implementation
period of 755 000 tonnes, or about 5 percent over the initial quota. Most of the scheduled increases in the quotas for individual coarse grains, in descending order, are in maize, barley, sorghum and millet. Countries with the largest commitments are Canada (barley), China (sorghum and millet), Hungary (maize), the Philippines (maize), Poland (barley) and South Africa (maize).
The increase in the value of coarse grain trade as a result of the Uruguay Round is projected to be substantially higher than for wheat, amounting to over US$ 1 billion. Hover unlike for wheat, the burden of higher importing costs are also likely to be more equally distributed between developing and developed countries. Among the developing countries, the coarse grain import bills for Asia are predicted to rise by US$ 650 million as a result of the Uruguay Round, largely in the Far East for maize and barley. By comparison, Latin America should face smaller import costs for coarse grains of around US$ 100 million, primarily for maize, while Africa could experience a small net decline in its expenditures on coarse grain imports. The developed countries, as a group, may be confronted with an additional US$ 500 million cost to import coarse grains under the Uruguay Round, and perhaps a little more due to lower export subsidies. The EC and some other developed countries are
likely to have to pay, in aggregate, an extra US$ 500 million for coarse grain imports, especially for maize and barley, while the area of the former USSR and eastern Europe are projected to have lower import bills under the Uruguay Round by US$ 45 million although this could be offset by reduction of export subsidies.
As regards exports, the most striking change resulting from the Uruguay Round is likely to occur in North America and western Europe: while shipments from North America would expand by 3 million tonnes compared to the baseline, those from the latter would Pall by almost 4 million tonnes. Among other major exporters, shipments by Australia and Argentina are expected to rise.
These results are partly due to the level of subsidized coarse grains exports under the Uruguay Round which are scheduled to decline from 33 million tonnes in the base period to 26 million tonnes by the end of the implementation period (down 21 percent). Some 70 percent of the volume reductions are accounted for by four countries, the EC-12 (2.2 million tonnes), Hungary (1.1 million tonnes), Canada (0.8 million tonnes) and China (0.8 million tonnes). Other countries making significant subsidy reduction commitments in coarse grains are Mexico, South Africa, Turkey and the United States.
Conclusions. The effects of the Uruguay Round on coarse grains in terms of shifts in the location of production, the direction of trade flows and the share in trade volumes are not as significant as those for wheat.
This is due to the relatively low level of subsidies in the coarse grain sector compared to wheat. Nevertheless, some regions which have subsidized production and promoted exports in the past, such as in the EC, will likely face stronger competition in the future from those countries which had fewer coarse grain subsidies, such as in North America, in particular for maize and barley, Argentina [or maize, and Australia for barley. The effect of the reduction in subsidized exports under the Uruguay Round is also likely to be higher international coarse grain prices compared to a scenario without the Uruguay Round.
The effect of the market access commitments on the future volume of coarse grains imports will be determined to a large extent by the level of the bound tariffs and the in quota tariffs under the minimum access provisions. In many countries, the bound rates for coarse grains appear to be prohibitive, i.e. 100 percent or more, especially in some of the developing countries. In the case of maize, for example, countries with bound tariffs of 50 percent or more represent imports of 17 million tonnes, or 28 percent, of recent world trade. For those countries which offered minimum access commitments, the in-quota tariffs in some cases, in particular for maize and barley, are still high and would likely not increase the volume of imports.
As with wheat, a significant share of the world coarse grain trade is not directly covered under the Uruguay Round; about 20 million tonnes, or 22 percent, of the total imports. The largest shares of individual coarse grain imports not covered by the Agreement are for barley (53 percent of the world trade), rye (36 percent) and maize (17 percent).
Table 5: TOTAL COARSE GRAINS - Commodity Balances, 1987-89 Average, 2000 Baseline and 2000 Uruguay Round Scenarios
Table 6: MAIZE - Commodity Balances, 1987-89 Average, 2000 Baseline and 2000 Uruguay Round Scenarios
Table 7: MILLET AND SORGHUM - Commodity Balances, 1987- 89 Average ,2000 Baseline and 2000 Uruguay Round Scenarios
Table 8: OTHER COARSE GRAINS N.E.S. - Commodity Balances, 1987-89 Average, 2000 Baseline and 2000 Uruguay Round Scenarios
continue
<section>5</section>
Oils and fats and oilmeals
Production. World production of fats and oils is projected to reach 108.6 million tonnes by the year 2000, 42 percent above the 1987-1989 average. This output would be only marginally different (one percent higher) from the baseline projections before taking into account the impact of the Uruguay Round Final Act.
The additional quantity of oils and fats expected to be produced by the year 2000 as a result of the Uruguay Round (about one million tonnes) will be concentrated in the low-cost exporting countries of the Far East and Latin America and most of it would enter world trade. About three-quarters of the increase in production of oils and fats due to the Uruguay Round implementation is projected to be on account of larger availabilities of palm and palm kernel oils (which are the oils produced at lowest costs) originating mainly in Malaysia and Indonesia' where oilpalm plantings are expected to accelerate in response to the incentive of the Uruguay Round-induced higher prices for oils. Increases in soybean oil production, accounting for about 22 percent of the additional world output of oils and fats would largely originate from Brazil and Argentina. The export subsidy reduction commitments of the United Sates would result in a decrease of production in the United States. A
marginal increase is projected for production of lard and tallow, mainly on account of the Uruguay Round induced expansion of the livestock sector projected in North America, while world output of butter is projected to fall in response to the trend towards a reduction of the protection given to this commodity in many developed and developing countries.
In the case of oilmeals, world production is expected to amount to 71.7 million tonnes (100 percent protein) by the year 2000 nearly 43 percent above the average during 1987 to 1989 and only 0.7 percent higher than the baseline projections ignoring the outcome of the Uruguay Round. Over 90 percent of the additional production of oilmeals, largely of soybean meal, originating from Brazil and Argentina would be for export. The slight increase of the soybean meal production projected in the Far East (Indonesia mainly) would be absorbed by the local requirements for animal feeding.
Consumption. World consumption of fats and oils by the year 2000 is projected to be 108.3 million tonnes, i.e. almost 40 percent over the 1987-89 average, out of which 1.0 million tonnes would be due to the Uruguay Round. However, while the projected impact of Uruguay Round commitments on the consumption of oilseed-based commodities its expected to be modest at the global level, substantial changes would occur at regional or country levels, and for individual commodities.
About 55 percent of the projected increase in world consumption of oils and fats induced by the Uruguay Round is projected to occur in the developing countries. The Uruguay Round-induced higher price would result in a lowering of consumption in Latin America and Africa, but these decreases are expected to be largely offset by the substantial increase in consumption in the Far East region due to the demand-boosting effect of higher GDP growth.
In the developed countries, the global increase in consumption of oils and fats due to the Uruguay Round is estimated at 464 000 tonnes. Most of the additional growth in consumption is expected to occur in eastern Europe and the area of the former USSR.
World consumption of oilmeals by the year 2000 is expected to reach 71.7 million tonnes (100 percent protein equivalent), about 40 percent over the 1987-1989 annual average. The boost to world consumption resulting from the Uruguay Round is projected at 500 000 tonnes (100 percent protein equivalent). Almost all of this additional amount would occur in the developing countries (60 percent in the Far East and 30 percent in Latin America). As regards the developed countries, a decrease of 800 000 tonnes (100 percent protein equivalent) is expected to occur in the demand for oilmeals in Western Europe, resulting from the Uruguay Round-induced decline in livestock numbers. However, a rising output of livestock products as a result of the Uruguay Round is expected to lift the demand for oilmeals in North America (730 000 tonnes), which would largely offset the decline in the consumption in Western Europe. Therefore, the global growth in the consumption of oilmeals in the
developed countries by the year 2000 attributable to the Uruguay Round is expected to be minimal.
Trade. The effect of the implementation of the Uruguay Round on world trade in oilseed-based products, in particular oils and fats, would be greater than for production and consumption, largely as a consequence of the expected reduction in export subsidies, of the market access commitments and the general trend towards liberalization and increased transparency of trade. The average of reduction commitments of ad valorem tariffs, which are the most used form of protection is of 11.3 percent for oilmeals, 16.4 percent for fats and oils and 15.1 percent for butter. Minimum and current access commitments have been established by some developing and developed countries, but they cover only 5 percent of the world trade in fats and oils and 6 percent of the trade in oilmeals and the increase in access offered during the implementation period is small. The export subsidy reduction commitments cover 18 percent of the world trade in fats and oils (6 percent of which for developing
countries), and 11 percent of the trade in oilmeals (7 percent for developing countries). The incidence of the full implementation of commitments by the year 2000 to reduce by a global 29 percent^5 the subsidized exports of fats and oils and by 17 percent the subsidized exports of oilmeals will be significant (these reductions refer to the trade in quantity, and include the oil and respectively the oilmeal content of traded oilseeds).
It is important to note that while the projections for trade in oils, fats and oilmeals by the year 2000 have been revised to take account of the Uruguay Round commitments, this study assumes no revisions to preferential agreements, such as the Generalized System of Preferences and the Lom Convention.
World trade in these commodities is expected to amount to 69.3 million tonnes (38.5 million tonnes of oils and fats and 30.8 million tonnes of oilmeals - 100 percent protein equivalent), 1.8 percent above the forecast figure excluding the Uruguay Round. The value of world trade in oilseeds, oils and oilmeals, which would have risen by 32 percent between 1987-1989 and the year 2000 in the absence of the Uruguay Round, is now projected to increase by an additional 6 percent to US$29 600 million by the end of the century. Developing countries would account for a considerably larger share of the increase in trade than the developed countries.
World trade in fats and oils by the year 2000 would reach 38.5 million tonnes, 47 percent above the 1987-1989 average. The additional trade resulting from the implementation of Uruguay Round is estimated at 1.3 million tonnes. The bulk of the Uruguay Round induced increases in exports of fats and oils is projected to be in vegetable oils originating from Latin America, i.e. Brazil and Argentina (with combined exports of soybean and sunflower oils of 520 000 tonnes) and in palm oil from the Far Eastern countries, i.e. Malaysia and Indonesia (with combined exports of palm and palm kernel oil of 640 000 tonnes). The global effect of the Uruguay Round on exports of fats and oils from developed countries is expected to be minimal, as the slight increases in the exports induced in North America is expected to be offset by a decrease in export availabilities of eastern Europe. About two-thirds of additional imports by the year 2000 resulting from the Uruguay Round would be
concentrated in large importing countries in the Far East, in particular China. The balance would be imported by developed countries in wester Europe, eastern Europe and Japan, reflecting the effect of increased GDP and the trend to reduce protection, which would limit domestic production.
Global world trade in oilmeals due to the Uruguay Round is projected to decrease marginally by the year 2000, compared to the level of trade in the baseline projections. This is largely the result of over 800 000 tonnes decrease projected in the imports of western Europe. By contrast, the imports of the developing countries are expected to increase by over 600 0(10 tonnes, mainly due to larger purchases by some Far Eastern (China, Indonesia, the Philippines) and Latin American countries.
Prices. Uruguay Round commitments to reduce subsidies to production and exports would induce some reallocation of production and trade, and world prices are expected to be higher than they would have been in the absence of the Uruguay Round. The impact on prices is particularly marked for commodities for which protectionism is most widespread, namely butter whose world prices by the year 2000, assuming full Uruguay Round implementation, are expected to be 12 percent higher than in the absence of Uruguay Round. The impact of the Uruguay Round on prices is expected to be stronger for vegetable oils than for oilmeals, and world prices in real terms of vegetable oils are expected to be 4 percent higher by year 2000, against almost no change for oilmeals.
Conclusions. The Uruguay Round impact on world production and consumption of both oils and oilmeals is likely to be limited, but somewhat larger for the volume of world trade in oils, for the international market prices of oils and fats and for the value of the world trade in oilseeds, oils and oilmeals.
The bulk of the Uruguay Round-induced increases in the production and exports of oils is projected to be in the developing countries in the Far East and in Latin America, chiefly on account of palm and palm kernel oils from Malaysia and Indonesia and soybean-based products from Brazil and Argentina, while for oilmeals the major expansion would lake place in Latin America.
By the year 2000, the increase in import demand will be mainly for fats and oils in the Far East, particularly China, and less marked expansions are expected in imports of oils and fats in eastern European countries (Poland and Romania) and western Europe.
The implementation of the Uruguay Round would increase not only the transparency of the trade environment in the sector, but also the competition for markets between exporting developing countries, which would still be confronted with competition from subsidized exports mainly from developed countries.
Both exporting and importing countries will be required to conform to the SPS Agreement and ensure that the standards governing international trade, including those on aflatoxin contamination, remain in conformity with the Agreement without creating barriers to trade because of their excessive stringency.
Table 9: TOTAL FATS AND OILS . Commodity Balances, 1987-89 Average, 2000 Baseline and 2000 Uruguay Round Scenarios
Table 10: OILMEAL PROTEINS - Commodity Balances, 1987-89 Average, 2000 Baseline and 2000 Uruguay Round Scenarios
Sugar
Introduction. The impact of implementing the Uruguay Round on the world sugar economy is expected to be relatively limited. The following analysis is of a preliminary nature, reflecting mainly the consensus of opinion regarding the likely effects of agreed commitments on trade flows and price levels. Analysis of the full implications at the global level and for individual countries will be covered in detail in a new joint study of prospects in the world sugar economy to be carried out by FAO and the International Sugar Organisation in the latter part of 1995. The last joint projections study of the two organizations was published in 1992, and subsequent developments indicate the need for reassessment of projected trends for individual countries. Therefore, the present analysis has been carried out at a high level of aggregation. It assumes no further policy changes apart from the implementation of the Uruguay Round agreements, for example further national sugar policy
reforms or changes in preferential trade agreements. Moreover, stocks are taken as constant. Though providing only a rough indication, the analysis at the regional and global level gives some indication of the direction and magnitude of changes in trade which might result from the Uruguay Round.
Over 55 percent of world sugar production and consumption takes place in developing countries. About 25 percent of world production is traded internationally, with developing countries accounting for about 65 percent of total exports. On the importing side, the developed and developing regions shared about equally the total market in 1987-89. However, because of underlying factors affecting consumption, the projected growth is expected to continue to be rapid in the developing countries while import demand would stagnate or decline in the developed regions. Almost every government intervenes in the sugar market, and various restrictions and regulations in different forms are imposed on sugar production and trade. As a reflection of the role of sugar as a foodstuff and important source of calories, as well as the sensitivity of farm support measures in many major sugar producing areas, under the Uruguay Round little change will occur in domestic support programmers since
existing regimes are generally considered to be consistent with the provisions of the Agreements, particularly in the European Community and the United States. Nevertheless, the extent of future support programmer is under discussion within the context of domestic legislative processes. Should changes be made in regulatory provisions, there could be far-reaching effects on global production and trade of sugar.
Uruguay Round provisions affecting sugar markets. Among the elements under the Uruguay Round Agreement on Agriculture that are foreseen to have an impact on the world sugar market are tariffication, tariff reduction, minimum access provisions and reductions in export subsidies. Tariffs are widely used by governments to intervene in trade in sugar. According to a recent study by the International Sugar Organisation (ISO), almost all countries involved in sugar trade impose tariffs or duties on sugar imports. The importance of preferential treatment of imports has been sharply curtailed since the mid-eighties and it is estimated that the volume of preferential trade is currently less than 3 million tonnes compared to about 8 million tonnes in 1985. It is therefore significant that under the Uruguay Round 89 countries have agreed to reduce tariffs on sugar imports, though average rates will still remain very high. On average, the developing and developed countries would reduce
tariff rates on raw sugar imports by 22 percent and 16 percent, respectively, by 2004. For white sugar, the developed countries will undertake a larger average tariff reduction, 30 percent, compared to a 14 percent reduction by the developing countries. For some major markets, the impact of such reductions is of lesser significance as they are being made from relatively high levels, for example the European Community, Japan and the United States. Nevertheless, the binding of tariff rates provides a ceiling for these policy instruments, which could in due course constitute a starting point for further negotiations.
A total of 20 countries made commitment on minimum access for sugar, amounting to 3.11 million tonnes in 1995, rising to 3.35 million tonnes by 2004. The United States and the European Community set minimum annual low-duty import quotas at average 1986-88 levels, about 1.14 million and 1.30 million tonnes, respectively. While based on actual import levels of the late eighties, and thus not contributing to increased access, the Uruguay Round accord effectively limited the extent to which future adjustment in supply would need to be borne by exporting countries. The import quotas of 18 other countries would provide markets for about one million tonnes of sugar exports, largely additional compared with 1986-88.
Commitments on export subsidies represent a major innovation in policy developments affecting volumes and patterns of world sugar trade. Some reductions, for example in the European Community would be achieved by the year 2000 while others would be concluded by 2004. Among the major commitments, the European Community would reduce subsidized exports by 340 000 tonnes, or 21 percent below the 198688 average level. South Africa would also reduce subsidized exports by 21 percent, or 200 000 tonnes. Reductions of subsidized exports shall also be made by several major developing country suppliers including Brazil and Mexico. While the reduction commitments amount to a small proportion of world sugar trade, less than 5 percent, and are thus expected to have a limited impact, nevertheless they represent an important step in the direction of less subsidized trade in the world sugar economy. Annex tables A4 and A5 present a summary of base tariff rates, reduction commitments and
minimum low-duty import quotas for selected countries.
Production. Before taking account of the Uruguay Round world sugar production was projected to grow by about 1.6 percent annually from 1987-89 to reach 127.3 million tonnes in the year 2000. Production in all regions would increase, but growth in developing countries would considerably exceed that of developed countries. In particular, production was projected to expand in the Far East and Africa by about 3 percent annually to reach 38.5 million tonnes and 7.4 million tonnes, respectively. Production in developing countries would account for two-thirds of world output by 2000. Among the developed regions, production would expand by about 1.5 percent in North America but would remain relatively stable in Europe. Also in the area of the former USSR and eastern Europe little change is projected in production.
Implementation of the Uruguay Round would increase world production by about 1 percent to nearly 129.0 million tonnes. Most of the addition to output would occur in Latin America and the Caribbean and the Far East, where production would reach 31.1 million tonnes and 38.9 million tonnes, respectively. The (Uruguay Round would have a little impact on production in most developed countries where agricultural policies are assumed to remain unchanged. Growth in North America and the European Community would continue in line with domestic market opportunities since minimum access provisions and limitations on subsidized exports would constrain the shifting of adjustments to the world market. Some additional impetus to production would, however, occur in relatively low cost developed exporting countries, such as Australia, to take advantage of market opportunities arising from trade liberalization.
Consumption. The baseline projections indicated that world sugar consumption would increase from 105.8 million tonnes in 1987-89 to 126.8 million tonnes by 2000. Consumption growth at 1.6 percent would be lower than that achieved during the eighties. As in the past, however, the expansion would be concentrated overwhelmingly in the developing countries, consumption increasing from 58.3 million tonnes to 79.0 million tonnes by 2000. All regions would experience growth, but the bulk of the rise in consumption would occur in the Far East. However, in contrast to the eighties, consumption would increase also in the developed countries mainly in the United States and the European Community.
The rise in consumption of sugar as a consequence of the Uruguay Round would occur mainly in the developing countries, where consumption would expand by a further 2.0 million tonnes, or 2.5 percent. In the developed countries, on the contrary, consumption would be only slightly greater. The rise in income resulting from overall trade liberalization would contribute significantly to the increase in consumption in developing countries. Most of the increment would occur in Asia, but consumption would also increase in Africa, Latin America and, to a lesser extent the Near East. The Uruguay Round would have only a limited impact on sugar consumption in the developed countries because of low price and income elasticilies.
Trade. Some increase in trade volume is expected to occur as a result of the Uruguay Round. Both the reduction in tariffs, but more important, rising incomes would induce world imports to expand by 5 percent over the baseline projections to 28.6 million tonnes by 2000. imports into the developing countries would account for most of the expansion, with increases occurring mainly in the Far East, the Near East and Africa. Imports into the European Community and the United States are not expected to exceed greatly import access commitments. The increase in import requirements would bring the world sugar market into a better balance. The reduced volume of subsidized exports would also improve the balance. As a result of increased import demand and reductions in subsidized exports, world market prices are expected to increase. The current analysis indicates that world market prices would be 7 percent higher in 2000 compared with the previous projections, thus providing some
inducement for increases in production and exports, particularly among low cost competitive supplying countries.
Conclusions. The implementation of the Uruguay Round Agreement would induce increases in world sugar production, consumption and trade, but the overall effects would be relatively small. Further developments in the world sugar market will be heavily influenced by policy developments which may occur leading to reduced support to sugar production and exports. Other factors such as the economic growth in the area of the former USSR and in eastern Europe, production recovery in Cuba, and regional trading arrangements will also have important effects on future prospects in the world sugar market. Lastly, developments in productivity and comparative advantages for sugar and alternative crops could over the longer run significantly affect the sugar sectors of individual producing and exporting countries.
Table 11: SUGAR - Commodity Balances, 1987-89 Average, 2000 Baseline and 2000 Uruguay Round Scenarios
Meat
Consumption. World meat consumption is projected to grow by 2.2 percent per annum from 1987-89 to the year 2000 to 213 million tonnes, down from the 3 percent growth rate in the 1980s. Average per caput consumption would then rise from 31.9 kg to 33.8 kg. Demand for poultry products is expected to show the strongest momentum among the various types of meat, followed by pork, which should remain the most popular meat. The contribution of the Uruguay Round Agreement to projected meat consumption is expected to be marginal at the global level, although it is estimated to be positive in the Far East. In most other regions, consumption is expected to be negatively affected by the rise in international prices of meat associated with the Bound which would tend to offset the impact of lower duties on domestic prices.
The developing countries are expected to account for the bulk of the 50 million tonnes projected expansion in overall meat consumption, with an annual growth of 4.5 percent. Meat consumption is likely to expand fastest in the Far East. Strong income growth will stimulate per caput demand, particularly in China, Indonesia, the Republic of Korea and Pakistan. Relatively fast expansion has been projected for poultry and bovine meat in the region as diets, often based largely on pork, diversify.
Multiplication of fast-food outlets could also become an important influence underpinning demand for poultry and bovine meal.
In the rest of the developing world, population is anticipated to be the dominant factor driving demand. Nonetheless, increased economic growth in the Latin America and the Caribbean region should also stimulate demand, especially for pig and poultry meat, though beef would still account for over 40 percent of total meat intake. In Africa and the Near East, little change in per caput consumption is expected, but fast population growth would still provide the basis for a rapid expansion of domestic meat markets.
Growth of consumption in the developed countries has been projected to stagnate in the 1990s. Increases in per caput levels of consumption, which are already very high, will be constrained by the modest growth in incomes and increasing health concerns. A decrease in the already low rate of population growth will further contribute to slow the expansion in demand. These factors will be particularly felt in western Europe and Oceania. By contrast, in Japan, relatively fast growth has been projected reflecting changes in the dietary patterns, rising incomes and falling prices, following the reduction in tariff protection initiated in the early 1990s and carried on under the aegis of the Uruguay Round.
Structural changes in eastern Europe and in the area of the former USSR since 1989 have been a major development affecting projections. In particular, the reduction or removal of the exceptionally large retail price subsidies, which guaranteed to most people easy access to livestock products, have already cut consumption sharply. Although a recovery in disposable incomes in the latter part of 1990s should underpin the demand for meat, consumption levels of the late 1980s are unlikely to be regained by the year 2000.
Overall, consumers in the more affluent societies are likely to place a greater emphasis on quality and convenience over increases in quantities consumed. At the end of the decade the developed countries are expected to account for less than half of total meat consumption, clown from 60 percent in the late 1980s. However, the projections still show a considerable disparity between average per caput meat consumption in the developed countries of 79 kg and in the developing countries of 22 kg. The two groups of countries are, however, expected to share the long-run shift in demand towards poultry meat.
Production. Growth in world production of all major types of meat is projected to slow compared with the 1980s, except for that of bovine meat, which is projected to be maintained at a relatively low rate. Although the overall Uruguay Round effect on meat production is expected to be very small at the global level, it is projected to be important for countries in North America and Oceania where the transmission of higher international prices under the Round should boost an expansion in the meat sector. By contrast, production in the European countries, especially in the EC, and in Japan is projected to be slightly reduced under the Uruguay Round scenario.
In the developing countries, growth in overall meat production is projected to diminish from an annual rate of 5 percent over the 1980s to 4 percent till the end of the decade. In volume terms these countries will record an expansion of some 43 million tonnes to 106 million tonnes, considerably more than the 24 million tonnes increase they achieved during the 1980s. Among the different types of meat, poultry and pig meat output is expected to grow faster than that of bovine and sheep meat as most developing countries have a strategy of catering for consumption growth by expansion of intensive poultry and pig husbandry.
More dynamic meat production growth than in the past decade has been projected for Africa and the Latin America and the Caribbean region, while it may slow down in the Near East and in the Far East regions reflecting resource constraints there and a reduced potential for large productivity gains. Nonetheless, meat production in the Far East is still projected to expand the fastest, at over 5 percent per year.
Meat production in the developed countries is projected to rise by less than half a percent a year, as a 2 percent growth in poultry meat will be offset by stagnating output for the other meat categories. Production growth in North America and Oceania is anticipated to be fastest at 2 percent and 1 percent per annum respectively. In North America this tendency should reflect significant productivity gains, and a very dynamic poultry sector. In Oceania, production is projected to recover from the near stagnation of the past decade, mainly owing to a reversal of the previous negative trends in bovine meat output, bolstered with improved access to foreign markets under the Uruguay Round.
By contrast, production growth rates in western Europe are expected to be curbed by continuing policies to limit surpluses of livestock products. In the EC, this was mainly fostered through the reform of the Common Agricultural Policy. In eastern and central Europe, structural changes and, in some cases, the loss of traditional export markets have been responsible for a depletion of animal stocks and for a scaling-down in meat production in the early 1990s. For most of these countries a full recovery is unlikely to occur by the cud of the century. The meat sector in the area of the former USSR has been seriously impaired by the reduction of direct state support and the movement towards a market economy, leading to massive slaughtering in the first part of the 1990s. Although it is expected that the recovery in income and demand, and progress in the transformation of the industry will assist in reversing the falling trend after the mid-1990s, meat output in the area of the
former USSR is projected to decline by one quarter over the 1990s.
Projections for meat production in Japan also point to a contraction, reflecting fiercer foreign competition following the progressive opening of the domestic market to imports since the early 1990s and further improvements in access under the Uruguay Round, as well as rising production costs, in part related to a strengthening of environmental protection measures.
One outcome of these projections would be a rise in the share of global meat production of the developing countries from 39 percent in the late 1980s to over 50 percent by the year 2000.
Trade. A significant increase is projected in the volume of global trade in meat (including trade in live animals and intra-EC flows), from 14 million tonnes in 1987-1989 to 19 million tonnes in the year 2000, or 36 percent over the whole period. Of this, 3 percent can be attributed to the implementation of the Uruguay Round.
Bovine meat is likely to remain the most important commodity in international meat trade, accounting for 42 percent of total shipments. World bovine meat imports are projected to grow by 35 percent since the late 1980s (i.e. 2.5 percent per annum) to 8.0 million tonnes, of which close to 6 percent due to the Uruguay Round. Import markets are expected to expand by over 4 percent in the developing countries. This would reflect growth in the Far East, (especially China, Indonesia, the Republic of Korea, the Philippines and Malaysia), in Latin America and the Caribbean (especially Brazil and Mexico), and in Africa (especially Nigeria). Among the developed countries, Japan is projected to import 1.3 million tonnes, three times more than in the base period, following tariffication in 1991 and the subsequent lowering in import duties from 70 percent in 1991 to 38.5 percent in the year 2000. By contrast, shipments to the United States may decline somewhat while its exports are
projected to be boosted by its growing penetration of the expanding markets in the Far East. For countries in the area of the former USSR, imports and exports are projected to decline following restructuring and the dissolution of the traditional trading relationships between these countries. In the EC, the commitment to reduced subsidized exports under the Uruguay Round, combined with measures to stabilize production introduced in 1992 under the reform of the Common Agriculture Policy, should lower net bovine meat exports compared with the baseline projections. By contrast, countries in Oceania are anticipated to regain part of the world market shares which they lost during the 1980s, reflecting improved access to some Pacific markets, especially Japan and the Republic of Korea. Under the Uruguay Round the United States has also raised Australia's and New Zealand's specific import quotas compared with recent years, but these increases basically restored access to the levels
of the base period. Compared with the baseline, exports from Latin America and the Caribbean are expected to recover somewhat, following improved access to the EC and continued expansion in Asian markets. Deliveries from the region could be further boosted should some South American producing countries become eligible to supply Foot-and Mouth Disease (FMD) free countries, as a result of eradication of the disease or the recognition of FMD-free regions within their territory, following the application of sanitary and phytosanitary measures under the Uruguay Round.
Prospects for sheep and goat meat are for a 2 percent per annum growth in trade to the year 2000 with little extra effect expected from the Uruguay Round. World trade has been projected to reach 1.4 million tonnes in 2000, stimulated mainly by an expansion in import demand from countries in the Near East, North Africa and the EC.
Developed countries in Europe and Oceania are expected to remain the major suppliers.
By contrast, the expansion of trade in pig meat products is anticipated to slow compared with the high growth rates achieved in the past decade, with the Uruguay Round bolstering the volume of flows by 3 percent, mainly from North America. Although the developing countries are anticipated to play an increasing role in world pig meat markets, the developed countries would still account for the bulk of world imports and exports, a considerable proportion of which being traded within the EC. Import markets are expected to expand in the Far East, notably in Japan and Singapore. However, shipments to the area of the former USSR are likely to fall significantly from the level of the late 1980s. One of the major developments would be the projected shift of the United States from being a net importer to a net exporter, following large scale investments in the sector in recent years. By contrast, net exports from the EC are expected to decline, reflecting a reduction in subsidized
sales and a strengthening of pollution-control measures, including the EC Nitrate Directive. This may erode the positive effects of falling grain prices on production costs and, hence, on international competitiveness. In eastern and central Europe, Bulgaria, Hungary and Romania are expected to remain net exporters, although overall sales from the region would shrink notably, reflecting, to a large extent, the Uruguay Round limitations on export subsidies. In China, expansion of the pig sector should enable the country to meet rising domestic requirements and to increase sales to foreign markets slightly, even though exports from the Province of Taiwan may be constrained by a strengthening of environment regulations on producers and rising feed costs.
World trade in poultry meat has been projected to grow by 5 percent per annum to 4.4 million tonnes between the base period and the year 2000, with marginal impact from the Uruguay Round. The expansion would reflect major increases in imports by high-cost producing countries such as Japan. Particularly large deficits have also been anticipated in the Near East, especially Iraq and Saudi Arabia, and in Mexico. Exports are projected to originate mainly from developed countries, with the United States consolidating its leading position supplying 35 percent of world exports while the EC commitment to reduce support to exporters is likely to lessen the EC poultry trade surplus. The developing countries are expected to raise their share in world exports following an expansion of sales by countries such as Brazil, China and Thailand. At the same time, imports by developing countries are projected to double by the year 200(1, with large increases anticipated in all regions,
especially in the Far East and in Latin America and the Caribbean.
Despite the expected expansion in meat trade to the year 2000, total meat imports are expected to account for only about 9 percent of world consumption by the end of the decade, about the same share as in 198789. Developed countries are projected to rely on trade to meet 13 percent of their domestic demand compared with 5 percent for developing countries. The reliance on imports will be larger for bovine (14 percent) and sheep and goal meat (12 percent) and less for poultry (8 percent) and pig meat (6 percent). The balance of projected world import demand and export supplies to the year 2000 would result in a strengthening of international prices, varying between 13 percent for pig, 14 percent for bovine and poultry and 24 percent for sheep and goat meat, with a substantial boost provided by the Uruguay Round. However, given the small share of meat trade in relation to production and consumption, relatively small variations in these two basic variables may lead to large
changes in world trade balances and hence to unexpected changes in international prices.
Contribution of the Uruguay Round Agreement to the projections. The impact of the Uruguay Round on projected global meat production anti consumption is only slight, although there are expected to be changes in their location. Its effect is expected to be much stronger on international meal prices and to a lesser extent on trade. The reduction in export subsidies and tariffs under the Uruguay Round will contribute to a substantial rise in international prices of livestock and meat with bovine, pig and poultry meat estimated to rise by some 8 percent and sheep meat by 10 percent compared with the "no Round" scenario. Overall, the implementation of the Uruguay Round is estimated to bring about a 3 percent increase in the volume of trade in livestock and meat by boosting bovine and pig meat transactions, while trade in poultry and sheep meat should be little affected. Countries in Latin America and the Caribbean, North America and Oceania are expected to benefit the most as the
transmission of higher international prices onto their domestic markets would stimulate production and depress consumption. The commitment to reduce subsidized sales is a major reason for reduced exports from the EC and, to a lesser extent, from the Far East, especially China. On the import side, the improved access resulting from the reduction in tariffs is estimated to stimulate the developed countries' purchases, especially those by Japan, countries in eastern Europe and South Africa. The impact on the imports of the developing economies is much less, except in the Far East. For most other countries, the increase in international prices would offset the positive effects of reduced tariff on imports.
The increased volume of trade combined with the strengthening of international prices resulting from the implementation of the Uruguay Round should lead to a substantial boost of the global value of international trade in livestock and meal products of the order of 13 percent compared with the "no Round" projections results. Among the different meat categories, bovine meat and pigmeat trade value should be boosted the most at 14 percent, followed by sheep anti goat meat and poultry meat at 10 and 9 percent respectively. Although developing countries' export earnings are estimated to rise by 13 percent, slightly faster than their import bills, their unfavourable balance of trade in meat would increase by 3 percent. This would mainly reflect rising deficits in the Far East and Near East countries which would outweigh improved balances from countries in Latin America and the Caribbean, and to a lesser extent, in Africa The implementation of the Uruguay Round should add 13
percent and 14 percent respectively to the developed countries' meat export revenues and import bills, resulting in a 3 percent increase in their net earnings, although meat trade deficits are projected to increase for countries in eastern Europe and in the Area of the former USSR, as well as for Japan.
Table 12: TOTAL MEAT - Commodity Balances, 1987-89 Average, 2000 Baseline and 2000 Uruguay Round Scenarios
Milk and milk products
Production. World milk production is projected to rise to 559 million tonnes by 2000, and is virtually no different from that before including the effects of the Uruguay Round. The average annual growth rate would be 0.6 percent, less than half that of the previous decade. At the global level, the increase in production is expected to result from increases in both the number of milking animals and in yields. Milk production in developing countries is projected to be largely unchanged as a result of the Round; that is, it will increase at an annual average growth rate of 2.9 percent to reach 198 million tonnes by 2000. The developing countries would then account for 35 percent of world output in 2000, compared to 27 percent in 1987-89. For the developed countries, production, at 361 million tonnes, would bring their share of world output down to 65 percent. Unlike past trends, production is expected to rise primarily in the same areas as consumption and in a number of
low-cost producing countries which do not subsidize exports. In Asia, in particular, strong growth in demand is likely to stimulate milk production. In absolute terms, milk output is projected to expand most in India. However, other countries in Asia will also rapidly raise milk output, particularly Pakistan and China. An increase is also projected in Latin
America and the Caribbean, partly in response to higher demand from the growing urban population. The improvement in international trade conditions as a result of the Uruguay Round would also favour expansion of production and exports of several low-cost producing countries in South America, particularly Argentina and Uruguay. By contrast, in Africa, difficult economic conditions coupled with inadequate feed supplies, are expected to continue to restrict dairy development, irrespective of the Round.
In the developed countries, milk production is expected to drop by 20 million tonnes relative to 1987-89, falling to 361 million tonnes in 2000, largely unaffected by the Round. The global decrease in output relates mainly to changes in eastern Europe and the area of the former USSR. There, production has contracted sharply since 1990, following the removal of producer and consumer subsidies and the restructuring of production. This tendency is expected to continue over a number of years, unrelated to the Uruguay Round, with milk output in the year 2000 projected to be 24 million tonnes less than at the end of the 1980s. By contrast, in Oceania the Round is expected to have a notable impact. Milk production there is projected to rise by 11 percent in response to increased export opportunities created under the Round; output in New Zealand is particularly sensitive to changes in international conditions, as over 80 percent of milk production is exported. In the United States,
output will probably increase at a similar pace to domestic demand to reach 75 million tonnes by the end of the decade. Canada has been assumed to continue policies of curbing surpluses leading to some decrease in production during the current decade; however, recent decisions to increase quotas in that country may result in the drop in output being less than expected. The EC is assumed to make no changes in its quota system other than those implemented at the end of the 1980s and the early part of the 1990s, and would maintain production near 1994 levels. Other western European countries are also expected to maintain levels of milk production similar to those prevailing in 1994. In western Europe as a whole, adjustment will probably be carried out through a reduction in the numbers of dairy cows, as progress in breeding and animal husbandry suggests further increases in yields. In Japan, output is anticipated to rise by 0.8 million tonnes over the base period. This is
significantly below the expected expansion in domestic demand, and, as in recent years, Japan may admit imported products to satisfy a larger portion of its consumption.
Demand. Slower growth in global milk consumption is projected for the 1990s and would be largely unaffected by the Round. This slowing would mainly reflect a lower average per caput food demand and a sharp reduction in milk use in feed in Europe and area of the former USSR. Consumption in the developed countries is expected to fall slightly, from 367 to 342 million tonnes, while that of the developing countries is projected to increase substantially, from 160 to 217 million tonnes.
The decline in consumption of milk and milk products amongst the developed countries mainly reflects contraction of demand in eastern Europe and the former USSR, dating from the beginning of the 1990s, and is unconnected with the Uruguay Round. In these two groups of countries, per caput consumption is projected to fall by almost 20 kg, from 178 kg at the. end of the 1980s and to 159 kg in 2000. There, the wider availability of high quality margarine and a larger supply of vegetable oil and cooking fat will tend to reduce butter consumption. However, this may be partly offset by increased consumption Or a greater variety of cheese and fresh milk products which will become available in these countries during the 1990s.
For the other developed countries, the Uruguay Round is not anticipated to have any substantial impact on milk consumption. In western Europe the reduction relative to levels in late 1980s would mainly reflect construction of surplus disposal as animal feed associated with the decline in milk output. Elsewhere, consumption is expected to increase in the United States, Oceania and Japan. In per caput terms, Japan is expected to register the largest absolute increase in consumption amongst the developed countries; however, at 70 kg per caput, consumption will be well below the anticipated level of 190 kg for developed countries as a whole in 2000.
In the developing countries, consumption of milk and milk products is projected to grow at an average annual rate of 2.6 percent between the late 1980s and 2000, largely as a result of factors unrelated to the Uruguay Round. Developing countries' share of global consumption is projected to rise from 30 percent in the base period to 39 percent in 2000. However, per caput consumption in the developing countries, at 39 kg, will be only one fifth of that the developed countries. Growing population and urbanization, coupled with some increase in average incomes, will be the main factors behind the expansion of total consumption. Response to changes in incomes will remain high in all developing countries. With economic growth projected to be most pronounced in Asia, this continent is likely to experience the fastest expansion in consumption of milk and milk products: sustained growth in consumption is also anticipated for Latin America. Elsewhere, slight growth in consumption is
forecast for most countries. For a number of developing countries, population increase will mean that, while the total amount of milk and milk products available for consumption increases, per caput consumption will be lower in 2000 than it was at the cud of the 1980s.
Trade. At the global level, the Uruguay Round is not expected to alter the amount of milk and dairy products traded internationally. Overall, the volume of milk and milk products exported, expressed in milk equivalent, is in any case expected to be 5 percent less in 2000 than in the 1987X9, a decline of 3 million tonnes. The principal reason for this is that in the years 198789 dairy exports, particularly by the EC, were especially large. Since that time, the EC has diminished milk production through quota reductions and has expanded internal schemes for surplus milk disposal. However, the commitments to reduce subsidized exports were specific to four distinct classes of dairy products, namely: butter and butter oil; cheese; non-fat dry milk; and other dairy products. Thus, even though EC exports of the butter were estimated to have fallen, by 1994, to below half the level stipulated as the maximum for 2000, exports of cheese had grown to far exceed even the initial maximum
level in the EC schedule. Implementation of commitments in the dairy sector is thus likely to put an important constrain! on EC cheese exports while subsidized exports of butter and skimmed milk powder are likely to be far below those permitted under the Round.
Australia and New Zealand, which were already expected to benefit from reduced supplies of dairy products to the world market from elsewhere, are projected to increase their exports by 1.7 million tonnes as a result of increased opportunities opened up by the Uruguay Round. Both are expected to benefit from both reduced competition from subsidised exports by other developed countries and the increased openness of markets of some developed countries to imports. In North America, the United States is projected to move from being a net importer to being a net exporter of dairy products; however, this was already foreseen in the baseline projections. The principal factor behind this switch is expected to be reductions in domestic prices relative to those prevailing internationally.
Exports of milk and milk products by developing countries are projected to increase under the Uruguay Round; however, countries in this category will continue to account for a small proportion of global exports, .approximately 5 percent. Most exports from the developing countries are projected to originate in Latin America, in particular Argentina and Uruguay. In Asia, growth in India's milk production could mean that it will become a regular exporter.
Comparing imports projected for 2000 with those in 1987-89, the decline by developed countries would be largely offset by growth in purchases from the developing countries, and would be largely unaffected by the Round. Developed countries would still account for most imports, although the establishment of regional trade agreements, such as MERCOSUR in South America, may act as a stimulus to trade within developing regions. Competition for limited export supplies and reduced subsidies are expected to lift the general level of dairy product prices considerably above the average for 198789, this would be accentuated by implementation of the Uruguay Round. However, by 1994, average export prices for dairy products were already over 20 percent higher than those prevailing in the base period. Since then, the prices of most dairy products on the international market have risen further.
Conclusions. At the world level, virtually no change in milk demand and production is expected to result from the Uruguay Round. However, on a regional basis, the Agreement is projected to stimulate higher production in Oceania following increased export opportunities, which will be offset by a contraction in Europe and the area of the former USSR. Similarly, the Round is expected to have a slight positive impact on production in Latin America.
The overall level of trade in milk and milk products is not expected to be affected by the Uruguay Round; however, there will be some redistribution in terms of region of origin and destination. The reduced volume of subsidised exports from several developed countries will, to an extent, be offset by increased exports from Oceania. Some growth in export opportunities is also likely to promote the expansion of shipments by some developing countries, especially in Latin America. A decrease in the proportion of subsidised exports of milk and milk products is expected to result- in higher prices, which could restrain imports by many developing countries. In contrast, imports by some developed countries could be increased as a result of minimum access agreements under the Uruguay Round.
Table 13: TOTAL MILK - Commodity Balances, 1987-89 Average, 2000 Baseline and 2000 Uruguay Round Scenarios
continue
<section>6</section>
Coffee
Lower import tariffs for coffee, following the Uruguay Round of Multilateral Trade Negotiations, were not envisaged to have much effect on the world coffee market. Developed countries, by far the largest importers of coffee, already had low, or no import tariffs for the commodity, and therefore their reductions in duties would be relatively modest. The higher import duties for coffee largely applied by some producing countries, would not, with a few exceptions, be reduced significantly under the Uruguay Round. Therefore, factors such as economic growth, the relatively high level of consumption reached in the developed importing countries, changes in taste and preferences, weather conditions in supplying countries, were envisaged to play a more central role in shaping the world coffee marker by the year 2000, than the conclusion of the Uruguay Round.
Production. World coffee production is projected to reach 7.1 million tonnes by 2000, less than one percent above the pre-Uruguay Round estimate. This represents a growth of 1.3 percent per year between the late eighties and the year 2000. By contrast, world production of coffee grew al an annual rate of 2.6 percent during the preceding decade, when, after the disastrous frost of 1975 in Brazil, a huge draw-down in coffee stocks took place and prices reached unprecedented levels fuelling a massive expansion in coffee areas globally. This expansion carried on into the eighties and was the main cause for a production growth rate twice as high as the one projected for the nineties. Furthermore, the resulting over-supply situation in the eighties was exacerbated by the introduction of national price support schemes which shielded many producers from the effects of declining market prices. However, since the late eighties policies isolating coffee growers from lower prices have
tended to disappear, at least partially, and therefore the rate of growth in global coffee production has decreased
Most of the limited increments to production stimulated by the Uruguay Round are expected to take place in Latin America and the Caribbean and Africa, where coffee output should reach to 4.24 million tonnes and 1.44 million tonnes, respectively. In Latin America and the Caribbean, the coffee crop is expected to increase slightly in Brazil, by 10 000 tonnes, Colombia, by 4 000 tonnes, and some other countries of the region, by 9 000 tonnes. In Africa, growth should occur mainly in Cte d'Ivoire, 5 000 tonnes, and Ethiopia, 3 000 tonnes, and to a lesser extent in Cameroon, Kenya and Zaire, with a combined 6 000 tonnes.
Demand. Global coffee consumption is also projected to expand, as lower import duties would translate into slightly lower consumer (retail) prices for coffee, and these into slightly stronger demand for the commodity. North America, Europe and Japan account for nearly 90 percent of world trade in coffee. imports of coffee into North America are to remain duty free, with the exception of coffee used as ingredient in substitutes. In the EC the 5 percent duty on green coffee will be phased out by 2000, and green decaffeinated coffee reduced from 13 percent to 8.3 percent. Tariffs levied on roasted coffee will be reduced by 50 percent from base rates of 15 percent for regular coffee and from 18 percent for decaffeinated. In Japan, where import duties were levied only on roasted coffee and substitutes containing coffee, the base rate of 20 percent will be bound at 12 percent by 2000. However, because of the slowdown in economic growth and saturation in some markets, world demand
for coffee is only projected to grow by 1.8 percent per year between the hate eighties and the year 2000, compared with 2.3 percent a year during the previous decade.
Global coffee demand is projected to be about 130 000 tonnes greater in the year 2000 as a result of the Uruguay Round. More than 85 percent of this increase would be absorbed by developed countries, mainly in Europe. Europe and North America will remain the two largest coffee consuming regions with an estimated intake of around 2.8 million tonnes and 1.3 million tonnes, respectively. In Europe, the Uruguay Round would translate into a 3 percent increase in the level of coffee demand by the year 2000, while in North America projected consumption would remain unchanged from pre-Uruguay Round estimates. In Japan demand is projected somewhat higher as a result of agreed reductions in import tariffs.
Coffee consumption in developing countries would reach approximately 2.45 million tonnes, a modest increase of 18 000 tonnes from pre-Agreement estimates. Increased consumption in the developing world was likely mainly in Africa and Latin America, the main producing areas.
Trade^6. Projections of world coffee imports were also revised upwards slightly as a result of the Uruguay Round. The relatively modest projected increase in global imports, of 118 000 tonnes, again reflects the reduction of import tariffs for coffee in some developed and developing coffee consuming countries and, which would encourage some growth in import demand. Consequently, world imports for coffee should grow, by 1.2 percent per year, to around 5.01 million tonnes by the end of the decade. coffee imports grew at an average annual rate of 2.5 percent per year during the eighties, underpinned by the abundant supply situation and the relatively depressed level of prices.
Import demand for coffee in developed countries is expected to grow at an annual rate of 1.14 percent, reaching 4.65 million tonnes by the end of the decade. Coffee imports would increase most strongly in Europe, by 69 000 tonnes. Smaller increases were projected for Japan and developed countries in Oceania and the area of the former USSR.
Coffee imports by developing countries as a whole were projected at 362 000 tonnes, 8 000 tonnes above the pre-Agreement estimates. Consequently, coffee purchases by developing countries were likely to grow by 2.0 percent per year during the nineties, compared to 1.6 percent during the preceding decade.
Most of the projected growth in exportable coffee supplies would originate in Latin America and the Caribbean and Africa, hut smaller increases were also projected in the Far East. Exports from Latin America and the Caribbean were projected to rise by l7 000 tonnes to 3.11 million tonnes, while in Africa coffee sales to overseas destinations would increase by 16 0110 tonnes to 1.14 million tonnes. In Latin America, increases in exports were projected, among others, for Brazil, 6 000 tonnes, Colombia, 3 000 tonnes, and Costa Rica, 2 000 tonnes. Coffee exports in Africa would increase mainly in Cte d'Ivoire, by 5 000 tonnes, Ethiopia, by 4 000 tonnes, Kenya, by 3 000 tonnes, Zaire, by 2 000 tonnes and Cameroon, by 1 000 tonnes. Increases totalling close to 6 000 tonnes were projected for developing coffee exporters in other regions, mainly the Far East.
Prices. As a result of the Uruguay Round, consumer prices for coffee should decline slightly in certain markets, encouraging some rise in demand for imports there. Nevertheless, a major factor affecting overall market growth will continue to be the slower rate of increase in certain markers such as western Europe and North America where consumption approaches near saturation. The incremental growth in demand for coffee should underpin export prices in producing countries, encouraging a positive supply response. However, the impact of a stronger world demand for coffee, should outweigh the impact of an eventually larger availability of supplies, and therefore, at the world market level, coffee prices in 2000 should be slightly firmer than without the effect of the Uruguay Round. As for the actual price level, this would depend also on other factors which directly affect supply and demand, such as weather conditions in producing countries and the stock levels in importing
countries as well as any policy measures such as export retention schemes, which have not been modelled in this analysis.
Table 14: COFFEE - Commodity Balances, 1987-89 Average, 2000 Baseline and 2000 Uruguay Round Scenarios
Cocoa
Following the Uruguay Round of Multilateral Trade Negotiations, import duties on cocoa products are to be reduced in several major markets. Import duties on cocoa beans, in place mainly in cocoa producing countries, are also to be reduced in some importing countries. In the period to 2000, cocoa exports from developing countries will continue to be mainly in the form of beans, and therefore gains ensuing from lower import duties on cocoa products should benefit developing countries mostly through stronger derived import demand for beans. Nevertheless, the reduction in import duties on cocoa beans and cocoa products is not expected to have a major impact on the world cocoa market.
Production. Global cocoa output is projected to reach 2.83 million tonnes, 2.8 percent higher than the pre-Agreement estimate. Consequently, global cocoa production is anticipated to grow by 2 percent a year between the late eighties and the year 2000, compared with 1.8 percent per year projected without the Uruguay Round. By contrast, world production of cocoa grew at 4.3 percent per year during the preceding decade, mainly because cocoa growers in major producing countries were, by means of diverse policy instruments, insulated from low market prices and thus encouraged to sustain production growth.
Most of the 77 000 tonnes projected increase in world cocoa output resulting from the Uruguay Round should originate in Africa and in the Latin America and Caribbean regions. Only marginal increases in output are projected for the Far East, but its share in total production is expected to grow from 13 percent during 198789 to around 28 percent by 2000, in line with previous projections. The larger share projected for the Far East would stem from continuing rapid growth, mainly in Indonesia and Malaysia, while production shares are expected to decrease in Africa and to decrease in Latin America. The share of Africa would decline from 57 percent in 1987-89 to around 50 percent in 2000, and that of Latin America and the Caribbean region from 28 to 20 percent, also in accordance with pre-Agreement estimates. By the year 2000, the Far East would displace Latin America and the Caribbean as the second largest cocoa producing region in the world; the Far East will continue to
capitalize on its lower production costs, improved production techniques involving high yielding hybrid material and relatively unrestricted land availability.
Demand. World cocoa consumption is also projected to slightly exceed previous estimates, a direct reflection of lower import tariffs for the commodity agreed under the Uruguay Round. Global demand for cocoa should grow by 2.6 percent per year to about 2.83 million tonnes by 2000, compared to 2.3 percent per year projected prior to the conclusion of the Uruguay Round. Demand growth would nevertheless still be limited in major markets such as Europe, North America and the area of the former USSR, compared to the previous decade when world cocoa intake grew at an annual rate of 3.8 percent.
Cocoa consumption will continue to be concentrated mainly in developed countries, which would account for more than 80 percent of total demand in 2000. Cocoa intake by developed countries is projected to reach 2.34 million tonnes, an increase of 84 000 tonnes over pre-Agreement estimates, while demand in developing countries should reach 487 000 tonnes, 15 000 tonnes above pre-Uruguay Round projections.
Cocoa demand projections have been revised upwards for Europe, by 54 000 tonnes; North America, by 20 000 tonnes; and for other developed countries, by 11 000 tonnes. In North America, demand is now expected to grow from 548 000 tonnes in 1987-89 to 712 000 tonnes in 2000, reflecting a small increase in consumption per caput. European demand was likely to grow from about 929 000 tonnes in 1987-89 to around 1.23 million tonnes in 2000, and in the area of the former USSR from 169 000 tonnes to 194 000 tonnes during the same period. In Japan, with relatively low per caput consumption, cocoa demand is expected to grow from 102 000 tonnes in 1987-89 to 145 000 tonnes in 2000.
Cocoa consumption is also projected to increase slightly above pre-Uruguay Round estimates in Africa, by 7 000 tonnes; in Latin America, by 5 000 tonnes; and in the Far East, by 3 000 tonnes. Aggregate demand in the developing countries is projected to grow at 4.4 percent a year to reach 487 000 tonnes by 2000. Latin America and the Caribbean would remain the largest developing consuming region, accounting for 55 percent of consumption. In the Far East, the analogous share was projected to increase from 20 percent in 1987-89 to 28 percent in 2000.
Trade^7. Projections for global cocoa trade in 2000 have also been revised upwards following the conclusion of the Uruguay Round. Lower domestic prices resulting from reduced tariffs would underpin stronger demand for imports in several markets. Consequently, world cocoa trade is expected to grow to 2.45 million tonnes by the cud of the decade.
World imports of cocoa are expected to grow by 1.6 percent per year during the nineties, compared to an annual growth rate of 1.3 percent projected prior to the Uruguay Round agreement. World imports of cocoa increased by approximately 4.5 percent per year during the previous decade when supplies were ample and market prices relatively weak, particularly towards the end of the period.
Import demand for cocoa in developed countries is expected to reach 2.34 million tonnes by 2000. Most of the increment in cocoa imports resulting from the Uruguay Round would be accounted for by countries of Europe and North America. The EC would remain the main import market for cocoa beans and products, absorbing more than 40 percent of globally traded supplies in 2000. In North America, import demand would grow by 1.3 percent per year, reaching 712 000 tonnes by the end of the decade. Cocoa import requirements in the area of the former USSR would remain almost unchanged from 1987-89 levels, at around 194 000 tonnes, while in Japan they are likely to increase from 118 000 tonnes in 1987-89 to around 145 000 tonnes in 2000.
Developing countries as a whole are expected to import 105 000 tonnes in 2000, a modest increase of 2 000 tonnes from pre-Uruguay Round estimates. Their demand for cocoa imports would grow by 1.6 percent per year during the nineties, and their purchases would account for about 4 percent of world cocoa trade in 2000.
The likely growth in exportable supplies resulting from the Uruguay Round Agreement would originate mainly in Africa, but smaller increases were also projected for countries of Latin America and the Far Last. Cocoa exports from Africa are projected to rise by 48 000 tonnes, with most of the additional volume originating in Cte d'Ivoire and Ghana. Exports from Latin America and the Far East would be higher in the year 2000, by 10 000 tonnes and 4 000 tonnes, respectively.
Prices. As a result of the Uruguay Round the import demand for cocoa should strengthen in markets where import duties are to be reduced, even though the reductions are generally rather small. Lower consumer prices should encourage the demand for cocoa and cocoa products and the impact of a somewhat stronger world demand for cocoa should exceed the impact of eventually larger supplies, and therefore international cocoa prices in 2000 should be slightly firmer than without the effect of Uruguay Round. The actual level of prices would continue to depend also on other factors such as national policies affecting cocoa production, policies affecting consumption levels in importing countries, weather conditions in producing countries, and the level of stocks in relation to demand, which were assumed exogenous to this analysis.
Table 15: COCOA - Commodity Balances, 1987-89 Average, 2000 Baseline and 2000 Uruguay Round Scenarios
Tea
The impact of the Uruguay Round on the world tea economy should be small for two reasons. First, trade in black tea is already relatively free of restrictions. In some of the world's largest importing countries, such as the United Kingdom and the United States, no restrictions are imposed on black tea imports, while tariffs are levied at low rates in most other major markets. The second is the expectation that structural surpluses would continue to prevail over the projections period, thus limiting increases in world market prices induced by stronger import demand following trade liberalization. However, since the Uruguay Round is projected to bring about significant increases in global income, there is likely to be a positive impact on lea consumption in addition to the tariff effects.
Production. Production expansion programmes initialed by many exporting countries have contributed to increases in output of black tea, and will continue to do so. World tea production is projected to increase from the 1987-89 annual average of 1 818 000 tonnes to 2 638 000 tonnes in 2000, implying an annual average growth rate of 3.2 percent. The Uruguay Round reduction in tariffs and other effects would induce a slightly higher growth in world production to 2 653 000 tonnes, or 0.8 percent above the basic projection.
Production in India is estimated at 966 000 tonnes in 2000, an average annual growth rate of 3.0 percent from the 1987-89 base. The Uruguay Round would have little effect on production growth in this country. Similarly, in Sri Lanka, the Uruguay Round is expected to induce production to increase by only 1 percent. Rather, most of the envisaged expansion is expected to result from recent economic reforms and the national plan for tea production expansion. Production by 2000 is projected to reach about 265 000 tonnes, compared to 216 000 tonnes during 1987-89.
Significant growth in production is also projected for all the other major tea producing countries. China and Indonesia would increase black tea production to 205 000 tonnes and 204 000 tonnes by 2000, respectively. The Uruguay Round would induce China to increase production by another 2.0 percent to 209 000 tonnes by 2000, and Indonesia by an additional 1.2 percent, to 206 000 tonnes.
Increases in both yields and planted area are likely to continue to support the strong growth in lea production in African countries. In Kenya small lea growers presently account for about two-thirds of planted area but for only half of the national production, suggesting that there is substantial potential for expansion. Output in Kenya is projected to increase at an average annual rate of 3.0 percent to about 250 000 tonnes in 2000. Malawi, Tanzania and Zimbabwe are also expected to increase production significantly. The Uruguay Round effect would be minimal on African tea production. Additional output would amount to only 3 000 tonnes, with Kenya accounting for more than half of this amount.
Consumption. While growth in the tea consumption in developed countries has slowed down, demand for lea in developing countries has increased significantly as a result of growing income and population. This trend is likely to continue. World black tea consumption is projected to increase from 1 842 000 tonnes in 1987-89 to 2 548 000 tonnes by 2000. The Uruguay Round would stimulate a 1.4 percent increase in consumption to 2 582 000 tonnes, implying an annual growth rate of 2.9 percent.
Developing countries would account for the larger part of the prospective increase, with consumption rising from the 1987-89 average of 1 176 000 tonnes to 1 842 000 tonnes by 2000, an annual growth rate of 3.8 percent considering also the effect of the Uruguay Round on demand.
Black lea consumption in India is projected to continue to rise rapidly, reaching about 750 000 tonnes by 2000, an annual growth rate of 3.9 percent between 1987-89 and 2000. In other major markets for black tea such as Pakistan, the Islamic Republic of Iran and Egypt consumption is projected at 210 000 tonnes, 138 000 tonnes and 108 000 tonnes by 200.0, respectively. The projections also suggest significant increases in the black tea consumption in other developing countries, such as Turkey where consumption would grow at an annual average rate of 2.4 percent to 180 000 tonnes.
By contrast in the developed countries, black tea consumption would increase only slightly. Consumption in the European Community is projected to remain stable in the next decade since somewhat higher purchases by Germany and France would counterbalance continued declines in the United Kingdom. Demand in the United States is projected to increase, though at a relatively low rate in the period to 2000. Since many developed countries impose no, or only small, restrictions on bulk and packaged black lea imports, the effect of tariff reduction on consumption is negligible.
In the area of the former USSR black lea consumption is projected to increase from 237 000 tonnes to 298 000 tonnes in 2000, with an annual growth rate of 1.9 percent over the period, based on increases in both domestic production and imports.
Exports. Net export availabilities are projected to be 1 325 000 tonnes in 2000. China, India, Indonesia, Kenya and Sri Lanka, would account for nearly 70 percent of the total projected export availabilities. Other exporting countries, particularly Bangladesh, Turkey, Malawi, Tanzania, and Zimbabwe, are also expected to increase export availabilities significantly during this period. The increase in the demand for imports due to the implementation of the Uruguay Round should not substantially affect world market prices due to the existence of ample export availabilities projected for the year 2000.
Substantial growth in export availabilities is projected for African tea exporting countries. Their total availabilities would amount to 340 000 tonnes in 2000 reflecting an annual average increase of 3.9 percent from actual exports of 215 000 tonnes during 1987-89. Kenya which currently accounts for 65 percent of Africa's tea exports would increase its availabilities from 145 000 tonnes to 228 000 tonnes in 2000.
Most of the increase in the volume of export availabilities would originate in Asia. India, the world's largest lea producer and consumer, would continue to expand its exports while satisfying growing domestic demand. The projected export availabilities would be 216 000 tonnes in 2000. Projected export availabilities for Sri Lanky would amount to 246 000 tonnes in 2000, a 1.5 percent rate of annual growth above the average export volume during 1987853.
China and Indonesia are also projected to increase export availabilities. China would continue the rapid growth of tea sales from the eighties, amounting to 180 000 tonnes by 2000 while Indonesia would attain a level of 195 000 tonnes.
Imports. The projected import requirements in 2000 are 1 227 000 tonnes which reflect an increase by 31 percent compared with the average actual black lea imports during 1987-89. Developing country importers would show a strong rise in demand, projected to reach 626 000 tonnes, over 50 percent above the average imports during 1987-89. Developed countries are projected to have small increases in imports of black tea. If the former USSR is excluded from this group, their imports by 2000 would be 413 000 tonnes, reflecting only a one percent annual growth rate from 1987-89 to 2000. In terms of quantity, the major importers are Pakistan, the area of the former USSR, the United Kingdom, Egypt and the United States.
Projected world black imports would increase by 2.9 percent to 1 263 000 tonnes by 2000 because of Uruguay Round tariff reductions and higher income. Most of the increase in imports would be in the developing countries, which account for more than 80 percent of the increase. Import requirements by Pakistan would rise from 204 000 tonnes to 210 000 tonnes in 2000.
Because of the significant expansion in consumption, almost tripling from 1972 to 1992, Pakistan would become the leading black importer in the world tea market in 2000.
The Uruguay Round is expected to boost imports into the Near East from 354 000 tonnes to 372 000 tonnes by 2000. Import demand in Egypt in 2000 would be 10X 000 tonnes, 4.6 percent above its projected levels prior to tariff reduction. Imports by the Islamic Republic of Iran would be 58 000 tonnes, implying a 4.6 annual growth rate between 1987-89 and 2000.
The simulations suggest that imports of black tea into the United Kingdom, the United States and Canada would amount to 135 000, 88 000, and 12 000 tonnes in 2000, respectively. There would be no changes in their projected import requirements as a result of the Uruguay Round because no trade restrictions are imposed on trade in black tea by these countries. The simulated import requirements for other developed countries reveal slight increases as they liberalize trade. Thus, the reductions in tariffs would induce the developed countries as a whole to increase imports from 601 000 tonnes to 608 000 tonnes by 2000.
Conclusions. The projections suggest that increases will take place in both world black tea production and consumption by 2000. Developing countries would account for most of the growth in consumption with an annual rate of 3.8 percent, and their share in the world total would rise from 63 percent in 1993 to 71 percent in 2000. Since demand for tea in developing countries depends largely on income, economic development of these countries will continue to have a major impact on the world tea economy.
The projections also suggest the continuation of an imbalance in the international market. Before allowing for the effects of the Uruguay Round the projected surplus of export availabilities as compared to import requirements was about 100 000 tonnes by 2000. The impact of the Uruguay Round on the world tea economy is expected to be small. Despite some increase in import demand, world market prices are expected to continue to be mainly influenced by the existence of large excess export availabilities. However, the projected gap between exports and imports would be reduced to 78 000 tonnes, as trade is liberalized. In addition, trade liberalization may offer some new opportunities for lea exporting countries. Most importing countries have tariffs on imports of small package black lea (not exceeding 3 kg) which have negatively influenced attempts to export value-added products. The Uruguay Round commitments mean that it should be possible for tea exporting countries to ship
more small package black tea in the future and thus gain some value added.
Table 16: BLACK TEA - Commodity Balances, 1987-89 Average, 2000 Baseline and 2000 Uruguay Round Scenarios
Bananas
Introduction. The world banana market is highly demand driven, and therefore, estimating demand is considered the crucial factor in projecting the global demand/supply balance. Import barriers are now minimal or nonexistent in most of the major banana importing countries, except the European Community (EC), and this situation is expected to continue. For instance, bananas are imported free of any duty or quota into the United States and Canada, respectively the world's second and fourth largest banana import markets. In Japan, the third largest market, banana imports are currently subjected to an ad-valorem tariff of 10 percent during the off-season for domestically produced fruits (mostly mikans) and 20 percent during the main marketing season (1 October to 31 March), under its GSP.
The only major development that would significantly affect demand at the world level, to the year 2000, is expected to occur in the EC, the largest global import market for bananas. Therefore the following analysis focuses on the new EC regime^8. The new EC banana policy, which became operational on 1 July 1993, and is included in the Community's commitments under the Uruguay Round, grants preferential access to traditional banana supplying countries from Africa, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) countries, signatories to the Lom Convention. It also allows for the continued support of domestic production. In order to measure the impact of its commitments under the Round, the EC banana import regime was analyzed using a policy simulation model. The likely demand of each member state was estimated by including the new policy variables in the simulation, as well as income and price elasticities.
Uruguay Round commitments on banana imports. The harmonization measures introduced by the EC during the de-compartmentalization of its market into a single regime, are included as a tariff quota. The tariff quota imposed from I January 1995 was 2.2 million tonnes^9 for imports from third countries (mainly dollar bananas, but non-traditional ACP supplies also qualify) levied at 75 ECU per tonne, or approximately 10 percent of the average retail price of dollar bananas in 1993. An import duty of 850 ECU per tonne (or 750 ECU per tonne for non-traditional ACP supplies) is imposed on quantities imported above the tariff quota. The EC is committed under the Round to reduce this tariff to 680 ECU per tonne by 2000. The regime also includes a duty free quota of 857 000 tonnes for traditional ACP supplies and an EC quota of 854 000 tonnes that would qualify for domestic support. For imports from third countries under the Framework Agreement annexed to the EC schedule of commitments,
the global tariff quota of 2.2 million tonnes is divided up as follows: Costa Rica 23.4 percent, Colombia 21 percent, Nicaragua 3 percent, Venezuela 2 percent, Dominican Republic and other nontraditional ACP countries 90 000 tonnes (4.09 percent), and 46.51 percent for other third country suppliers.
Demand and supply prospects. World demand for banana imports is projected to grow by 1.4 percent annually, from 1993 to 2000. Although there is little change expected at the global level, 10.86 million tonnes under the Uruguay Round compared with 10.92 million tonnes projected in 1992 (without the changes due to the Round), a significant reduction is expected in the imports of the EC (more than 300 000 tonnes). This decline in volume in the EC would be only partially offset by increases in other markets.
Import requirements by developed countries are projected to increase by 0.9 percent annually, mainly due to the continued increases in traditional importing countries, while among developing countries imports are projected to remain small (10 percent of the global total), with an annual growth rate of 2 percent. Tariffication leading to lower tariffs would largely be responsible for this increase.
Taking into account policy initiatives such as the Framework Agreement on Bananas, export availabilities are expected to keep pace with demand at a growth rate of a little more than 1 percent annually to reach 11.3 million tonnes by 2000. This compares with a projection of 12.4 million tonnes made in 1992. The apparent surplus of 0.5 million tonnes (4 percent of exports) would be accounted for by quantities in transit, shrinkage and waste.
Impact of the Uruguay Round. As mentioned earlier, apart from the EC banana regime the impact of the Uruguay Round on international banana trade would be small. The duty free banana import regimes in the United States and Canada would continue. In Japan, MFN tariff rates will be cut from 40 and 50 percent for the two periods of the year to bound rates of 20 and 25 percent, respectively, by 2000. However, major supplying countries, Philippines and Ecuador, qualify for the lower GSP rates of 10 and 20 percent being imposed now^10. It is expected that the current lower preferential tariff rates will continue to be applied to the bulk of its imports.
Other importing countries, which collectively accounted for about 25 percent of global imports in 1993, generally have tariffied their import regimes. Although a few of these importing countries have a potential for a larger growth in demand, concessions made under the Uruguay Round are not considered to be large enough to have a major impact. For instance, when the Republic of Korea began phasing out its quantitative restrictions in 1990, imports surged from 21 000 tonnes in 1990 to 314 000 tonnes in 1991. However, as tariffs remained high, levels subsequently fell to 146 000 tonnes by 1993. Under the Uruguay Round the Republic of Korea is committed to a base rate duty of 100 percent being hound at 90 percent in 2004.
In the EC, the 850 ECU duty levied on quantities imported above the tariff quota, is equivalent to almost 60 percent of the average retail price of dollar bananas in 1993. At this price level significant incremental increases in imports are not envisaged. Furthermore, in order to qualify for additional dollar banana shipments importers are required to obtain an equivalent amount from ACP/EC origins. Hence, the resultant increase in retail prices and fear of possible substitution with other fruits, are expected to prohibit growth in consumption. Projected levels of dollar, ACP, and EC banana imports by 2000 are indicated in Table 17.
Consumers in Germany, the largest consuming area in the EC market would be the most affected by the new regime, going from a duty-free arrangement to a tariffs level equivalent to 10 percent of the average import price of dollar bananas in 1993. Consumers in other member stales are expected to gain, slightly in Belgium, Luxembourg, Ireland, Denmark, and Netherlands, because of the lower tariff level (10 percent in the new regime compared to the 20 percent previously), and more substantially in the United Kingdom, France and Italy where imports were predominantly of ACP and EC origins under the old regime.
Producers in the EC and ACP countries are expected to benefit by US$22 per tonne and US$25 per tonne, respectively, from the new regime, while producers in the dollar countries would receive US$5 per tonne less for their bananas than the average price received during 1993. It must be mentioned that the simulation assumes that the ceiling placed on dollar imports in the EC would continue to lead to a diversion of supplies to other world markets, resulting in a decrease in prices. However, a realignment in the production sector or expansion in new markets could easily change this expectation.
Table 17: BANANAS - Commodity Balances, 1987-89 Average, 1993 Actual, 2000 Baseline and 2000 Uruguay Round Scenarios
Hides and skins
Supply. Global production of cattle hides and calfskins is projected to increase at 0.8 percent annually, the same rate of growth as recorded in the eighties, to reach more than 5.6 million tonnes by the year 2000. Although the overall effect of the Uruguay Round Agreement on bovine production is expected to be very small at the global level, it is likely to be important for some developed and developing countries where higher international prices for meat and for raw hides under the Round should sustain an expansion in bovine output. The faster growth in the developing countries compared with the past decade would be partly offset by a contraction in the developed countries.
The developing countries would continue to have more than two-thirds of the world's cattle, and are expected to increase their share of the world supply of' cattle hides. The share of developing countries' hide output in the world total, which was below 40 percent in the late eighties,, has been projected to expand to almost 50 percent by the year 2000. This reflects steadily improving, albeit low, productivity and continuing programmer to raise the standards of animal husbandry, and improve utilization of livestock products and techniques of flaying and curing. A more efficient collection of hides from fallen animals, especially in the Far East, and policies geared to improve off take rates, should also contribute to the additional supply of hides.
Greater growth in the output of bovine hides and skins is expected in Africa mainly under the pressure of rising demand for ruminant meat. Asia is predicted to continue to be a major source of hides in 2000, with its share increasing to about 20 percent of global production. In the Latin America and the Caribbean region, dynamic growth in meat production is expected to sustain a rapid increase in the output of hides. In total, the developing countries are expected to expand their output of bovine hides and skins by 2.8 percent annually to reach 2.8 million tonnes by the year 2000.
The slaughtering of cattle in the developed countries has been projected to decline, partly as a result of a contraction in herds. As a result, the domestic supply of bovine hides and skins would also fall, by about 0.8 percent annually to below 2.9 million tonnes. Output in North America and Oceania is expected to recover as higher international prices for meat resulting from the Uruguay Round should boost bovine meat production and the decline in hides anti skins output, which characterised the past decade, should be halted. By contrast, growth rates for meat production in western Europe are expected to be curbed by policies to limit livestock product surpluses and, given the continuing shift towards white meat consumption at the expense of bovine meat, cattle slaughterings are likely to decline and consequently in hide output is projected to recede from the levels of the late eighties. In eastern Europe and the area of the former USSR, structural changes and the reduction
of consumer subsidies resulted in a contraction in demand for livestock products in the early nineties. Consequently, as cattle herds are expected to be reduced, slaughterings have been projected to recede from the levels reached in the late eighties and hide output is forecast to decline by 2.5 percent annually.
Demand for leather goods. Global demand for leather and leather products is projected to continue to expand in the nineties under the influence mainly of growing incomes and to a lesser extent of reductions in import tariffs for leather and leather footwear in major consuming countries. Trade weighted average tariffs in the developed countries, are likely to fall from 4.6 to 3.5 percent for leather and from 8.7 to 7.3 percent for leather products. While growth in demand is likely to be at a slower rate than in the eighties, it is projected to exceed the growth of production, pointing to some finning of prices. However, the projected rate of growth of demand varies between regions. This reflects different factors influencing leather usage such as consumer tastes and lifestyles. Globally, footwear is likely to remain overwhelmingly the principal and-use for hides and skins and, consequently, demand prospects for leather shoes would continue to determine to a large extent the
demand for hides and skins.
In the developing countries demand for leather and leather goods is projected to rise in the nineties, under the impact of the Uruguay Round, at a faster rate than in the previous decade. Demand growth will be higher than in the developed countries, where it has been projected to slow to below 0.5 percent annually. Nevertheless, the developed countries will continue to account for more than 60 percent of global leather consumption in the year 2000. In particular, consumers in the more affluent countries are expected to continue to place increased emphasis on the quality of products. As a result, demand for leather goods at the fashionable, top quality end of the market is likely to increase in the developed countries, particularly in North America and in those western European countries with long established tanning and leather industries.
Demand for raw hides and skins. The tanning and leather products industry of the developing countries has undergone considerable change in the last two decades. The amount of raw hides anti skins produced and exported from these countries has been reduced, and increasing quantities of finished leather are being converted into leather garments, footwear and other leather manufactures. The growth in tanning and manufacturing capacity of some developing countries is expected to continue in the nineties, most notably in India, China, Pakistan and other countries with fast growing economies in the Far East and Latin America. The reduction of tariffs in consuming countries under the Uruguay Round for semi-finished and finished leather products, of about 20 and 15 percent respectively, would also contribute to this expansion. However these exporting countries are considered unlikely to replicate the fast growth rates achieved in the past decade, when their tanning and leather
manufacturing capacity was in its infancy and provided greater scope for rapid expansion.
The volume of leather processing in the developed countries has declined in recent decades in the face of competition from developing countries with lower production costs and often less restrictive environmental laws and regulations. However, tanning and leather manufacturing capacity, especially in the shoe sector, is likely to expand in eastern Europe, where costs of production are lower than in western Europe.
Trade. As a result of the strong increase in processing in the developing countries over the past 20 years, trade between the developing countries has increased, with some, particularly in the Far East, importing raw material and exporting leather products.
In other cases, developing countries which produce raw hides and skins are increasingly processing this material to at least a partly finished stage, before export. At the same time, the processing activity in the developed countries has declined markedly, as imports are increasingly at a higher level of processing. Among the developed countries, the net exports of North America and Oceania are the result of a large volume of exported raw material, partly offset by imports of leather products such as shoes.
The decline of trade in bovine hides, skins, leather and leather products between developing and developed countries was reversed during the eighties. In the late seventies, the developing countries were net importers from the developed countries. However, by the late eighties, the developing countries had become net exporters of leather and leather products, and their net exports are expected to expand by 2000. Reduced customs duties for leather and leather products in the European Community and in other major consuming countries would further sustain this trend. In particular, exports from Latin America and Africa are projected to expand over the nineties. A number of countries in the Far East import raw material for processing and re-export, and this trade is also likely to expand. Among the developed regions, exports of hides from North America are projected to decline during the nineties, but the region will remain a major net exporter. Import requirements by the
European Community are projected to continue to increase.
Contribution of the Uruguay Round Agreement to the projections. The impact of the Uruguay Round on projected global hides and skins production is slight. Only a small fraction of the total expected increase in global output of hides and skins in the period to 2000 is attributable to the Uruguay Round, although for some countries it is expected to have a more significant impact. New Zealand, Australia and United States are expected to increase their production largely reflecting increases in meat prices.
By contrast, in many European countries the effect will be negative.
Import demand for hides and skins is derived from market opportunities for leather and leather products and the existence of the processing capacity in the exporting countries. Growth in processing and manufacturing of hides and skins is proceeding more rapidly in developing than in developed countries. The Uruguay Round is expected to result in further increases in processing and manufacturing activity in these countries and this would be reflected in significant increases in trade by the year 2000. Imports of raw bovine hides by the developing countries are projected to increase by 12 percent while their exports of leather and footwear are projected to increase by about 30 percent each. These increased volumes combined with higher international prices are expected to lead to a considerable increase in the value of international trade of bovine hides and skins, leather and leather products. Developing countries are expected to add US$43 million and US$350 million to exports
of leather and footwear respectively, although these will be partially offset by increases in imports of raw materials. Developed exporters are likely to increase their total export revenues from hides, leather and leather footwear by over US$60 million.
Table 18: HIDES AND SKINS - Commodity Balances, 1987-89 Average and 2000 Baseline, 2000 Uruguay Round Scenarios
<section>7</section>
IV. Impact by region
Lower value of preferences
Higher income growth
Stability of prices
Tariff escalation
The implications for countries of the revised outlook for agricultural commodity markets following the implementation of the Uruguay Round by the year 2000 stem from the changes in market prices, the new market opportunities for their exports and the extent to which external market signals are transmitted back to producers and consumers.
Before turning to the impact on the developing countries, a few observations may be made about the effect of these changes in markets in the developed countries. For the developed countries as a whole, with or without the Uruguay Round, a sharp slowdown is foreseen in growth of production and consumption of the main agricultural commodities. An even sharper slowdown is envisaged for trade. The reductions in growth are right across the board. The effect of the Uruguay Round is to attenuate the decline marginally (Table 19a), where allowance is also made for products not covered, which are assumed to grow at the same rate.
The main change in western Europe is a sharp increase in its net imports of the main agricultural commodities from a net import level (imports f.o.b.) of US$4.0 billion in 1987-89 to net imports of US$13.4 billion by the year 2000, including a substantial increase due to the Uruguay Round. The Region would be a smaller exporter of cereals, oilseeds, milk and sugar, while import volumes are expected to grow for cereals, fats and oils, some meat and tropical products.
For Eastern Europe and the area of the former USSR, there is projected to be a sharp fall in the import bill for the main agricultural commodities, but exports would also be less. The resulting import deficit would shrink from US$10.5 billion to US$7.8 billion. The drop in the import deficit is mainly on account of the projected fall in consumption of cereals, milk and some meat. As regards the other net importing region "other developed" (effectively mainly Japan), the net import deficit on account of the principal agricultural commodities is projected to rise from US$12.5 billion to US$21.2 billion. Big increases in imports of meat, other basic foodstuffs and tropical products are envisaged with or without the Uruguay Round, but the Uruguay Round will significantly increase expenditures on imports of the main agricultural commodities.
The major beneficiaries among, the developed countries are North America, the net exports of which rise from US$15.0 billion to US$22.9 billion, and Oceania with net exports growing from US$11.6 trillion to US$18.1 billion. Both regions would gain from higher exports of cereals, fats and oils, meat and milk.
Turning now to the rest of the world, most African countries tend to be importers of food, particularly wheat, rice and dairy products and exporters of tropical products such as cocoa, coffee, fruit and some agricultural raw materials. Most of these countries are least developed (28 out of over 50) and low income food deficit countries (43) and have preferential access for their exports under arrangements such as GSP or the Lom Convention. The increase in the prices of the temperate zone food commodities covered in this study point to a substantial rise in import bills. Assuming the other commodities not covered (another 5 percent) behave in the same way the agricultural import bill could rise from US$8.4 billion (f.o.b. basis) in 1987-88 to US$14.9 billion in the year 2000, with an estimated 17 percent of the rise due to the Uruguay Round. The increase is mainly an account of changes other than the Uruguay Round (particularly population growth). The effect on production is
seen to be marginally positive at best, while consumption would fall slightly. The net result of generally small declines in the volume of imports would be outweighed by the rise in prices due to the Uruguay Round. In addition, the Uruguay Round will lead to lower export subsidies on imports of wheat and livestock products, which could boost import bills by perhaps something under US$100 million (Table 19b).
Table 19a - Developed countries: projected agricultural trade balances to the year 2000
2000 Base Run
2000 with UR effects
US$ billion
Imports 
Selected Commodities^a 105.6 119.6 129.7
Other 103.1 116.8 126.6
Total 208.7 236.4 256.3
Exports 
Selected Commodities 105.2 120.4 129.1
Other 93.3 106.8 114.5
Total 198.5 227.2 243.6
Balance (Exports Imports) -10.2 -9.2 -12.7
Selected commodities are items listed in Table 1.
Table 19b - African developing; countries: Projected agricultural trade balances to the year 2000
2000 Base Run
2000 with UR effects
US$ billion
Imports 
Selected Commodities 7.8 12.9 13.8 +0.1^a
Other 0.6 1.0 1.1 
Total 8.4 13.9 14.9 +0.1^b
Exports 
Selected Commodities 7.1 9.4 10.2 
Other 2.3 3.0 3.3 
Total 9.4 12.4 13.5 -0.2^b
Balance (Exports Imports) 1 .0 - 1.5 - 1.7
a Estimated effect of loss of export subsidies on the imports of the subsidy receiving countries.
b Estimated loss of the potential value of preferences provided by the major preferences giving countries.
The per caput consumption levels of basic foodstuffs by the year 2000 would remain precarious, with increases in rice, maize, oilseeds and poultry and reductions in other coarse grains, beef, sheepmeat and milk. The Uruguay Round would hardly change this pessimistic scenario.
The possibilities for increased exports are expected to arise for maize, millet/sorghum, fat, oils and oilmeals among the food commodities and all the tropical products covered. Overall the value of agricultural exports from Africa could rise from US$7.1 billion in 1987-89 to US$10.2 billion in the year 2000. The effect of the Uruguay Round would be to add US$800 million to the value of exports, just under a quarter of the overall growth. Also to be taken into account, however, is the possible loss of the potential value deriving from reduced preferential markets a loss that may be estimated at some US$200 million.
The net result, therefore, for the African developing countries is that import bills of the main agricultural commodities could rise by the year 2000 from their level in the late eighties by US$6 billion plus US$0.1 trillion loss due to reduced export subsidies while export earnings from the main agricultural commodities (but excluding many important ones) could rise by US$3.1 billion less the loss of potential preferences of US$0.2 billion. On any interpretation this is not a very satisfactory outcome. If allowance is made for the agricultural commodities not covered, assuming their values to grow at the same rate as the commodities covered, African developing countries would move from an export surplus of US$1 billion in 1987-89 (f.o.b. basis) to a deficit of US$1.5 million in the year 2000 including inter alia the effects of the Uruguay Round.
The situation varies from sub-region to sub-region. Thus North Africa is a food importing area, its agricultural exports mainly being horticultural products and olive oil. The countries in this sub-region should, therefore, be faced with the prospect of slightly rising prices of their agricultural imports but market access for their exports may Pace some problems particularly for tomatoes and sweet orange^11. The changes should, however, prompt review of the appropriate balance between food and export crops.
In West and Central Africa, most countries are importers of grains and livestock products but exporters of tropical beverages, some oilseeds, some agricultural raw materials and tropical fruit. There is also a significant trade in live animals within the region. A substantial part of their exports are made under preferential arrangements with Europe. The higher food prices and possible rather limited gains and even possibly losses for some of their major export commodities should encourage these countries to look afresh al the possibilities of expanding their food crop sector. This conclusion was also reached by an FAO/ECOWAS Expert Consultation on International Policy Change and Agricultural Trade in Africa South of the Sahara.
In Eastern Africa, most countries are importers of cereals while they export coffee, lea, fibres and hides/skins, and in some cases horticultural products, while Mauritius is a large exporter of sugar and has a considerable textile and clothing industry. The rise in the import price of cereals and oilseeds should give a stimulus to their production providing the increases are passed on to the farmers. Although not covered in this study, the market for textile fibres could also expand somewhat. In the case of hides and skins much depends on tapping the potential of this sub-region by improving the quality of the product. Production of hides and skins should expand substantially if the forecast rise in meat production takes place.
Southern Africa is usually more self-sufficient in food but has suffered from civil strife and drought which have led to large-scale imports in several recent years. Under normal circumstances, however, the region should be largely self-sufficient and an exporter of a wide range of agricultural products such as tobacco, sugar and fibres but also fruit, vegetables and coffee. The landlocked nature of several of these countries limits the extent that world price changes can affect farmers' decisions even when they are passed on in full. A combination of fostering intra-regional trade and relying on high value products for export to world markets will continue to be among the policy options to be considered.
The upshot of these changes is that most African countries could well have to give a greater weight to a strategy of (a) increasing food production and (b) of promoting diversification for their export crop sector. The rise in the world prices and the decrease in export subsidies over the period to the year 2000 offers an opportunity to African countries to pass on the increase in prices to the producers of cereals, including part or all of the permissible degree of protection al least for the period of implementation of the Uruguay Round. Al the least, African developing countries could consider the feasibility of "capturing the surplus" for their farmers by raising farm prices to offset the domestic price depressing effect of the remaining export subsidies within the limits set by the tariff bindings included in their schedules. The extent of the increase should, however, be worked out on a country by country basis taking into account changes in other sectors.
As regards the other sectors it will be important for African countries to improve the quality and competitiveness of products for which new market opportunities may open up in for example some horticultural products, oilseed products and hides and skins. In order for countries to diversify their exports it is necessary for the right enabling environment to be developed and for adequate international support to be given for project development. However, it must be remembered that the bulk of Africa's agricultural exports are likely to come from traditional export crops, particularly coffee, cocoa, sugar and rubber, which together will account for well over half of total agricultural exports.
As regards Latin America and the Caribbean, only one country is among the least developed though 9 are low-income food-deficit countries. The region as a whole is a net importer of cereals, even though several countries in the region are exporters, particularly Argentina and Uruguay. The higher prices of most agricultural commodities are projected to lead to a substantial rise in import bills both of food and non-food agricultural commodities, with particularly large increases in wheat, rice, fats anti oils, bovine meat, dairy products and sugar. Most of the increase in imports to 2000 is due to factors such as growth of income and population. However, the effect of the Uruguay Round is to boost these imports by another US$0.9 billion, almost entirely on account of higher prices as import volumes are not expected to change significantly and, if anything, could be smaller than otherwise (Table 19c).
Reflecting the relative rapid growth in per caput incomes, consumption per head is expected to rise for a broad range of commodities particularly poultry, fats and oils, some other meat, and the feed use of grains. The Uruguay Round effect on consumption is small; higher incomes and higher prices appear to have offsetting effects.
The most encouraging aspect of the revised projections concerns export earnings, which are expected to grow substantially by the year 2000. For the commodities covered in this study exports could grow by 3.8 percent a year from their base level in 1987-89. Assuming the exports of other agricultural commodities to grow at the same rate, the total value of agricultural exports for the region would reach US$46 billion compared with US$31 billion in the base period. The Uruguay Round would be expected to boost such exports by US$3.0 billion, even allowing for a loss of the potential value of preferences of around US$10.3 billion. Significant gains are expected for the exports of grains, oilseeds, oilmeals and some livestock products by Argentina, Brazil and Uruguay. By contrast, the export Or bananas is projected to be lower than trend, although still higher than in 1987-89, as is poultry, reflecting the rapid growth of consumption.
Table 19c - Developing countries in Latin America and the Caribbean: Projected agricultural trade balances to the year 2000
1987-89 2000 Base Run 2000 with UR Effects
US$ billion
Imports 
Selected Commodities 9.9 15.0 15.8 
Other 0.6 0.9 1.0 
Total 10.5 15.9 16.8 
Exports 
Selected Commodities 25.1 34.4 37.1 
Other 5.8 7.9 8.5 
Total 30.9 42.3 45.6 -0.3^a
Balance (Exports Imports) +20.4 +26.4 +28.5
a Estimated loss of the potential value of preferences provided by the major preference giving countries.
Table 19- Developing countries in the Near East: Projected agricultural trade balances to the year 2000
1987-89 2000 Base Run 2000 with UR Effects
US$ billion
Imports 
Selected Commodities 13.4 19.2 20.4 
Other 4.4 6.3 6.7 
Total 17.8 25.5 27.1 +0.1^a
Exports 
Selected Commodities 1.3 1.5 1.6 
Other 5.4 6.2 6.6 
Total 6.5 7.7 8.2 
Balance (Exports- Imports) -1 1.3 -17.8 -19.0
a Estimated effect of loss of export subsidies on the imports of the subsidy receiving countries.
The net result of these developments is the expectation that the positive agricultural export balance of US$20 billion that the region obtained in 1987-89 should expand to an estimated US$29 billion in 2000, with US$2.1 billion of the increment ascribed to the Uruguay Round.
At the sub-regional level, in South America most countries are significantly involved in agricultural trade. The sub-region includes both temperate zone countries that import tropical products and export cereals, livestock products, oilseeds and fruit and vegetables, and more tropical region countries which export a wide variety of products such as coffee, cocoa, fruit, oilseeds and cut flowers, and import grains and dairy products. The main feature of this sub-region is the highly diversified structure of trade often countries troth import and export related commodities. Overall, the sub-region stands to make considerable trade gains but some of the net food importers face increased food bills for which assistance may be required.
Central America is an important exporter of coffee, cocoa, cotton, fruit, sugar anti an importer of some basic foodstuffs such as cereals, dairy products and meat. The production of some cereals e.g maize, could no doubt be increased, but not wheat.
Overall there would appear to be some improved trade opportunities to be realized but no major shifts. The main impact will be higher prices for imported cereals, dairy products and meat, which will have an adverse impact on consumption and nutritional status.
The Caribbean sub-region depends extensively on food imports, the prices of which will rise, and relics on a rather limited range of agricultural exports mainly sugar, fruit, tobacco and beverages, a significant part of which are exported under preferential arrangements, which are estimated to lose part of their value. For this sub-region the importance of the Decision on the interests of the net food importing developing countries is to be underscored, as the net impact of the Agreement will be decidedly negative. Also in view of the land shortage in these countries, it will be necessary for them to seek fresh opportunities to diversify their agricultural production towards high value products for export and to supply their expanding tourist industries.
The Near East region is predominantly a net importer relying extensively on food imports and having a variety of horticultural and cotton exports. Only two countries are in the least developed group. However, only a minority of countries in the region are GATT/WTO members anti although nonmembers will be affected by changes in international markets, their own policies will not necessarily change. The rise in the prices of basic foodstuffs should give all the countries in this region the chance of passing on the higher prices to their farmers and hence giving a fillip to output, but they are likely to remain large net importers even though unit prices will be significantly higher. For horticulture there are problems of market access; although some improvements have been made by importing countries, in other cases there could be reduced possibilities and several countries are likely to lose part of the value of their preferential arrangements.
The cost of agricultural imports is projected to rise substantially from US$18 billion in 1987-89 to US$27 billion 2000 (Table 19d). The increase is particularly large in basic foods, the bill for which could rise by US$5.2 billion or 46 percent. The growth is due partly to fairly large volume increases of products for which little is produced domestically and partly to the impact of higher prices.
Consumption per head is not expected to increase greatly - in most countries it is already at relatively high levels - but there are expected to be some changes: consumption per head of cereals and milk is projected to fall but utilization of feeds is projected to rise as is that of fats and oils and to a lesser extend meal.
The region earns relatively little from agricultural exports and the bulk of this is in products not covered by these projections (fibres and horticulture) and, therefore the value of the assessment is somewhat limited. However, it is likely that agriculture will still remain a relatively minor contributor to foreign exchange earnings for most countries. Accordingly the gap between agricultural exports and imports is forecast to widen considerably from US$11 to US$19 billion by the year 2000. One of the interesting possibilities that may, however, open up is the increased scope for intra-regional trade if there is a growing move towards eliminating non-tariff berriers.
The Far East overall is a net exporter of rice, fats and oils and tropical products, and a net importer of other cereals and milk products. Particularly large increases in imports are envisaged for feed stuffs for the thriving livestock sector where output is expected to grow by over 5 percent a year. A large increase is also envisaged in imports of dairy products and sugar. Overall, agricultural imports are projected to expand by 56 percent (Table 19c) to reach US$47 billion. The effect of the Uruguay Round itself is to boost the agricultural import bill by US$4.1 billion. The generally rapid economic growth in this region that underpins the growth in imports would be boosted further by the Uruguay Round. As a result the per caput consumption of agricultural commodities is projected to grow, particularly for meat, fats and oils and feeds, and all the tropical products covered.
Table 19e - Developing countries in She Far East: Projected agricultural trade balances to the year 2000
1987-89 2000 Base Run 2000 with UR Effects
US$ billion
Imports 
Selected Commodities 24.7 35.2 38.5 +0.1^a
Other 5.4 7.7 8.4 
Total 30.1 42.9 46.9 +0.1^a
Exports 
Selected Commodities 25.9 38.4 40.9
Other 9.1 13.5 14.4
Total 35.0 51.9 55 3 -03^b
Balance (Exports- Imports) +4.9 +9.0 +8.0
a Estimated effect of loss of export subsidies on the imports of the subsidy receiving countries.
b Estimated loss of the potential value of preferences provided by the major preference giving countries.
The sharp growth in consumption is not expected to harm agricultural exports, the growth of which is projected at US$20 billion between 1987-89 and 2000. Notable export increases are expected in rice (+US$2 billion), bovine hides and skins (+US$3 billion), fats and oils (+US$4 billion), poultry, cocoa, sugar and rubber (+US$1 billion). Among the commodities not covered it is likely that cassava will suffer a reduction but cotton could be boosted. The effect of the Uruguay Round is estimated to boost export earnings by around US$3 billion.
Overall the surplus on the balance of agricultural trade is expected to improve from US$5 billion to US$8.0 billion. However, in this region in particular, increased absorption of agricultural raw materials, from domestic or imported sources for processing industries, is reflected in rapid growth of exports of semi/processed or processed manufactured goods.
Looking at the sub-regions, South Asia, where four countries are least developed, is largely self-sufficient in basic cereals although a net exporter of rice anti a net importer of wheat. It is also a net importer of oilseeds and dairy products but a major exporter of a number of agricultural commodities such as tea, spices, cotton, jute, tobacco and fruit. On balance the region may be a small loser in net trade in the basic foodstuffs except for possible gains in the rice sector although the concentration of gains in rice would favour Japonica rice exporters more than the Indica rice exporters of this sub-region. Bigger gains may be expected from textiles under the Multifibre Agreement liberalization, which could give a boost to the production of fibres domestically.
South East and East Asia, where two countries are least developed, shares a similar pattern to South Asia and could lose from higher world prices of wheat and coarse grain, which would more than offset possible export gains from higher rice prices. With some significant exceptions, most countries in the region will stay relatively close to food self-sufficiency anti the main result of the Uruguay Round price changes would be to reinforce this tendency. The sub-region enjoys a wide and diversified range of exports including rice, oilseeds, fibres, tropical beverages, fruit, sugar, cassava and hides anti skins. Probably few gains can be expected from the tropical beverages, the market for cassava may contract. Fibres may be boosted somewhat as a result of increased demand from the textile sector while oilseeds, fruit anti hides anti skins could benefit from market expansion.
Finally as regards the Pacific islands (four countries of which are in the least developed group), they are generally like the Caribbean countries, net importers of food and net exporters of sugar (Fiji), and palm and coconut products. The shortage of land in most of the countries will presumably limit the possibilities of a major increase in domestic food production so that a careful focusing on high valued products, exploiting the possibilities for diversification where feasible, will still be important options. Food imports will cost more.
<section>8</section>
V. Special issues
Lower value of preferences
The widespread reduction in standard tariff rates (i.e. the Most Favoured Nation or MFN rates) combined with unchanged rates under the various tariff preference schemes (GSP, Lom, Caribbean Basin Initiative) signifies a reduction in the preference margin. The basic idea behind preferential schemes is that a recipient exporting country can sell products into the preference giving country either at a lower price than non-preference receivers and so capture increased sales or sell at the same market price but get a higher return (the difference equal to the preference margin). Typically, preferential access is given on a limited range of agricultural commodities and usually not for unlimited amounts. The quantities benefit from preferential rates are limited either by quota or by rules-of-origin.
To calculate the value of preferences it would theoretically be necessary to know whether countries choose to lower prices and increase the volume or take the full benefit of the preference margin. Because, however, in most markets with preferential access the developing country recipients can be assumed to be relatively small suppliers and hence "price takers", it has been assumed that the recipient countries do not normally use price discounts but rather take the preference margin. Essentially this approach defines a preference margin potential, the maximum that could be obtained. The potential value of such preferences was taken to be the product of the percentage preference margin and the value of imports from the preference receiving exporting country. Only significant flows of such trade are reported, which indicates an underestimate of the value of preferences. However, some tariff receiving countries apparently sell some goods at the preferential rate and others (of
the same type) at the MFN rate indicating an overestimate of the value of preferences. With possible sources of both over and under-estimation, it may be concluded on balance that this method of estimating the potential value of preferences is reasonable.
Using this method, the potential value of preferences given by the European Union, Japan and the United States in the agricultural sector in 1992, was US$1.9 trillion, one third going to Africa, 40 percent to Latin America and the Caribbean, and the rest mainly to the Far East anti Oceania developing countries. The Near East is estimated to have benefited very little. After the Uruguay Round reduction in MFN rates, the potential value of preferences is estimated to fall by US$0.8 billion with losses of US$ billion 0.2, 0.3, 0.2 anti 0.1 for Africa, Latin America and the Caribbean, the Far East and others respectively. On a commodity basis the biggest losses are estimated for fruit and nuts, sugar, coffee and tea.
Higher income growth
The range of estimated impacts on world income of the Uruguay Round is quite wide. The GATT estimates these to be between US$100 billion and US$500 billion. The present study has been based on the World Bank/OECD estimate of US$213 billion. In order to see the possible effect of a higher income assumption it was chosen to take a figure double the original level. The effect on the projections is relatively small: the value of world agricultural trade would be boosted by just over one percent, half due to higher prices and half to increased trade volumes. The pattern of trade would not change significantly as the percentage increase in income postulated would be much the same for all regions compared with the lower income growth variant.
Stability of prices
One of the more important anticipated benefits accruing from the Uruguay Round is the expected reduction in price instability. The idea behind this view is that by increasing the number of countries that are open to world price signals, "shocks" (arising say from unexpected production shortfalls) would be absorbed by a greater number of markets, thus cushioning the effect of such shocks on world prices. However, liberalization is also expected to lead to a decline in government stockholding, a decline that is unlikely to be compensated by an expansion of private stockholding, so that total stocks could well decline. This second consideration is not captured by the way that the modeling has been done (nor could it easily be done, as the matter is highly complex). The approach that was followed, therefore, relied essentially on examining the impact of production shocks on world price stability to see whether the tariffication and reduction of tariffs had the expected effect.
The production shocks chosen for examination were a generalized 5 percent decline in cereals output in the year 1999 and their effect on world prices in the year 2000. The result of the simulation is that trade liberalization as modelled in this study appears to have almost no effects on the stability of cereals.
Tariff escalation
The problem of tariff escalation is that importing countries may and often do put a higher effective tariff on the more processed products and a lower effective tariff on the raw materials thus encouraging imports of the latter and discouraging those of the processed product, potentially depriving the exporting countries of the chance to increase the value added on their primary products. This question has not been examined in the present study but has been analyzed by the GATT Secretariat for hides and skins and leather, rubber, jute and tobacco among agricultural commodities. Their study shows a degree of reduction in tariff escalation for the four importers concerned (Canada, the EC, Japan and the United States). However, in about half the cases the decrease in the tariffs on intermediate agricultural processed goods has been larger than the decrease in the final goods tariffs, implying an increase in tariff escalation at the final stage. These cases include rubber in the
EC, Japan and the United States; jute in Canada, the EC and the United States and hides and skins and leather in Japan. This is a subject on which more research is required.
<section>9</section>
VI. Conclusions
The outlook for commodity markets even after all the ongoing trade liberalization efforts is still for a slowdown in growth rates compared with the eighties. The Uruguay Round is estimated to have a positive effect on the value of trade as the small boost to volumes is coupled with a positive effect on prices, but it will not overturn the slowdown that is caused by decreased import growth in the main developed country markets. World agricultural market prices are generally expected to be higher than in the 1987-89 base period, the growth due significantly to the effects of the Uruguay Round.
Overall the global value of world trade of the principal agricultural commodities is expected to rise by US$55 billion between 1987-89 and 2000, US$15 billion of which may be attributed to the Uruguay Round.
Among the developed countries there would be large increases in the net imports of the principal commodities by western Europe and Japan, a decline in the deficit of Eastern Europe and the area of the former USSR. By contrast, large export gains will he made by North America and Oceania.
As regards the developing countries, their overall agricultural export earnings are expected to keep pace with the rise in import bills. However, the gap between the value of imports and exports is expected to widen substantially for the Near East while in Africa it is projected to go from a small surplus to a small deficit. Net exports are expected to improve for the Latin America and the Caribbean region and for the Far East The Uruguay Round, though only accounting for a part of these changes, will affect the agricultural import bills of all developing regions adversely and boost exports to a lesser extent. Apart from higher prices and shifts in market shares towards the more efficient exporting countries, the Uruguay Round will raise food import bills because of the reduction in export subsidies on these products anti will lead to a sizeable fall in the value of preferential trading arrangements.
The slowdown in the growth of world agricultural trade, despite the positive effects of the Uruguay Round, is a disappointment to agricultural exporting countries. However, agricultural trade liberalization per se does not necessarily boost the volume of world trade especially when the protectionism being reduced is concentrated in countries that are exporters of agricultural goods. The effect of reduced protectionism in these cases is more on world prices ante on trade shares; and, as has been noted, these are expected to change as a result of the Uruguay Round.
Moreover, the Uruguay Round only represents a partial reduction in protectionism. Only a relatively small cut in domestic support is envisaged though more substantial cuts in border protection are to be made. It may also be noted, however, that the Uruguay Round Agreement on Agriculture calls in Article 20 for the continuation of the reform process and reiterates that the long term objective remains that of "substantial progressive reductions in support and protection resulting in fundamental reform".
One of the side-effects of the reduction in tariffs will be the erosion of the value of preferential margins, the potential loss of which has been estimated at US$0.8 billion. As many of the recipients of preferential schemes are among the poorest of the developing countries, this is a loss that should be examined in depth by the preference giving countries with a view to restoring the value of the preferences by other trade concessions or by other forms of compensation.
Though this document is concerned with the assessment of the impact of the Uruguay Round and other developments on agricultural markets, it should be noted that the Uruguay Round Final Act is also a milestone in the development of agricultural policy. The implications for national policy formulation are manifold and can only be listed in a very summary way here. They are, however, the focus of FAO's normative and operational policy work at present and will continue to be in the future. FAO has organized four regional expert consultations on the subject and a number of requests for policy assistance have been approved; others will be undertaken subject to resources being available. Briefly the following are the main areas where policies may need to be reexamined:
(i) the expected increase in food and agricultural prices in international markets may call for modifications in national food security and nutrition enhancement policies and strategies, including consumer price policies for food; (ii)although the rise in prices at the world level, coupled with use of tariffs, can lead to more appropriate incentives to producers, most developing countries will need to evolve targeted and decoupled (Green Box) forms of assistance that can be implemented at low budgetary costs;
(iii) tariffication may introduce greater instability to domestic prices, which may require reconsideration of producer price policies and modifications in "price bands" or other instruments to prevent excessive instability;
(iv) countries will need to assess carefully the extent to which countervailing measures may be required to offset the internal price depressing effects of gradually declining but continuing high levels of protectionism elsewhere, and use the financial resources captured to increase food production and enhance food security in accord with their comparative advantages in a protectionism-free world;
(v) following tariffication, and hence the elimination of non-tariff barriers, there may well be increased scope for intra-regional or sub-regional trading arrangements based on tariff concessions;
(vi) countries not members of the CATT/WTO will need to assess carefully the costs/benefits of membership in view of the changed international trading environment; and
(vii) countries will need to strengthen their technical services in the sanitary and phytosanitary areas.
Developing countries will be [acing considerable changes in world market conditions while also confronting a complex policy agenda. They may require a variety of assistance to capture potential benefits from new market opportunities and to cope with new problems and exigencies. The relatively sluggish growth of world markets for the principal agricultural commodities should encourage them into diversification and further processing of their primary agricultural commodities. More thought needs, therefore, to be given to questions of tariff escalation and targeted tariff reduction in areas of potential market growth of interest to developing countries. New forms of assistance to replace loss of preferences need to be considered and technical assistance in policy formulation and sanitary and phytosanitary measures will need to be stepped up. In all this, the particular needs of the least developed countries will need to be given priority consideration.
<title>Impact of the Uruguay Round on agriculture</title>
Table A3 - Per Caput GDP at 1980 Prices, 1980 to 1990 Actual and 1990 to 2000 Projected
Region
2000 Projected
Actual
Baseline
UR
UR
Actual
Baseline
UR
UR
Central
High
Central
High
US$ al 1980 prices
percent per year
WORLD 2,599 2,912 3,312 3,339 3,369 1.1 1.3 1.4 1.5
DEVELOPING 752 865 1,139 1,151 1,164 1.4 2.8 2.9 3.0
Africa 701 606 655 653 655 -1.4 0.8 0.7 0.8
Latin America 2,309 2,112 2,532 2,541 2,550 -0.9 1.8 1.9 1.9
Near East 2,331 1,870 2,040 2,042 2,051 -2.2 0.9 0.9 0.9
Far East 370 610 915 931 948 5.1 4.1 4.3 4.5
Other Developing 1,734 1,954 2,500 2,564 2,629 1.2 2.5 2.8 3.0
DEVELOPED 7,783 9,544 11,488 11,576 11,665 2.1 1.9 1.9 2.0
North America 11,722 14,263 16,522 16,554 16,586 2.0 1.5 1.5 1.5
Europe 8,065 9.783 12,318 12,480 12,643 1.9 2.3 2.5 2.6
EC 9,994 12,305 15,811 16,026 16,244 2.1 2.5 2.7 2.8
Other W.Europe 13,148 16,058 19,479 19,746 20,018 2.0 2.0 2.1 2.2
Eastern Europe 2.053 2,080 1,908 1,910 1,911 0.1 -0.9 -0.9 -0.8
Former USSR 3,362 3,861 3,270 3,273 3,276 1.4 -1.6 -1.6 -1.6
Oceania 10,200 11,816 13,884 13,897 13,910 1.5 1.6 1.6 1.6
Other Developed 7.799 10,600 14,713 14,835 14,960 3.1 3.3 3.4 3.5
Source: World Bank and other international organizations
Note: For country derails see: FAO "Compendium of Macro-Economic Indicators", ESC/M/93/1, Rome 1993
<title>Impact of the Uruguay Round on agriculture</title>
<section>1</section>
Table A5 - Subsidized export reduction commitments by commodity
Export subsidies (million US$)
Change from higher base
Subsidized quantities (thousand tonnes)
Change from higher base
Unit export subsidy (US, per tonne)
Change from higher base
Wheat 3314.4 4628.1 2404.8 -48 51448 60058 41654 -31 64 77 58 -25
Rice 113.3 119.0 81.4 -32 1631 1828 1465 -17 69 67 56 -20
Coarse grains 2356.9 2378.2 1658.4 -30 33778 33351 27254 -19 70 71 61 -15
Vegetable oils 265.8 285.4 191.4 -33 1621 2020 1403 -31 164 141 136 -17
Oilseeds 244.5 233.7 177.8 -27 4311 4190 3582 -17 57 56 50 -12
Oilmeals 245.8 239.7 209.2 -15 2940 2913 2658 -10 84 82 79 -6
Bovine meat 3460.0 3347.7 2232.1 -35 1830 1905 1489 -22 1890 1757 1499 -21
Ovine meat 53.4 50.3 35.7 -33 62 61 52 -16 855 827 684 -20
Pigmeat 578.9 551.1 397.1 -31 883 854 715 -19 656 645 555 -15
Poultry meat 499.9 475.9 356.8 -29 795 856 651 -24 629 556 548 -13
Butter, butter oil 1619.8 1542.7 1039.8 -36 594 612 472 -23 2726 2520 2204 -19
Skim milk 762.2 719.4 488.0 -36 686 713 542 -24 1111 1010 900 -19
Cheese 727.1 814.6 467.3 -43 545 575 437 -24 1335 1416 1069 -24
Other milk products 1602.0 1539.4 1025.5 -36 1443 1427 1141 -21 1111 1079 899 -19
Sugar 3506.9 3221.7 2540.6 -28 6434 5974 5294 -18 545 539 480 -12
Note: Commitments converted to US dollars using 1986-88 average exchange rates.
Note: As products are expressed at different stages of processing in the Schedules, the totals given above can only be considered indicative.
<section>2</section>
Annex Table 1 - Wheat - Aggregated Tariff Equivalents
Base Rates
Bound Rates
Year Of
Producer
Changes
Specific
Ad Valorem
Specific
Ad Valorem
Implem.
Prices
Specific
Ad Valorem
US$
US$
US$
ARGENTINA 0.00 38.00 0.00 38.00 2004 190.87 0.0 0.0
AUSTRALIA 0.88 0.22 0.00 0.22 2000 114.80 -100.0 0.0
AUSTRIA 463.06 2.68 390.74 2.18 2000 286.73 -15.6 -18.7
BELGIUM 229.02 4.46 135.67 2.87 2000 208.59 -40.8 -35.7
BENIN 0.00 79.00 0.00 79.00 2004 300.00 0.0 0.0
BRAZIL 0.00 58.91 0.00 54.89 2004 465.96 0.0 -6.8
CAMEROON 0.00 310.00 0.00 310.00 2004 279.97 0.0 0.0
CANADA 9.78 75.60 8.32 64.26 2000 90.17 -14.9 -15.0
CHILE 0.00 35.00 0.00 30.53 2004 188.97 0.0 -12.8
CHINA P.REP. 0.00 95.02 0.00 84.41 2004 134.32 0.0 -11.2
COLOMBIA 0.00 133.55 0.00 118.05 2004 210.04 0.0 -11.6
CONGO 0.00 30.00 0.00 30.00 2004 300.00 0.0 0.0
COSTA RICA 0.00 53.93 0.00 34.26 2004 200.00 0.0 -36.5
CUBA 0.00 40.00 0.00 40.00 2004 238.07 0.0 0.0
CYPRUS 386.84 39.21 293.72 29.70 2004 253.89 -24.1 -24.3
CZECH REP. 0.00 22.76 0.00 20.23 2000 314.28 0.0 -11.1
DENMARK 175.81 4.39 86.77 2.82 2000 205.15 -50.6 -35.8
DOMINICAN REP. 0.00 40.00 0.00 40.00 2004 200.00 0.0 0.0
EGYPT 0.00 10.39 0.00 5.71 2004 319.89 0.0 -45.0
EL SALVADOR 0.00 32.37 0.00 31.19 2004 114.36 0.0 -3.6
FIJI 0.00 40.00 0.00 40.00 2004 201.32 0.0 0.0
FINLAND 217.60 269.06 185.26 218.69 2000 532.23 -14.9 -18.7
FRANCE 190.95 1.31 99.94 0.84 2000 175.75 -47.7 -35.9
GABON 0.00 260.00 0.00 260.00 2004 300.00 0.0 0.0
GERMANY 228.20 2.42 146.45 1.55 2000 250.00 -35.8 -36.0
GHANA 0.00 125.00 0.00 99.00 2004 300.00 0.0 -20.8
GREECE 209.38 0.87 121.90 0.56 2000 203.58 -41.8 -35.6
GUATEMALA 0.00 117.04 0.00 105.17 2004 242.08 0.0 -10.1
GUYANA 0.00 160.00 0.00 160.00 2004 500.00 0.0 0.0
HONDURAS 0.00 38.00 0.00 35.00 2004 191.67 0.0 -7.9
HUNGARY 0.00 52.27 0.00 33.35 2000 79.16 0.0 -36.2
INDIA 0.00 143.88 0.00 143.95 2004 166.52 0.0 0.0
INDONESIA 0.00 36.10 0.00 29.90 2004 200.00 0.0 -17.2
IRELAND 199.96 4.33 112.61 2.78 2000 170.51 -43.7 -35.8
ISRAEL 0.00 136.31 0.00 105.61 2000 206.19 0.0 -22.5
ITALY 233.15 2.03 143.34 1.30 2000 278.36 -38.5 -36.0
JAPAN 548.16 2.13 465.12 1.57 2000 1258.78 -15.1 -26.3
KOREA REP. 0.00 21.04 0.00 4.51 2004 398.58 0.0 -78.6
KUWAIT 0.00 115.00 0.00 115.00 2004 140.00 0.0 0.0
MADAGASCAR 0.00 280.00 0.00 280.00 2004 258.34 0.0 0.0
MALAYSIA 0.00 65.96 0.00 53.11 2004 250.00 0.0 -19.5
MEXICO 0.00 56.53 0.00 50.70 2004 132.01 0.0 -10.3
MOROCCO 0.00 186.75 0.00 142.12 2004 269.48 0.0 -23.9
MYANMAR 0.00 52.79 0.00 52.79 2004 777.84 0.0 0.0
NAMIBIA 0.00 201.59 0.00 93.50 2004 195.73 0.0 -53.6
NETHERLANDS 211.01 5.27 121.67 3.39 2000 222.39 -42.3 -35.7
NEW ZEALAND 0.00 21.51 0.00 12.21 2000 125.10 0.0 -43.2
NICARAGUA 0.00 60.00 0.00 40.00 2004 400.00 0.0 -33.3
NORWAY 0.00 347.65 0.00 249.34 2000 446.33 0.0 -28.6
PAKISTAN 0.00 105.68 0.00 105.68 2004 117.20 0.0 0.0
PHILIPPINES 0.00 47.65 0.00 37.58 2004 160.00 0.0 -21.1
POLAND 175.40 15.67 112.43 9.98 2000 155.42 -35.9 -36.3
PORTUGAL 248.00 0.80 155.98 0.51 2000 333.30 -37.1 -36.3
ROMANIA 0.00 279.69 0.00 223.89 2000 115.23 0.0 -20.0
SINGAPORE 0.00 27.00 0.00 10.00 2004 279.07 0.0 -63.0
SLOVAK REP. 0.00 22.76 0.00 20.23 2000 314.28 0.0 -11.1
SOUTH AFRICA 0.00 176.50 0.00 84.88 2000 166.94 0.0 -51.9
SPAIN 217.22 0.50 127.47 0.32 2000 222.32 -41.3 -36.0
SRI LANKA 0.00 65.98 0.00 49.99 2004 73.89 0.0 -24.2
SWAZILAND 0.00 221.40 0.00 99.84 2004 261.04 0.0 -54.9
SWEDEN 90.93 19.07 67.00 15.56 2000 207.74 -26.3 -18.4
THAILAND 201.68 53.98 109.55 29.40 2004 120.00 -45.7 -45.5
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO 0.00 115.00 0.00 115.00 2004 200.00 0.0 0.0
TUNISIA 0.00 183.01 0.00 137.94 2004 224.59 0.0 -24.6
TURKEY 0.00 191.02 0.00 171.92 2004 122.79 0.0 -10.0
UK 201.06 1.23 108.90 0.79 2000 195.78 -45.8 -35.8
URUGUAY 0.00 28.82 0.00 47.98 2004 160.44 0.0 66.5
USA 7.81 0.12 4.18 0.06 2000 106.74 -46.5 -50.0
VENEZUELA 0.00 125.77 0.00 113.63 2004 209.47 0.0 -9.7
ZAMBIA 0.00 0.96 0.00 2.15 2004 177.90 0.0 124.0
<section>3</section>
Annex Table 2 - Rice - Aggregated Tariff Equivalents
Base Rates Bound Rates 
Year Of Producer
Changes
Specific
Ad Valorem
Specific
Ad Valorem
Implem. Prices
Specific
Ad Valorem
US$
US$
US$
ARGENTINA 0.00 38.00 0.00 38.00 2004 297.57 0.0 0.0
AUSTRALIA 0.00 2.00 0.00 1.00 2000 101.62 0.0 -50.0
AUSTRIA 113.51 0.00 65.80 0.00 2000 253.81 -42.0 0.0
BELGIUM 379.63 0.00 242.97 0.00 2000 252.86 -36.0 0.0
BENIN 0.00 79.00 0.00 79.00 2004 414.83 0.0 0.0
BRAZIL 0.00 53.56 0.00 54.25 2004 431.20 0.0 1.3
CAMEROON 0.00 310.00 0.00 310.00 2004 489.63 0.0 0.0
CANADA 2.22 0.00 1.43 0.00 2000 230.00 -35.6 0.0
CHILE 0.00 35.00 0.00 25.00 2004 179.90 0.0 -28.6
CHINA P.REP. 0.00 148.03 0.00 112.32 2004 133.03 0.0 -24.1
COLOMBIA 0.00 209.39 0.00 188.23 2004 165.61 0.0 -10.1
CONGO 0.00 30.00 0.00 30.00 2004 282.31 0.0 0.0
COSTA RICA 0.00 55.99 0.00 36.13 2004 243.11 0.0 -35.5
CUBA 0.00 40.00 0.00 40.00 2004 472.59 0.0 0.0
CYPRUS 714.83 33.00 542.88 25.00 2004 250.00 -24.1 -24.2
CZECH REP. 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2000 400.00 0.0 0.0
DENMARK 434.22 0.00 277.88 0.00 2000 250.00 -36.0 0.0
DOMINICAN REP. 0.00 40.00 0.00 40.00 2004 271.35 0.0 0.0
EGYPT 0.00 29.80 0.00 19.87 2004 300.00 0.0 -33.3
EL SALVADOR 0.00 50.00 0.00 40.00 2004 197.38 0.0 -20.0
FIJI 0.00 59.81 0.00 45.94 2004 186.94 0.0 -23.2
FINLAND 0.08 14.82 0.07 12.64 2000 550.00 -12.5 -14.7
FRANCE 371.12 0.00 237.46 0.00 2000 290.53 -36.0 0.0
GABON 0.00 260.00 0.00 260.00 2004 630.46 0.0 0.0
GERMANY 455.39 0.00 291.38 0.00 2000 283.53 -36.0 0.0
GHANA 0.00 125.00 0.00 99.00 2004 354.84 0.0 -20.8
GREECE 400.91 0.00 256.52 0.00 2000 325.29 -36.0 0.0
GUATEMALA 0.00 99.35 0.00 89.41 2004 337.38 0.0 -10.0
GUYANA 0.00 141.19 0.00 141.19 2004 523.65 0.0 0.0
HONDURAS 0.00 38.00 0.00 35.00 2004 255.33 0.0 -7.9
HUNGARY 0.00 98.31 0.00 40.27 2000 310.40 0.0 -59.0
INDIA 0.00 1.42 0.00 1.42 2004 191.09 0.0 0.0
INDONESIA 0.00 177.72 0.00 157.90 2004 124.48 0.0 -11.2
IRELAND 456.67 0.00 292.41 0.00 2000 250.00 -36.0 0.0
ISRAEL 0.00 9.98 0.00 7.58 2000 250.00 0.0 -24.0
ITALY 440.28 0.00 281.77 0.00 2000 425.09 -36.0 0.0
JAPAN 0.45 0.00 0.45 0.00 2000 2233.92 0.0 0.0
KOREA REP. 0.00 0.14 0.00 0.10 2004 542.97 0.0 -28.6
KUWAIT 0.00 115.00 0.00 115.00 2004 270.00 0.0 0.0
MADAGASCAR 0.00 280.00 0.00 280.00 2004 145.21 0.0 0.0
MALAYSIA 0.00 44.44 0.00 39.48 2004 267.98 0.0 -11.2
MEXICO 0.00 48.73 0.00 43.72 2004 203.24 0.0 -10.3
MOROCCO 0.00 246.23 0.00' 187.34 2004 374.93 0.0 -23.9
MYANMAR 0.00 10.70 0.00 10.70 2004 99.26 0.0 0.0
NAMIBIA 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2000 200.00 0.0 0.0
NETHERLANDS 413.53 0.00 264.64 0.00 2000 250.00 -36.0 0.0
NEW ZEALAND 0.00 0.11 0.00 0.00 2000 150.00 0.0 -100.0
NICARAGUA 0.00 69.90 0.00 59.80 2004 824.50 0.0 -14.4
NORWAY 55.53 2.19 12.44 1.53 2000 500.00 -77.6 -30.1
PAKISTAN 0.00 100.00 0.00 100.00 2004 177.38 0.0 0.0
PHILIPPINES 0.00 0.45 0.00 0.30 2004 144.06 0.0 -33.3
POLAND 496.50 15.00 317.76 9.60 2000 200.00 -36.0 -36.0
PORTUGAL 491.89 0.00 314.82 0.00 2000 435.81 -36.0 0.0
ROMANIA 0.00 150.00 0.00 119.84 2000 195.77 0.0 -20.1
SINGAPORE 0.00 27.00 0.00 10.00 2004 528.87 0.0 -63.0
SLOVAK REP. 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2000 400.00 0.0 0.0
SOUTH AFRICA 0.00 5.03 0.00 0.02 2000 234.34 0.0 -99.6
SPAIN 424.71 0.00 271.74 0.00 2000 323.61 -36.0 0.0
SRI LANKA 0.00 66.00 0.00 50.00 2004 140.19 0.0 -24.2
SWAZILAND 0.00 5.65 0.00 0.45 2004 404.57 0.0 -92.0
SWEDEN 0.00 0.02 0.00 0.01 2000 264.23 0.0 -50.0
THAILAND 3.68 56.61 2.76 50.60 2004 117.53 -25.0 -10.6
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO 0.00 115.00 0.00 115.00 2004 523.25 0.0 0.0
TUNISIA 0.00 100.00 0.00 60.00 2004 250.00 0.0 -40.0
TURKEY 0.00 49.67 0.00 44.70 2004 457.99 0.0 -10.0
UK 405.34 0.00 259.32 0.00 2000 243.31 -36.0 0.0
URUGUAY 0.00 25.00 0.00 54.61 2004 184.17 0.0 118.4
USA 16.32 0.00 10.41 0.00 2000 131.18 -36.2 0.0
VENEZUELA 0.00 134.94 0.00 121.94 2004 295.15 0.0 -9.6
ZAMBIA 0.00 123.42 0.00 123.42 2004 129.00 0.0 0.0
<section>4</section>
Annex Table 3 - Maize - Aggregated Tariff Equivalents
Base Rates Bound Rates 
Year Of Producer
Changes
Specific
Ad Valorem
Specific
Ad Valorem
Implem. 
Prices
Specific
Ad Valorem
US$
US$
US$
ARGENTINA 0.00 38.00 0.00 38.00 2004 168.71 0.0 0.0
AUSTRALIA 2.08 1.40 0.00 1.00 2000 104.02 -100.0 -28.6
AUSTRIA 277.88 0.00 235.79 0.00 2000 240.19 -15.1 0.0
BELGIUM 168.07 0.00 85.56 0.00 2000 307.63 -49.1 0.0
BENIN 0.00 79.00 0.00 79.00 2004 242.90 0.0 0.0
BRAZIL 0.00 42.25 0.00 54.46 2004 322.43 0.0 28.9
CAMEROON 0.00 310.00 0.00 310.00 2004 264.31 0.0 0.0
CANADA 2.70 0.39 1.72 0.25 2000 82.25 -36.3 -35.9
CHILE 0.00 35.00 0.00 25.00 2004 140.53 0.0 -28.6
CHINA P.REP. 0.00 124.80 0.00 101.47 2004 98.99 0.0 -18.7
COLOMBIA 0.00 242.04 0.00 179.76 2004 194.28 0.0 -25.7
CONGO 0.00 30.00 0.00 30.00 2004 232.24 0.0 0.0
COSTA RICA 0.00 55.00 0.00 30.02 2004 212.50 0.0 -45.4
CUBA 0.00 40.00 0.00 40.00 2004 248.73 0.0 0.0
CYPRUS 235.17 33.00 177.43 25.00 2004 145.76 -24.6 -24.2
CZECH REP. 0.00 11.70 0.00 7.07 2000 386.65 0.0 -39.6
DENMARK 162.41 0.00 95.69 0.00 2000 200.50 -41.1 0.0
DOMINICAN REP. 0.00 40.00 0.00 40.00 2004 183.73 0.0 0.0
EGYPT 0.00 11.67 0.00 8.67 2004 324.14 0.0 -25.7
EL SALVADOR 0.00 33.54 0.00 31.99 2004 155.23 0.0 -4.6
FIJI 0.00 40.00 0.00 40.00 2004 147.40 0.0 0.0
FINLAND 0.06 265.19 0.05 212.23 2000 494.79 -16.7 -20.0
FRANCE 164.39 0.00 76.20 0.00 2000 168.14 -53.6 0.0
GABON 0.00 260.00 0.00 260.00 2004 240.02 0.0 0.0
GERMANY 188.69 0.00 103.90 0.00 2000 170.33 -44.9 0.0
GHANA 0.00 125.00 0.00 99.00 2004 293.52 0.0 -20.8
GREECE 163.23 0.00 73.75 0.00 2000 191.12 -54.8 0.0
GUATEMALA 0.00 49.09 0.00 34.72 2004 162.45 0.0 -29.3
GUYANA 0.00 160.00 0.00 160.00 2004 551.88 0.0 0.0
HONDURAS 0.00 38.00 0.00 35.00 2004 175.33 0.0 -7.9
HUNGARY 0.00 48.32 0.00 31.39 2000 119.43 0.0 -35.0
INDIA 0.00 128.28 0.00 128.28 2004 137.81 0.0 0.0
INDONESIA 0.00 80.98 0.00 52.08 2004 212.96 0.0 -35.7
IRELAND 198.64 0.00 119.89 0.00 2000 137.94 -39.6 0.0
ISRAEL 0.00 48.50 0.00 36.79 2000 177.06 0.0 -24.1
ITALY 165.60 0.00 76.97 0.00 2000 239.39 -53.5 0.0
JAPAN 105.81 0.25 89.94 0.21 2000 841.03 -15.0 -16.0
KOREA REP. 0.00 381.43 0.00 342.77 2004 365.51 0.0 -10.1
KUWAIT 0.00 115.00 0.00 115.00 2004 130.00 0.0 0.0
MADAGASCAR 0.00 280.00 0.00 280.00 2004 263.33 0.0 0.0
MALAYSIA 0.00 6.34 0.00 5.21 2004 136.10 0.0 -17.8
MEXICO 0.00 84.11 0.00 75.80 2004 231.58 0.0 -9.9
MOROCCO 0.00 158.86 0.00 120.65 2004 206.21 0.0 -24.1
MYANMAR 0.00 39.07 0.00 39.07 2004 159.79 0.0 0.0
NAMIBIA 0.00 212.05 0.00 96.48 2004 158.48 0.0 -54.5
NETHERLANDS 169.43 0.00 84.30 0.00 2000 181.78 -50.2 0.0
NEW ZEALAND 0.00 4.58 0.00 2.93 2000 104.41 0.0 -36.0
NICARAGUA 0.00 70.00 0.00 60.00 2004 803.32 0.0 -14.3
NORWAY 0.00 222.53 0.00 162.23 2000 379.23 0.0 -27.1
PAKISTAN 0.00 114.35 0.00 114.35 2004 49.73 0.0 0.0
PHILIPPINES 0.00 80.93 0.00 45.41 2004 133.36 0.0 -43.9
POLAND 143.81 46.20 93.92 29.44 2000 139.87 -34.7 -36.3
PORTUGAL 167.79 0.00 78.14 0.00 2000 284.77 -53.4 0.0
ROMANIA 0.00 292.35 0.00 234.06 2000 80.81 0.0 -19.9
SINGAPORE 0.00 27.00 0.00 10.00 2004 259.80 0.0 -63.0
SLOVAK REP. 0.00 11.70 0.00 7.07 2000 386.65 0.0 -39.6
SOUTH AFRICA 0.00 148.64 0.00 76.02 2000 131.41 0.0 -48.9
SPAIN 167.20 0.00 78.71 0.00 2000 222.64 -52.9 0.0
SRI LANKA 0.00 66.00 0.00 50.00 2004 125.12 0.0 -24.2
SWAZILAND 0.00 123.90 0.00 68.11 2004 147.17 0.0 -45.0
SWEDEN 3.90 125.31 2.94 81.09 2000 262.89 -24.6 -35.3
THAILAND 1.21 80.01 0.91 71.97 2004 85.00 -24.8 -10.0
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO 0.00 115.00 0.00 125.00 2004 215.67 0.0 8.7
TUNISIA 0.00 30.52 0.00 20.67 2004 149.73 0.0 -32.3
TURKEY 0.00 127.31 0.00 114.57 2004 128.44 0.0 -10.0
UK 202.10 0.00 120.96 0.00 2000 192.25 -40.1 0.0
URUGUAY 0.00 41.19 0.00 41.12 2004 148.20 0.0 -0.2
USA 2.55 0.00 0.79 0.00 2000 73.67 -69.0 0.0
VENEZUELA 0.00 135.39 0.00 110.65 2004 288.95 0.0 -18.3
ZAMBIA 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2004 97.79 0.0 0.0
<section>5</section>
Annex Table 4 - Millet and Sorghum - Aggregated Tariff Equivalents
Base Rates Bound Rates Year Of Producer Changes
Specific
Ad Valorem
Specific
Ad Valorem
Implem. 
Prices
Specific
Ad Valorem
US$
US$
US$
ARGENTINA 0.00 38.00 0.00 38.00 2004 125.08 0.0 0.0
AUSTRALIA 0.00 2.00 0.00 1.00 2000 89.02 0.0 -50.0
AUSTRIA 265.37 0.00 225.56 0.00 2000 269.31 -15.0 0.0
BELGIUM 158.75 0.00 71.36 0.00 2000 199.13 -55.0 0.0
BENIN 0.00 79.00 0.00 79.00 2004 285.59 0.0 0.0
BRAZIL 0.00 55.00 0.00 54.89 2004 239.92 0.0 -0.2
CAMEROON 0.00 310.00 0.00 310.00 2004 178.02 0.0 0.0
CANADA 0.88 0.00 0.00 0.00 2000 71.37 -100.0 0.0
CHILE 0.00 35.00 0.00 25.00 2004 127.39 0.0 -28.6
CHINA P.REP. 0.00 67.60 0.00 37.38 2004 124.44 0.0 -44.7
COLOMBIA 0.00 147.00 0.00 132.00 2004 146.44 0.0 -10.2
CONGO 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2000 269.32 0.0 0.0
COSTA RICA 0.00 55.00 0.00 45.00 2004 194.42 0.0 -18.2
CUBA 0.00 40.00 0.00 40.00 2004 131.47 0.0 0.0
CYPRUS 233.87 33.00 176.47 25.00 2004 99.91 -24.5 -24.2
CZECH REP. 0.00 4.71 0.00 0.94 2000 262.12 0.0 -80.0
DENMARK 99.58 0.00 62.48 0.00 2000 186.32 -37.3 0.0
DOMINICAN REP. 0.00 40.00 0.00 40.00 2004 133.15 0.0 0.0
EGYPT 0.00 15.00 0.00 10.00 2004 402.38 0.0 -33.3
EL SALVADOR 0.00 40.30 0.00 35.15 2004 149.75 0.0 -12.8
FIJI 0.00 40.00 0.00 40.00 2004 115.04 0.0 0.0
FINLAND 265.49 0.00 225.67 0.00 2000 377.59 -15.0 0.0
FRANCE 159.67 0.00 71.50 0.00 2000 192.01 -55.2 0.0
GABON 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2000 230.00 0.0 0.0
GERMANY 134.15 0.00 85.30 0.00 2000 168.75 -36.4 0.0
GHANA 0.00 125.00 0.00 99.00 2004 263.75 0.0 -20.8
GREECE 146.20 0.00 69.48 0.00 2000 191.31 -52.5 0.0
GUATEMALA 0.00 89.72 0.00 80.65 2004 143.42 0.0 -10.1
GUYANA 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2000 551.88 0.0 0.0
HONDURAS 0.00 38.00 0.00 35.00 2004 167.50 0.0 -7.9
HUNGARY 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2000 428.97 0.0 0.0
INDIA 0.00 135.77 0.00 135.77 2004 149.99 0.0 0.0
INDONESIA 0.00 58.45 0.00 39.04 2004 191.83 0.0 -33.2
IRELAND 104.37 0.00 63.20 0.00 2000 137.94 -39.4 0.0
ISRAEL 0.00 10.04 0.00 7.63 2000 149.57 0.0 -24.0
ITALY 159.93 0.00 71.54 0.00 2000 333.08 -55.3 0.0
JAPAN 0.00 0.08 0.00 0.07 2000 842.00 0.0 -12.5
KOREA REP. 0.00 29.10 0.00 22.11 2004 1016.23 0.0 -24.0
KUWAIT 0.00 115.00 0.00 115.00 2004 160.00 0.0 0.0
MADAGASCAR 0.00 280.00 0.00 280.00 2004 41.58 0.0 0.0
MALAYSIA 0.00 4.48 0.00 0.00 2004 165.25 0.0 -100.0
MEXICO 0.00 50.00 0.00 45.00 2004 152.84 0.0 -10.0
MOROCCO 0.00 209.17 0.00 159.02 2004 196.43 0.0 -24.0
MYANMAR 0.00 46.77 0.00 46.77 2004 202.51 0.0 0.0
NAMIBIA 0.00 46.06 0.00 33.95 2004 138.93 0.0 -26.3
NETHERLANDS 140.74 0.00 70.22 0.00 2000 191.59 -50.1 0.0
NEW ZEALAND 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2000 80.50 0.0 0.0
NICARAGUA 0.00 64.48 0.00 48.97 2004 750.84 0.0 -24.1
NORWAY 0.00 227.90 0.00 159.75 2000 342.77 0.0 -29.9
PAKISTAN 0.00 100.00 0.00 100.00 2004 110.60 0.0 0.0
PHILIPPINES 0.00 54.13 0.00 40.00 2004 147.20 0.0 -26.1
POLAND 0.00 10.00 0.00 8.00 2000 189.70 0.0 -20.0
PORTUGAL 159.73 0.00 71.51 0.00 2000 280.07 -55.2 0.0
ROMANIA 0.00 20.00 0.00 18.00 2000 91.74 0.0 -10.0
SINGAPORE 0.00 27.00 0.00 10.00 2004 200.00 0.0 -63.0
SLOVAK REP. 0.00 4.71 0.00 0.94 2000 262.12 0.0 -80.0
SOUTH AFRICA 0.00 45.43 0.00 33.39 2000 89.79 0.0 -26.5
SPAIN 161.57 0.00 71.78 0.00 2000 205.24 -55.6 0.0
SRI LANKA 0.00 66.00 0.00 50.00 2004 159.16 0.0 -24.2
SWAZILAND 0.00 44.81 0.00 33.81 2004 241.21 0.0 -24.5
SWEDEN 138.51 0.06 89.03 0.05 2000 193.50 -35.7 -16.7
THAILAND 106.73 0.50 0.00 27.00 2004 74.26 -100.0 5300.0
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2000 180.00 0.0 0.0
TUNISIA 0.00 186.32 0.00 139.74 2004 95.91 0.0 -25.0
TURKEY 0.00 200.00 0.00 180.00 2004 147.28 0.0 -10.0
UK 104.72 0.00 63.25 0.00 2000 174.88 -39.6 0.0
URUGUAY 0.00 25.00 0.00 35.00 2004 109.33 0.0 40.0
USA 8.79 0.00 2.21 0.00 2000 70.00 -74.9 0.0
VENEZUELA 0.00 90.01 0.00 81.01 2004 215.09 0.0 -10.0
ZAMBIA 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2004 114.33 0.0 0.0
<section>6</section>
Annex Table 5 - Coarse Grains - Aggregated Tariff Equivalents
Base Rates
Bound Rates
Year Of Producer
Changes
Specific
Ad Valorem
Specific
Ad Valorem
Implem. 
Prices
Specific
Ad Valorem
US$
US$
US$
ARGENTINA 0.00 38.00 0.00 38.00 2004 196.61 0.0 0.0
AUSTRALIA 0.05 0.25 0.00 0.13 2000 85.13 -100.0 -48.0
AUSTRIA 282.44 0.00 239.70 0.00 2000 269.31 -15.1 0.0
BELGIUM 167.97 0.00 86.76 0.00 2000 199.38 -48.3 0.0
BENIN 0.00 79.00 0.00 79.00 2004 250.00 0.0 0.0
BRAZIL 0.00 38.79 0.00 30.14 2004 414.46 0.0 -22.3
CAMEROON 0.00 310.00 0.00 310.00 2004 175.25 0.0 0.0
CANADA 4.00 17.75 0.91 15.03 2000 71.37 -77.3 -15.3
CHILE 0.00 35.00 0.00 25.00 2004 129.49 0.0 -28.6
CHINA P.REP. 0.00 106.64 0.00 58.80 2004 119.78 0.0 -44.9
COLOMBIA 0.00 133.26 0.00 119.94 2004 208.78 0.0 -10.0
CONGO 0.00 30.00 0.00 30.00 2004 269.32 0.0 0.0
COSTA RICA 0.00 26.91 0.00 24.62 2004 155.59 0.0 -8.5
CUBA 0.00 40.00 0.00 40.00 2004 195.43 0.0 0.0
CYPRUS 1.96 221.73 1.49 168.28 2004 223.29 -24.0 -24.1
CZECH REP. 0.00 23.56 0.00 20.07 2000 306.99 0.0 -14.8
DENMARK 160.05 0.00 71.79 0.00 2000 192.70 -55.1 0.0
DOMINICAN REP. 0.00 40.00 0.00 40.00 2004 133.13 0.0 0.0
EGYPT 0.00 15.34 0.00 10.26 2004 330.48 0.0 -33.1
EL SALVADOR 0.00 50.00 0.00 25.00 2004 98.46 0.0 -50.0
FIJI 0.00 40.00 0.00 40.00 2004 110.00 0.0 0.0
FINLAND 304.84 216.04 258.90 183.12 2000 377.59 -15.1 -15.2
FRANCE 161.90 0.00 77.80 0.00 2000 160.00 -51.9 0.0
GABON 0.00 260.00 0.00 260.00 2004 230.00 0.0 0.0
GERMANY 233.56 0.00 148.81 0.00 2000 160.00 -36.3 0.0
GHANA 0.00 125.00 0.00 99.00 2004 250.00 0.0 -20.8
GREECE 159.86 0.00 73.65 0.00 2000 172.53 -53.9 0.0
GUATEMALA 0.00 45.00 0.00 38.89 2004 186.48 0.0 -13.6
GUYANA 0.00 160.00 0.00 160.00 2004 551.88 0.0 0.0
HONDURAS 0.00 38.00 0.00 35.00 2004 156.67 0.0 -7.9
HUNGARY 0.00 43.26 0.00 32.22 2000 86.42 0.0 -25.5
INDIA 0.00 102.37 0.00 100.55 2004 131.89 0.0 -1.8
INDONESIA 0.00 12.37 0.00 10.23 2004 191.83 0.0 -17.3
IRELAND 160.01 0.00 74.36 0.00 2000 155.50 -53.5 0.0
ISRAEL 0.00 81.37 0.00 59.52 2000 125.77 0.0 -26.9
ITALY 158.88 0.00 75.05 0.00 2000 223.77 -52.8 0.0
JAPAN 233.76 3.43 198.19 2.22 2000 1059.52 -15.2 -35.3
KOREA REP. 0.00 120.16 0.00 108.08 2004 642.80 0.0 -10.1
KUWAIT 0.00 115.00 0.00 115.00 2004 140.00 0.0 0.0
MADAGASCAR 0.00 280.00 0.00 280.00 2004 41.58 0.0 0.0
MALAYSIA 0.41 10.40 0.07 7.40 2004 165.25 -82.9 -28.8
MEXICO 0.00 95.72 0.00 84.19 2004 175.42 0.0 -12.0
MOROCCO 0.00 144.08 0.00 109.63 2004 149.23 0.0 -23.9
MYANMAR 0.00 10.79 0.00 10.79 2004 202.51 0.0 0.0
NAMIBIA 0.00 44.00 0.00 33.00 2004 130.00 0.0 -25.0
NETHERLANDS 163.66 0.00 81.49 0.00 2000 221.32 -50.2 0.0
NEW ZEALAND 0.00 3.16 0.00 1.85 2000 80.50 0.0 -41.5
NICARAGUA 0.00 60.00 0.00 40.00 2004 171.35 0.0 -33.3
NORWAY 0.00 390.36 0.00 279.53 2000 370.55 0.0 -28.4
PAKISTAN 0.00 100.00 0.00 100.00 2004 95.70 0.0 0.0
PHILIPPINES 0.00 46.25 0.00 35.49 2004 133.36 0.0 -23.3
POLAND 132.99 12.11 85.29 7.67 2000 127.69 -35.9 -36.7
PORTUGAL 155.83 0.00 79.51 0.00 2000 274.47 -49.0 0.0
ROMANIA 0.00 293.18 0.00 234.54 2000 112.22 0.0 -20.0
SINGAPORE 0.00 27.00 0.00 10.00 2004 755.53 0.0 -63.0
SLOVAK REP. 0.00 23.56 0.00 20.07 2000 306.99 0.0 -14.8
SOUTH AFRICA 0.00 69.06 0.00 42.87 2000 129.36 0.0 -37.9
SPAIN 160.14 0.00 72.35 0.00 2000 185.68 -54.8 0.0
SRI LANKA 0.00 66.00 0.00 50.00 2004 120.00 0.0 -24.2
SWAZILAND 0.00 57.41 0.00 38.41 2004 225.95 0.0 -33.1
SWEDEN 123.65 0.85 103.12 0.71 2000 183.18 -16.6 -16.5
THAILAND 91.50 34.67 59.42 29.60 2004 78.92 -35.1 -14.6
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO 0.00 115.00 0.00 115.00 2004 180.00 0.0 0.0
TUNISIA 0.00 95.97 0.00 78.18 2004 149.48 0.0 -18.5
TURKEY 0.00 197.47 0.00 177.67 2004 103.04 0.0 -10.0
UK 161.95 0.00 75.86 0.00 2000 170.72 -53.2 0.0
URUGUAY 0.00 40.09 0.00 46.60 2004 127.60 0.0 16.2
USA 3.20 0.01 0.86 0.01 2000 104.16 -73.1 0.0
VENEZUELA 0.00 102.84 0.00 92.37 2004 200.00 0.0 -10.2
ZAMBIA 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2004 100.00 0.0 0.0
<section>7</section>
Annex Table 6 - Fats and Oils - Aggregated Tariff Equivalents
Base Rates Bound Rates Year Of Producer Changes
Specific
Ad Valorem
Specific
Ad Valorem
Implem. 
Prices
Specific
Ad Valorem
US$
US$
US$
ARGENTINA 0.00 38.00 0.00 37.34 2004 297.98 0.0 -1.7
AUSTRALIA 3.55 4.64 0.00 3.88 2000 178.87 -100.0 -16.4
AUSTRIA 354.30 1.06 170.38 0.60 2000 369.77 -51.9 -43.4
BELGIUM 50.27 5.33 32.61 3.34 2000 630.00 -35.1 -37.3
BENIN 0.00 94.45 0.00 94.45 2004 117.83 0.0 0.0
BRAZIL 0.00 47.69 0.00 36.02 2004 300.00 0.0 -24.5
CAMEROON 0.00 310.00 0.00 310.00 2004 150.00 0.0 0.0
CANADA 0.51 2.43 0.33 1.56 2000 155.24 -35.3 -35.8
CHILE 0.00 35.00 0.00 27.87 2004 263.65 0.0 -20.4
CHINA P.REP. 0.00 74.38 0.00 48.38 2004 249.72 0.0 -35.0
COLOMBIA 0.00 200.96 0.00 134.58 2004 640.57 0.0 -33.0
CONGO 0.00 30.00 0.00 30.00 2004 200.00 0.0 0.0
COSTA RICA 0.00 51.83 0.00 39.32 2004 334.47 0.0 -24.1
CUBA 0.00 40.00 0.00 40.00 2004 146.97 0.0 0.0
CYPRUS 80.26 133.12 61.00 100.81 2004 500.00 -24.0 -24.3
CZECH REP. 0.00 23.00 0.00 17.98 2000 500.00 0.0 -21.8
DENMARK 38.68 2.30 25.11 1.41 2000 630.00 -35.1 -38.7
DOMINICAN REP. 0.00 40.00 0.00 40.00 2004 300.00 0.0 0.0
EGYPT 0.00 21.50 0.00 17.24 2004 300.00 0.0 -19.8
EL SALVADOR 0.00 72.76 0.00 56.85 2004 300.00 0.0 -21.9
FIJI 0.00 40.07 0.00 40.02 2004 101.02 0.0 -0.1
FINLAND 0.00 269.56 0.00 171.93 2000 400.00 0.0 -36.2
FRANCE 30.45 2.55 22.15 1.60 2000 630.00 -27.3 -37.3
GABON 0.00 260.00 0.00 260.00 2004 300.00 0.0 0.0
GERMANY 0.17 3.31 0.11 2.09 2000 630.00 -35.3 -36.9
GHANA 0.00 125.00 0.00 99.00 2004 1147.08 0.0 -20.8
GREECE 1192.61 0.74 953.13 0.47 2000 630.00 -20.1 -36.5
GUATEMALA 0.00 160.65 0.00 143.76 2004 111.81 0.0 -10.5
GUYANA 0.00 160.00 0.00 160.00 2004 300.00 0.0 0.0
HONDURAS 0.00 38.00 0.00 35.00 2004 300.00 0.0 -7.9
HUNGARY 0.00 59.37 0.00 22.54 2000 214.46 0.0 -62.0
INDIA 0.00 179.27 0.00 173.02 2004 335.54 0.0 -3.5
INDONESIA 0.00 58.58 0.00 40.50 2004 492.03 0.0 -30.9
IRELAND 25.61 4.56 17.34 2.88 2000 630.00 -32.3 -36.8
ISRAEL 0.00 67.81 0.00 52.66 2000 379.45 0.0 -22.3
ITALY 625.88 1.60 495.63 1.00 2000 630.00 -20.8 -37.5
JAPAN 144.73 5.19 107.20 3.11 2000 600.00 -25.9 -40.1
KOREA REP. 0.00 331.55 0.00 295.54 2004 400.00 0.0 -10.9
KUWAIT 0.00 115.00 0.00 115.00 2004 800.00 0.0 0.0
MADAGASCAR 0.00 280.00 0.00 280.00 2004 250.00 0.0 0.0
MALAYSIA 0.22 11.69 0.18 9.34 2004 278.11 -18.2 -20.1
MEXICO 55.18 46.31 49.66 40.33 2004 349.76 -10.0 -12.9
MOROCCO 0.00 185.07 0.00 140.32 2004 441.16 0.0 -24.2
MYANMAR 0.00 19.25 0.00 19.25 2004 300.00 0.0 0.0
NAMIBIA 0.00 83.72 0.00 51.76 2004 300.00 0.0 -38.2
NETHERLANDS 21.95 4.97 14.55 3.07 2000 630.00 -33.7 -38.2
NEW ZEALAND 0.00 2.58 0.00 0.74 2000 125.63 0.0 -71.3
NICARAGUA 0.00 63.77 0.00 47.54 2004 300.00 0.0 -25.5
NORWAY 6.61 12.89 1.95 11.18 2000 400.00 -70.5 -13.3
PAKISTAN 0.00 100.00 0.00 100.00 2004 250.00 0.0 0.0
PHILIPPINES 0.00 67.46 0.00 48.92 2004 250.00 0.0 -27.5
POLAND 49.39 71.02 31.70 44.97 2000 278.11 -35.8 -36.7
PORTUGAL 224.09 3.52 177.16 2.20 2000 630.00 -20.9 -37.5
ROMANIA 0.00 193.17 0.00 166.44 2000 225.40 0.0 -13.8
SINGAPORE 0.00 27.00 0.00 10.00 2004 300.00 0.0 -63.0
SLOVAK REP. 0.00 23.00 0.00 17.98 2000 500.00 0.0 -21.8
SOUTH AFRICA 0.00 116.82 0.00 64.66 2000 245.68 0.0 -44.6
SPAIN 669.50 1.84 533.09 1.17 2000 630.00 -20.4 -36.4
SRI LANKA 0.00 66.00 0.00 50.00 2004 250.00 0.0 -24.2
SWAZILAND 0.00 111.77 0.00 62.86 2004 300.00 0.0 -43.8
SWEDEN 69.62 1.73 57.66 1.11 2000 394.94 -17.2 -35.8
THAILAND 36.48 69.27 18.99 59.63 2004 300.00 -47.9 -13.9
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO 0.00 115.00 0.00 115.00 2004 450.00 0.0 0.0
TUNISIA 0.00 149.31 0.00 99.95 2004 335.64 0.0 -33.1
TURKEY 0.00 39.04 0.00 32.11 2004 228.46 0.0 -17.8
UK 74.19 3.46 54.76 2.09 2000 630.00 -26.2 -39.6
URUGUAY 0.00 23.94 0.00 35.00 2004 245.99 0.0 46.2
USA 8.92 15.30 4.43 12.71 2000 213.67 -50.3 -16.9
VENEZUELA 0.00 122.76 0.00 109.18 2004 431.71 0.0 -11.1
ZAMBIA 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2004 200.20 0.0 0.0
<section>8</section>
Annex Table 7 - Butter - Aggregated Tariff Equivalents
Base Rates Bound Rates Year Of Producer Changes
Specific
Ad Valorem
Specific
Ad Valorem
Implem. 
Prices
Specific
Ad Valorem
US$
US$
US$
ARGENTINA 0.00 38.00 0.00 38.00 2004 776.52 0.0 0.0
AUSTRALIA 71.90 0.00 0.00 1.00 2000 709.14 -100.0 ERR
AUSTRIA 5375.16 0.00 4569.27 0.00 2000 2654.89 -15.0 0.0
BELGIUM 3279.02 0.00 2098.93 0.00 2000 3600.00 -36.0 0.0
BENIN 0.00 79.00 0.00 79.00 2004 1176.54 0.0 0.0
BRAZIL 0.00 55.00 0.00 55.00 2004 2645.84 0.0 0.0
CAMEROON 0.00 310.00 0.00 310.00 2004 4197.60 0.0 0.0
CANADA 0.00 351.40 0.00 298.70 2000 1825.55 0.0 -15.0
CHILE 0.00 35.00 0.00 31.50 2004 1407.23 0.0 -10.0
CHINA P.REP. 0.00 70.00 0.00 40.00 2004 690.98 0.0 -42.9
COLOMBIA 0.00 128.00 0.00 115.00 2004 900.75 0.0 -10.2
CONGO 0.00 30.00 0.00 30.00 2004 2621.51 0.0 0.0
COSTA RICA 0.00 111.00 0.00 95.00 2004 1210.89 0.0 -14.4
CUBA 0.00 40.00 0.00 40.00 2004 994.78 0.0 0.0
CYPRUS 5744.29 33.00 4364.68 25.00 2004 1065.61 -24.0 -24.2
CZECH REP. 0.00 82.00 0.00 68.00 2000 3408.27 0.0 -17.1
DENMARK 3279.02 0.00 2098.93 0.00 2000 3600.00 -36.0 0.0
DOMINICAN REP. 0.00 40.00 0.00 40.00 2004 958.46 0.0 0.0
EGYPT 0.00 15.00 0.00 10.00 2004 3057.02 0.0 -33.3
EL SALVADOR 0.00 40.00 0.00 30.00 2004 1297.00 0.0 -25.0
FIJI 0.00 40.00 0.00 40.00 2004 763.51 0.0 0.0
FINLAND 0.00 566.00 0.00 481.00 2000 3033.91 0.0 -15.0
FRANCE 3279.02 0.00 2098.93 0.00 2000 3600.00 -36.0 0.0
GABON 0.00 260.00 0.00 260.00 2004 1500.00 0.0 0.0
GERMANY 3279.02 0.00 2098.93 0.00 2000 3600.00 -36.0 0.0
GHANA 0.00 125.00 0.00 99.00 2004 1430.33 0.0 -20.8
GREECE 3279.02 0.00 2098.93 0.00 2000 3600.00 -36.0 0.0
GUATEMALA 0.00 115.00 0.00 103.00 2004 1163.26 0.0 -10.4
GUYANA 0.00 160.00 0.00 160.00 2004 1402.40 0.0 0.0
HONDURAS 0.00 38.00 0.00 35.00 2004 2598.47 0.0 -7.9
HUNGARY 0.00 159.00 0.00 101.80 2000 747.37 0.0 -36.0
INDIA 0.00 100.00 0.00 40.00 2004 1639.79 0.0 -60.0
INDONESIA 0.00 45.00 0.00 40.00 2004 2040.74 0.0 -11.1
IRELAND 3279.02 0.00 2098.93 0.00 2000 3600.00 -36.0 0.0
ISRAEL 0.00 190.00 0.00 162.00 2000 1595.49 0.0 -14.7
ITALY 3279.02 0.00 2098.93 0.00 2000 3600.00 -36.0 0.0
JAPAN 8002.90 35.00 6801.43 29.80 2000 3050.77 -15.0 -14.9
KOREA REP. 0.00 10.00 0.00 5.00 2004 1927.27 0.0 -50.0
KUWAIT 0.00 115.00 0.00 115.00 2004 1800.00 0.0 0.0
MADAGASCAR 0.00 280.00 0.00 280.00 2004 1113.68 0.0 0.0
MALAYSIA 107.08 5.00 62.21 4.04 2004 2000.00 -41.9 -19.2
MEXICO 0.00 20.00 0.00 18.00 2004 1267.15 0.0 -10.0
MOROCCO 0.00 45.00 0.00 34.00 2004 1180.12 0.0 -24.4
MYANMAR 0.00 38.50 0.00 38.50 2004 1276.35 0.0 0.0
NAMIBIA 0.00 158.00 0.00 79.00 2004 1525.39 0.0 -50.0
NETHERLANDS 3279.02 0.00 2098.93 0.00 2000 3600.00 -36.0 0.0
NEW ZEALAND 0.00 10.00 0.00 6.40 2000 1000.00 0.0 -36.0
NICARAGUA 0.00 60.00 0.00 40.00 2004 1500.00 0.0 -33.3
NORWAY 0.00 403.00 0.00 343.00 2000 2185.57 0.0 -14.9
PAKISTAN 0.00 100.00 0.00 100.00 2004 1011.58 0.0 0.0
PHILIPPINES 0.00 50.00 0.00 40.00 2004 990.86 0.0 -20.0
POLAND 0.00 160.00 0.00 102.00 2000 822.64 0.0 -36.3
PORTUGAL 3279.02 0.00 2098.93 0.00 2000 3600.00 -36.0 0.0
ROMANIA 0.00 250.00 0.00 200.00 2000 878.14 0.0 -20.0
SINGAPORE 0.00 27.00 0.00 0.00 2004 1448.06 0.0 -100.0
SLOVAK REP. 0.00 82.00 0.00 68.00 2000 3408.27 0.0 -17.1
SOUTH AFRICA 0.00 158.00 0.00 79.00 2000 934.39 0.0 -50.0
SPAIN 3279.02 0.00 2098.93 0.00 2000 3600.00 -36.0 0.0
SRI LANKA 0.00 66.00 0.00 50.00 2004 905.03 0.0 -24.2
SWAZILAND 0.00 158.00 0.00 79.00 2004 552.68 0.0 -50.0
SWEDEN 1867.07 0.00 1585.40 0.00 2000 3511.37 -15.1 0.0
THAILAND 0.00 20.06 0.00 18.02 2004 1233.92 0.0 -10.2
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO 0.00 115.00 0.00 115.00 2004 2498.16 0.0 0.0
TUNISIA 0.00 164.00 0.00 100.00 2004 1341.90 0.0 -39.0
TURKEY 0.00 200.00 0.00 180.00 2004 1261.78 0.0 -10.0
UK 3279.02 0.00 2098.93 0.00 2000 3600.00 -36.0 0.0
URUGUAY 0.00 25.00 0.00 55.00 2004 2657.16 0.0 120.0
USA 1814.21 0.03 1542.03 0.02 2000 1323.45 -15.0 -33.3
VENEZUELA 0.00 102.00 0.00 92.00 2004 1753.82 0.0 -9.8
ZAMBIA 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2004 726.22 0.0 0.0
<section>9</section>
Annex Table 8 -Oilmeals -Aggregated Tariff Equivalents
Base Rates Bound Rates Year Of Producer Changes
Specific
Ad Valorem
Specific
Ad Valorem
Implem. 
Prices
Specific
Ad Valorem
US$
US$
US$
ARGENTINA 0.00 38.00 0.00 38.00 2004 199.06 0.0 0.0
AUSTRALIA 0.00 0.28 0.00 0.14 2000 125.82 0.0 -50.0
AUSTRIA 0.54 0.00 0.46 0.00 2000 132.26 -14.8 0.0
BELGIUM 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2000 280.00 0.0 0.0
BENIN 0.00 79.00 0.00 79.00 2004 127.66 0.0 0.0
BRAZIL 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2004 200.00 0.0 0.0
CAMEROON 0.00 310.00 0.00 310.00 2004 150.00 0.0 0.0
CANADA 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.01 2000 126.52 0.0 0.0
CHILE 0.00 35.00 0.00 31.50 2004 127.83 0.0 -10.0
CHINA P.REP. 0.00 20.02 0.00 18.01 2004 154.82 0.0 -10.0
COLOMBIA 0.00 121.73 0.00 105.39 2004 200.00 0.0 -13.4
CONGO 0.00 30.00 0.00 30.00 2004 200.00 0.0 0.0
COSTA RICA 0.00 11.75 0.00 6.26 2004 156.84 0.0 -46.7
CUBA 0.00 40.00 0.00 40.00 2004 174.11 0.0 0.0
CYPRUS 0.00 53.06 0.00 40.05 2004 200.00 0.0 -24.5
CZECH REP. 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2000 250.00 0.0 0.0
DENMARK 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2000 280.00 0.0 0.0
DOMINICAN REP. 0.00 40.00 0.00 40.00 2004 200.00 0.0 0.0
EGYPT 0.00 15.00 0.00 10.00 2004 200.00 0.0 -33.3
EL SALVADOR 0.00 20.90 0.00 20.90 2004 200.00 0.0 0.0
FIJI 0.00 40.00 0.00 40.00 2004 94.67 0.0 0.0
FINLAND 795.51 0.24 676.81 0.16 2000 200.00 -14.9 -33.3
FRANCE 0.00 0.02 0.00 0.01 2000 280.00 0.0 -50.0
GABON 0.00 260.00 0.00 260.00 2004 200.00 0.0 0.0
GERMANY 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2000 280.00 0.0 0.0
GHANA 0.00 122.40 0.00 97.37 2004 150.00 0.0 -20.4
GREECE 0.00 0.03 0.00 0.02 2000 280.00 0.0 -33.3
GUATEMALA 0.00 45.00 0.00 40.00 2004 245.39 0.0 -11.1
GUYANA 0.00 160.00 0.00 160.00 2004 200.00 0.0 0.0
HONDURAS 0.00 38.00 0.00 35.00 2004 200.00 0.0 -7.9
HUNGARY 0.00 0.74 0.00 0.47 2000 166.08 0.0 -36.5
INDIA 0.00 100.00 0.00 100.00 2004 150.00 0.0 0.0
INDONESIA 0.00 50.07 0.00 40.15 2004 150.00 0.0 -19.8
IRELAND 0.00 0.06 0.00 0.04 2000 280.00 0.0 -33.3
ISRAEL 0.00 30.00 0.00 25.00 2000 237.17 0.0 -16.7
ITALY 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.01 2000 280.00 0.0 0.0
JAPAN 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2000 250.00 0.0 0.0
KOREA REP. 0.00 50.61 0.00 42.70 2004 220.00 0.0 -15.6
KUWAIT 0.00 115.00 0.00 115.00 2004 200.00 0.0 0.0
MADAGASCAR 0.00 280.00 0.00 280.00 2004 150.00 0.0 0.0
MALAYSIA 0.00 12.47 0.00 9.98 2004 200.00 0.0 -20.0
MEXICO 0.00 27.35 0.0 24.04 2004 186.93 0.0 -12.1
MOROCCO 0.00 102.07 0.00 77.53 2004 200.00 0.0 -24.0
MYANMAR 0.00 20.84 0.00 20.84 2004 200.00 0.0 0.0
NAMIBIA 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2000 200.00 0.0 0.0
NETHERLANDS 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2000 280.00 0.0 0.0
NEW ZEALAND 0.30 4.46 0.00 2.01 2000 110.58 -100.0 -54.9
NICARAGUA 0.00 60.00 0.00 40.00 2004 200.00 0.0 -33.3
NORWAY 0.00 249.30 0.00 174.42 2000 200.00 0.0 -30.0
PAKISTAN 0.00 100.00 0.00 100.00 2004 150.00 0.0 0.0
PHILIPPINES 0.00 40.45 0.00 27.85 2004 81.00 0.0 -31.1
POLAND 0.00 14.13 0.00 7.89 2000 105.98 0.0 -44.2
PORTUGAL 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.01 2000 280.00 0.0 0.0
ROMANIA 0.00 50.00 0.00 25.00 2000 212.08 0.0 -50.0
SINGAPORE 0.00 27.00 0.00 10.00 2004 200.00 0.0 -63.0
SLOVAK REP. 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2000 250.00 0.0 0.0
SOUTH AFRICA 0.00 52.93 0.00 34.09 2000 180.00 0.0 -35.6
SPAIN 0.00 0.03 0.00 0.02 2000 280.00 0.0 -33.3
SRI LANKA 0.00 66.00 0.00 50.00 2004 147.08 0.0 -24.2
SWAZILAND 0.00 53.00 0.00 34.00 2004 200.00 0.0 -35.8
SWEDEN 175.06 0.22 107.49 0.12 2000 200.00 -38.6 -45.5
THAILAND 0.10 119.18 0.07 107.08 2004 200.00 -30.0 -10.2
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO 0.00 115.00 0.00 115.00 2004 264.62 0.0 0.0
TUNISIA 0.00 26.73 0.00 18.34 2004 243.01 0.0 -31.4
TURKEY 0.00 15.04 0.00 13.52 2004 144.00 0.0 -10.1
UK 0.00 0.01 0.00 0.01 2000 280.00 0.0 0.0
URUGUAY 0.00 50.00 0.00 35.00 2004 220.02 0.0 -30.0
USA 6.94 0.00 4.50 0.00 2000 195.70 -35.2 0.0
VENEZUELA 0.00 130.75 0.00 117.93 2004 200.00 0.0 -9.8
ZAMBIA 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2004 150.00 0.0 0.0
<section>a</section>
References
1. Discussed at the 1993 session of the Committee on Commodity Problems, see CCP:93/18.
2. Total AMS means the annual level of support provided for agricultural products or non-product-specific support provided in favour of agricultural producers in general other than support provided under exempt programmes (e.g. Green Box).
3. "The Results of the Uruguay Round of Multilateral Trade Negotiations" GATT, Geneva, November 1994.
4. Trade Liberalization: Global Economic Implications by Ian Goldin, Odin Knudsen and Dominique van der Mensbrugghe, OECD and World Bank, 1993.
5. The reduction is below 36 percent because a number of countries have chosen as base period from which to start the reductions the average subsidized exports in 1990-91, as these were higher than the 1986-90 average.
6. Coffee stocks held in exporting countries and coffee inventories carried by importing countries, were assumed not to change from the base scenario. Therefore, for exporting countries the change in exports reflects the difference between the change in production and the change in consumption. For importing countries, the change in imports equals the change in consumption. 7. Levels of cocoa stocks held in exporting and importing countries were assumed not to change from the base scenario. Therefore, for exporting countries changes in export volumes reflect changes in domestic production and consumption only, while in importing countries changes in imports are implicitly equal to changes in local consumption.
8. Prior to the implementation of its single market policy in 1993, the EC had four distinct segments. The largest of these (37 percent of EC banana imports) was Germany, which was duty and tariff free. The next largest, representing 28 percent of EC banana imports (France, Greece, Portugal and Spain), absorbed the bulk of the EC production, supplemented with varying quantifies from ACP and Latin American (dollar bananas) countries. A variable quota and 20 percent tariff was Ievied on dollar imports. The third largest (26 percent of EC imports) was predominantly supplied by the ACP countries. The United Kingdom, and before civil unrest in Somalia, Italy, belonged to this segment, which also imposed a quota and 20 percent tariff on dollar supplies. The last segment (9 percent of EC imports) did not impose a quota but levied a 20 percent duty on dollar imports. Belgium, Denmark, Ireland, Luxembourg and the Netherlands belonged to this segment.
9. In April 1995 the EC agreed to expand the tariff quota from 2.2 million tons to 2.55 million tons to allow for the entry of Austria, Finland and Sweden as new members of the Community. However, the impact of the additional quantity was not simulated as the distribution amongst dollar suppliers was not known when this document was finalized, and the impact was expected to be minimal.
10. Japan's LDC rate is zero, but quantities imported under this scheme are insignificant.
11. The problems of the horticultural sector were discussed at FAO's Expert Consultation on the Impact of the Changing International Trade Environment on Agricultural Trade in the Near East Region, Cyprus, December 1994.
12. The results of the Uruguay Round of Multilateral Trade Negotiations: GATT, 10 November 1994.
<section>b</section>
Annex I - Methodology
Introduction .To undertake the assessment of the impact of the agreements reached in the Uruguay Round of Multilateral Trade Negotiations, the existing projections to the year 2000 for the main agricultural commodities prepared in 1992/93^1 have been adjusted to take into account both the commitments to reduce tariffs and export subsidies and to introduce minimum levels agreed in the Final Act of the Uruguay Round as well as the effects on income as estimated by the OECD/World Bank due to the impact of the Round as a whole.
The methodology used in the previous round of projections - the "baseline" projections in this publication is described in the aforementioned FAO study. In order to accomplish this task the FAO World Food Model (WFM), used in the last round of projections for the cereal/livestock/fats and oil complex, has been extended and improved to better reflect the impacts of specific policy changes while simple single commodity models have been developed to cover some of the commodities not included in the WFM.
The "central" or "baseline" scenario based on the assumptions regarding the economic and demographic conditions expected to prevail by 2000, the most likely development of technology, no change in agricultural policies (including however known policy changes at the time of writing, e.g. including reform of the EC's CAP) and normal weather conditions - has been used as a point of reference to evaluate the impact of the policy changes reflected in the "Uruguay Round scenario".
A number of additional policy scenarios were simulated. These include: a) a "higher income growth scenario" reflecting a more optimistic estimate of the impact on world income deriving from the Uruguay Round; b) a "crop failure scenario" simulating the influence of bad weather on the output of cereals during the projection period; c) a "bumper crop scenario" following exceptionally favourable weather conditions affecting the output of cereals.
Assumptions .The projections made under the alternative scenarios rest on a set of assumptions on population and income growth. The study uses a single population growth assumption for each country, based on demographic projections prepared by the United Nations Population Division, corresponding to the UN "medium variant" calculated in 1990.^2 Detailed information on the methods and assumptions used in making the projections can be found in the documentation of the UN Population Division (op.cit.).
As regards income growth, the baseline scenario uses a single growth rate of Gross Domestic Product (GDP) for each country. The GDP growth assumptions for the 1990s are mainly based on the long-term economic forecasts prepared by the International Economics Department of the World Bank. These were supplemented, for countries where such forecasts are not available, with estimates derived from other sources.
Estimates of net income gains resulting from the Uruguay Round has been made by various authors. According to the GATT Secretariat, estimates of the increase in world income from the liberalization of trade in goods range from a low of US$ 109 billion to a high of US$5 10 billion in 2005 depending on the assumptions used^3. These estimates are based on a general equilibrium model of the world economy, elaborated and applied by the GATT Secretariat. Three versions of the model have been used, with different assumptions about the nature of competition in domestic markets, economy of scale, the degree of product differentiation and the extent to which income gains in turn stimulate savings and investment. The World Bank/OECD has estimated gains of around US$213 billion in 2002^4. For the purpose of the present study the World Bank/OECD estimates were retained, with appropriate adjustments, for the main "Uruguay Round scenario" while double this amount was taken for tile higher
income growth scenario. Tables A1 to A3 summarize the assumptions of population, total and per caput GDP which were used in the three scenarios covered by tit is study, namely tile "baseline" the "Uruguay Round central scenario" and "Uruguay Round higher income growth scenario".
Table A1 - Total Population, 1980 to 1990 Actual and 1990 to 2000- Projected
Region Actual Projected Actual Projected
million percent per year
WORLD 4,448.1 5,294.3 6,2628 1.8 1.7
DEVELOPING 3,279.5 4,045,9 4,947.9 2.1 2.0
Africa 386.4 524.7 718.6 3.1 3.2
Latin America 362.7 448.1 538.4 2.1 1.9
Near East 212.3 280.5 366.3 2.8 2.7
Far East 2,313.1 2,786.3 3,316.8 1.9 1.8
Other Developing 5.1 6.3 7.8 2.2 2.0
DEVELOPED 1,168.5 1,248.4 1,314.9 0.7 0.5
North America 251.8 275.7 294.6 0.9 0.7
Western Europe 366.8 376.8 383.2 0.3 0.2
EC 335.0 343.9 349.8 0.3 0.2
Other W. Europe 149.5 156.2 162.0 0.3 0.2
Eastern Europe 117.6 123.4 128.6 0.5 0.4
Former USSR 265.5 288.6 308.4 0.8 0.7
Oceania 11.8 20.4 22.7 1.4 1.1
Other Developed 148.9 163.4 177.5 0.9 0.8
Source: UN World Demographic Projections as Assessed in 1990
Note: For country derails see: FAO "Compendiums of Demographic and Macro-Economic Indicators", ESC/M/93/2/Rome 1993.
Table A2 - Total GDP at 1980 Prices, 1980 to 1990 Actual and 1990 to 2000 Projected
Table A3 - Per Caput GDP at 1980 Prices, 1980 to 1990 Actual and 1990 to 2000 Projected
Simulating the impact of tire Uruguay Round
The present assessment relates primarily to the market and policy changes likely to arise up to the year 2000 when the bulk of the Uruguay Round commitments will have been completed. It should be clearly understood, however, that the study covers only those measurable policy changes in trade and agricultural policies explicitly defined in the GATT commitments and likely to occur in practice over the implementation period.
The simulation runs cover principally the effect of the Uruguay Round Agreement for the agricultural sector related to the tariffication of trade distortion measurements and of the agreed reductions. The country specific commitments concerning cuts in subsidized exports and increases in imports under the minimum access provisions are also included in the simulation runs.
The main source of data on tariff reductions and bindings is the Schedules of Market Access Concessions which cover 89 participant countries (the 12 Member States of the European Union coupling as one). Agricultural product categories are defined in terms of the six-digit Harmonized System code. Tariff lines for individual commodities are provided for the "Base Rate of Duty" relating to the year 1986-88 and for the "Bound Rate of Duty" relating to the final year of implementation (generally the year 2000 for the developed and transition economies and 2004 for the developing countries), expressed in "specific" and "ad-valorem" tariffs.
For the purpose of the simulation, all tariffs, including those for derived products, were converted and aggregated into a weighed average primary product equivalent, the weights being the total domestic availability of the products concerned in each country.
The "specific" tariffs, generally expressed in national currencies, were converted into US dollars and divided by the respective producer prices in order to include them into the WFM normalized price transmission equations. Annex tables 1-14 contain the summary aggregated tariffs for the basic foodstuffs for all countries for which data were available.
Some observations are in order for a proper use of the Schedules. The Uruguay Round on Agriculture requires the conversion of all non-tariff barriers into ordinary customs duties, and the binding of the resulting tariffs. All tariff equivalents created by the tariffication process, are bound and all tariffs including pre-existing ones are to be reduced, on average, 36 percent over the period 1995 to 2000, with a minimum reduction of 15 percent per tariff line^5. For developing countries the figures were 24 and 10 percent respectively.
Tariffication of non-tariff barriers to agricultural trade is one of the most significant achievement of the Uruguay Round^6. The resulting tariff equivalents are transparent and, moreover, they provide a common basis for reductions in future negotiations. However, the particular way in which the conversion of non-tariff barriers into tariffs has been achieved in the Agreement has sometimes been called "dirty" tariffication, because the tariffs are often very high when compared to the actual level of protection as measured by the PSEs. The reason for this is that the years 1986-88 were chosen as the base years for tariffication when world prices for many agricultural commodities were the lowest in decades. This means that, when the world price in the base period is compared to the protected and supported internal prices, the gap was unusually wide. In addition many countries used prices to calculate their tariff equivalents which resulted in higher initial tariffs than more
objective calculations might have produced. Many developing countries opted to offer ceiling bindings to their tariffs instead of tariffying. Finally, the simple (unweighted) averaging that country could use when allocating tariff reduction to individual products has allowed much scope for continued protection of the "sensitive" products.
In practice, it is possible that in some cases countries will not apply the full tariff recorded in the Schedules, so that the new tariffs can be interpreted as representing maxima.
Despite the above reservations, the simulation of the "Uruguay Round" scenario assumes that countries will undertake reforms according to their offers on the reductions in tariffs, as presented in the Schedules of reduction commitments. In addition, the simulation assumes that developing countries will not raise their tariffs, even though in many cases the new tariff bindings are above the previously observed rates, implying a presumption that countries will not exercise the option to increase protection as a result of the Agreement.
The minimum access provisions have been introduced into the WFM on an "ad-hoc" basis in all cases where the model did not generate a sufficient volume of imports to meet national commitments. The additional import quantities have been modelled by decreasing the production and/or increasing the demand, depending on the particular circumstances. Figures on the current and minimum access commitments by commodity and country are provided in Table A4.
Regarding export subsidy commitments (Table A5), the approach followed in the WFM differs according to the type of export subsidies used in the past. In particular, for countries that have used export subsidies for all their exports, a maximum has been introduced exogenously on the volume of their exports according to the commitments for specific commodity and year. In order to accommodate this reduction, it was necessary to increase the demand, i.e in the feed sector, or to adjust the production by lowering yields or restricting the projected cultivated area, taking into account current and expected country adjustment policies and plans. For those exporters which only subsidize a part of their exports targeted to some countries only, no such constraint has been modelled but it is still assumed that this will erode part of their competitiveness and hence influence the volume of their exports. Net exporters subsidizing their exports create an "artificial" price incentive on
the internal marker and contribute to depress world market prices especially when the quantities exported are drawn from government stocks. The approach followed in the WFM to simulate the impact of reduced targeted export subsidies was to include an additional clement in the supply and demand price transmission equations reflecting the price reduction expected to prevail in the domestic market of the subsidizing exporters and the corresponding increase in the price of the importing countries.
Table A4 - Market access under minimum access opportunity commitments by commodity1/
Initial Quota Final Quota 2/ Increase
thousand tonnes
Wheat 12 898.2 13 243.5 345.3
Coarse grains 17 473.0 18 378.2 905.2
Rice 982.4 1 753.3 770.9
Vegetable oils 3/ 773.5 794.7 21.2
oilseeds 1 671.8 1 727.7 55.9
Oilmeals 191.8 191.8 0.0
Bovine meat 1 198.5 1 339.0 140.5
Ovine meat 328.9 333.9 5.0
Pigmeat 137.1 269.3 132.2
Poultry meat 229.9 307.9 60.0
Butter 110.7 137.6 26.9
Skim milk 522.3 649.8 127.5
Cheese 214.2 325.0 110.8
Other milk products 1 065.4 1 243.1 177.7
Sugar 3 109.9 3 359.5 249.6
1/ As products are expressed at different stages of processing in the schedules, the totals are only indicative.
2/ The implementation period generally begins in 1995 and ends in 2000 for the developed countries and in 2004 for the developing countries and for the economies in transition.
3/ Including other fats
Table A5 - Subsidized export reduction commitments by commodity
Alternative Scenarios
Evaluating the impact of policy changes is done by comparing the results of the simulation run which include these policy alterations with those of the base run. The latter provides a neutral point of comparison for the assessment and, hence, depicts the evolution of agricultural commodity markers, given past developments of all major determinants including policies.
No feedbacks effects due to liberalization are included in the "Uruguay Round" scenario with the exception of its likely impact on income growth. The income assumptions used in the "baseline" scenario have been modified to include the income gains to be expected from trade liberalization. Since the WFM covers only a limited number of agricultural products it was not possible to estimate directly the overall welfare gain relative to the level of income assumed for the "baseline" projections. The present simulations, therefore, utilize estimates derived from other models with a more comprehensive coverage. In particular, the World Bank/OECD "conservative" estimates of US$213 billion were retained for the base "Uruguay Round" scenario^7. These were included as percentage increases in income relative to the benchmark levels for individual countries and regions. In addition, in order to see the effect of an acceleration of income growth on the pattern and value of world
agricultural trade, a Higher Income Growth scenario was generated doubling the percentage increases in income gains.
One of the most important benefits likely to arise from the Uruguay Round Agreement is the expected reduction in price instability. The idea behind this view is that there will be increasing the number of countries open to world market forces which could eventually absorb shocks generated by production fluctuations, such as those due to unexpected production shortfalls or bumper crops as a consequence, for example, of large weather fluctuations. Since the WFM is basically a determinist model, i.e. does not contain stochastic elements, the approach followed was essentially to examine the impact of production shocks on world price stability in order to verify if tariffication and reduction of tariffs had the expected effect. The production shocks chosen for examination were a generalized 5 percent decline (and symmetrically a 5 percent increase) in cereals output in the year 1999 with respect to that projected for the same year in the "baseline" scenario. Due to the lag nature
of the cereal supply equation their effect are reflected on world prices in the year 2000.
Methodology for other commodities The "baseline" projections for commodities not included in the WFM, namely coffee, cocoa, tea, sugar, bananas, rubber and bovine hides, were made using methodologies ranging from detailed econometric commodity models (e.g. sugar) to demand and supply projections based on analyses and adjusted extrapolations of past treads supplemented by expert judgments of the FAO commodity specialists^8. In a number of cases, the projections were prepared jointly or in cooperation with other international organizations.
In particular, the demand projections for tropical beverages were made using demand functions which links per caput consumption to the projected growth rates of per caput GDP by means of income elasticities estimated mainly from cross-section studies. It was assumed that real prices would remain constant during the projection period, i.e. the effect of price changes was implicitly excluded as influencing future demand. On the supply side, projections were made separately for area and yield. The area projections are mainly based on trends, which were adjusted by incorporating relevant information on policies and technological changes. An important property of most of these crops is their long production period and at the same time short term (usually biennial) yield fluctuations. Given both the long term production profile and the short term output fluctuations, the development of yields is to be considered the crucial determinant for the future evolution of production of
these commodity groups. The yield projections were made by the FAO commodity specialists taking into account (i) the composition of the total area of the respective commodity according to the year of planting, e.g. the number of bearing and nonbearing trees etc.; (ii) the percentage of trees uprooted or replanted because of age, disease or damage; (iii) the average yield profile during its life; (iv) technical progress and (v) the impact of other exogenous factors influencing future production (e.g. frost in the past). Net trade was calculated as the difference between quantities supplied, defined as production minus stock changes, and quantities demanded, defined as the sum of the various form of utilization. At the country level this difference represents export availability (if positive) or import requirements (if negative).
The projections for sugar were prepared in cooperation with the International Sugar Organization using an econometric model where standard production, demand and price linkage equations were estimated using data from 1970 to 1990. The "baseline" projections were generated on the basis of a series of assumptions about income growth, agricultural policies, weather and technological changes. Agricultural policies relating to sugar production and consumption were assumed to be continued in all countries. For the production projections average weather conditions and historical rates of technological change were assumed to prevail during the projection period. However, for several countries production constraints were introduced on an ad hoc basis, details of which are given in the document^9.
Projections of import Requirement and export availability for bananas were made on the general assumption of a continuation of present national policies. Although it was possible to make a simplifying assumption that price relations would remain unchanged during the projection period this has not been done. Unchanged price relations would lead to a large disequilibrium between supply and demand at the world level that is unlikely to occur in practice. Therefore, some change in price relations has been allowed when preparing the projections. In addition, recent trends in actual imports and exports of bananas have been given greater weight to obtain a more realistic balance between projected export availabilities and import requirements. In interpreting the results, several factors need to be considered. These include the varying degree of accuracy of historical data on which past trends are assessed and the unsettled situation in several areas that theoretically have strong
prospects for future growth of consumption.
Projections of bovine hides were directly linked to the WFM projections of cattle population, using historically-based conversion factors to derive hides production from the projected number of animals slaughtered. For countries where hides and skins are produced predominantly from "fallen" animals, a time trend was added. Per caput consumption was projected for each country or group of countries using a regression equation incorporating income projections and a time trend. the resulting projections were then adjusted so that the aggregate world demand equalled total supply. Net trade was calculated as the difference between domestic production and consumption.
Simulating the impact of tariff reductions For the non-WFM commodities a "simple" price-equilibrium model was used to calculate the effects of the tariff reductions following the Uruguay Round Agreement. This is a single-commodity model which uses multiple spreadsheets. The model, therefore, does not presently allow a multi-commodity approach similar to that of the WFM, although substitution and complementary relations to other products could theoretically be included. However, in order not to add complexity to the model and to facilitate interpretation, it was considered unnecessary to expand it to add these features also because its use was limited to commodities which compete only marginally. This "simple" model only takes one primary commodity into account. All derived products from the commodity concerned are expressed in primary commodity equivalent including tariff rates following a methodology similar to that utilized in the WFM.
The model does not itself generate projections but utilizes the "baseline" scenario as a starting point for the simulation. Supply and demand respond to changes in domestic producer and retail prices, respectively, through a semi-logarithmic function and selected price elasticities of supply and demand. Domestic prices are linked to border prices (i.e import unit values and export unit values) by margins representing internal marketing, processing, distribution costs and excise taxes. Border prices are, in turn, linked to world market prices (i.e the clearing price) by price wedges reflecting both transport cost and trade policies. In a situation in which a country imports the primary commodity, the cif price is equal to the world market price plus transport costs from the world market to the country. The landed price includes the rate of import tariff, or rather the nominal rate of protection. Should the country, however, turn out, in a given model run, to be an exporter of
the primary commodity, the f.o.b. price is relevant. Moreover an export tax may apply or export subsidies can be granted.
To simulate the impact of the Uruguay Round, model assumes that all other margins remains proportionally constant in relation to the base period with the exception of the tariff component which is reduced in line with the country's reduction commitment.
The equilibrium solution of the model is found through an iterative process. The first iteration starts with an arbitrary level of world market price (i.e. generally the price projected under the "baseline" scenario). Domestic prices are modified as a consequence of the reduction in the effective rate of protection. For each country new supply and demand levels are calculated and net trade position derived. If net exports do not sum up to zero, the world market price is changed fur the second iteration and this procedure is repeated until world supply and demand are in equilibrium (i.e. world net trade equal to zero or close to zero with any predetermined precision). The final solution determines the new levels of supply and demand and the market clearing price.
Annex Table 1 - Wheat - Aggregated Tariff Equivalents
Annex Table 2 - Rice - Aggregated Tariff Equivalents
Annex Table 3 - Maize - Aggregated Tariff Equivalents
Annex Table 4 - Millet and Sorghum - Aggregated Tariff Equivalents
Annex Table 5 - Coarse Grains - Aggregated Tariff Equivalents
Annex Table 6 - Fats and Oils - Aggregated Tariff Equivalents
Annex Table 7 - Butter - Aggregated Tariff Equivalents
Annex Table 8 -Oilmeals -Aggregated Tariff Equivalents
Annex Table 9 - Beef - Aggregated Tariff Equivalents
Annex Table 10 - Milk - Aggregated Tariff Equivalents
Annex Table 11 - Sheep and Goat Meat - Aggregated Tariff Equivalents
Annex Table 12 - Pigmeat - Aggregated Tariff Equivalents
Annex Table 13 -Poultry Meat Aggregated Tariff Equivalents
Annex Table 14 - Tariff reductions in selected sugar importing and exporting countries
Base 1986-88 ad valorem Committed tariff
tariff (percent) bound rate (percent)
Raw Sugar White Sugar Raw Sugar White Sugar
AUSTRALIA 43 34 21 17
BANGLADESH ^a ^a 200 200
BRAZIL 55 85 35 35
CANADA 10 11 8 10
CHINA 100 100 76 76
EGYPT 30 30 20 20
EC 168 ^b 133 ^b 134^ b 106 ^b
GUATEMALA 178 178 160 160
INDIA ^a ^a 150 150
JAPAN 339 376 288 320
MEXICO 173 173 156 156
PAKISTAN ^a ^a 150 150
S. AFRICA 124 124 105 105
THAILAND 104 104 94 94
TURKEY 150 150 135 135
USA 18 ^b 15 ^b 15 ^b 13^ b
a Countries committed to a maximum rate. b Tariff rate on above-quota imports. Source: International Sugar Organisation calculation based on WTO schedules.
REFERENCES
1. "Medium-term prospects for agricultural commodities: Projections to the year 2000", FAO Economic and Social Development Paper 120, Rome 1994. "Impact of the Uruguay Round on Agriculture", FAO CCP: 95/13, Rome, January 1995.
2. UN - Department of International Economic and Social Affairs: "World Population Prospects 1990", New York, 1991.
3. " The Results of the Uruguay Round of Multilateral Trade Negotiations", GATT, Geneva, November 1994
4. "Trade Liberalization: Global Economic Implications" by Ian Goldin, Odin Knudsen and Dominique van der Mensbrugghe, OECD and World Bank, 1993. See also "The Uruguay Round: An Assessment of Economy wide and Agricultural Reforms" by Ian Golding and Dominique van der Mensbrugghe, presented at The Uruguay Round and the Developing Economies, a World Bank Conference, January 1995.
5. For developing countries the reduction is 24 percent, on average, over the period 1995-2004, with a minimum of 5 percent per tariff line.
6. See Tangermann S. "An Assessment of the Uruguay Round Agreement on Agriculture" paper prepared for the Directorate for Food, Agriculture and Fisheries and the Trade Directorate of OECD, Stanford, 1994.
7. According to the World Bank/OECD simulations, the most important source of income gains from the liberalization of trade in goods is the elimination of quotas on industrial products, particularly MFA quotas, and the reduction in industrial tariffs. However the different estimates of income gains produced by the World Bank and the OECD depend on the version of the model used, i.e. with static or dynamic specifications.
8. The FAO "baseline" projections to the year 2000 extend the commodity coverage to other agricultural products, such as roots and tubers, pulses, citrus fruit and textile fibres. The Secretariat is considering the possibility ( resource permitting ) of conducting further studies of the impact of the Uruguay Round on selected agricultural commodities not included in the present study.
9. FAO-ISO "The World Sugar Market: Prospects for the Nineties", Rome 1992.
<section>c</section>
Table 1a - Growth of Production of Selected Agricultural Commodities, Past and Projected
WORLD
DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Baseline
UR
Baseline
UR
Baseline
UR
Percent per annum
ALL COMMODITIES 2.2 1.6 1.6 1.2 0.2 0.2 3.9 3.1 3.1
FOODSTUFFS 1/ 2.3 1.6 1.6 1.2 0.3 0.2 4.1 3.2 3.2
Wheat 2.1 1.7 1.6 0.9 0.8 0.6 4.3 2.7 2.9
Rice 2.6 1.8 1.8 -0.5 0.7 0.2 2.8 1.9 1.9
Total Coarse Grains 0.7 1.6 1.7 0.0 0.8 0.9 2.2 2.9 2.9
Fats and Oils 3.6 2.9 3.0 2.1 1.5 1.5 5.4 4.0 4.2
Proteins 3.6 3.0 3.0 1.8 1.8 1.8 6.0 4.0 4.2
Bovine Meat 1.0 1.0 1.0 0.5 -0.2 -0.1 2.0 3.0 2.9
Pig Meat 3.7 2.2 2.1 2.0 0.1 -0.0 6.9 4.4 4.4
Ovine Meat 2.4 1.6 1.6 1.6 -0.3 -0.4 3.1 3.0 3.0
Poultry Meat 4.8 3.8 3.8 3.8 2.0 2.0 6.9 6.6 6.6
Milk 1.5 0.6 0.6 0.9 -0.4 -0.5 3.5 2.8 2.9
OTHERS 1.8 1.5 1.6 0.6 -0.1 0.0 2.4 2.3 2.3
Coffee 2.6 1.2 1.3 0.0 0.0 0.0 2.6 1.2 1.3
Cocoa 4.3 1.8 2.0 0.0 0.0 0.0 4.3 1.8 2.0
Tea 2.8 3.2 3.2 1.2 1.6 1.6 2.9 3.2 3.3
Sugar 1.6 1.6 1.7 0.9 0.7 0.8 2.1 2.1 2.3
Bananas 1.4 3.7 2.8 0.8 1.0 0.4 1.4 3.9 3.1
Natural Rubber 3.0 2.9 2.9 0.0 0.0 0.0 3.0 2.9 2.9
Bovine Hides & Skins 0.8 0.7 0.8 0.4 -0.9 -0.8 1.4 2.8 2.8
1/ including butter
<section>d</section>
Table 1b - Growth of Consumption of Selected Agricultural Commodities, Past and Projected
WORLD
DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Baseline
UR
Baseline
UR
Baseline
UR
percent per annum
ALL COMMODITIES 2.4 1.6 1.6 1.3 0.1 0.1 4.1 3.1 3.1
FOODSTUFFS 1/ 2.4 1.6 1.6 1.3 0.0 0.0 4.2 3.2 3.2
Wheat 2.5 1.3 1.3 0.8 0.0 0.0 4.4 2.4 2.4
Rice 2.6 1.8 1.8 0.7 0.9 0.9 2.8 1.9 1.9
Total Coarse Grains 1.4 1.3 1.3 0.6 0.0 0.1 2.9 3.0 3.0
Fats and Oils 3.8 2.7 2.8 2.7 1.5 1.5 5.4 3.9 4.0
Proteins 3.7 2.7 2.8 3.0 1.1 1.1 5.5 5.5 5.6
Bovine Meat 1.0 1.1 1.1 0.4 -0.4 -0.3 2.4 3.4 3.3
Pig Meat 3.6 2.2 2.2 1.8 0.1 0.0 6.9 4.5 4.5
Ovine Meat 2.5 1.7 1.7 1.5 -0.4 -0.4 3.3 3.0 2.9
Poultry Meat 4.8 3.8 3.8 3.9 2.0 2.0 6.6 6.3 6.4
Milk 1.6 0.5 0.5 0.9 -0.6 -0.6 3.5 2.6 2.6
OTHERS 1.9 1.5 1.6 1.1 0.7 0.7 3.6 2.4 2.7
Coffee 2.3 1.6 1.8 2.4 1.0 1.2 2.2 3.0 3.0
Cocoa 3.8 2.3 2.6 3.6 1.9 2.2 5.6 4.1 4.4
Tea 2.9 2.7 2.9 1.3 0.8 0.9 3.9 3.7 3.8
Sugar 2.1 1.5 1.7 -0.1 0.0 0.1 4.5 2.6 2.8
Bananas 1.3 2.8 2.8 1.5 2.3 2.2 -0.9 7.6 7.6
Natural Rubber 3.0 2.8 2.9 1.2 0.9 1.0 6.0 4.8 4.8
Bovine Hides & Skins 0.8 0.4 0.7 0.8 0.5 0.5 0.8 0.2 1.0
1/ including butter
<section>e</section>
Table 1c - Growth of imports of Selected Agricultural Commodities, Past and Projected
WORLD
DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Baseline
UR
Baseline
UR
Baseline
UR
percent per annum
ALL COMMODITIES 3.1 1.3 1.5 2.3 0.4 0.6 5.5 2.8 2.9
FOODSTUFFS 1/ 3.1 1.4 1.5 2.3 0.0 0.4 5.1 3.2 3.2
Wheat 3.7 0.2 0.0 3.1 -3.0 -2.4 4.2 1.9 1.3
Rice 1.9 3.2 3.8 3.8 2.3 4.0 1.3 3.5 3.7
Total Coarse Grains 1.1 0.8 1.0 -1.4 -2.0 -1.8 7.2 4.1 4.2
Fats and Oils 4.0 2.8 3.1 2.1 1.6 1.9 6.5 3.9 4.2
Proteins 3.6 1.8 1.8 2.3 -0.2 -0.5 10.5 6.6 7.0
Bovine Meat 2.1 2.1 2.5 1.9 1.3 2.0 3.1 4.5 4.4
Pig Meat 4.3 0.9 1.2 3.9 0.5 0.8 8.1 3.8 4.2
Ovine Meat 2.0 2.0 2.0 0.4 1.2 1.4 4.6 3.1 2.7
Poultry Meat 6.9 5.2 5.2 7.3 4.5 4.2 6.3 6.1 6.5
Milk 2.6 -0.3 -0.2 2.3 -1.0 -0.7 3.1 1.0 0.6
OTHERS 3.2 1.1 1.3 2.4 0.9 0.9 6.6 1.6 2.2
Coffee 2.5 1.0 1.2 2.5 0.9 1.1 1.6 1.8 2.0
Cocoa 4.5 1.3 1.6 4.6 1.2 1.6 2.8 1.4 1.6
Tea 2.6 2.1 2.3 2.2 0.7 0.8 3.3 3.6 4.0
Sugar 0.7 0.6 1.0 -0.7 -1.2 -1.3 4.0 2.2 2.8
Bananas 1.3 2.8 2.8 1.5 2.3 2.2 -0.9 7.6 7.6
Natural Rubber 2.2 1.2 1.3 0.9 0.7 0.7 6.1 2.3 2.4
Bovine Hides & Skins 4.6 0.9 1.2 3.0 1.1 1.1 8.8 0.5 1.4
1/ including butter
<section>f</section>
Table 1d - Growth of Exports of Selected Agricultural Commodities, Past and Projected
WORLD
DEVELOPED COUNTRIES
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Baseline
UR
Baseline
UR
Baseline
UR
percent per annum
ALL COMMODITIES 
FOODSTUFFS 1/ 
Wheat 
Rice 
Total Coarse Grains 
Fats and Oils 
Proteins 
Bovine Meat 
Pig Meat 
Ovine Meat 
Poultry Meat 
Milk 
OTHERS 
Coffee 
Cocoa 
Tea 
Sugar 
Bananas 
Natural Rubber 
Bovine Hides & Skins
1/ including butter
<section>g</section>
Table 1e - World: Base period 1987-89 average and Projections to the year 2000, Base-line and GATT simulation
1987-89 BASE PERIOD
2000 BASELINE
2000 GATT SIMULATION
Product.
Import
Export
Consumpt.
Product.
Import
Export
Consumpt.
Product.
Import
Export
Consumpt.
million tonnes
FOODS
Total Cereals 1638.8 235.3 239.2 1689.0 2003.1 255.8 255.8 1999.0 2005.6 256.0 256.0 1999.8
Wheat 519.5 114.3 115.5 537.6 632.5 117.8 117.8 631.3 630.9 114.8 114.8 629.5
Rice 324.4 12.1 13.0 323.9 403.3 17.7 17.7 401.8 404.0 18.9 18.9 402.4
Coarse Grains 794.9 108.9 110.7 827.4 967.3 120.4 120.4 965.9 970.7 122.3 122.4 967.8
Maize 441.8 71.2 71.5 467.8 589.4 80.1 80.1 588.1 592.4 82.3 82.3 590.1
Millet and Sorghum 91.9 9.3 9.6 96.7 108.7 10.5 10.5 108.7 109.3 9.6 9.6 109.3
Other Coarse Grains 261.3 28.4 29.5 263.0 269.2 29.8 29.8 269.0 269.0 30.4 30.5 268.5
Fats and oils 76.5 26.8 26.2 77.7 107.5 37.2 37.2 107.3 108.6 38.5 38.5 108.3
Oilmeals 50.2 24.9 24.5 51.6 71.2 30.9 30.9 71.1 71.7 30.8 30.8 71.6
Total Meat 164.2 13.9 14.7 163.3 213.3 18.4 18.4 213.3 212.8 19.0 19.0 212.8
Bovine Meat 52.4 5.9 6.5 51.9 59.0 7.6 7.6 59.0 59.1 8.0 8.0 59.1
Sheep and Goat Meat 9.0 1.1 1.2 8.9 10.9 1.4 1.4 10.9 10.9 1.4 1.4 10.9
Pig Meat 65.9 4.5 4.6 65.6 85.4 5.1 5.1 85.4 84.8 5.3 5.3 84.8
Poultry Meat 36.9 2.4 2.4 36.9 58.0 4.4 4.4 58.0 58.0 4.4 4.4 58.0
Milk 522.6 55.9 57.5 527.2 558.9 54.2 54.3 558.9 559.3 54.6 54.5 559.3
Butter 7.5 1.7 1.7 8.0 7.8 1.6 1.6 7.8 7.7 1.6 1.6 7.8
OTHER COMMODITIES
Coffee 6.1 4.3 4.3 5.7 7.0 4.9 5.0 7.0 7.1 5.0 5.0 7.1
Cocoa 2.2 2.0 2.0 2.1 2.8 2.4 2.4 2.7 2.8 2.4 2.4 2.8
Tea 1.8 1.0 0.9 1.8 2.6 1.2 1.3 2.5 2.7 1.3 1.3 2.6
Bananas 8.1 7.8 8.1 7.8 12.4 10.9 12.4 10.9 11.3 10.9 11.3 10.9
Sugar 105.6 25.4 26.4 105.8 127.3 27.5 28.4 126.8 129.0 28.6 29.1 129.9
Bovine Hides and Skins 5.2 4.4 4.4 5.1 5.6 4.9 5.1 5.4 5.7 S.0 5.1 5.6
Rubber 5.1 4.2 4.1 5.1 7.1 4.9 4.9 7.1 7.2 4.9 4.9 7.2
<section>h</section>
Table 1f - Developing countries: Base period 1987-89 average and Projections to tile year 2000, Base-line and GATT simulation
1987-89 BASE PERIOD
2000 BASELINE
2000 GATT SIMULATION
Product.
Import
Export
Consumpt.
Product.
Import
Export
Consumpt.
Product.
Import
Export
Consumpt.
million tonnes
FOODS
Total Cereals 813.8 119.1 30.3 908.8 1092.2 167.3 40.6 1215.1 1099.8 162.8 44.3 1213.9
Wheat 216.3 68.6 8.5 280.8 298.3 86.1 8.8 374.3 303.4 80.5 10.0 372.7
Rice 306.6 9.1 9.0 306.7 384.0 13.8 13.8 382.6 385.7 14.2 15.0 383.3
Coarse Grains 290.9 41.4 12.8 321.3 409.8 67.4 18.0 458.2 410.7 68.1 19.3 458.0
Maize 189.7 26.5 9.6 206.2 284.9 46.5 13.5 317.0 284.8 47.9 14.5 317.0
Millet and Sorghum 68.9 3.5 2.1 72.2 81.1 6.5 2.9 84.7 81.6 5.6 2.7 84.5
Other Coarse Grains 32.2 11.4 1.2 42.9 43.9 14.4 1.6 56.5 44.2 14.7 2.1 56.4
Fats and Oils 38.8 12.8 13.1 38.2 62.3 20.1 22.1 60.3 63.3 20.9 23.3 60.9
Oilmeals 24.1 5.5 13.8 15.8 38.8 11.9 20.7 30.0 39.4 12.5 21.4 30.5
Total Meat 63.3 3.3 2.8 63.8 106.6 5.7 3.8 108.4 106.3 5.8 4.0 108.2
Bovine Meat 17.9 1.3 1.5 17.6 25.4 2.2 1.3 26.2 25.2 2.1 1.3 26.1
Sheep and Goat Meat 4.9 0.4 0.1 5.2 7.0 0.6 0.2 7.4 7.0 0.6 0.2 7.4
Pig Meat 27.7 0.5 0.6 27.6 46.5 0.8 0.6 46.7 46.6 0.9 0.9 46.6
Poultry Meat 12.9 1.0 0.5 13.4 27.6 2.1 1.6 28.0 27.6 2.2 1.6 28.1
Milk 141.1 20.3 1.1 160.2 197.5 22.8 2.5 217.8 197.9 21.9 2.9 216.9
Butter 1.8 0.4 0.0 2.2 2.7 0.5 0.2 3.1 2.6 0.7 0.2 3.1
OTHER COMMODITIES
Coffee 6.1 0.3 4.3 1.7 7.0 0.4 5.0 2.4 7.1 0.4 5.0 2.4
Cocoa 2.2 0.1 2.0 0.3 2.8 0.1 2.4 0.5 2.8 0.1 2.4 0.5
Tea 1.7 0.4 0.9 1.2 2.5 0.6 1.3 1.8 2.5 0.7 1.3 1.8
Bananas 7.3 0.6 7.3 0.6 11.5 1.4 11.5 1.4 10.5 1.4 10.5 1.4
Sugar 61.8 12.8 16.9 58.3 79.8 16.6 17.5 79.0 80.9 17.8 17.9 81.0
Bovine Hides and Skins 2.0 1.4 1.5 1.9 2.8 1.5 2.3 2.0 2.8 1.7 2.3 2.2
Rubber 5.1 1.3 4.1 2.2 7.1 1.7 4.9 3.9 7.2 1.7 4.9 3.9
<section>i</section>
Table 1g . Developed countries: Base period 1987-89 average and Projections to the year 2000, Base-line and GATT simulation
1987-89 BASE PERIOD
2000 BASELINE
2000 GATT SIMULATION
Product.
Import
Export
Consumpt.
Product.
Import
Export
Consumpt.
Product.
Import
Export
Consumpt.
million tonnes
FOODS
Total Cereals 825.0 116.2 208.9 780.2 910.9 88.5 215.3 783.9 905.8 93.2 211.7 785.8
Wheat 303.2 45.8 107.0 256.8 334.2 31.7 109.0 257.0 327.4 34.3 104.8 256.8
Rice 17.8 2.9 4.0 17.2 19.3 3.9 3.9 19.2 18.3 4.7 3.9 19.2
Coarse Grains 504.0 67.5 97.8 506.1 557.4 53.0 102.4 507.7 560.0 54.2 103.1 509.9
Maize 252.0 44.6 62.0 261.5 304.6 33.5 66.6 271.1 307.6 34.4 67.8 273.1
Millet and Sorghum 22.9 5.8 7.5 24.5 27.6 4.0 7.6 24.0 27.7 4.0 6.9 24.7
Other Coarse Grains 229.0 17.1 28.4 220.1 225.2 15.5 28.2 212.5 224.8 15.8 28.4 212.0
Fats and Oils 37.7 14.1 13.1 39.5 45.2 17.1 15.1 47.0 45.2 17.6 15.2 47.4
Oilmeals 26.0 19.4 10.7 35.8 32.3 19.0 10.2 41.0 32.3 18.3 9.5 41.1
Total Meat 100.9 10.6 11.9 99.5 106.7 12.7 14.6 104.8 106.4 13.2 15.0 104.6
Bovine Meat 34.5 4.6 4.9 34.3 33.6 5.4 6.3 32.7 34.0 5.9 6.7 33.1
Sheep and Goat Meat 4.1 0.6 1.0 3.7 3.9 0.7 1.1 3.5 3.9 0.7 1.1 3.5
Pig Meat 38.2 4.0 4.0 38.0 38.8 4.2 4.5 38.6 38.2 4.4 4.4 38.2
Poultry Meat 24.1 1.3 1.9 23.5 30.4 2.3 2.7 30.0 30.4 2.2 2.8 29.8
Milk 381.5 35.6 56.4 367.0 361.4 31.4 51.8 341.1 361.4 32.7 51.6 342.5
Butter 5.7 1.2 1.7 5.8 5.1 1.0 1.4 4.7 5.1 1.0 1.4 4.7
OTHER COMMODITIES
Coffee 0.0 4.1 0.0 4.0 0.0 4.5 0.0 4.5 0.0 4.6 0.0 4.6
Cocoa 0.0 1.9 0.0 1.8 0.0 2.3 0.0 2.3 0.0 2.3 0.0 2.3
Tea 0.1 0.6 0.0 0.7 0.1 0.6 0.0 0.7 0.1 0.6 0.0 0.7
Bananas 0.7 7.2 0.7 7.2 0.8 9.5 0.8 9.5 0.8 9.4 0.8 9.4
Sugar 43.8 12.6 9.5 47.5 47.5 10.9 11.0 47.8 48.1 10.8 11.2 48.0
Bovine Hides and skins 3.2 2.9 2.9 3.2 2.8 3.4 2.8 3.4 2.9 3.4 2.9 3.4
Rubber 0.0 2.9 0.0 2.9 0.0 3.2 0.0 3.2 0.0 3.2 0.0 3.2
<section>j</section>
Table 3: WHEAT - Commodity Balances, 1987-89 Average, 2000 Baseline and 2000 Uruguay Round Scenarios
Countries/Regions
1987-89 Average
2000 Baseline
2000 Uruguay Round
Growth Rates: 1987-89 to 2000 UR
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
thousand tonnes
percent per year
WORLD TOTAL 519507 114335 115505 537636 632471 117782 117792 631308 630888 114799 114782 629522 1.6 0.0 -0.1 1.3
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES 216310 68554 8491 280849 298301 86131 8830 374301 303444 80512 9979 372716 2.9 1.3 1.4 2.4
Africa 6598 11050 153 16983 9450 15196 154 24381 9333 15217 157 24276 2.9 2.7 0.2 3.0
Algeria 880 4158 0 4870 995 5753 0 6729 1014 5703 0 6699 1.2 2.7 - 2.7
Ethiopia 839 687 0 1560 1338 1166 0 2485 1349 1140 0 2471 4.0 4.3 - 3.9
Morocco 3463 1572 1 4520 4468 1650 1 6091 4330 1804 1 6100 1.9 1.2 0.0 2.5
Nigeria 47 325 0 372 195 371 0 564 196 360 0 555 12.6 0.9 - 3.4
Latin America 22074 8742 4368 26460 22186 16538 5611 33037 23353 15710 6362 32623 0.5 5.0 3.2 1.8
Argentina 9153 0 4101 5000 10855 0 5247 5602 11478 0 5934 5533 1.9 - 3.1 0.8
Brazil 5776 1675 8 7160 2988 6126 8 9098 3268 5688 8 8942 -4.6 10.7 0.0 1.9
Mexico 4152 709 170 5000 4673 1970 169 6457 4845 1710 170 6373 1.3 7.6 0.0 2.0
Peru 147 867 0 1098 176 1312 0 1486 179 1304 0 1481 1.7 3.5 - 2.5
Venezuela 0 1063 1 1128 0 1459 1 1456 0 1444 1 1441 - 2.6 0.0 2.1
Near East 36196 19750 3263 54799 54351 19583 2362 71288 55063 18993 2737 71029 3.6 -0.3 -1.5 2.2
Egypt 2914 6941 3 9893 6762 5003 3 11747 6894 4759 3 11640 7.4 -3.1 0.0 1.4
Iran Isl.Rep.of 6797 3522 1 10528 11808 1858 1 13559 11976 1685 1 13557 4.8 -6.0 0.0 2.1
Saudi Arabia 3015 310 1842 1868 3441 390 1051 2779 3501 390 1114 2775 1.3 1.9 -4.1 3.4
Syria 1581 1072 20 2605 4118 97 20 4158 4167 54 33 4151 8.4 -22.0 4.3 4.0
Turkey 18559 806 1335 19215 22395 893 1227 22028 22609 892 1525 21925 1.7 0.8 1.1 1.1
Far East 151442 28781 704 182393 212313 34511 700 245298 215694 30289 719 244492 3.0 0.4 0.2 2.5
Bangladesh 1054 1998 0 3052 1456 3357 0 4770 1472 3321 0 4752 2.8 4.3 - 3.8
China 87383 15427 86 104141 121830 11250 86 132672 122670 10577 26 132887 2.9 -3.1 -9.5 2.1
India 48201 679 104 50442 68162 2097 104 69874 69569 34 171 69209 3.1 -22.1 4.2 2.7
Indonesia 0 1720 8 1712 0 3198 8 3173 0 3013 8 2991 - 4.8 0.0 4.8
Korea Rep. 2 3508 23 3488 3 4925 23 4893 3 5010 23 4971 3.4 3.0 0.0 3.0
Pakistan 13037 1050 4 13870 18217 3314 4 21417 19312 1914 4 21139 3.3 5.2 0.0 3.6
Philippines 0 1066 5 1061 0 1844 5 1823 0 1811 5 1795 - 4.5 0 .0 4.5
Thailand 0 295 51 244 0 512 51 455 0 588 52 520 - 5.9 0.2 6.5
Other Developing 0 231 3 214 1 303 3 297 1 303 3 297 - 2.3 0.0 2.8
DEVELOPED COUNTRIES 303197 45781 107014 256787 334171 31651 108962 257007 327444 34287 104804 256805 0.6 -2.4 -0.2 0.0
North America 76225 955 56146 33644 98097 1172 60582 38466 95641 1176 57603 38882 1.9 1.7 0.2 1.2
Canada 22188 136 18259 6453 26077 157 18919 7293 26373 157 19138 7313 1.5 1.2 0.4 1.0
United States 54037 819 37887 27191 72020 1015 41663 31173 69268 1019 38465 31570 2.1 1.8 0.1 1.3
Western Europe 83089 17069 33112 65884 78878 18395 27809 69523 74688 19797 25087 69399 -0.9 1.2 -2.3 0.4
EC-12 78999 16048 31848 62085 74691 17561 26505 65795 71104 18858 24255 65705 -0.9 1.4 -2.2 0.5
Oth.Western Europe 4090 1021 1264 3799 4187 834 1304 3729 3584 939 833 3694 -1.1 -0.7 -3.4 -0.2
Eastern Europe 39392 3021 2635 38962 41502 1177 5425 37255 40234 2022 5605 36630 0.2 -3.3 6.5 -0.5
Poland 7995 2153 3 9993 9883 493 3 10374 8834 1349 3 10175 0.8 -3.8 0.0 0.2
Romania 7484 22 200 6754 6940 20 658 6306 6763 20 595 6185 -0.8 -0.8 9.5 -0.7
Former USSR 86688 18064 1587 104589 93964 3526 1583 96244 94632 2717 1591 96108 0.7 -14.6 0.0 -0.7
Oceania 13705 143 12631 3878 17314 251 13132 4422 18788 268 14483 4515 2.7 5.4 1.1 1.3
Australia 13479 29 12615 3550 17150 36 13116 4059 18633 36 14467 4146 2.7 1.8 1.1 1.3
Other Developed 4098 6529 903 9830 4415 7130 431 11097 3460 8308 434 11272 -1.4 2.0 -5.9 1.1
Japan 957 5688 397 6217 1378 5533 396 6510 1374 5564 399 6528 3.1 -0.2 0.0 0.4
South Africa 2904 20 496 2638 2804 744 25 3512 1851 1904 25 3677 -3.7 46.2 -22.0 2.8
<section>k</section>
Table 4: RICE - Commodity Balances, 1987-89 Average, 2000 Baseline and 2000 Uruguay Round Scenarios
Countries/Regions
1987-89 Average
2000 Baseline
2000 Uruguay Round
Growth Rates: 1987-89 to 2000 UR
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
thousand tonnes
percent per year
WORLD TOTAL 324401 12081 13005 323886 403331 17690 17691 401818 404014 18893 18882 402427 1.8 3.8 3.2 1.8
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES 306569 9134 8983 306659 384026 13839 13767 382601 385683 14164 15010 383259 1.9 3.7 4.4 1.9
Africa 5582 2578 104 8115 9128 3838 99 12779 9152 3795 99 12759 4.2 3.3 -0.4 3.8
Cte D'Ivoire 396 412 0 808 700 494 0 1191 700 493 0 1190 4.9 1.5 - 3.3
Guinea 317 89 0 409 370 160 0 528 370 159 0 528 1.3 5.0 - 2.2
Liberia 190 97 0 293 228 201 0 428 229 201 0 428 1.6 6.3 - 3.2
Madagascar 1479 76 0 1597 1777 120 0 1896 1793 99 0 1891 1.6 2.2 - 1.4
Nigeria 1252 261 0 1517 2798 146 0 2934 2796 137 0 2924 6.9 -5.2 - 5.6
Senegal 98 310 0 416 166 461 0 624 166 461 0 624 4.5 3.4 - 3.4
Sierra Leone 297 106 0 408 476 51 0 524 478 49 0 524 4.0 -6.2 - 2.1
Latin America 12667 970 371 13028 16510 1863 782 17459 16503 1868 776 17450 2.2 5.6 6.3 2.5
Argentina 272 0 36 247 566 0 173 390 561 0 166 393 6.2 - 13.6 3.9
Brazil 7466 121 16 7372 9616 214 16 9753 9574 239 16 9727 2.1 5.8 0.0 2.3
Colombia 1112 13 11 1243 1347 156 11 1487 1369 139 11 1491 1.7 21.8 0.0 1.5
Mexico 345 80 0 442 433 232 0 660 436 229 0 660 2.0 9.2 - 3.4
Peru 753 149 0 833 825 332 0 1150 825 335 0 1152 0.8 7.0 - 2.7
Uruguay 336 0 236 57 495 0 383 104 494 0 382 105 3.3 - 4.1 5.2
Near East 3215 2467 76 5849 3789 4329 240 7763 3775 4343 222 7779 1.3 4.8 9.3 2.4
Egypt 1536 14 64 1519 1791 15 229 1576 1776 15 211 1578 1.2 0.6 10.5 0.3
Iran Isl.Rep.of 1099 468 0 1683 1437 1007 0 2387 1439 1011 0 2392 2.3 6.6 - 3.0
Far East 285086 2937 8432 279457 354565 3543 12646 344307 356219 3889 13912 344975 1.9 2.4 4.3 1.8
Bangladesh 16318 159 0 16308 21802 9 149 21623 21855 9 168 21656 2.5 -21.3 - 2.4
China 115300 671 742 117901 137510 1018 739 137199 137890 1141 684 137764 1.5 4.5 -0.7 1.3
India 66974 443 449 64827 84467 265 736 83687 85078 249 1163 83826 2.0 -4.7 8.3 2.2
Indonesia 27404 155 51 27361 34982 84 52 34960 35107 70 281 34819 2.1 -6.4 15.3 2.0
Korea Rep 5210 1 1 4704 4534 0 46 4496 4435 100 50 4496 -1.3 46.8 38.5 -0.4
Malaysia 1133 290 2 1530 1146 627 2 1769 1156 622 2 1774 0.2 6.6 0.0 1.2
Myanmar 8800 0 233 8757 12647 0 745 11885 12715 0 811 11884 3.1 - 11.0 2.6
Pakistan 3097 0 852 2193 3571 0 1045 2516 3626 0 1066 2546 1.3 - 1.9 1.3
Philippines 5843 104 42 5938 7860 332 43 8119 7956 243 43 8l23 2.6 7.3 0.2 2.6
Sri Lanka 1507 196 0 1853 1855 251 0 2104 1851 257 0 2106 1.7 2.3 - 1.1
Thailand 13205 0 4916 8006 16186 0 6336 9833 16446 245 6827 9840 1.8 - 2.8 1.7
Viet Nam 11913 66 1050 10964 17500 76 2567 14956 17572 76 2630 14963 3.3 1.2 8.0 2.6
Other Developing 19 182 0 210 35 266 0 293 35 269 0 296 5.2 3.3 - 2.9
DEVELOPED COUNTRIES 17832 2947 4022 17227 19304 3850 3924 19217 18330 4729 3871 19168 0.2 4.0 -0.3 0.9
North America 4769 262 2548 2739 6219 460 2092 4572 6244 459 2130 4556 2.3 4.8 -1.5 4.3
United States 4769 132 2548 2608 6219 244 2092 4356 6244 243 2130 4340 2.3 5.2 -1.5 4.3
Western Europe 1309 1551 1052 1810 1680 1959 1280 2352 1187 2015 854 2341 -0.8 2.2 -1.7 2.2
EC-12 1309 1375 1052 1635 1680 1726 1280 2122 1187 1784 853 2113 -0.8 2.2 -1.7 2.2
Oth.Western Europe 0 176 0 175 0 233 1 231 0 231 1 229 - 2.3 - 2.3
Eastern Europe 164 223 4 403 213 230 5 437 218 282 61 436 2.4 2.0 25.5 0.7
Former USSR 1757 580 52 2284 2085 591 53 2618 2073 605 53 2621 1.4 0.4 0.2 1.2
Oceania 482 32 366 122 629 42 478 191 644 42 492 191 2.4 2.3 2.5 3.8
Australia 482 21 366 110 629 24 478 173 644 24 492 173 2.4 1.1 2.5 3.8
Other Developed 9351 299 0 9869 8479 568 16 9048 7964 1326 280 9023 -1.3 13.2 - -0.7
Japan 9349 13 0 9575 8477 1 16 8483 7962 758 280 8458 -1.3 40.3 - -1.0
<section>l</section>
Table 5: TOTAL COARSE GRAINS - Commodity Balances, 1987-89 Average, 2000 Baseline and 2000 Uruguay Round Scenarios
Countries/Regions
1987-89 Average
2000 Baseline
2000 Uruguay Round
Growth Rates: 1987-89 to 2000 UR
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
thousand tonnes
percent per year
WORLD TOTAL 794872 108894 110685 827436 967250 120376 120361 965885 970673 122330 122385 967821 1.7 1.0 0.8 1.3
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES 290883 41393 12841 321299 409849 67376 17985 458177 410653 68129 19324 457953 2.9 4.2 3.5 3.0
Africa 47948 4112 810 51989 70071 5785 712 74879 70788 5398 1134 74742 3.3 2.3 2.8 3.1
Algeria 689 1485 0 2045 1169 1751 0 2914 1176 1755 0 2924 4.6 1.4 - 3.0
Ethiopia 5049 60 0 5185 7284 55 2 7330 7300 44 14 7324 3.1 -2.6 - 2.9
Morocco 3090 173 91 3104 3859 162 29 3975 3812 211 8 3981 1.8 1.7 -18.3 2.1
Nigeria 11500 156 0 11902 17457 419 0 17842 17639 222 23 17804 3.6 3.0 - 3.4
Latin America 67724 10719 4987 75466 96122 19406 9875 105472 98244 17689 10463 105242 3.1 4.3 6.4 2.8
Argentina 11287 10 4680 6603 17078 12 8914 8152 17689 12 9429 8243 1.8 1.5 6.0 1.9
Brazil 26792 971 8 27757 39406 3196 8 42510 40675 1478 8 42048 1.5 3.6 0.0 3.5
Mexico 17608 5172 23 24624 22910 9250 23 32112 23157 9093 23 32191 2.3 4.8 0.0 2.3
Peru 1113 500 2 1599 1371 516 2 1904 1389 524 2 1910 1.9 0.4 0.0 1.5
Venezuela 1888 1472 3 3452 3332 19$0 0 5274 3311 1964 0 6265 4.8 2.4 - 1.6
Near East 24389 11897 803 36413 38464 14944 1381 51887 39005 14747 1867 51728 4.0 1.8 7.3 3.0
Egypt 4788 1678 3 6405 6429 1273 121 7578 6470 1237 113 7587 2.5 -2.5 35.3 1.4
Iran Isl.Rep.of 3029 981 0 4183 5019 1794 0 6801 5119 1696 0 6803 4.5 4.7 - 4.1
Saudi Arabia 374 5831 5 6190 2739 737:3 6 10076 2764 7353 7 10081 18.1 2.0 2.8 4.1
Syria 1321 131 117 1459 2183 215 40 2335 2285 215 138 2334 4.7 4.2 1.4 4.0
Turkey 9043 394 258 9413 12574 299 447 12407 12734 300 753 12256 2.9 -2.2 9.3 2.2
Far East 150817 14606 6241 157366 205185 27155 6018 225846 202609 30210 5859 226149 2.5 6.2 -0.5 3.1
Bangladesh 87 5 0 91 159 4 1 163 160 4 1 163 5.2 -1.8 - 5.0
China 95481 5763 4443 95114 138388 11545 4429 145089 136237 13943 4070 145402 3.0 7.6 -0.7 3.6
India 30780 160 4 31146 31875 875 0 32770 32291 167 1 32472 0.4 0.4 -10.9 0.3
Indonesia 6002 153 92 6062 9479 214 92 9597 8941 1033 93 9874 3.4 17.3 0.1 4.1
Korea Rep. 666 5943 1 6666 490 10153 1 10615 497 10287 1 10744 -2.4 4.7 0.0 4.1
Pakistan 1703 1 0 1705 2281 81 6 2355 2361 30 29 2360 2.8 32.8 - 2.7
Philippines 4409 369 0 4723 6709 647 1 7336 6259 1066 1 7288 3.0 9.2 - 3.7
Thailand 4177 39 1424 2569 5707 68 1027 4737 5707 132 1169 4655 2.6 10.7 -1.6 5.1
Other Developing 5 59 0 65 7 86 0 93 7 85 0 92 2.8 3.1 - 2.9
DEVELOPED COUNTRIES 503989 67501 97844 506137 557401 53000 102376 507708 560020 54200 103061 509868 0.9 -1.8 0.4 0.1
North America 219614 2072 62988 190875 277431 368 59205 218023 284517 368 62180 221275 2.2 -13.4 -0.1 1.2
Canada 23036 715 5345 18922 26449 185 5517 21084 27237 185 6308 21020 1.4 -10.7 1.4 0.9
United States 196578 1357 57643 171953 250982 183 53688 196939 257280 183 55872 200254 2.3 -15.4 -0.3 1.3
Western Europe 103509 21450 27253 98188 105308 23391 26379 102272 99910 25350 22349 102848 -0.3 1.4 -1.6 0.4
EC-12 92051 20114 26202 86231 94354 21888 25857 90379 89095 23930 21780 91188 -0.3 1.5 -1.5 0.5
Oth.Western Europe 11458 1336 1051 11957 10955 1452 522 11893 10814 1421 569 11660 -0.5 0.5 -5.0 -0.2
Eastern Europe 55960 2857 1539 58132 57995 2195 10251 49927 56837 1724 10347 48188 0.1 -4.1 17.2 -1.6
Poland 17846 809 79 18540 16741 1572 79 18235 16453 1138 81 17506 -0.7 2.9 0.2 -0.5
Romania 10751 206 196 10877 11531 140 2839 8832 10900 138 2698 8338 0.1 -3.3 24.4 -2.2
Former USSR 106937 16777 469 122075 95042 2580 462 97417 95398 2468 479 97637 -0.9 -14.8 0.2 -1.8
Oceania 7867 30 3162 4381 9291 31 3895 5422 10239 32 4543 5715 2.2 0.5 3.1 2.2
Australia 7278 10 3015 3822 8637 7 3835 4803 9532 8 4477 5050 2.3 -1.8 3.3 2.3
Other Developed 10102 24315 2433 32486 12332 24485 2184 34646 13119 24257 3162 34205 2.2 -0.0 2.2 0.4
Japan 404 22957 0 22977 445 22906 0 23372 448 22709 0 23173 0.9 -0.1 - 0.1
South Africa 9682 142 2433 8292 11868 169 2184 9846 12653 147 3162 9616 2.3 0.3 2.2 1.2
<section>a</section>
Annex Table 9 - Beef - Aggregated Tariff Equivalents
Base Rates Bound Rates Year Of Producer Changes
Specific
Ad Valorem
Specific
Ad Valorem
Implem. 
Prices
Specific
Ad Valorem
US$
US$
US$
ARGENTINA 0.00 38.00 0.00 38.00 2004 1860.30 0.0 0.0
AUSTRALIA 0.00 0.17 0.00 0.09 2000 1283.03 0.0 -47.1
AUSTRIA 3310.60 18.97 2757.70 16.12 2000 3544.44 -16.7 -15.0
BELGIUM 2465.15 18.47 1579.26 11.94 2000 3551.46 -35.9 -35.4
BENIN 0.00 79.00 0.00 79.00 2004 1255.28 0.0 0.0
BRAZIL 0.00 20.39 0.00 44.22 2004 5067.21 0.0 116.9
CAMEROON 0.00 310.00 0.00 310.00 2004 1810.00 0.0 0.0
CANADA 0.08 31.40 0.05 21.55 2000 2472.44 -37.5 -31.4
CHILE 0.00 35.00 0.00 25.00 2004 1621.54 0.0 -28.6
CHINA P.REP. 0.00 43.08 0.00 29.53 2004 1186.80 0.0 -31.5
COLOMBIA 0.00 113.51 0.00 97.64 2004 966.94 0.0 -14.0
CONGO 0.00 30.00 0.00 30.00 2004 3835.20 0.0 0.0
COSTA RICA 0.00 55.00 0.00 45.00 2004 1116.76 0.0 -18.2
CUBA 0.00 40.00 0.00 40.00 2004 1812.20 0.0 0.0
CYPRUS 6404.20 33.53 4866.71 25.40 2004 2477.29 -24.0 -24.2
CZECH REP. 0.00 48.97 0.00 39.98 2000 6867.14 0.0 -18.4
DENMARK 2465.91 18.26 1579.38 11.59 2000 2818.56 -36.0 -36.5
DOMINICAN REP. 0.00 40.00 0.00 40.00 2004 2755.50 0.0 0.0
EGYPT 0.00 10.78 0.00 6.89 2004 3285.71 0.0 -36.1
EL SALVADOR 0.00 80.60 0.00 59.02 2004 2021.61 0.0 -26.8
FIJI 0.00 40.00 0.00 40.00 2004 2013.20 0.0 0.0
FINLAND 0.00 392.33 0.00 324.53 2000 6465.40 0.0 -17.3
FRANCE 3576.59 18.39 2292.98 11.56 2000 7644.64 -35.9 -37.1
GABON 0.00 260.00 0.00 260.00 2004 7598.81 0.0 0.0
GERMANY 2983.03 17.82 1912.72 11.18 2000 2225.04 -35.9 -37.3
GHANA 0.00 125.00 0.00 99.00 2004 1481.63 0.0 -20.8
GREECE 3117.43 19.21 1996.75 12.19 2000 3288.43 -35.9 -36.5
GUATEMALA 0.00 60.79 0.00 47.29 2004 1897.92 0.0 -22.2
GUYANA 0.00 160.00 0.00 160.00 2004 3265.53 0.0 0.0
HONDURAS 0.00 38.00 0.00 35.00 2004 3500.00 0.0 -7.9
HUNGARY 0.00 94.61 0.00 62.69 2000 1814.23 0.0 -33.7
INDIA 0.00 139.98 0.00 100.89 2004 777.99 0.0 -27.9
INDONESIA 0.00 92.27 0.00 40.00 2004 2931.89 0.0 -56.6
IRELAND 3229.94 18.39 2071.20 11.56 2000 3339.60 -35.9 -37.1
ISRAEL 0.00 197.03 0.00 167.91 2000 2372.77 0.0 -14.8
ITALY 2517.53 18.80 1612.43 11.93 2000 4365.58 -36.0 -36.5
JAPAN 17.58 82.23 14.94 44.66 2000 15052.36 -15.0 -45.7
KOREA REP. 0.00 75.65 0.00 67.11 2004 4431.30 0.0 -11.3
KUWAIT 0.00 115.00 0.00 115.00 2004 2500.00 0.0 0.0
MADAGASCAR 0.00 280.00 0.00 280.00 2004 1003.43 0.0 0.0
MALAYSIA 0.00 18.95 0.00 14.25 2004 3398.49 0.0 -24.8
MEXICO 0.00 47.38 0.00 41.13 2004 2458.49 0.0 -13.2
MOROCCO 0.00 314.89 0.00 238.91 2004 3397.84 0.0 -24.1
MYANMAR 0.00 165.00 0.00 165.00 2004 1867.27 0.0 0.0
NAMIBIA 0.00 218.42 0.00 100.40 2004 1666.66 0.0 -54.0
NETHERLANDS 2367.10 18.42 1516.23 11.69 2000 3842.43 -35.9 -36.5
NEW ZEALAND 0.00 2.91 0.00 1.87 2000 875.47 0.0 -35.7
NICARAGUA 0.00 64.79 0.00 49.58 2004 5000.00 0.0 -23.5
NORWAY 0.00 405.03 0.00 344.02 2000 5141.49 0.0 -15.1
PAKISTAN 0.00 99.63 0.00 99.63 2004 844.48 0.0 0.0
PHILIPPINES 0.00 53.75 0.00 35.85 2004 1772.16 0.0 -33.3
POLAND 2237.60 28.80 1432.44 18.18 2000 1645.86 -36.0 -36.9
PORTUGAL 3152.12 18.90 2020.16 11.95 2000 4278.09 -35.9 -36.8
ROMANIA 0.00 319.28 0.00 287.06 2000 1159.65 0.0 -10.1
SINGAPORE 0.00 27.00 0.00 9.59 2004 3000.00 0.0 -64.5
SLOVAK REP. 0.00 48.97 0.00 39.98 2000 6867.14 0.0 -18.4
SOUTH AFRICA 0.00 106.99 0.00 64.47 2000 1184.69 0.0 -39.7
SPAIN 3117.46 19.03 1997.50 12.05 2000 3812.27 -35.9 -36.7
SRI LANKA 0.00 66.00 0.00 50.00 2004 631.75 0.0 -24.2
SWAZILAND 0.00 105.23 0.00 63.63 2004 1114.47 0.0 -39.5
SWEDEN 0.08 85.08 0.07 64.51 2000 3494.54 -12.5 -24.2
THAILAND 61.59 59.04 41.26 47.25 2004 1562.16 -33.0 -20.0
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO 0.00 115.00 0.00 115.00 2004 3447.08 0.0 0.0
TUNISIA 0.00 118.85 0.00 83.36 2004 1673.70 0.0 -29.9
TURKEY 0.00 247.79 0.00 223.00 2004 2523.67 0.0 -10.0
UK 3002.69 18.32 1924.15 11.59 2000 2915.96 -35.9 -36.7
URUGUAY 0.00 34.80 0.00 48.06 2004 1305.88 0.0 38.1
USA 9.76 24.55 4.43 20.80 2000 2390.79 -54.6 -15.3
VENEZUELA 0.00 105.09 0.00 89.91 2004 3357.20 0.0 -14.4
ZAMBIA 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2004 340.17 0.0 0.0
<section>m</section>
Table 6: MAIZE - Commodity Balances, 1987-89 Average, 2000 Baseline and 2000 Uruguay Round Scenarios
Countries/Regions
1987-89 Average
2000 Baseline
2000 Uruguay Round
Growth Rates: 1987-89 to 2000 UR
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
thousand tonnes
percent per year
WORLD TOTAL 441752 71156 71540 467759 589435 80056 80061 588103 592391 82319 82345 590091 2.5 1.2 1.2 2.0
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES 189704 26531 9586 206212 284875 46523 13471 316967 284838 47909 14498 317004 3.4 5.0 3.5 3.6
Africa 19866 2679 640 22312 30750 3443 500 33530 31164 3374 863 33484 3.8 1.9 2.5 3.4
Algeria 2 1069 0 928 4 1335 0 1339 4 1344 0 1347 5.9 1.9 - 3.2
Ethiopia 1683 21 0 1703 2807 1 2 2802 2817 1 14 2799 4.4 -22.4 - 4.2
Morocco 334 149 0 512 510 144 0 653 500 161 0 658 3.4 0.6 - 2.1
Nigeria 1881 0 0 1881 2965 10 0 2967 2989 0 23 2958 3.9 - - 3.8
Latin America 53632 6198 3460 58252 77590 12890 7670 82655 79521 11253 8140 82438 3.3 5.1 7.4 2.9
Argentina 7570 1 3375 4130 12266 1 7107 5143 12749 1 7524 5205 4.4 0.0 6.9 1.9
Brazil 26047 376 3 26420 38146 2463 3 40523 39418 754 3 40073 3.5 6.0 0.0 3.5
Mexico 11050 3533 21 16396 14613 6212 21 20790 14840 6054 21 20849 2.5 4.6 0.0 2.0
Peru 943 392 2 1332 1217 453 2 1667 1233 445 2 1674 2.3 1.1 0.0 1.9
Venezuela 1157 0 3 1199 1820 396 0 2212 1784 462 0 2241 3.7 - - 5.4
Near East 7254 4613 20 11970 10421 6386 35 16754 10462 6351 35 16754 3.1 2.7 4.8 2.8
Egypt 4079 .1647 2 5659 5637 1271 2 6903 5683 1235 2 6910 2.8 -2.4 0.0 1.7
Iran Isl.Rep.of 18 669 0 861 137 1070 0 1206 139 1071 0 1209 18.6 4.0 - 2.9
Saudi Arabia 2 444 0 447 4 1904 0 1907 4 1906 0 1909 5.9 12.9 - 12.9
Syria 85 117 0 202 170 195 0 365 171 195 0 366 6.0 4.3 - 5.1
Turkey 2133 272 11 2394 3051 147 11 3180 3034 149 11 3163 3.0 -4.9 0.0 2.3
Far East 108948 13025 5466 113657 166108 23773 5265 183991 163685 26901 5460 184290 3.5 6.2 -0.0 4.1
Bangladesh 3 0 0 2 5 0 0 5 5 0 0 5 4.3 - - 7.9
China 78829 5164 3805 78038 124210 10309 3808 130168 122700 12110 3835 130260 3.8 7.4 0.1 4.4
India 7786 95 0 7548 9405 5 0 9409 9311 7 0 9316 1.5 -19.5 - 1.8
Indonesia 6000 115 92 6023 9477 130 92 9512 8940 950 93 9789 3.4 19.2 0.1 4.1
Korea Rep. 118 5572 0 5690 142 9493 0 9606 141 9642 0 9742 1.5 4.7 - 4.6
Pakistan 1170 0 0 1170 1711 81 0 1790 1768 30 0 1796 3.5 - - 3.6
Philippines 4409 86 0 4496 6709 359 0 7048 6259 783 0 7006 3.0 20.2 - 3.8
Thailand 3950 2 1349 2369 5393 2 1014 4371 5455 2 1156 4287 2.7 0.0 -1.3 5.1
Other Developing 4 16 0 21 6 31 0 37 6 31 0 37 3.4 5.7 - 4.8
DEVELOPED COUNTRIES 252048 44625 61954 261547 304560 33533 66590 271137 307553 34410 67847 273087 1.7 -2.1 0.8 0.4
North America 172085 785 48483 150697 215907 274 46238 169541 221104 274 48277 172093 2.1 -8.4 -0.0 1.1
Canada 6254 687 201 6833 7557 154 247 7453 7714 154 415 7434 1.8 -11.7 6.2 0.7
United States 165831 98 48282 143864 208350 119 45991 162088 213390 120 47862 164659 2.1 1.7 -0.1 1.1
Western Europe 28845 12088 9849 31287 32543 12365 11022 33854 30712 13310 9782 34182 0.5 0.8 -0.1 0.7
EC-12 27005 11725 9602 29221 30626 12020 10847 31768 28828 12966 9590 32148 0.5 0.8 -0.0 0.8
Oth.Western Europe 1840 363 247 2066 1917 345 175 2086 1883 344 192 2035 0.2 -0.4 -2.1 -0.1
Eastern Europe 26476 1663 895 28417 28936 642 6793 22778 27802 670 6341 22116 0.4 -7.3 17.7 -2.1
Poland 198 255 0 509 287 218 0 506 233 248 0 480 1.4 -0.2 - -0.5
Romania 7513 167 167 7679 8145 126 2072 6199 7532 124 1769 5886 0.0 -2.5 21.7 -2.2
Former USSR 15381 13251 277 26854 15975 1604 278 17384 15970 1674 279 17445 0.3 -15.8 0.1 -3.5
Oceania 361 15 50 253 405 13 134 284 413 13 121 305 1.1 -1.2 7.6 1.6
Australia 210 8 25 111 219 5 96 128 220 5 90 135 0.4 -3.8 11.3 1.6
Other Developed 8900 16823 2400 24039 10792 18636 2125 27295 11552 18469 3048 26946 2.2 0.8 2.0 1.0
Japan 1 16358 0 16188 1 18103 0 18102 1 17938 0 17931 0.0 0.8 - 0.9
South Africa 8895 48 2400 7443 10788 56 2125 8715 11548 56 3047 8539 2.2 1.3 2.0 1.2
<section>b</section>
Annex Table 10 - Milk - Aggregated Tariff Equivalents
Base Rates Bound Rates Year Of Producer Changes
Specific
Ad Valorem
Specific
Ad Valorem
Implem. 
Prices
Specific
Ad Valorem
US$
US$
US$
ARGENTINA 0.00 38.00 0.00 38.00 2004 160.88 0.0 0.0
AUSTRALIA 45.12 0.00 36.72 0.17 2000 146.92 -18.6 -
AUSTRIA 864.50 0.01 725.39 0.00 2000 550.02 -16.1 -100.0
BELGIUM 605.30 0.09 410.13 0.06 2000 285.49 -32.2 -33.3
BENIN 0.00 79.00 0.00 79.00 2004 243.75 0.0 0.0
BRAZIL 0.00 68.84 0.00 54.52 2004 548.15 0.0 -20.8
CAMEROON 0.00 310.00 0.00 310.00 2004 869.63 0.0 0.0
CANADA 0.00 289.36 0.00 246.09 2000 378.21 0.0 -15.0
CHILE 0.00 35.00 0.00 27.68 2004 291.54 0.0 -20.9
CHINA P.REP. 0.00 37.70 0.00 32.38 2004 143.15 0.0 -14.1
COLOMBIA 0.00 173.87 0.00 156.18 2004 186.61 0.0 -10.2
CONGO 0.00 30.00 0.00 30.00 2004 543.11 0.0 0.0
COSTA RICA 0.00 111.00 0.00 95.00 2004 250.86 0.0 -14.4
CUBA 0.00 44.23 0.00 40.00 2004 206.09 0.0 -9.6
CYPRUS 3480.51 34.87 2644.47 26.34 2004 220.77 -24.0 -24.5
CZECH REP. 0.00 32.04 0.00 25.68 2000 706.10 0.0 -19.9
DENMARK 542.18 0.02 362.29 0.01 2000 400.00 -33.2 -50.0
DOMINICAN REP. 0.00 40.00 0.00 40.00 2004 198.57 0.0 0.0
EGYPT 0.00 37.69 0.00 28.36 2004 633.33 0.0 -24.8
EL SALVADOR 0.00 49.90 0.00 44.70 2004 268.70 0.0 -10.4
FIJI 0.00 40.26 0.00 40.08 2004 158.18 0.0 -0.4
FINLAND 0.00 235.66 0.00 200.03 2000 628.55 0.0 -15.1
FRANCE 590.46 0.18 396.19 0.11 2000 285.93 -32.9 -38.9
GABON 0.00 260.00 0.00 260.00 2004 911.95 0.0 0.0
GERMANY 713.15 0.00 495.35 0.00 2000 164.01 -30.5 0.0
GHANA 0.00 125.00 0.00 55.41 2004 296.33 0.0 -55.7
GREECE 473.95 0.08 305.99 0.05 2000 288.08 -35.4 -37.5
GUATEMALA 0.00 104.15 0.00 90.14 2004 241.00 0.0 -13.5
GUYANA 0.00 160.00 0.00 160.00 2004 290.54 0.0 0.0
HONDURAS 0.00 38.00 0.00 35.00 2004 538.33 0.0 -7.9
HUNGARY 0.00 86.82 0.00 53.60 2000 154.84 0.0 -38.3
INDIA 0.00 99.54 0.00 96.51 2004 339.72 0.0 -3.0
INDONESIA 0.00 77.82 0.00 41.33 2004 422.79 0.0 -46.9
IRELAND 626.70 0.03 424.24 0.02 2000 262.33 -32.3 -33.3
ISRAEL 0.00 209.37 0.00 178.05 2000 330.54 0.0 -15.0
ITALY 363.39 0.02 237.85 0.02 2000 404.92 -34.5 0.0
JAPAN 594.29 27.63 505.40 23.27 2000 632.04 -15.0 -15.8
KOREA REP. 0.00 69.55 0.00 59.28 2004 399.28 0.0 -14.8
KUWAIT 0.00 115.00 0.00 115.00 2004 160.00 0.0 0.0
MADAGASCAR 0.00 280.00 0.00 280.00 2004 230.73 0.0 0.0
MALAYSIA 3.51 3.74 3.22 3.56 2004 374.59 -8.3 -4.8
MEXICO 41.46 35.94 37.31 27.14 2004 262.52 -10.0 -24.5
MOROCCO 0.00 114.76 0.00 86.84 2004 244.49 0.0 -24.3
MYANMAR 0.00 35.00 0.00 35.00 2004 264.43 0.0 0.0
NAMIBIA 0.00 214.77 0.00 96.98 2004 316.02 0.0 -54.8
NETHERLANDS 559.67 0.05 384.53 0.03 2000 300.00 -31.3 -40.0
NEW ZEALAND 0.00 13.58 0.00 9.15 2000 115.05 0.0 -32.6
NICARAGUA 0.00 85.00 0.00 75.00 2004 800.00 0.0 -11.8
NORWAY 0.00 416.59 0.00 354.19 2000 452.79 0.0 -15.0
PAKISTAN 0.00 100.00 0.00 100.00 2004 209.57 0.0 0.0
PHILIPPINES 0.00 32.10 0.00 22.40 2004 205.28 0.0 -30.2
POLAND 0.00 187.28 0.00 119.58 2000 170.43 0.0 -36.1
PORTUGAL 349.63 0.06 228.98 0.04 2000 367.00 -34.5 -33.3
ROMANIA 0.00 183.28 0.00 159.57 2000 181.93 0.0 -12.9
SINGAPORE 0.00 27.00 0.00 9.72 2004 300.00 0.0 -64.0
SLOVAK REP. 0.00 32.04 0.00 25.68 2000 706.10 0.0 -19.9
SOUTH AFRICA 0.00 211.42 0.00 96.71 2000 193.58 0.0 -54.3
SPAIN 430.25 0.01 281.04 0.01 2000 439.94 -34.7 0.0
SRI LANKA 0.00 66.00 0.00 50.00 2004 187.50 0.0 -24.2
SWAZILAND 0.00 214.10 0.00 96.93 2004 114.50 0.0 -54.7
SWEDEN 0.00 103.32 0.00 67.70 2000 727.46 0.0 -34.5
THAILAND 1.89 106.53 0.95 93.26 2004 255.64 -49.7 -12.5
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO 0.00 115.00 0.00 115.00 2004 517.55 0.0 0.0
TUNISIA 0.00 187.52 0.00 152.73 2004 278.01 0.0 -18.6
TURKEY 0.00 198.11 0.00 178.30 2004 261.41 0.0 -10.0
UK 402.69 0.04 265.12 0.03 2000 272.64 -34.2 -25.0
URUGUAY 0.00 37.74 0.00 54.12 2004 550.49 0.0 43.4
USA 89.16 0.00 76.36 0.00 2000 274.18 -14.4 0.0
VENEZUELA 0.00 85.79 0.00 66.34 2004 363.34 0.0 -22.7
ZAMBIA 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2004 150.45 0.0 0.0
<section>n</section>
Table 7: MILLET AND SORGHUM - Commodity Balances, 1987- 89 Average ,2000 Baseline and 2000 Uruguay Round Scenarios
Countries/Regions
1987-89 Average
2000 Baseline
2000 Uruguay Round
Growth Rates: 1987-89 to 2000 UR
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
Prod,
Import
Export
Cons.
Prod,
Import
Export
Cons.
thousand tonnes
percent per year
WORLD TOTAL 91864 9298 9596 96663 108660 10478 10479 108749 109304 9574 9582 109276 1.5 0.2 -0.0 1.0
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES 68932 3488 2082 72213 81063 6471 2895 84723 81634 5559 2722 84542 1.4 4.0 2.3 1.3
Africa 21849 197 64 22288 30896 598 162 31261 31215 287 242 31188 3.0 3.2 11.7 2.8
Algeria 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 - 
Ethiopia 1137 8 0 1179 1402 26 0 1428 1397 30 0 1426 1.7 11.6 - 1.6
Morocco 19 17 0 36 29 10 0 39 28 11 0 39 3.3 -3.6 - 0.7
Nigeria 9592 38 0 9864 14465 242 0 14681 14623 54 0 14651 3.6 3.0 - 3.4
Latin America 11133 2831 1021 13025 14598 4380 1367 17593 14666 4345 1403 17588 2.3 3.6 2.7 2.5
Argentina 2606 1 1009 1644 3152 2 1183 1970 3202 2 1209 1993 1.7 5.9 1.5 1.6
Brazil 325 2 0 328 432 92 0 524 432 87 0 519 2.4 36.9 - 3.9
Mexico 5982 1546 1 7527 7630 2780 1 10399 7630 2799 1 10418 2.0 5.1 0.0 2.7
Peru 31 0 0 31 27 13 0 40 27 13 0 40 -1.1 - - 2.1
Venezuela 731 1180 0 1911 1513 1201 0 2709 1527 1153 0 2674 6.3 -0.2 - 2.8
Near East 4015 45 363 4114 6758 122 792 6052 6828 118 872 6036 4.5 8.4 7.6 3.2
Egypt 574 0 0 574 587 0 97 491 580 0 86 494 0.1 - - -1.2
Iran Isl.Rep.of 20 11 0 31 33 21 0 54 33 21 0 54 4.3 5.5 - 4.7
Saudi Arabia 68 3 0 71 74 0 1 73 75 0 2 73 0.8 - - 0.2
Syria 8 0 0 9 8 2 0 10 8 2 0 10 0.0 - - 0.9
Turkey 10 9 1 18 5 21 1 24 5 21 1 24 -5.6 7.3 0.0 2.4
Far East 31934 411 634 32781 28810 1361 573 29806 28923 800 205 29719 -0.8 5.7 -9.0 -0.8
Bangladesh 72 0 0 72 138 0 1 137 139 0 1 118 5.6 - - 5.6
China 9485 152 561 9543 6331 145 544 6123 6050 146 157 6226 -3.7 -0.3 -10.1 -3.5
India 21338 0 4 21876 21111 674 0 21805 21549 47 0 21611 0.1 - - -0.1
Indonesia 2 11 0 13 2 14 0 16 2 14 0 16 0.0 2.0 - 1.7
Korea Rep. 5 224 0 269 3 479 0 481 3 481 0 483 -4.2 6.6 - 5.0
Pakistan 410 0 0 411 370 0 6 364 384 0 19 365 -0.5 - - -1.0
Philippines 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 - - - -
Thailand 213 2 66 160 286 13 3 295 223 77 3 296 0.4 35.6 -22.7 5.3
Other Developing 1 4 0 5 1 10 0 11 1 10 0 11 0.0 7.9 - 6,8
DEVELOPED COUNTRIES 22932 5810 7514 24450 27597 4008 7584 24026 27670 4014 6860 24734 1.6 -3.0 -0.8 0.1
North America 16461 5 6724 13676 23294 5 6524 16753 23294 5 5728 17457 2.9 0.0 -1.3 2.1
Canada 0 4 1 3 0 4 1 3 0 4 1 3 - 0.0 0.0 0.0
United States 16461 1 6723 13673 23294 1 6522 16750 23294 1 5726 17454 2.9 0.0 -1.3 2.1
Western Europe 454 882 197 1038 504 868 219 1154 504 870 215 1155 0.9 -0.1 0,7 0.9
EC-12 454 838 196 994 504 824 218 1110 504 827 215 1113 0.9 -0.1 0.8 0.9
Oth.Western Europe 0 44 1 44 0 44 0 44 0 43 0 43 - -0.2 - -0.2
Eastern Europe 116 129 32 206 135 10 88 57 139 9 96 54 1.5 -19.9 9.6 -10.6
Poland 0 104 1 103 0 8 1 7 0 8 1 7 - -19.2 0.0 -20.1
Romania 20 0 0 19 20 0 5 15 20 0 6 13 0.0 - - -3.1
Former USSR 3917 381 9 4046 1484 77 1 1574 1477 105 16 1579 -7.8 -10.2 4.9 -7,5
Oceania 1483 5 544 680 1557 5 718 844 1618 6 716 907 0.7 1.5 2.3 2.4
Australia 1483 0 544 675 1557 0 718 839 1618 0 716 901 0.7 - 2.3 2.4
Other Developed 501 4408 8 4804 622 3042 34 3645 638 3019 90 3582 2.0 -3.1 22.3 -2.4
Japan 1 4060 0 3993 1 2611 0 2628 1 2596 0 2614 0.0 -3.7 - -3.5
South Africa 500 3 8 445 621 3 34 589 617 3 89 549 2.0 0.0 22.2 1.8
<section>c</section>
Annex Table 11 - Sheep and Goat Meat - Aggregated Tariff Equivalents
Base Rates Bound Rates Year Of Producer Changes
Specific
Ad Valorem
Specific
Ad Valorem
Implem. 
Prices
Specific
Ad Valorem
US$
US$
US$
ARGENTINA 0.00 36.48 0.00 36.42 2004 1579.11 0.0 -0.2
AUSTRALIA 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2000 707.79 0.0 0.0
AUSTRIA 3549.22 0.00 2541.29 0.00 2000 2981.09 -28.4 0.0
BELGIUM 2406.96 19.33 1538.93 12.37 2000 2827.44 -36.1 -36.0
BENIN 0.00 79.00 0.00 79.00 2004 1418.38 0.0 0.0
BRAZIL 0.00 25.00 0.00 35.00 2004 3757.84 0.0 40.0
CAMEROON 0.00 310.00 0.00 310.00 2004 2898.94 0.0 0.0
CANADA 46.78 0.00 28.28 0.00 2000 3215.64 -39.5 0.0
CHILE 0.00 35.00 0.00 25.00 2004 1644.69 0.0 -28.6
CHINA P.REP. 0.00 52.31 0.00 34.70 2004 952.73 0.0 -33.7
COLOMBIA 0.00 100.00 0.00 88.92 2004 1451.10 0.0 -11.1
CONGO 0.00 30.00 0.00 30.00 2004 3835.20 0.0 0.0
COSTA RICA 0.00 55.00 0.00 42.32 2004 1475.50 0.0 -23.1
CUBA 0.00 40.00 0.00 40.00 2004 1492.40 0.0 0.0
CYPRUS 9905.60 35.50 7526.78 26.78 2004 4073.53 -24.0 -24.6
CZECH REP. 0.00 94.35 0.00 66.05 2000 6368.13 0.0 -30.0
DENMARK 2892.36 19.95 1851.09 12.77 2000 2328.07 -36.0 -36.0
DOMINICAN REP. 0.00 40.00 0.00 40.00 2004 3129.62 0.0 0.0
EGYPT 0.00 10.00 0.00 5.00 2004 3652.50 0.0 -50.0
EL SALVADOR 0.00 40.00 0.00 30.00 2004 1271.17 0.0 -25.0
FIJI 0.00 40.00 0.00 40.00 2004 1150.40 0.0 0.0
FINLAND 0.00 342.00 0.00 291.00 2000 7098.15 0.0 -14.9
FRANCE 3046.67 17.50 1933.57 11.20 2000 6415.01 -36.5 -36.0
GABON 0.00 260.00 0.00 260.00 2004 9000.00 0.0 0.0
GERMANY 2888.24 20.00 1848.74 12.80 2000 3601.33 -36.0 -36.0
GHANA 0.00 125.00 0.00 99.00 2004 1834.11 0.0 -20.8
GREECE 5188.08 9.31 3168.32 5.96 2000 4116.91 -38.9 -36.0
GUATEMALA 0.00 45.00 0.00 40.00 2004 1742.64 0.0 -11.1
GUYANA 0.00 160.00 0.00 160.00 2004 7592.00 0.0 0.0
HONDURAS 0.00 38.00 0.00 35.00 2004 3268.33 0.0 -7.9
HUNGARY 0.00 52.37 0.00 30.99 2000 5068.58 0.0 -40.8
INDIA 0.00 140.00 0.00 100.00 2004 1988.73 0.0 -28.6
INDONESIA 0.00 70.00 0.00 43.10 2004 2494.86 0.0 -38.4
IRELAND 2847.58 19.98 1822.70 12.79 2000 3049.20 -36.0 -36.0
ISRAEL 0.00 148.09 0.00 109.02 2000 3972.10 0.0 -26.4
ITALY 2752.73 8.22 1704.75 5.26 2000 5823.55 -38.1 -36.0
JAPAN 0.00 0.03 0.00 0.00 2000 9409.63 0.0 -100.0
KOREA REP. 0.00 29.31 0.00 22.28 2004 4711.92 0.0 -24.0
KUWAIT 0.00 115.00 0.00 115.00 2004 1580.00 0.0 0.0
MADAGASCAR 0.00 280.00 0.00 280.00 2004 1500.29 0.0 0.0
MALAYSIA 0.00 19.99 0.00 14.99 2004 2824.30 0.0 -25.0
MEXICO 0.00 49.99 0.00 37.49 2004 2936.92 0.0 -25.0
MOROCCO 0.00 370.15 0.00 281.52 2004 3770.23 0.0 -23.9
MYANMAR 0.00 165.00 0.00 165.00 2004 1063.13 0.0 0.0
NAMIBIA 0.00 158.95 0.00 84.38 2004 2534.27 0.0 -46.9
NETHERLANDS 3607.95 14.24 2259.86 9.11 2000 5646.02 -37.4 -36.0
NEW ZEALAND 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2000 777.05 0.0 0.0
NICARAGUA 0.00 62.94 0.00 45.88 2004 5666.64 0.0 -27.1
NORWAY 0.00 504.93 0.00 428.94 2000 5019.11 0.0 -15.0
PAKISTAN 0.00 100.00 0.00 100.00 2004 1439.84 0.0 0.0
PHILIPPINES 0.00 58.99 0.00 37.34 2004 1425.45 0.0 -36.7
POLAND 0.00 101.46 0.00 64.67 2000 3313.29 0.0 -36.3
PORTUGAL 4261.75 11.56 2636.07 7.40 2000 3343.41 -38.1 -36.0
ROMANIA 0.00 80.45 0.00 71.62 2000 656.05 0.0 -11.0
SINGAPORE 0.00 27.00 0.00 8.00 2004 3500.00 0.0 -70.4
SLOVAK REP. 0.00 94.35 0.00 66.05 2000 6368.13 0.0 -30.0
SOUTH AFRICA 0.00 159.47 0.00 84.34 2000 1488.28 0.0 -47.1
SPAIN 3362.34 15.79 2119.14 10.10 2000 4639.19 -37.0 -36.0
SRI LANKA 0.00 66.00 0.00 50.00 2004 1869.41 0.0 -24.2
SWAZILAND 0.00 150.28 0.00 82.86 2004 1214.68 0.0 -44.9
SWEDEN 0.03 89.82 0.02 53.89 2000 3316.51 -33.3 -40.0
THAILAND 0.00 50.00 0.00 30.00 2004 993.56 0.0 -40.0
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO 0.00 115.00 0.00 115.00 2004 3512.60 0.0 0.0
TUNISIA 0.00 257.58 0.00 100.00 2004 2165.05 0.0 -61.2
TURKEY 0.00 239.60 0.00 215.64 2004 2038.28 0.0 -10.0
UK 2884.30 19.99 1846.15 12.79 2000 3864.24 -36.0 -36.0
URUGUAY 0.00 59.32 0.00 33.43 2004 1073.18 0.0 -43.6
USA 83.44 0.00 70.46 0.00 2000 2893.00 -15.6 0.0
VENEZUELA 0.00 93.00 0.00 80.91 2004 2382.31 0.0 -13.0
ZAMBIA 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2004 239.32 0.0 0.0
<section>o</section>
Table 8: OTHER COARSE GRAINS N.E.S. - Commodity Balances, 1987-89 Average, 2000 Baseline and 2000 Uruguay Round Scenarios
Countries/Regions
1987-89 Average
2000 Baseline
2000 Uruguay Round
Growth Rates: 1987-89 to 2000 UR
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
thousand tonnes
percent per year
WORLD TOTAL 261256 28440 29549 263014 269155 29841 29821 269033 268978 30437 30457 268454 0.2 0.6 0.3 0.2
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES 32247 11374 1173 42874 43911 14383 1619 56488 44181 14661 2104 56407 2.7 2.1 5.0 2.3
Africa 6233 1236 106 7389 8425 1744 50 10088 8409 1738 30 10070 2.5 2.9 -10.0 2.6
Algeria 687 416 0 1117 1165 416 0 1574 1172 411 0 1577 4.6 -0.1 - 2.9
Ethiopia 2229 31 0 2303 3076 27 0 3101 3087 13 0 3098 2.8 -7.0 - 2.5
Morocco 2737 7 91 2556 3321 8 28 3283 3284 40 7 3284 1.5 15.6 -19.2 2.1
Nigeria 27 118 0 157 27 168 0 195 27 168 0 195 0.0 3.0 - 1.8
Latin America 2959 1690 506 4189 3934 2136 837 5224 4056 2091 920 5215 2.7 1.8 5.1 1.8
Argentina 1111 8 296 829 1660 9 625 1039 1738 9 696 1045 3.8 1.0 7.4 1.9
Brazil 420 593 5 1009 827 641 5 1463 825 637 5 1456 5.8 0.6 0.0 3.1
Mexico 576 93 1 701 667 258 1 923 687 240 1 924 1.5 8.2 0.0 2.3
Peru 139 108 0 236 126 70 0 197 129 66 0 195 -0.6 -4.0 - -1.6
Venezuela 0 292 0 342 0 353 0 353 0 350 0 350 - 1.5 - 0.2
Near East 13120 7239 420 20329 21285 8435 553 29082 21714 8278 960 28938 4.3 1.1 7.1 3.0
Egypt 135 31 1 172 205 2 22 184 207 2 25 183 3.6 -20.4 30.8 0.5
Iran Isl.Rep.of 2991 301 0 3291 4849 703 0 5541 4947 604 0 5540 4.3 6.0 - 4.4
Saudi Arabia 304 5384 5 5672 2661 5469 5 8095 2685 5448 5 8099 19.9 0.1 0.0 3.0
Syria 1228 14 117 1248 2005 18 40 1961 2106 18 138 1958 4.6 2.1 1.4 3.8
Turkey 6900 113 246 7001 9519 131 435 9203 9696 131 740 9069 2.9 1.2 9.6 2.2
Far East 9935 1170 141 10928 10267 2021 179 12049 10001 2509 194 12139 0.1 6.6 2.7 0.9
Bangladesh 12 5 0 17 16 4 0 20 16 4 0 20 2.4 -1.8 - 1.4
China 7167 447 77 7533 7847 1091 77 8798 7487 1687 79 8916 0.4 11.7 0.1 1.4
India 1656 65 0 1722 1359 196 0 1556 1432 112 1 1544 -1.2 4.6 - -0.9
Indonesia 0 27 0 26 0 69 0 69 0 69 0 69 - 8.1 - 8.5
Korea Rep. 543 147 1 707 345 181 1 527 353 164 1 519 -3.5 0.9 0.0 -2.5
Pakistan 12:3 1 0 124 201 0 0 201 210 0 10 199 4.6 - - 4.0
Philippines 0 283 0 227 0 288 0 288 0 282 0 282 - -0.0 - 1.8
Thailand 14 15 9 40 28 52 9 71 28 53 10 72 5.9 3.5 0.9 5.0
Other Developing 0 39 0 39 0 45 0 45 0 45 0 45 - 1.2 - 1.2
DEVELOPED COUNTRIES 229009 17066 28376 220140 225245 15459 28202 212546 224797 15775 28354 212047 -0.2 -0.7 -0.0 -0.3
North America 31068 1282 7781 26502 38230 89 6443 31729 40119 89 8176 31725 2.2 -19.9 0.4 1.5
Canada 16782 24 5143 12086 18892 27 5269 13628 19523 27 5892 13583 1.3 1.0 1.1 1.0
United States 14286 1258 2638 14416 19338 63 1174 18101 20596 63 2284 18142 3.1 -22.1 -1.2 1.9
Western Europe 74210 8480 17207 65863 72261 10109 15137 67265 68694 11171 12352 67510 -0.6 2.3 -2.7 0.2
EC-12 64592 7551 16404 56016 63223 9044 14792 57501 59763 10137 11976 57928 -0.6 2.5 -2.6 0.3
Oth.Western Europe 9618 929 803 9847 9037 1064 345 9764 8931 1034 376 9583 -0.6 0.9 -6.1 -0.2
Eastern Europe 29368 1065 612 29509 28924 1541 3371 27091 28896 1045 3911 26019 -0.1 -0.2 16.7 -1.0
Poland 17648 450 78 17928 16454 1346 78 17722 16220 882 80 17020 -0.7 5.8 0.2 -0.4
Romania 3218 39 29 3179 3366 14 762 2618 3349 14 922 2439 0.3 -8.2 33.4 -2.2
Former USSR 87639 3145 183 91175 77583 899 183 78460 77951 689 184 78613 -1.0 -11.9 0.0 -1.2
Oceania 6023 10 2568 3448 7329 13 3043 4294 8208 13 3706 4504 2.6 2.2 3.1 2.3
Australia 5585 2 2446 3036 6861 2 3022 1836 7695 2 3671 4015 2.7 0.0 3.4 2.4
Other Developed 701 3084 25 3643 918 2808 25 3706 929 2769 25 3676 2.4 -0.9 0.0 0.1
Japan 402 2539 0 2796 443 2192 0 2641 446 2175 0 2628 0.9 -1.3 - -0.5
South Africa 287 91 25 404 459 110 25 542 469 88 25 528 4.2 -0.3 0.0 2.3
<section>d</section>
Annex Table 12 - Pigmeat - Aggregated Tariff Equivalents
Base Rates Bound Rates Year Of Producer Changes
Specific
Ad Valorem
Specific
Ad Valorem
Implem. 
Prices
Specific
Ad Valorem
US$
US$
US$
ARGENTINA 0.00 38.00 0.00 38.00 2004 1816.03 0.0 0.0
AUSTRALIA 0.00 0.13 0.00 0.10 2000 1235.41 0.0 -23.1
AUSTRIA 1933.93 3.79 1630.28 3.23 2000 1870.88 -15.7 -14.8
BELGIUM 787.48 0.71 503.91 0.37 2000 1542.62 -36.0 -47.9
BENIN 0.00 79.00 0.00 79.00 2004 1418.38 0.0 0.0
BRAZIL 0.00 24.52 0.00 53.08 2004 3020.77 0.0 116.5
CAMEROON 0.00 310.00 0.00 310.00 2004 2425.34 0.0 0.0
CANADA 0.09 0.04 0.06 0.03 2000 1364.74 -33.3 -25.0
CHILE 0.00 35.00 0.00 25.00 2004 1217.03 0.0 -28.6
CHINA P.REP. 0.00 50.26 0.00 40.00 2004 725.70 0.0 -20.4
COLOMBIA 0.00 118.67 0.00 105.67 2004 1336.77 0.0 -11.0
CONGO 0.00 30.00 0.00 30.00 2004 3995.00 0.0 0.0
COSTA RICA 0.00 55.00 0.00 45.00 2004 1658.63 0.0 -18.2
CUBA 0.00 40.00 0.00 40.00 2004 1616.77 0.0 0.0
CYPRUS 2702.67 39.45 2054.40 29.61 2004 1091.51 -24.0 -24.9
CZECH REP. 0.00 41.92 0.00 35.23 2000 3045.30 0.0 -16.0
DENMARK 1043.39 1.00 667.53 0.61 2000 1597.23 -36.0 -39.0
DOMINICAN REP. 0.00 40.00 0.00 40.00 2004 2400.00 0.0 0.0
EGYPT 0.00 89.38 0.00 71.50 2004 5447.62 0.0 -20.0
EL SALVADOR 0.00 50.00 0.00 40.00 2004 2000.00 0.0 -20.0
FIJI 0.00 40.00 0.00 40.00 2004 1869.40 0.0 0.0
FINLAND 0.00 322.35 0.00 272.72 2000 3708.74 0.0 -15.4
FRANCE 911.93 0.30 583.46 0.10 2000 1566.29 -36.0 -66.7
GABON 0.00 260.00 0.00 260.00 2004 9438.21 0.0 0.0
GERMANY 966.58 0.70 618.28 0.42 2000 1086.24 -36.0 -40.0
GHANA 0.00 125.00 0.00 99.00 2004 776.68 0.0 -20.8
GREECE 943.54 0.28 603.53 0.13 2000 1959.04 -36.0 -53.6
GUATEMALA 0.00 59.67 0.00 53.27 2004 1500.00 0.0 -10.7
GUYANA 0.00 160.00 0.00 160.00 2004 4925.07 0.0 0.0
HONDURAS 0.00 38.00 0.00 35.00 2004 2800.00 0.0 -7.9
HUNGARY 0.00 62.18 0.00 49.35 2000 1149.26 0.0 -20.6
INDIA 0.00 139.99 0.00 100.89 2004 1432.60 0.0 -27.9
INDONESIA 0.00 69.99 0.00 49.99 2004 2456.60 0.0 -28.6
IRELAND 912.44 0.43 584.02 0.18 2000 1742.40 -36.0 -58.1
ISRAEL 0.00 150.28 0.00 128.23 2000 2049.70 0.0 -14.7
ITALY 818.83 0.52 524.09 0.27 2000 1966.77 -36.0 -48.1
JAPAN 0.00 5.52 0.00 4.69 2000 3390.24 0.0 -15.0
KOREA REP. 0.00 33.41 0.00 23.87 2004 3170.61 0.0 -28.6
KUWAIT 0.00 115.00 0.00 115.00 2000 1800.00 0.0 0.0
MADAGASCAR 0.00 280.00 0.00 280.00 2004 1871.46 0.0 0.0
MALAYSIA 0.00 147.91 0.00 132.95 2004 1983.10 0.0 -10.1
MEXICO 0.00 50.00 0.00 44.77 2004 2532.00 0.0 -10.5
MOROCCO 0.00 45.00 0.00 34.00 2004 4452.35 0.0 -24.4
MYANMAR 0.00 165.00 0.00 165.00 2004 883.07 0.0 0.0
NAMIBIA 0.00 49.06 0.00 36.18 2004 1053.40 0.0 -26.3
NETHERLANDS 818.51 0.45 523.73 0.25 2000 1776.93 -36.0 -44.4
NEW ZEALAND 0.00 15.54 0.00 7.73 2000 1625.25 0.0 -50.3
NICARAGUA 0.00 69.42 0.00 58.85 2004 3000.00 0.0 -15.2
NORWAY 0.00 426.67 0.00 361.90 2000 3788.90 0.0 -15.2
PAKISTAN 0.00 69.72 0.00 69.72 2004 0.00 0.0 0.0
PHILIPPINES 0.00 95.04 0.00 39.07 2004 1406.27 0.0 -58.9
POLAND 0.00 108.26 0.00 68.45 2000 1800.00 0.0 -36.8
PORTUGAL 954.13 0.71 610.30 0.38 2000 2029.51 -36.0 -46.5
ROMANIA 0.00 366.96 0.00 330.27 2000 1069.24 0.0 -10.0
SINGAPORE 0.00 27.00 0.00 10.00 2004 3000.00 0.0 -63.0
SLOVAK REP. 0.00 41.92 0.00 35.23 2000 3045.30 0.0 -16.0
SOUTH AFRICA 0.00 54.25 0.00 39.79 2000 912.95 0.0 -26.7
SPAIN 921.58 0.10 589.47 0.04 2000 1599.36 -36.0 -60.0
SRI LANKA 0.00 66.00 0.00 50.00 2004 756.67 0.0 -24.2
SWAZILAND 0.00 50.15 0.00 38.00 2004 1664.07 0.0 -24.2
SWEDEN 0.02 115.39 0.01 73.47 2000 2139.00 -50.0 -36.3
THAILAND 87.29 60.00 43.65 32.93 2004 1792.11 -50.0 -45.1
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO 0.00 115.00 0.00 115.00 2004 1744.47 0.0 0.0
TUNISIA 0.00 148.83 0.00 118.96 2004 2565.59 0.0 -20.1
TURKEY 0.00 165.04 0.00 148.53 2004 949.88 0.0 -10.0
UK 1032.87 0.48 660.77 0.28 2000 1615.21 -36.0 -41.7
URUGUAY 0.00 25.88 0.00 35.00 2004 922.36 0.0 35.2
USA 0.71 0.00 0.57 0.00 2000 1508.60 -19.7 0.0
VENEZUELA 0.00 58.77 0.00 40.52 2004 2000.00 0.0 -31.1
ZAMBIA 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2004 214.11 0.0 0.0
<section>e</section>
Annex Table 13 -Poultry Meat Aggregated Tariff Equivalents
Base Rates Bound Rates Year Of Producer Changes
Specific
Ad Valorem
Specific
Ad Valorem
Implem. 
Prices
Specific
Ad Valorem
US$
US$
US$
ARGENTINA 0.00 37.92 0.00 29.56 2004 1686.36 0.0 -22.0
AUSTRALIA 0.00 0.28 0.00 0.16 2000 1283.24 0.0 -42.9
AUSTRIA 1169.63 0.00 784.28 0.00 2000 2005.57 -32.9 0.0
BELGIUM 498.41 0.67 332.52 0.43 2000 1541.96 -33.3 -35.8
BENIN 0.00 79.00 0.00 79.00 2004 2623.49 0.0 0.0
BRAZIL 0.00 44.92 0.00 35.00 2004 2749.77 0.0 -22.1
CAMEROON 0.00 310.00 0.00 310.00 2004 1539.19 0.0 0.0
CANADA 0.46 239.88 0.28 204.38 2000 1111.50 -39.1 -14.8
CHILE 0.00 35.00 0.00 25.00 2004 1122.04 0.0 -28.6
CHINA P.REP. 0.00 50.02 0.00 39.66 2004 1380.92 0.0 -20.7
COLOMBIA 0.00 125.95 0.00 112.91 2004 1686.62 0.0 -10.4
CONGO 0.00 30.00 0.00 30.00 2004 3196.00 0.0 0.0
COSTA RICA 0.00 55.00 0.00 43.90 2004 1275.33 0.0 -20.2
CUBA 0.00 40.00 0.00 40.00 2004 2238.60 0.0 0.0
CYPRUS 3163.59 40.67 2404.82 30.51 2004 1495.27 -24.0 -25.0
CZECH REP. 0.00 17.64 0.00 14.70 2000 5691.20 0.0 -16.7
DENMARK 537.15 0.67 356.23 0.43 2000 1026.62 -33.7 -35.8
DOMINICAN REP. 0.00 40.00 0.00 40.00 2004 1101.44 0.0 0.0
EGYPT 0.00 79.28 0.00 59.52 2004 2895.24 0.0 -24.9
EL SALVADOR 0.00 147.54 0.00 131.42 2004 1451.52 0.0 -10.9
FIJI 0.00 40.00 0.00 40.00 2004 1725.60 0.0 0.0
FINLAND 0.00 263.93 0.00 223.91 2000 2775.84 0.0 -15.2
FRANCE 554.01 0.29 364.23 0.18 2000 1225.33 -34.3 -37.9
GABON 0.00 260.00 0.00 260.00 2004 5015.91 0.0 0.0
GERMANY 511.45 0.00 327.68 0.00 2000 2491.73 -35.9 0.0
GHANA 0.00 125.00 0.00 96.39 2004 1278.97 0.0 -22.9
GREECE 514.44 0.22 333.56 0.14 2000 1716.50 -35.2 -36.4
GUATEMALA 0.00 271.45 0.00 242.39 2004 1141.62 0.0 -10.7
GUYANA 0.00 160.00 0.00 160.00 2004 7348.67 0.0 0.0
HONDURAS 0.00 38.00 0.00 35.00 2004 1645.00 0.0 -7.9
HUNGARY 0.00 50.11 0.00 32.87 2000 998.50 0.0 -34.4
INDIA 0.00 140.00 0.00 86.24 2004 2118.63 0.0 -38.4
INDONESIA 0.00 98.27 0.00 40.05 2004 1373.22 0.0 -59.2
IRELAND 534.03 0.74 360.55 0.47 2000 1463.13 -32.5 -36.5
ISRAEL 0.00 179.80 0.00 152.53 2000 1313.20 0.0 -15.2
ITALY 528.86 0.06 343.50 0.04 2000 2260.41 -35.0 -33.3
JAPAN 0.00 12.66 0.00 10.73 2000 1664.31 0.0 -15.2
KOREA REP. 0.00 77.54 0.00 69.73 2004 1075.91 0.0 -10.1
KUWAIT 0.00 115.00 0.00 115.00 2004 1400.00 0.0 0.0
MADAGASCAR 0.00 280.00 0.00 280.00 2004 1826.21 0.0 0.0
MALAYSIA 0.00 73.75 0.00 66.39 2004 5858.57 0.0 -10.0
MEXICO 1653.78 0.19 1488.40 0.15 2004 2092.81 -10.0 -21.1
MOROCCO 0.00 132.18 0.00 100.76 2004 1347.42 0.0 -23.8
MYANMAR 0.00 165.00 0.00 165.00 2004 1256.03 0.0 0.0
NAMIBIA 0.00 150.00 0.00 83.00 2004 916.00 0.0 -44.7
NETHERLANDS 532.50 1.36 367.72 0.87 2000 1460.12 -30.9 -36.0
NEW ZEALAND 0.00 28.49 0.00 18.19 2000 2911.46 0.0 -36.2
NICARAGUA 0.00 69.24 0.00 58.48 2004 1956.02 0.0 -15.5
NORWAY 0.00 427.25 0.00 363.21 2000 3058.64 0.0 -15.0
PAKISTAN 0.00 100.00 0.00 100.00 2004 1809.60 0.0 0.0
PHILIPPINES 0.00 98.82 0.00 39.94 2004 1591.49 0.0 -59.6
POLAND 0.00 120.02 0.00 76.01 2000 1085.25 0.0 -36.7
PORTUGAL 522.77 0.11 339.95 0.07 2000 1537.09 -35.0 -36.4
ROMANIA 0.00 160.00 0.00 96.00 2000 1256.75 0.0 -40.0
SINGAPORE 0.00 27.00 0.00 10.00 2004 1500.00 0.0 -63.0
SLOVAK REP. 0.00 17.64 0.00 14.70 2000 5691.20 0.0 -16.7
SOUTH AFRICA 0.00 149.26 0.00 82.66 2000 1178.59 0.0 -44.6
SPAIN 513.47 0.03 329.95 0.02 2000 1231.97 -35.7 -33.3
SRI LANKA 0.00 66.00 0.00 50.00 2004 1100.93 0.0 -24.2
SWAZILAND 0.00 150.00 0.00 83.00 2004 1274.77 0.0 -44.7
SWEDEN 6.84 105.69 4.37 67.82 2000 1916.84 -36.1 -35.8
THAILAND 137.33 58.22 87.55 30.97 2004 1410.13 -36.2 -46.8
TRINIDAD AND TOBAGO 0.00 134.28 0.00 110.18 2004 1628.90 0.0 -17.9
TUNISIA 0.00 101.95 0.00 76.75 2004 1309.50 0.0 -24.7
TURKEY 0.00 86.72 0.00 78.73 2004 1805.36 0.0 -9.2
UK 531.91 0.24 347.64 0.15 2000 1200.28 -34.6 -37.5
URUGUAY 0.00 25.02 0.00 35.00 2004 1607.56 0.0 39.9
USA 124.03 0.02 99.29 0.01 2000 1132.00 -19.9 -50.0
VENEZUELA 0.00 50.14 0.00 30.15 2004 1139.14 0.0 -39.9
ZAMBIA 0.00 0.00 0.00 0.00 2004 529.07 0.0 0.0
<section>p</section>
Table 9: TOTAL FATS AND OILS . Commodity Balances, 1987-89 Average, 2000 Baseline and 2000 Uruguay Round Scenarios
Countries/Regions
1987-89 Average
2000 Baseline
2000 Uruguay Round
Growth Rates: 1987-89 to 2000 UR
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
thousand tonnes
percent per year
WORLD TOTAL
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES
Africa
Cte D'Ivoire 304 10 126 188 492 12 166 338 493 12 178 327 4.1 1.5 2.9 4.7
Nigeria 1150 49 45 1154 1556 298 46 1808 1558 276 46 1788 2.6 15.5 0.2 3.7
Tunisia 103 159 49 213 146 190 50 286 145 221 50 316 2.9 2.8 0.2 3.3
Zaire 264 1 8 257 305 68 0 373 306 59 0 365 1.2 40.5 - 3.0
Latin America 9797 2456 4397 7825 15125 3643 7358 11374 15472 3690 7881 11241 3.9 3.5 5.0 3.1
Argentina 2890 4 2298 543 4735 4 4057 661 4877 4 4219 639 4.5 0.0 5.2 1.4
Brazil 4483 92 1572 3023 6908 103 2638 4364 7097 102 2986 4202 3.9 0.9 5.5 2.8
Chile 271 57 103 219 288 113 61 338 288 113 61 338 0.5 5.9 -4.3 3.7
Colombia 296 150 0 446 589 85 0 674 591 161 0 751 5.9 0.6 - 4.4
Mexico 561 965 19 1507 618 1750 19 2349 623 1741 19 2345 0.9 5.0 0.0 3.8
Peru 276 91 71 306 340 146 61 423 341 144 62 419 1.8 3.9 -1.1 2.7
Near East 1663 3030 207 4503 2161 4799 189 6769 2164 4749 188 6723 2.2 3.8 -0.8 3.4
Egypt 172 790 1 961 219 1220 1 1438 225 1204 1 1428 2.3 3.6 0.0 3.4
Sudan 253 55 75 233 271 85 56 301 273 76 53 295 0.6 2.7 -2.9 2.0
Turkey 884 438 109 1212 1192 980 111 2059 1186 986 111 2059 2.5 7.0 0.2 4.5
Far East 23370 5575 7720 21033 39565 8738 13619 34624 40217 9536 14262 35416 4.6 4.6 5.2 4.4
China 6298 1533 319 7512 9125 3471 325 12271 9006 4582 328 13260 3.0 9.6 0.2 4.8
India 5305 1275 84 6496 9355 440 86 9710 9246 207 86 9367 4.1 -14.1 0.2 3.1
Indonesia 2716 138 857 1981 7335 167 3767 3716 7674 168 1979 3342 9.0 1.7 11.6 5.7
Malaysia 5922 100 5253 597 9060 117 8119 1015 9559 117 8613 1007 4.1 1.3 4.2 4.5
Pakistan 591 1019 4 1606 979 2029 4 3004 1015 1915 4 .926 4.6 5.4 0.0 5.1
Philippines 1288 54 959 382 1521 63 937 647 1520 64 911 681 1.4 1.4 -0.5 4.9
Other Developing 327 37 293 73 415 59 369 105 415 59 369 105 2.0 4.0 1.9 3.1
DEVELOPED COUNTRIES 37712 14050 13085 39496 45181 17073 15138 46978 45238 17572 15224 47442 1.5 1.9 1.3 1.5
North America 16556 1241 7503 10745 21092 1307 9534 12776 21214 1307 9664 12763 2.1 0.4 2.1 1.4
Canada 2196 146 1440 886 3084 155 2149 1069 3140 154 2209 1058 3.0 0.4 3.6 1.5
United States 14360 1095 6063 9859 18008 1153 7385 11707 18074 1153 7455 11705 1.9 0.4 1.7 1.4
Western Europe 9947 7886 3833 14450 11685 9424 3730 17346 11689 9556 3764 17445 1.4 1.6 -0.2 1.6
EC-12 9220 7332 3534 13477 10905 8793 3439 16226 10946 8355 3471 16296 1.4 1.6 -0.1 1.6
Oth.Western Europe 727 554 299 973 780 631 291 1120 743 701 294 1149 0.2 2.0 -0.1 1.4
Austria 154 125 35 244 222 97 36 283 208 127 37 299 2.5 0.1 0.5 1.7
Sweden 204 151 83 275 199 190 84 305 194 199 34 309 -0.4 2.3 0.1 1.0
Eastern Europe 3316 505 700 3116 3437 523 709 3251 3279 737 537 3478 -0.1 3.2 -2.2 0.9
Hungary 641 12 333 317 699 12 373 337 632 13 245 400 -0.1 0.7 -2.5 2.0
Poland 946 187 216 917 1038 193 214 1017 967 363 171 1159 0.2 5.7 -1.9 2.0
Romania 553 50 70 533 538 86 38 587 511 139 38 613 -0.7 8.9 -5.0 1.2
Former USSR 5694 1551 121 7064 6494 1382 123 7749 6541 1285 124 7699 1.2 -1.6 0.2 0.7
Oceania 977 196 642 531 1204 210 750 663 1294 210 840 664 2.4 0.6 2.3 1.9
Australia 622 156 318 460 864 167 454 577 901 167 491 577 3.1 0.6 3.7 1.9
Other Developed 1222 2671 286 3590 1269 4227 292 5193 1222 4478 295 5394 0.0 4.4 0.3 3.5
Japan 816 2290 231 2858 775 3681 235 4210 759 3755 237 4265 -0.6 4.2 0.2 3.4
South Africa 382 240 51 571 464 357 52 170 434 511 54 911 1.1 6.8 0.5 4.0
<section>q</section>
Table 10: OILMEAL PROTEINS - Commodity Balances, 1987-89 Average, 2000 Baseline and 2000 Uruguay Round Scenarios
Countries/Regions
1987-89 Average
2000 Baseline
2000 Uruguay Round
Growth Rates: 1987 -89 to 2000 UR
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
thousand tonnes
percent per year
WORLD TOTAL 50185 24912 24496 51606 71178 30908 30899 71056 71694 30837 30843 71556 3.0 1.8 1.9 2.8
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES 24137 5530 13781 15787 38844 11898 20687 30013 39409 12510 21387 30484 4.2 7.0 3.7 5.6
Africa 920 279 279 923 1376 771 348 1800 1381 816 351 1846 3.4 9.4 1.9 5.9
Cte D'Ivoire 45 3 21 27 83 4 27 60 83 4 27 60 5.2 2.4 2.1 6.9
Nigeria 122 8 29 101 188 10 36 162 189 10 36 162 3.7 1.9 1.8 4.0
Tunisia 1 45 0 46 3 81 0 84 3 88 0 91 9.6 5.7 - 5.8
Zaire 46 1 4 43 68 10 1 78 69 9 0 78 3.4 20.1 - 5.1
Latin America 12948 1436 10110 4183 21295 2710 16716 7251 21853 2867 17290 7386 4.5 5.9 4.6 4.9
Argentina 3316 0 3150 79 6646 0 6422 202 6839 0 6608 207 6.2 - 6.4 8.4
Brazil 6891 0 5049 1786 11210 1 8107 3087 11571 1 8498 3053 4.4 - 4.4 4.6
Chile 801 23 721 134 807 26 623 210 807 26 617 216 0.1 1.0 -1.3 4.1
Colombia 86 70 0 156 97 130 0 227 94 158 0 252 0.7 7.0 - 4.1
Mexico 364 602 8 958 451 1415 8 1858 451 1493 8 1935 1.8 7.9 0.0 6.0
Peru 703 50 590 175 714 55 535 233 714 55 534 234 0.1 0.8 -0.8 2.5
Near East 868 701 87 1479 1211 1536 97 2649 1212 1543 98 2657 2.8 6.8 1.0 5.0
Egypt 132 129 1 260 171 146 1 315 171 160 1 329 2.2 1.8 0.0 2.0
Sudan 161 0 78 82 190 0 91 99 190 0 91 99 1.4 - 1.3 1.6
Turkey 425 41 7 458 644 335 0 979 644 327 0 971 3.5 18.9 - 6.5
Far East 9374 3113 3289 9192 14927 6878 3508 18294 14929 7281 3631 18575 4.0 7.3 0.8 6.0
China 4575 1258 2139 3694 6193 1654 1388 6459 6121 1787 1386 6522 2.5 3.0 -3.6 4.9
India 1044 4 619 2429 5884 5 1513 4376 5935 5 1635 4305 5.7 1.9 8.4 4.9
Indonesia 142 281 122 301 439 533 124 847 445 596 125 916 10.0 6.5 0.2 9.7
Malaysia 22' 241 162 296 298 487 165 611 313 485 165 630 2.9 6.0 0.2 6.5
Pakistan 538 2 1 540 854 610 1 1463 856 613 1 1468 3.9 61.1 0.0 8.7
Philippines 144 264 131 276 258 473 133 598 258 518 134 642 5.0 5.8 0.2 7.3
Other Developing 27 1 16 10 34 3 18 19 34 3 18 19 1.9 9.6 1.0 5.5
DEVELOPED COUNTRIES 26048 19382 10715 35819 32335 19010 10212 41043 32285 18327 9456 41072 1.8 -0.5 -1.0 1.1
North America 18592 426 9707 10427 22884 453 9129 14117 22870 456 8384 14850 1.7 0.6 -1.2 3.0
Canada 1122 298 656 742 .707 300 1134 856 1737 301 1156 863 3.7 0.4 4.8 1.3
United States 17470 138 9051 9685 21177 152 7996 1:3261 21133 155 7227 13987 1.6 1.0 -1.9 3.1
Western Europe 2969 12447 756 14639 3815 12262 743 15331 3847 11421 744 14526 2.2 -0.7 -0.1 -0.1
Ec-12 2597 11796 597 13780 3447 11614 607 14452 3487 10757 607 13639 2.5 -0.8 0.1 -0.1
Oth.Western Europe 372 651 159 859 369 648 136 879 360 664 137 887 -0.3 0.2 -1.2 0.3
Austria 16 233 7 241 49 188 7 230 46 158 7 197 9.2 -3.2 0.0 -1.7
Sweden 75 132 1 204 74 123 1 196 72 132 2 203 -0.3 0.0 5.9 -0.0
Eastern Europe 1007 1802 189 2624 1271 1449 192 2529 1214 1438 193 2462 1.6 -1.9 0.2 -0.5
Hungary 166 343 27 489 215 235 27 444 213 207 27 394 2.1 -4.1 0.0 -1.8
Poland 278 642 106 813 295 790 109 977 274 727 108 893 -0.1 1.0 0.2 0.8
Romania 241 119 0 150 295 21 0 319 279 112 0 392 1.2 -0.5 - 0.7
Former USSR 2303 2062 3 4361 3064 2182 4 5243 3070 2199 4 5265 2.4 0.5 2.4 1.6
Oceania 148 47 34 161 297 29 117 209 299 30 105 224 6.0 -3.7 9.9 2.8
Australia 146 42 32 156 293 26 116 203 295 26 103 218 6.0 -3.9 10.2 2.8
Other Developed 1029 2598 26 3607 1004 2636 26 3614 986 2783 26 3745 -0.4 0.6 0.0 0.3
Japan 747 2334 18 1070 674 2270 18 2927 674 2297 18 2955 -0.9 -0.1 0.0 -0.3
South Africa 262 96 6 352 302 178 6 474 285 298 6 576 0.7 9.9 0.0 4.2
<section>r</section>
Table 11: SUGAR - Commodity Balances, 1987-89 Average, 2000 Baseline and 2000 Uruguay Round Scenarios
Countries/Regions
1987-89 Average
2000 Baseline
2000 Uruguay Round
Growth Rates: 1987-89 to 2000 UR
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
thousand tonnes
percent per year
WORLD TOTAL 105636 25398 26432 105793 127300 27450 28420 126750 128970 28626 29075 128941 1.7 1.0 0.8 1.7
Developing Countries 61836 12820 16884 58282 79800 16550 17470 79000 80918 17824 17913 80974 2.3 2.8 0.5 2.8
Africa 5225 3134 1618 6506 7400 4800 1900 10200 7459 5104 1826 10537 3.0 4.1 1.0 4.1
Latin America 28208 887 11100 18056 30500 1000 10100 21500 31106 1050 10500 21611 0.8 1.4 -0.5 1.5
Asia 27943 8778 3737 33639 41400 10700 5020 47200 41843 11620 5127 48726 3.4 2.4 2.7 3.1
Near East 1/ 2774 2438 204 5760 2900 4400 120 7400 2976 4620 123 7473 0.6 5.5 -4.1 2.2
Far East 25169 6340 3533 27879 38500 6300 4900 39800 38867 7000 5004 41253 3.7 0.8 2.9 3.3
Oceania 460 21 429 81 500 50 450 100 510 50 460 100 0.9 7.7 0.6 1.7
Developed countries 43800 12578 9548 47511 47500 10900 10950 47750 48052 10802 11162 47967 0.8 -1.3 1.3 0.1
North America 6403 2341 497 8536 7000 2600 400 9600 7036 2650 381 9648 0.8 1.0 -2.2 1.0
Europe 21209 2975 5437 19381 22880 2840 5850 19905 23029 2869 5850 20050 0.7 -0.3 0.6 0.3
Western Europe 2/ 16420 2090 5239 13701 18100 2300 5450 14950 18215 2340 5450 15105 0.9 0.9 0.3 0.8
EC 15238 1641 5082 12249 16797 1805 5286 13365 16814 1837 5286 13504 0.8 0.9 0.3 0.8
Other W. Europe 1182 449 157 1452 1303 495 164 1585 1401 503 164 1601 1.4 1.0 0.4 0.8
Eastern Europe 4789 885 198 5680 4780 540 400 4955 4814 529 400 4945 0.0 -4.2 6.0 -1.1
Former USSR 9337 5017 0 14150 9320 3060 0 12345 9387 3002 0 12319 0.0 -4.2 0.0 -1.1
Oceania 4248 213 2972 1013 5146 228 3807 1097 5332 217 3994 1107 1.9 0.2 2.5 0.7
Other developed countries 2603 2032 642 4431 3154 2172 893 4803 3268 2064 937 4843 1.9 0.1 1.2 0.7
1/ Including Turkey
2/ EC intra-trade not included.
<section>s</section>
Table 12: TOTAL MEAT - Commodity Balances, 1987-89 Average, 2000 Baseline and 2000 Uruguay Round Scenarios
Countries/Regions
1987-89 Average
2000 Baseline
2000 Uruguay Round
Growth Rates: 1987-89 to 2000 UR
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
thousand tonnes
percent per year
WORLD TOTAL 164162 13900 14654 163277 213267 18393 18401 213258 212841 19032 19033 212840 2.2 2.7 2.2 2.2
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES 63302 3283 2765 63783 106551 5727 3843 108436 106419 5845 4000 108265 4.4 4.9 3.1 4.5
Africa 4622 343 156 4821 6821 598 193 7226 6851 553 227 7178 3.3 4.1 3.2 3.4
Ethiopia 439 0 3 436 595 1 17 580 601 1 27 574 2.7 - 20.1 2.3
Kenya 326 0 1 326 507 4 2 509 511 2 8 505 3.8 - 18.9 3.7
Nigeria 645 24 0 669 1005 82 0 1088 1011 66 0 1077 3.8 8.8 - 4.0
Latin America 17578 616 1443 16650 24567 1207 1728 24046 24483 1166 1836 23813 2.8 5.5 2.0 3.0
Argentina 3337 7 377 2861 3850 22 317 3555 3933 14 480 3467 1.4 5.9 2.0 1.6
Brazil 5624 152 652 5125 9061 156 999 8218 8842 227 922 8147 3.8 3.4 2.9 3.9
Chile 434 3 7 430 620 3 4 620 622 1 7 616 3.0 -8.7 0.0 3.0
Colombia 1067 3 9 1061 1427 11 22 1416 1423 1 15 1409 2.4 -8.7 4.3 2.4
Mexico 3376 175 103 3449 4579 663 30 5212 4608 584 30 5163 2.6 10.6 -9.8 3.4
Uruguay 424 0 170 253 497 4 220 282 503 2 225 280 1.4 - 2.4 0.8
Venezuela 785 27 6 806 1102 32 7 1127 1097 42 2 1136 2.8 3.8 -8.7 2.9
Near East 4156 1303 94 5411 6220 1800 79 7940 6208 1753 72 7890 3.4 2.5 -2.2 3.2
Egypt 773 197 3 969 820 214 3 1031 821 207 5 1023 0.5 0.4 4.3 0.5
Iran Isl.Rep. of 731 164 0 895 1319 228 0 1546 1324 218 0 1543 5.1 2.4 - 4.6
Turkey 967 22 63 924 1410 31 39 1402 1382 23 22 1384 3.0 0.4 -8.4 3.4
Far East 36887 933 1071 36751 68864 1991 1841 69015 68797 2241 1863 69174 5.3 7.6 4.7 5.4
China 25790 93 717 25165 50439 274 979 49734 50511 255 1062 49705 5.8 8.8 3.3 5.8
India 2910 0 66 2847 4086 18 111 3993 4046 56 61 4041 2.8 - -0.7 3.0
Indonesia 1034 7 1 1040 2290 15 1 2304 2254 90 1 2344 6.7 23.7 0.0 7.0
Korea Rep 721 63 22 763 1461 328 40 1749 1443 351 49 1745 6.0 15.4 6.9 7.1
Pakistan 1147 2 2 1147 2262 24 0 2286 2267 8 24 2251 5.8 12.2 23.0 5.8
Philippines 917 15 0 931 1463 22 5 1480 1422 172 3 1591 3.7 22.5 - 4.6
Thailand 1137 6 103 1040 1942 17 262 1698 1916 16 205 1727 4.4 8.5 5.9 4.3
Viet Nam 1025 0 0 1025 1557 7 9 1555 1561 5 14 1553 3.6 - - 3.5
Other Developing 59 88 1 150 79 132 3 208 79 133 3 209 2.5 3.5 9.6 2.8
DEVELOPED COUNTRIES 100860 10617 11889 99494 106715 12665 14558 104822 106422 13187 15033 104576 0.4 1.8 2.0 0.4
North America 30271 1906 1398 30787 38281 1860 3305 36836 39230 1921 4596 36554 2.2 0.1 10.4 1.4
Canada 2992 227 516 2696 3518 446 961 3003 3540 490 1045 2986 1.4 6.6 6.1 0.9
United states 27279 1679 882 28091 34763 1413 2344 33833 35689 1430 3551 33569 2.3 -1.3 12.3 1.5
Western Europe 33452 6282 7221 32622 36537 7189 8008 35719 35741 7213 7251 35703 0.6 1.2 0.0 0.8
EC-12 29587 6007 6939 28767 32980 6799 7768 32012 32242 6806 7052 31996 0.7 1.0 0.1 0.9
Oth.Western Europe 3865 275 282 3855 3557 390 240 3707 3498 407 199 3707 -0.8 3.3 -2.9 -0.3
Austria 765 29 86 710 771 69 100 741 726 83 67 742 -0.4 9.2 -2.1 0.4
Eastern Europe 8643 216 1203 7712 7230 220 810 6640 6701 513 440 6774 -2.1 7.5 -8.0 -1.1
Hungary 1723 15 548 1176 1312 15 302 1025 1189 15 173 1031 -3.0 0.0 -9.2 -1.1
Poland 2920 86 222 2810 2988 101 233 2855 2756 289 69 2977 -0.5 10.6 -9.3 0.5
Romania 1590 37 185 1470 1154 40 156 1038 1033 121 96 1058 -3.5 10.4 -5.3 -2.7
Former USSR 19211 962 29 19909 14655 476 17 15114 14736 335 11 15061 -2.2 -8.4 -7.8 -2.3
Oceania 4247 11 2015 2220 4719 38 2399 2359 5002 25 2722 2306 1.4 7.1 2.5 0.3
Australia 2954 8 1108 1853 3517 23 1568 1972 3703 8 1787 1924 1.9 0.0 4.1 0.3
New Zealand 1293 3 907 367 1202 15 831 386 1299 18 934 382 0.0 16.1 0.2 0.3
Other Developed 5036 1240 23 6244 5292 2882 19 8155 5012 3180 13 8178 -0.0 8.2 -4.6 2.3
Japan 3559 1065 7 4608 3278 2657 7 5928 3085 2826 7 5903 -1.2 8.5 0.0 2.1
South Africa 1254 129 5 1378 1733 177 4 1906 1651 304 3 1952 2.3 7.4 -4.2 2.9
<section>t</section>
Table 13: TOTAL MILK - Commodity Balances, 1987-89 Average, 2000 Baseline and 2000 Uruguay Round Scenarios
Countries/Regions
1987-89 Average
2000 Baseline
2000 Uruguay Round
Growth Rates: 1987-89 to 2000 UR
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
thousand tonnes
percent per year
WORLD TOTAL 522584 55930 57539 527166 558925 54246 54251 558921 559297 54550 54511 559336 0.6 -0.2 -0.4 0.5
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES 141106 20302 1137 160209 197487 22806 2483 217810 197926 21866 2933 216860 2.9 0.6 8.2 2.6
Africa 11463 3952 47 15610 13955 5811 60 19707 13983 5755 71 19666 1.7 3.2 3.5 1.9
Kenya 2334 3 14 2324 3424 0 31 3393 3427 0 41 3386 3.3 - 9.4 3.2
Nigeria 360 218 0 578 508 439 0 947 510 432 0 943 2.9 5.9 - 4.2
Somalia 2419 54 0 2473 1959 81 0 2039 1962 72 0 2034 -1.7 2.4 - -1.6
Latin America 39872 6155 554 45250 51617 4328 1844 54101 51990 4300 2180 54110 2.2 -2.9 12.1 1.5
Argentina 6446 46 342 6149 8420 53 1373 7100 8621 53 1672 7002 2.5 1.2 14.1 1.1
Brazil 13829 891 13 14706 18477 45 57 18465 18527 45 69 18502 2.5 -22.0 14.9 1.9
Mexico 6509 2247 1 8789 8494 1709 2 10202 8528 1744 2 10270 2.3 -2.1 5.9 1.3
Uruguay 994 1 170 829 1286 1 365 922 1304 1 382 923 2.3 0.0 7.0 0.9
Near East 16232 4591 68 20863 19184 6163 73 25274 19203 6065 71 25197 1.4 2.3 0.4 1.6
Egypt 2178 389 11 2627 2681 433 12 3102 2685 421 12 3094 1.8 0.7 0.7 1.4
Sudan 2843 118 0 2961 3316 116 0 3432 3327 92 0 3419 1.3 -2.1 - 1.2
Turkey 4894 58 15 4937 5567 13 15 5564 5558 6 13 5550 1.1 -17.2 -1.2 1.0
Far East 73477 5511 468 78332 112671 6368 506 118532 112690 5611 611 117690 3.6 0.1 2.2 3.5
China 6321 266 32 6388 9764 145 34 9875 9792 185 34 9943 3.7 -3.0 0.5 3.8
India 48700 344 0 49044 73197 548 0 73745 73157 17 100 73073 3.4 -22.2 - 3.4
Korea Rep. 1635 49 1 1683 2483 54 1 2536 2488 63 1 2550 3.6 2.1 0.0 3.5
Pakistan 12935 184 0 13120 22308 387 0 22695 22329 11 0 22341 4.7 -20.9 - 4.5
Other Developing 62 93 0 154 60 136 0 196 60 136 0 196 -0.3 3.2 - 2.0
DEVELOPED COUNTRIES 381478 35628 56402 366957 361438 31440 51768 341112 361371 32683 51578 342476 -0.5 -0.7 -0.7 -0.6
North America 72991 4685 3982 75357 81888 3685 4124 81449 81864 3560 4142 81282 1.0 -2.3 0.3 0.6
Canada 7657 411 850 7141 7288 393 789 6892 7134 401 507 7028 -0.6 -0.2 -4.2 -0.1
United States 65334 4274 3132 68216 74600 3292 3335 74557 74730 3159 3635 74254 1.1 -2.5 1.2 0.7
Western Europe 139386 27073 41875 128959 129563 24509 35631 118442 129138 25247 35107 119280 -0.6 -0.6 -1.5 -0.6
EC-12 123800 26082 39445 114734 114514 23548 33084 104980 114458 24255 32966 105747 -0.7 -0.6 -1.5 -0.7
Oth.Western Europe 15586 991 2430 14225 15049 961 2547 13462 14680 992 2140 13533 -0.5 0.0 -1.1 -0.4
Austria 3486 337 627 3215 3444 332 627 3149 3289 333 461 3162 -0.5 -0.1 -2.5 -0.1
Finland 2815 43 487 2420 2491 38 433 2096 2485 38 416 2107 -1.0 -1.0 -1.3 -1.1
Sweden 3360 185 280 3265 3184 174 282 3076 3090 205 178 3116 -0.7 0.9 -3.7 -0.4
Switzerland 3813 347 767 3401 3895 339 919 3315 3924 338 953 3310 0.2 -0.2 1.8 -0.2
Eastern Europe 37704 437 2606 35554 32058 195 2260 29993 30865 197 873 30189 -1.7 -6.4 -8.7 -1.4
Former Czechoslovakia 7056 18 776 6298 5394 14 426 4982 5411 14 438 4987 -2.2 -2.1 -4.7 -1.9
Hungary 2863 28 180 2711 2484 23 236 2271 2379 23 101 2301 -1.5 -1.6 -4.7 -1.4
Poland 15864 138 1427 14575 14293 123 1428 12988 13210 125 210 13125 -1.5 -0.8 -14.8 -0.9
Romania 4297 62 39 4320 3776 3 97 3682 3717 4 2 3719 -1.2 -20.4 -21.9 -1.2
Former USSR 106347 602 321 106628 88874 324 16 89182 89021 152 44 89129 -1.5 -10.8 -15.3 -1.5
Oceania 13810 202 7602 6626 16579 217 9670 7126 18476 221 11397 7301 2.5 0.8 3.4 0.8
Australia 6365 189 1947 4591 8279 203 3551 4931 9143 206 4348 5001 3.1 0.7 6.9 0.7
New Zealand 7445 13 5655 2035 8300 15 6119 2196 9333 15 7049 2300 1.9 1.2 1.9 1.0
Other Developed 11240 2629 16 13833 12475 2511 67 14919 12006 3307 17 15296 0.6 1.9 0.5 0.8
Japan 7667 2512 3 10176 8600 2501 3 11098 8453 2783 3 11232 0.8 0.9 0.0 0.8
<section>u</section>
Table 14: COFFEE - Commodity Balances, 1987-89 Average, 2000 Baseline and 2000 Uruguay Round Scenarios
Countries/Regions
1987-89 Average
2000 Baseline
2000 Uruguay Round
Growth Rates: 1987-89 to 2000 UR
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
thousand tonnes
percent per year
WORLD TOTAL 6097 4342 4340 5727 7046 4891 4970 6967 7095 5009 5009 7095 1.3 1.2 1.2 1.8
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES 6097 286 4340 1712 7046 354 4970 2430 7095 362 5009 2448 1.3 2.0 1.2 3.0
Africa 1233 119 980 277 1416 138 1124 430 1436 141 1140 437 1.3 1.4 1.3 3.9
Cameroon 107 115 15 130 112 18 132 113 19 1.8 -0.1 2.0
Cte d'Ivoire 232 200 3 250 247 3 255 252 3 0.8 1.9 0.0
Ethiopia 192 87 97 214 76 138 217 80 137 1.0 -0.7 2.9
Kenya 117 95 4 148 140 8 150 143 7 2.1 3.5 4.8
Uganda 163 156 3 190 184 6 190 185 5 1.3 1.4 4.3
Zaire 101 85 10 124 112 12 126 114 12 1.9 2.5 1.5
Latin America 3822 44 2748 907 4220 63 3091 1192 4243 65 3108 1200 0.9 3.3 1.0 2.4
Brazil 1700 1093 368 1700 1236 464 1710 1242 468 0.0 1.1 2.0
Colombia 675 650 110 905 765 140 909 768 141 2.5 1.4 2.1
Costa Rica 143 130 17 176 151 25 178 153 25 1.8 1.4 3.3
El Salvador 128 118 9 158 145 13 159 146 13 1.8 1.8 3.1
Guatemala 194 160 30 235 193 42 235 193 42 1.6 1.6 2.8
Mexico 368 224 107 302 157 145 305 159 146 -1.6 -2.8 2.6
Near East 6 61 1 69 8 83 91 8 84 92 2.4 2.7 2.4
Far East 971 61 548 457 1320 70 677 713 1326 72 681 717 2.6 1.4 1.8 3.8
India 177 101 60 207 112 95 207 112 95 1.3 0.9 3.9
Indonesia 394 316 39 488 428 60 489 431 58 1.8 2.6 3.4
Philippines 146 23 116 210 36 174 212 36 176 3.2 3.8 3.5
Viet Nam 166 37 142 245 31 214 246 31 215 3.3 -1.5 3.5
Other developing 65 1 63 2 82 78 4 82 80 2 2.0 2.0 0.0
Developed countries 4056 4015 4537 4537 4647 4647 1.1 1.2
North America 1224 1196 1260 1260 1260 1260 0.2 0.4
Canada 109 105 122 122 122 122 0.9 1.3
United States 1115 1091 1138 1138 1138 1138 0.2 0.4
Europe 2310 2297 2690 2690 2759 2759 1.5 1.5
EC 1807 1787 2150 2150 2218 2218 1.7 1.8
France 325 325 368 368 387 387 1.5 1.5
Germany 574 572 678 678 691 691 1.6 1.6
Italy 254 254 323 323 344 344 2.6 2.6
Netherlands 150 149 179 179 182 182 1.6 1.7
Spain 148 133 192 192 195 195 2.3 3.2
UK 147 147 175 175 180 180 1.7 1.7
Other Europe 371 371 439 439 439 439 1.4 1.4
Sweden 95 95 101 101 102 102 0.6 0.6
Former USSR 100 100 108 108 110 110 0.8 0.8
Oceania 54 54 70 70 76 76 2.9 2.9
Other Developed 368 368 409 409 442 442 1.5 1.5
Japan 340 340 370 370 386 386 1.1 1.1
<section>v</section>
Table 15: COCOA - Commodity Balances, 1987-89 Average, 2000 Baseline and 2000 Uruguay Round Scenarios
Countries/Regions
1987-89 Average
2000 Baseline
2000 Uruguay Round
Growth Rates: 1987-89 to 2000 UR
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
thousand tonnes
percent per year
WORLD TOTAL 2221 2034 2018 2088 2754 2363 2385 2732 2831 2449 2449 2831 2.0 1.6 1.6 2.6
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES 2221 87 2018 291 2754 103 2385 472 2831 105 2449 487 2.0 1.6 1.6 4.4
Africa 1268 4 1243 25 1359 4 1332 31 1414 4 1380 38 0.9 0.9 3.6
Cte d'Ivoire 714 745 4 720 715 5 737 731 6 0.3 -0.2
Ghana 239 219 1 328 327 1 347 345 2 3.2 3.9 5.9
Nigeria 138 127 4 152 147 5 154 148 6 0.9 1.3 3.4
Cameroon 128 121 1 122 121 1 137 136 1 0.6 1.0 0.0
Latin America 624 22 467 176 553 24 313 264 568 24 323 269 -0.8 0.7 -3.0 3.6
Brazil 350 258 63 290 185 105 299 192 107 -1.3 -2.4 4.5
Ecuador 83 90 7 75 71 4 77 72 5 -0.6 -1.8
Near East 22 20 30 30 30 30 2.6 3.4
Far East 287 39 273 57 786 45 698 133 791 47 702 136 8.8 1.6 8.2 7.5
Indonesia 66 63 3 360 340 20 360 340 20 15.2 15.1 17.1
Malaysia 206 190 16 370 349 21 374 353 21 5.1 5.3 2.3
Other developing 42 35 14 56 42 14 58 44 14 2.7 1.9 0.0
DEVELOPED COUNTRIES 1947 1797 2260 2260 2344 2344 1.6 2.2
North America 607 548 692 692 712 712 1.3 2.2
Canada 51 47 60 60 63 63 1.8 2.5
United States 556 501 632 632 649 649 1.3 2.2
Europe 985 929 1175 1175 1229 1229 1.9 2.4
EC 792 736 969 969 1004 1004 2.0 2.6
Belgium-Luxembourg 49 46 59 59 61 61 1.8 2.4
France 150 141 189 189 196 196 2.3 2.8
Germany 233 241 299 299 312 312 2.5 2.2
Italy 69 63 83 83 86 86 1.9 2.6
Netherlands 23 22 45 45 48 48 6.3 6.7
Spain 51 46 67 67 70 70 2.7 3.6
United Kingdom 181 149 196 196 203 203 1.0 2.6
Other Europe 193 111 199 199 225 225 1.3 6.1
Switzerland 34 33 39 39 41 41 1.6 1.8
Poland 23 24 39 39 42 42 5.1 4.8
Former USSR 192 169 192 192 194 194 0.1 1.2
Oceania 33 33 41 41 42 42 2.0 2.0
Other Developed 130 118 159 159 167 167 2.1 2.9
Japan 118 102 139 139 145 145 1.7 3.0
<section>w</section>
Table 16: BLACK TEA - Commodity Balances, 1987-89 Average, 2000 Baseline and 2000 Uruguay Round Scenarios
Countries/Regions
1987-89 Averagee
2000 Baseline
2000 Uruguay Round
Growth Rates: 1987-89 to 2000 UR
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
thousand tonnes
percent per year
WORLD TOTAL 1818 959 942 1842 2638 1227 1325 2548 2653 1263 1341 2582 3.2 2.3 3.0 2.9
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES 1709 408 942 1176 2506 626 1325 1817 2521 655 1341 1842 3.3 4.0 3.0 3.8
Africa 272 21 215 68 429 27 334 91 432 28 340 92 3.9 2.4 3.9 2.6
Kenya 167 145 22 250 228 22 251 231 23 3.5 4.0 0.4
Malawi 37 37 0 45 44 1 45 44 1 1.6 1.5
Rwanda 12 10 2 28 24 4 28 25 4 7.3 7.9 5.9
Tanzania 15 11 4 25 15 10 25 16 10 4.3 3.2 7.9
Tunisia 9 9 13 13 13 13 3.1 3.1
Zimbabwe 17 12 5 33 23 10 33 24 10 5.7 5.9 5.9
Latin America 56 13 37 13 71 21 39 40 71 21 40 41 2.0 4.1 0.7 10.0
Argentina 40 37 3 50 39 11 50 40 11 1.9 0.7 11.4
Chile 11 10 15 15 15 15 2.6 3.4
Near East 192 264 8 412 280 354 20 616 280 372 20 631 3.2 2.9 7.9 3.6
Egypt 67 67 103 103 108 108 4.1 4.1
Iran Isl.Rep. of 49 34 84 80 55 135 80 58 138 4.2 4.6 4.2
Iraq 46 44 50 50 50 53 0.7 1.6
Turkey 143 8 135 200 20 180 200 20 180 2.8 7.9 2.4
Far East 1/ 1189 110 682 683 1726 224 932 1070 1738 234 941 1078 3.2 6.5 2.7 3.9
Bangladesh 40 24 16 50 29 21 50 29 21 1.9 1.6 2.3
China 115 113 12 205 180 25 209 183 27 5.1 4.1 7.0
India 678 201 475 966 216 750 968 219 749 3.0 0.7 3.9
Indonesia 108 99 9 204 195 10 206 196 10 5.5 5.9 0.9
Sri Lanka 216 207 9 264 246 18 265 248 19 1.7 1.5 6.4
Pakistan 93 97 204 204 210 210 7.0 6.6
DEVELOPED COUNTRIES 109 551 666 132 601 731 132 608 740 1.6 0.8 0.9
North America 96 96 100 100 100 100 0.3 0.3
Canada 15 15 12 12 12 12 -1.8 -1.8
United States 81 81 88 88 88 88 0.7 0.7
Europe 252 257 253 253 257 257 0.2 0.0
Western Europe 215 217 216 214 219 217 0.2 0.0
EC 207 212 206 206 210 210 0.1 -0.1
Germany 17 17 24 24 24 24 2.9 2.9
Ireland 11 11 12 12 12 12 0.7 0.7
Netherlands 10 10 11 11 11 11 0.8 0.8
United Kingdom 156 161 135 135 135 135 -1.2 -1.5
Other W. Europe 8 5 10 8 9 7 1.0 2.8
Eastern Europe 37 40 37 39 38 40 0.2 0.0
Former USSR 97 156 253 110 188 298 110 188 298 1.1 1.6 1.4
Oceania 24 24 26 26 27 27 1.0 1.0
Other developed 12 23 36 22 34 54 22 36 58 5.2 3.8 4.1
1/ Including Oceania developing countries.
<section>x</section>
Table 17: BANANAS - Commodity Balances, 1987-89 Average, 1993 Actual, 2000 Baseline and 2000 Uruguay Round Scenarios
Countries/Regions
1987-89 Average
1993 Baseline
2000 Baseline
2000 Uruguay Round
Growth Rates: 1987-89 to 2000 UR
Import
Export
Import
Export
Import
Export
Import
Export
Import
Export
thousand tonnes
percent per year
WORLD TOTAL 7826 8051 10109 10783 10921 12392 10862 11266 2.8 2.8
Developing countries 589 7304 1244 10050 1425 11546 1425 10478 7.6 3.1
Africa 14 205 13 297 18 309 18 396 2.1 5.6
Cameroon 48 120 103 133 8.9
Cte d'Ivoire 86 173 125 192 6.9
Latin America 199 6120 444 8516 280 10209 280 8795 2.9 3.1
Argentina 91 213 110 110 1.6 
Colombia 919 1400 1800 1454 3.9
Costa Rica 1165 1833 1880 1904 4.2
Ecuador 1522 2403 2800 2503 4.2
Guatemala 371 427 437 1.4
Honduras 879 800 1200 831 -0.5
Jamaica 35 77 130 87 7.9
Panama 688 708 840 730 0.5
Former Windwards Is. 237 266 360 282 1.5
Near East 248 523 507 507 6.1 
Saudi Arabia 164 150 250 250 3.6 
Turkey 8 113 105 105 23.9
Far East 128 976 264 1235 620 1026 620 1285 14.1 2.3
Korea Rep. 14 146 470 470 34.0
Philippines 831 1144 980 1240 3.4
Other Developing 4/ 3 2 2 2 -3.3
DEVELOPED COUNTRIES 7237 747 8865 733 9496 846 9437 788 2.2 0.4
North America 3019 3603 3575 3780 1.9 
Canada 292 400 375 375 2.1 
United States 2726 3203 3200 3405 1.9 
Europe 3341 747 4234 733 4900 846 4648 788 2.8 0.4
EC 3078 747 3841 733 4443 846 4131 788 2.5 0.4
Belgium 82 100 99 111 2.6 
France 1/ 452 309 515 278 494 363 564 309 1.9 0.0
Germany 812 1060 1424 1182 3.2 
Italy 379 392 618 434 1.1 
Netherlands 123 160 161 178 3.1 
Portugal 2/ 85 38 138 40 153 43 153 44 5.0 1.2
Spain 3/ 367 400 420 400 442 440 442 420 1.6 0.4
United Kingdom 394 524 532 564 3.0 
Japan 770 913 883 971 2.0 
1/ Exports from Guadeloupe and Martinique
2/ Exports from Madeira
3/ Exports from Canary Islands
4/ Oceania
<section>y</section>
Table 18: HIDES AND SKINS - Commodity Balances, 1987-89 Average and 2000 Baseline, 2000 Uruguay Round Scenarios
Countries/Regions
1987-89 Average
2000 Baseline
2000 Uruguay Round
Growth Rates: 1987-89 to 2000 UR
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
Prod.
Import
Export
Cons.
thousand tonnes
percent per year
WORLD TOTAL 5159 4351 4391 5121 5637 4852 5110 5379 5652 5037 5124 5568 0.8 1.2 1.3 0.7
DEVELOPING COUNTRIES 2005 1402 1459 1948 2806 1484 2284 2005 2790 1664 2260 2193 2.8 1.4 3.7 1.0
Africa 217 34 74 178 272 34 102 205 275 34 100 209 2.0 0.0 2.6 1.3
Latin America 873 179 458 595 1049 211 681 579 1019 288 678 629 1.3 4.0 3.3 0.5
Argentina 237 0 130 107 217 3 134 85 222 2 138 86 -0.5 - 0.5 -1.8
Brazil 244 55 221 78 311 117 382 45 284 160 391 54 1.3 9.3 4.8 -3.0
Colombia 52 1 11 42 61 7 21 46 60 10 22 47 1.1 20.0 6.0 0.9
Mexico 167 61 9 220 182 52 7 227 165 70 7 228 -0.1 1.1 -2.2 0.3
Uruguay 34 8 39 4 38 11 43 5 39 11 44 5 1.1 2.0 1.2 2.0
Near East 183 57 48 192 281 43 94 230 289 56 76 269 3.9 -0.1 4.0 2.9
Egypt 45 3 0 48 39 21 0 60 39 21 0 60 -1.1 17.7 0.0 1.9
Far East 686 1114 864 936 1123 1187 1375 935 1123 1274 1380 1017 4.2 1.1 4.0 0.7
China 134 240 150 224 365 179 301 242 360 230 296 294 8.6 -0.4 5.8 2.3
Hong Kong 3 370 301 72 2 452 301 153 2 449 301 150 -3.6 1.6 0.0 6.3
India 344 6 67 283 419 4 87 336 417 2 86 333 1.6 -9.1 2.1 1.4
Korea Rep. 11 443 247 207 8 528 521 15 8 545 543 11 -2.7 1.8 6.8 -21.9
Pakistan 56 2 51 6 87 2 71 18 86 13 78 22 3.7 18.5 3.5 10.9
Other developing 46 18 16 48 81 8 31 57 83 12 25 70 5.1 -3.4 4.0 3.1
Developed COUNTRIES 3154 2949 2932 3173 2831 3369 2826 3373 2863 3373 2864 3374 -0.8 1.1 -0.2 0.5
North America 1024 506 925 604 945 509 807 648 974 526 846 654 -0.4 0.3 -0.7 0.7
Canada 83 46 89 40 71 56 94 33 71 56 94 33 -1.3 1.7 0.5 -1.5
United States 941 460 836 565 874 453 713 615 903 470 752 621 -0.3 0.2 -0.9 0.8
Europe 1029 2101 1574 1558 971 2303 1611 1664 963 2295 1577 1682 -0.6 0.7 0.0 0.6
Western Europe 850 1787 1489 1149 802 1959 1524 1238 795 1952 1492 1256 -0.6 0.7 0.0 0.7
EC 792 1669 1340 1121 760 1850 1420 1190 756 1840 1390 1206 -0.4 0.8 0.3 0.6
France 161 185 203 142 175 202 234 143 176 198 235 139 0.7 0.6 1.2 -0.2
Germany 192 305 228 269 148 333 218 263 146 330 215 260 -2.3 0.7 -0.5 -0.3
Italy 142 563 377 327 138 587 332 393 139 585 300 425 -0.1 0.3 -1.9 2.2
Netherlands 44 132 148 28 35 136 136 35 35 136 136 34 -2.0 0.2 -0.7 1.7
Spain 45 125 90 80 44 206 90 160 44 201 91 154 -0.2 4.1 0.1 5.6
Portugal 11 75 38 48 11 96 49 58 11 93 51 54 -0.0 1.8 2.4 0.9
United Kingdom 88 139 124 103 70 220 105 185 69 215 105 179 -2.0 3.7 -1.3 4.7
Eastern Europe 179 314 85 409 169 344 87 426 168 343 85 426 -0.5 0.7 0.0 0.3
Former USSR 802 68 96 773 583 248 1 830 586 239 1 824 -2.6 11.1 -32.8 0.5
Oceania 200 28 202 26 200 34 198 36 211 37 214 33 0.4 2.2 0.5 2.1
Australia 155 27 161 21 158 31 162 27 165 34 174 24 0.5 1.9 0.6 1.4
New Zealand 45 1 41 5 42 3 35 9 46 3 40 8 0.2 7.2 -0.1 4.4
Other developed 100 246 134 212 133 274 210 196 129 277 225 182 2.1 1.0 4.4 -1.3
Japan 44 233 110 167 36 257 114 178 34 254 121 167 -2.0 0.7 0.8 0.0
<section>z</section>
Table A2 - Total GDP at 1980 Prices, 1980 to 1990 Actual and 1990 to 2000 Projected
Region 1980 1990 2000 Projected 1980-90 1990 - 2000
Actual Baseline UR UR Actual Baseline UR UR
Central
High
Central
High
billion US$ at 1980 prices
percent per year
WORLD 11,562.2 15,414.6 20,741.9 20,913.7 21,096.9 2.9 3.0 3.1 3.2
DEVELOPING 2,467.4 3,500.4 5,636.0 5,692.8 5,759.2 3.6 4.9 5.0 5.1
Africa 271.0 317.9 470.6 469.1 470.6 1.6 4.0 4.0 4.0
Latin America 837.3 946.3 1,363.5 1,368.2 1,372.8 1.2 3.7 3.8 3.8
Near East 494.8 524.6 747.0 747.9 751.2 0.6 3.6 3.6 3.7
Far East 855.5 1,699.2 3,035.4 3,087.8 3,144.2 7.1 6.1 6.2 6.3
Other Developing 8.9 12.4 19.4 19.9 20.4 3.4 4.5 4.8 5.1
DEVELOPED 9,094.8 11,914.2 15,106.0 15,220.9 15,337.7 2.7 2.4 2.5 2.6
North America 2,951.7 3,932.9 4,867.0 4,876.4 4,886.0 2.9 2.2 2.2 2.2
Western Europe 3,665.8 4,636.7 6,058.9 6,141.3 6,224.8 2.4 2.7 2.9 3.0
EC 3,247.7 4,108.4 5,408.3 5,481.8 5,556.2 2.4 2.8 2.9 3.1
Other W.Europe 418.1 528.3 650.6 659.5 668.6 2.4 2.1 2.2 2.4
Eastern Europe 241.4 256.7 245.4 245.6 245.8 0.6 -0.4 -0.4 -0.4
Former USSR 892.9 1,114.3 1,008.3 1,009.3 1,010.3 2.2 -1.0 -1.0 -1.0
Oceania 181.6 241.6 315.4 315.7 316.0 2.9 2.7 2.7 2.7
Other Developed 1,161.5 1.732.1 2,611.0 2632.6 2,654.8 4.1 4.2 4.3 4.4
Source: World Bank and other international organizations
Note: For country details see: FAO "Compendium of Macro-Economic Indicators". ESC/M/93/1, Rome 1993
