<title>Farmer-first approaches to communication:a case study from the Philippines. Farmer - First approach to communication: a case study from the Philippines</title>
<section>1</section>
contents next
PREFACE
This case study, like others in the series produced by the Communication for Development Service of FAO's Research, Extension and Training Division, is intended to shed light on noteworthy examples concerning the use of communication to support rural development.
In this instance the setting is the Philippines, a country composed of 7 107 islands in South East Asia.
The case study derives from a "pure" development support communication project carried out over a period of three years, involving five of the country's 13 agricultural regions.
The project was implemented by the Applied Communication Division (ACD) of the Philippine Council for Agriculture, Forestry and Natural Resources Research and Development (PCARRD) and five of its Regional Applied Communication Offices (RACOs).
Once staff were trained, and equipment inventories upgraded, the over-riding goal was to take the ACD and the participating RACOs through prototype exercises in community-based technology transfer. This involved bottom-up needs assessment through rapid rural appraisals, key informant panels, and knowledge / attitude / practice surveys, as diagnostic tools for the setting of key priorities for technology transfer in five, carefully selected pilot-sites.
A variety of multi-channel communication approaches were then implemented in working toward each community's development objectives. To accelerate this process, a new lead-medium in the form of community audio-tower systems was pioneered by the project. How effective they were, the lessons learned along the way and challenges for the road ahead form the basis for this monograph.
The author, Dr Gary Coldevin of Concordia University, Montreal, wishes to acknowledge and commend all those who formed part of the team in the breaking of new ground as the project unfolded.
These included the special DSC section in ACD formed to guide and monitor the national coordination of the project, and the RAC O coordinators and staff in the five participating regions.
Special acknowledgments are extended to:
* Mr Ricardo Ramirez, Communication for Development, FAO, for technical backstopping
* Dr Teresa Stuart, Institute for Development Communication, University of the Philippines, Los Banos, who served as national consultant for FAO
* Dr Nora Quebral, national DSC process evaluation specialist
* and to the members of the Community Broadcast Associations formed in each of the five pilot-barangays who so quickly realized the potential of the powerful new medium under their control.
ABBREVIATIONS
ACD
Applied Communication Division
AKAP
Awareness, knowledge, attitudes, practices
ASEAN
Association of South East Asia Nations
CATS
Community audio tower system
CBA
Community Broadcast Association
DA
Department of Agriculture
DSC
Development Support Communication
IDC
Institute for Development Communication
IPM
Integrated pest management
KIPs
Key informant panels
LGU
Local Government Unit
NARRDN
National Agriculture and Natural Resources Research and Development Network
NIC
Newly-industrialized country
NPA
New People's Army
PCARRD
Philippine Council for Agriculture, Forestry and Natural Resources Research and Development
RACO
Regional Applied Communication Office
PRAs
Participatory rural appraisals
R & D
Research and development
RRAs
Rapid rural appraisals
SoA
School on the Air
UPLB
University of the Philippines at Los Banos
USAID
United States Agency for International Development
Barangay
A village which is recognised as the lowest administrative unit of the local government
Sitio
A sub-division of a village
Porok
A neighbourhood group in a village or town
Jeepney
A jeep converted into a vehicle for public transport
BACKGROUND
THE CURRENT AGRICULTURAL SCENE
Agriculture continues to be the dominant sector in the Philippine economy, accounting for 23 percent of gross national product, generating more than 25 percent of export revenues and employing about 50 percent of the labour force. Two thirds of the country's estimated 69 million people in 1994 were rural based and directly or indirectly dependent upon agriculture for their livelihood.
Notwithstanding its potential, agricultural output per capita declined in the 1980's and remained relatively stagnant during the early 1990's.
A series of natural disasters including typhoons (average of 21 per year with a high of 37 during 1993), earthquakes, and the Mt. Pinatubo eruption in 1991, have contributed to weakening productivity.
So too has political instability in the form of Muslim secessionist groups in the south and communist guerrilla armies still operating in pockets throughout the country.
A population growth rate of about 2.4 percent per annum, resulting in a relatively short "doubling" time of 29 years, has also been a major obstacle to increasing supply over demand.
When Corazon Aquino was democratically elected President in 1987, her emphasis was directed toward promoting the lot of the small farmer, who, taken as a group, constituted almost two-thirds of the 60 percent of the population falling under the poverty line. During her administration, the rallying cry became "pro-poor" with a number of initiatives taken to support rural improvement (for example, the Comprehensive Agrarian Reform Programme, or CARP, to redistribute land and allow small farmers to become land owners).
Currently, under President Ramos who came to power in 1992, the emphasis has shifted considerably with the initiation of an ambitious programme to bring the nation up to newly industrialized country (NIC) status by the year 2000.
As part of the "Philippines 2000" vision is a Medium-Term Agricultural Development Plan which calls for intensified production of rice, corn, vegetables and other commercial viable export crops in designated key production areas. It is estimated that 1.3 million hectares, or about 10 percent of the total area under cultivation, will be affected by the plan. The vast majority of farmers, who on average operate farms of less than 1.5 hectares, are largely unaffected by the plan and remain the most difficult to serve.
During the latter part of Aquino's regime, a congressional act was passed in which extension services were devolved from the Department of Agriculture to the Department of the Interior and Local Government.
Under the banner of the new Local Government Code, the full implementation of this act came into effect during April 1993. In practice this has meant that extension is now directed out of Local Government Units (LGUs) offices at the Provincial and Municipal levels.
Research, however, has remained within the Department of Agriculture at national and regional offices. This has tended to further exacerbate an already weak linkage between research and extension - and to virtually leave the farmer out of the continuum. The common result has been "a very poor fit between the technology that farmers need and the technology that is generated and hoped to be transferred" (FAO, 1994, p.20).
The timing for a farmer-first communication project designed to enhance the farmers' participation in the diagnosing of critical problems requiring technology solutions on the one hand, and as a major component in bringing back research-based training packages to rural communities on the other, was thus opportune.
DSC IN THE PHILIPPINES
The Philippines has been a particularly active player in the development support communication (DSC) scene over the past three decades, from both academic and field project perspectives.
DSC as a discipline, for example, has been taught at the University of the Philippines at Los Banos (UPLB) since 1954. Currently, the Institute for Development Communication (IDC) at UPLB has a twenty member faculty corps with more than 300 students spread throughout its undergraduate, Masters and Ph.D. programmes. IDC also serves as a DSC training centre for the Southeast Asian region.
And since 1967, through its collaboration with Radio DZLB, the rural educational radio station of UPLB, IDC has accumulated a variety of field experience with projects ranging from support for rural youth and 4H clubs to schools on-the-air covering topics spanning improved farming techniques to maternal and child care (Librero, 1990).
Communication campaigns have been widely used in the Philippines to promote a variety of development themes including health, nutrition, population issues and agriculture. Perhaps the best known of these, the "Masagana 99" campaign during 1973, catapulted the country's farmers toward adopting high yielding rice cultivation and in effect, over the space of three years, moved the nation from a net rice importer to meet domestic requirements to becoming an exporter of its excess harvest (FAO, 1985).
Another major boost to the applied use of the discipline has been the gradual building up of, and reliance on, DSC within the National Agricultural and Resources Research and Development Network (NARRDN) which comprises research centres, government agencies, and state colleges and universities.
NARRDN was created in 1975 by the Philippine Council for Agriculture, Forestry and Natural Resources Research and Development (PCARRD), one of five councils under the Department of Science and Technology. PCARRD's specific mandate is to develop, coordinate and monitor the national research and development programme in agriculture and natural resources.
It also serves as a national repository of research information through its Scientific Literature Service. And through PCARRD's central Applied Communication Division (ACD) outreach programme, a variety of publications are generated on its concentrated commodity areas, which currently number 32.
The bottom line of PCARRD's national mandate thus is the generation of information and technologies and their effective communication to the farmer level to ultimately improve farm productivity, income and general welfare (Stuart, 1993).
To better fulfil its role, PCARRD, from its base in Los Banos, has organised the over one hundred active research and development nodes in the NARRDN into 13 research and development (R & D) consortia and two research centres spanning the country's 13 geopolitical regions.
Within each consortium informal networks of regional government and NGO agencies are bound together through memoranda of agreement directed toward collaboration in managing an integrated research and development programme and in the sharing of resources.
A further innovative approach introduced by PCARRD within each consortium has been the organising of a sub-network of Regional Applied Communication Offices (RACOs), consisting of inter-agency communication specialists whose function is to provide communication support for field agents of the participating government departments and NGOs. The map above shows the distribution of RACOs in the country and the lead agency in each.
Network of regional applied communication offices in the Philippines
At the outset, in practice, the RACOs were to act as the development outposts of PCARRD through repackaging of ACD print materials, which presently consist of 13 publication series, into more user-friendly and localized communication formats for field workers and farmers.
Over time, photography and audio production capacities were added at both ACD and the regional consortia. As well, RACOs led by the Department of Agriculture were equipped with "agri-vans" for film and video showings at the village level.
Prior to the late 1980's, however, most operations were badly in need of equipment upgrading, particularly in video production capability, and concomitant staff training.
CONTEXT FOR DSC PROJECT
The roster of audio-visual production equipment was increased in Regions 1, 3, 5, 8, 10 and 12 through a USAID project during 1988-90. Following the USAID initiative, PCARRD began to actively seek further technical assistance for an additional five regions, 2, 4, 6, 9, and 11.
FAO, through UNDP funding support, was approached and the three year project "DSC for Selected Agricultural Technology Transfer Projects" was formally approved during late 1990.
The implementation framework for the project was built around four basic objectives:
1. To better coordinate communication activities among, and provide more effective linkages between, member agencies of NARRDN;
2. To strengthen the multimedia production capacity of PCARRD's Applied Communication Division outreach programme in preparing DSC materials and packaging recommended technologies for direct use as field agent support or for local adaptation by RACOs;
3. To improve the ability of RACOs to plan, produce, monitor and evaluate communication materials and strategies in support of government extension and NGO field activities;
4. To build up an operational capacity within the five participating RACOs to effectively assist agricultural extension and NGO field agents in conducting pilot technology transfer projects intended to serve as prototypes for expansion into longer term programmes.
As originally conceived, the four objectives constituted logical building blocks wherein the successful completion of one allowed for the development of the next.
In line with this thinking, the first 18 months of the project were primarily taken up with objectives one through three and the preparation of the RACOs, with ACD support, to undertake the pilot technology transfer projects.
Highlights of this period included the conducting of 11 in-country training workshops, ranging from a kick-off "Planning, Management, Monitoring and Evaluation of DSC Technology Transfer" workshop coordinated by the UNDP's DTCP (Development Training and Communication Planning) staff in Manila, through audio-visual, video, community broadcasting, and desk-top production skills refinement to courses in community organising, processing documentation, training methods, information system development, and development journalism.
Following the completion of preparatory training, three additional workshops were conducted as the project progressed:
an on-site message design and channel strategy exercise to set the framework for the pilot-site campaigns, and midterm and summative evaluation workshops.
As well, RACO coordinators from the five principal consortia and senior staff from ACD undertook a three week ASEAN Region study tour for on-site observation and discussions with colleagues in development communication and extension media operations in Thailand, Malaysia, Indonesia and Singapore.
Two fellowships were provided, one to the Director of ACD to attend a workshop on agricultural knowledge information systems (AKIS) at Wageningen Agricultural University in Holland, and the other to the ACD Area Coordinator for a summer workshop in DSC Planning at Cornell University in the USA.
Upon their return to PCARRD, "echo" workshops, or a summary of information acquired and skills learned, were provided to ACD staff.
Primary equipment purchases concentrated on upgrading photography, audio and desk-top publishing capability for both ACD and the five project RACOs; as well, professional video production and editing equipment (Super VHS) was installed within ACD with video production capability only being provided at the RACO level.
The rationale for this decision was that ACD would provide editing support to regional field productions. Other activities of note included the setting up of a national steering committee to provide policy guidelines to the project, quarterly meetings among ACD senior staff and RACO coordinators, an annual review wherein project activities were reported to representatives of all RACOs in the country, and a quarterly newsletter featuring project activities and accomplishments which was distributed to all members of NARRDN.
DSC Newslink quarterly publication provided regional updates throughout the project.
DSC PROCESS MODEL
The on-site workshop to set the communication objectives and delivery strategies for technology transfer support in the five pilot areas kicked-off the second year of the project.
At this juncture the DSC Process Model developed by the author for FAO was introduced and explained in detail. The chart on page 10 shows the major features of the model which was originally developed by FAO in Sierra Leone during 1984 (Coldevin, 1986) and subsequently refined in preparation for a series of agricultural communication campaigns in Lesotho during 1987 and 1988 (FAO, 1990).
While the process illustrated consists of a checklist of 11 principle operational steps or stages, detailed DSC action plans for field implementation can easily run into 40 to 50 specific activities.
As originally envisaged, the model can apply equally to top down or "push" strategies for technology transfer as well as to participatory, "demand" or "pull" approaches initiated at the farmer level.
It is also flexible enough to apply to intense, short-term communication campaigns and as a vehicle for systematic planning of sustained, longer term DSC programmes.
In the current example, the process model was essentially applied to information, motivation and training materials conforming to the bottom-up, farmer first approach, consistent with FAO's emphasis on audience involvement from the outset.
DEVELOPMENT SUPPORT COMMUNICATION PROCESS MODEL
Steps:
Key Points:
FRONT END ANALYSIS
l. Needs assessment
Establish major need-based technologies for potential transfer through a variety of methods beginning with rapid rural appraisal and proceeding to participatory community problem identification through key informant panels and elaboration of "problem trees". Consultation with field specialists and analysis of reports.
2. Development /
Project objectives
Select key development or project objectives to be addressed and prioritize technologies for transfer. Determine if communication support is needed. Analyse whether gap between existing and desired situation is resource-based (supplies and materials), or communication based (information, motivation, training) or both.
3. Situation analysis
Assess existing communication resources available, media access and preferred channels of target groups. Determine if technology transfer inputs are readily accessible.
SUPPORT COMMUNICATION PROCESS
4. Target audience analysis
Refer to existing documentation and secondary data. Conduct KAP (knowledge, attitudes, practices) survey and assess current level of income derived from technology(ies) to be transferred. Focus-group interviews may also be useful for providing qualitative data.
5. Setting DSC objectives
Select only tasks that are amenable to solution through communication. Specify objectives in terms of type of change expected from target audience(s), under what conditions the activities will take place, and what criteria will be used to measure success.
6. Message design & channel strategy
Break down content into modules or units to address gaps identified in baseline survey. Develop message design approaches and delivery mix in terms of lead and support channels (multimedia materials and interpersonal communication; individual, group or mass audience - or all three).
7. Preparation & pre- testing of prototype materials
Pre-test portions of materials under development with samples of target audience(s) for attention-getting power, comprehensibility, credibility and persuasiveness. Revise materials where warranted and re-test.
8. Final production of multimedia materials
Produce materials targeted to seasonal variation in farmers' needs. Ensure that channel strategy is systematically orchestrated to promote repetition of key messages.
9. Delivery & monitoring
Check for delivery-system constraints such as viewing and listening conditions and dependability of equipment used. Monitor how well content of materials is received and where practical, "mid-course" changes might be made to improve the system. Check appropriateness of channels selected and whether they are mutually reinforcing. Monitor feedback systems between target audience(s), field agents and media producers.
10. Summative or impact evaluation
Measure impact of DSC strategy through KAP summative evaluation procedures as well as increased productivity and incomes. Use results as input for future production decisions and channel strategies.
11. Review & replanning
Plan for continuity, adjustment and adaptation to changing audiences, project needs and opportunities.
contents next
<section>2</section>
back contents next
THE DSC PROCESS MODEL IN ACTION
PILOT SITE SELECTION
Along with the preparatory training, equipment installation, management and monitoring procedures, and facilitation of communication between ACD and the five RACOs, the selection of project sites proceeded apace.
Administratively, the Philippines is divided into regions, provinces, municipalities, barangays, porous, and sitios. Our basic unit for development was at the barangay or community level with each RACO going through a rigorous process of selecting one barangay in their region for project concentration according to pre-set criteria.
Prominent among the criteria used were the following:
* The barangay should be located in a depressed area with the income of most of its inhabitants falling under the poverty line and hence within the "pro-poor" development emphasis of the Aquino government;
* It should be readily accessible by the RACO to allow for frequent media presentations and extension support;
* There should be an active farmers' organization or cooperative and/or an active NGO programme;
* A willingness to participate on the part of the local government and agricultural extension should be ensured;
* There should be untapped economic potential present in the barangay and availability of local resources for technologies selected for transfer;
* A favourable peace and order situation should prevail.
Selection of pilot-sites was made according to specific criteria
NEEDS ASSESSMENT
With the site selection completed near the end of the first year of project implementation, the "front end" analysis of the model began in earnest.
First, in each barangay "rapid rural appraisals" (RRAs), following guidelines suggested by Lightfoot et al (1989), were conducted by an interdisciplinary team of about eight people (i.e., RACO staff, agricultural extensionists, subject matter specialists and knowledgeable community members), to provide descriptive information through transects of agro-ecological zones, maps of land use, land tenure, principal agricultural enterprises and other income generating activities, location of houses, cooperatives and other centres of agricultural produce transformation, market availability, social groupings (such as linguistic, religious, racial) and gender differentiation.
At the end of this process blue prints in the form of enterprise, social, topography and hydrology maps and a barangay transect were placed in each project site office for easy reference.
Community participation was vital in RRA mapping
Secondly, "key informant panels" (KIPs) of between 10 to 15 members were organised based on identification of suitable participants during the RRAs.
The purpose of this exercise was to elaborate and discuss priority problems faced by each community, to trace the causes of the problems, and then to illustrate the process through a "problem tree" displayed on a billboard near the barangay office.
Thus the project developed, the problem tree analysis helped set an agenda for action by the community and participating government agencies and NGOs. In the case of the FAO project, the primary agricultural problems were rank ordered in terms of priority followed by the identification and available inventory of technologies which might be transferred to solve the problems.
An important consideration in this priority ranking was that the technologies selected should represent the needs and aspirations of a critical mass of the agricultural operators in the community. A situational analysis also determined the potential communication resources which might be used.
Key informant panels conduct a problem tree analysis
TARGET AUDIENCE ANALYSIS
The foregoing needs assessment activities were intended as a pre-requisite to the undertaking of detailed AKAP (awareness -knowledge-attitudes-practices) baseline surveys in each community.
In essence, the qualitative data gleaned from the RRAs and KIPs set the stage for more focused attention on awareness and knowledge levels of, attitudes / motivations toward, practices of, and productivity and income derived from, the priority technologies selected for transfer by each.
The combined use of the RRAs and KIPs led to the identification of farmers' priorities and therefore avoided the need for a more general needs assessment. Like most surveys of this kind, the AKAP's primary purposes were to
1) identify knowledge and awareness gaps and address them during media production, and
2) provide a pre-project reference point for later comparison or impact studies to quantitatively assess how well the project had achieved its objectives.
Key technologies for transfer included improved varieties and recommended cultivation techniques for rice, mangos, bananas and coconuts as well as Tilapia.
In each case, the base-line survey included a preliminary section on demographic characteristics of each barangay sample, existing productivity and income levels derived from the technologies to be promoted, detailed AKAP indices pertinent to each technology, and information on communication channel access, utilization, and perceptions of the most useful of all available sources of information, including agricultural extension and NGO field workers.
An additional innovation in the knowledge section was that each interviewer was trained to judge, while conducting an interview with a farmer at home or in the field whether his or her response to a particular question could be rated as high, medium or low in terms of accuracy.
This procedure greatly reduced the tabulation time for rendering tables and graphs describing where content emphasis should be placed, such as on low to medium knowledge scores on the technology topics to be transferred.
Baseline AKAP interviews with farmers provided benchmark quantitative data for setting communication objectives, campaign message design assessment
All questionnaires were pre-tested for ambiguity and redundancy and streamlined for between 30 to 45 minutes administration time in the field.
Overall, the field interviews were given by the study leader assigned to each project site, RACO staff, and agriculture extension workers assigned to the area.
Since the number of farmers in each project site was relatively small (approximately 200 to 250 ), for the most part complete sampling was recommended to allow for a substantial summative evaluation resampling ratio of about 60 percent.
This in turn would allow sufficient cell sizes for cross tabulation of a number of dependent indices (such as awareness, knowledge, practices, income levels) and independent variables (sex, age, education level, size of land holdings, income levels, and participation in media presentations and on-site demonstrations by extension agents, etc.) and testing for statistically significant differences between base-line and post-campaign surveys.
Wherever possible, the majority of RACOs also included a sample from a non-project site to allow for a "control community" with which to compare the effects of the DSC media strategies on the pilot sites.
SETTING DSC OBJECTIVES
Since this was a first at carrying out a complete DSC process, only parts of which the ACD and RACOs had experienced previously (for the most part producing materials with limited prior audience analysis and input, and no evaluation of media effects), the communication objectives were primarily concentrated on maximum increases in awareness, knowledge and adoption or modification of the recommended technologies.
No specific ceilings were established but it was generally assumed that awareness levels should top out at least 80 percent or better and that key knowledge indicators and practice changes should demonstrate a statistically significant change between bench mark and post-campaign surveys.
No instruments were developed to generate quantifiable data on attitudes toward the technologies promoted since it is very difficult to construct reliable attitudinal scales which will yield consistent results over fame. Rather, these were drawn out and assessed through focus group discussion methods.
MESSAGE DESIGN, CHANNEL STRATEGY AND DELIVERY
A common dilemma to designers of both DSC and distance education is to choose a "lead" medium and then to provide a "wrap-around" variety of reinforcement or support media: the media-mix.
In the case of distance education, the lead medium of choice has been print with radio or audio-cassettes and television or video typically providing the back-up or support function, along with access to tutors and learning resource centres.
Increasingly, conferencing capability is being introduced, for the most part audio or audio-graphics, with video conferencing on the horizon as channel compression makes distribution by satellites more feasible.
DSC rural audiences in developing countries, however, in the face of widespread illiteracy tend to rely more on audiovisual channels, with the latter supported minimally with simple print.
Certainly, with the emphasis on "pro-poor" in the current project, the bulk of the farming population was targeted at the primary education level and minimal literacy skills.
Community audio tower
With the foregoing criteria in mind, while keeping in view a multimedia campaign type of communication strategy, the search for a lead medium centred on the use of radio versus video.
Radio was the most serious contender since all RACOs were producing a regular half-hour weekly agricultural programme, with broadcasts reaching into the project barangays. Its main disadvantage was that it catered to a regional audience and hence could not target broadcasts exclusively to address the specific concerns of each project site.
On the other hand, since video production equipment had been provided to each region, video had the advantage of "localizing" technology concerns unique to each project site. Its major constraint was the turn-around time for editing at ACD's studios in Los Banos, which would preclude a frequent lead-medium presence in the communities.
For these and other reasons, it was decided to introduce a novel communication approach to the Philippines, one borrowed from Thailand, namely the community audio-tower system (CATS).
The Philippine CATS differed from the Thai model, however, in two important aspects.
The first was that the Thai system uses a variety of speaker-tower arrangements with more than one speaker set-up location per community, including powerline poles. The Philippine project used only one tower with four 100-watt speakers located near the project site office, which was often the barangay captain's headquarters.
Using this configuration, the range of clear amplification was between 1.5 and 2 kilometres. In sections of the communities beyond this range, audio-cassette listening groups were set up using the same materials transmitted through the CATS.
The audio-towers were installed by the barangays with guidance provided by the ACD. As well, production and transmission studios were constructed through community resources.
CATS studio featured a Karaoke system
Box 1 Comparisons of CATS versus low power AM or FM community radio
The World Association of Community Radio Broad casters (AMARC) defines a community radio station as one that "responds to the needs of the community it serves and that contributes to its development in a progressive manner promoting social change."
It promotes the democratisation of communication by facilitating community participation in communication". While this definition is intended to delineate an AM or FM community radio station, it also applies admirably to the method in which CATS is used in the Philippines.
Basically the Philippine CATS consists of a simple recording / playback studio, a 500-watt amplifier and a four-speaker system mounted on a tower.
Central to this configuration is a Karaoke system which can be used for both studio operations and as a mobile community resource for meetings and entertainment.
While all basic equipment was supplied by the project, averaging about US$2 000, studio construction and materials and audio-tower erection, were undertaken by the communities.
The CATS advantages over AM or FM radio stations are its relative technological simplicity, and lower initial costs and recurrent operating expenses (averaging between US$2 and 3 per month for CATS electricity bills).
AM and FM stations, as opposed to CATS, typically require licenses from government authorities to begin operations, a daunting process in many instances which can hold up project operations.
The main disadvantage of CATS is that it cannot be "turned-off', and for those not directly interested in a particular broadcast, it can be distracting.
The second difference was that the Thai model uses for the most part a top-down, centralised approach wherein audio-tapes are produced by central departments such as agriculture, health and fisheries and distributed nationally to villages equipped with audio systems.
Contrarily, the Philippine system was operated for and by each community. Farmers essentially participated in the defining of relevant problems to be tackled and in the production of communication materials providing key guidelines in working toward their solution - with RACO and subject matter specialist guidance - in a "farmers talking to farmers approach".
With the installation of the CATS in place during the late summer or autumn of 1992, each project site had a formal one day campaign launching of their individual projects.
Typically, these were opened by the municipal mayor, with speeches by local dignitaries followed by pledges by officials of government agencies in line with the priority needs detailed on the problem tree billboards.
Displays of agricultural produce and prizes for winning entries, sports events, singing and dancing, along with sumptuous meals, all were part of the special day marking the kick-off of the multimedia campaigns spurring the promotion of the recommended technologies.
Some project-sites used flip-charts to good effect
After a trial period of some six months, Community Broadcast Associations (CBAs) were organised to oversee and control the output of community announcements and content of technology transfer messages, and its members were trained in broadcasting techniques.
A typical CBA would consist of a station manager, a production manager, a lead technician; about a dozen programme producers and four or five content specialists, approximately 20 members in all.
In addition, support media in the form of posters, simple, illustrated printed brochures, flip-charts, bulletin boards and video were being produced.
Pre-testing of materials for content comprehensibility was undertaken on the print-based and static visual media with samples of farmers from each community.
As the campaigns progressed, CATS hook-ups with the regular radio programmes developed by each RACO became a weekly routine. And by the summer of 1993, four out of five RACOs were planning for "Schools-on-the-Air" or SoAs (See Box 2).
By the end of the project the CATS had become the symbol of the project in the five sites and its potential as a sustaining catalyst for transfer to community development programmes in other sites appeared promising.
Box 2 Schools on-the-Air (SoA)
SoAs have been have been part of the Philippine landscape since the 1960's and used in a variety of development themes.
Their main role has been one of providing sequenced,instructional modules backed-up with other media providing informational and / or motivational support. Often, and certainly in the case of this project, they are reinforced at the field level through extension workers.
SoAs were conducted three of the four sites evaluated; two of the pilot-areas offered two rounds of SoAs on different topics.
Typically, an SoA would have two dozen or so 15 minute modules or lessons, aired twice a week over a two to three month period on a particularaspect of the technology promoted. Each module would be supported by a mimeo-graphed flier with follow- up print information.
Farmers are required to formally enroll in the school and after each lesson are asked to complete a feedback form assessing their understanding of the contents.
When results indicate areas of weakness, they are passed on to the programme producers for remedial attention in future broadcasts. Listeners are also encouraged to provide suggestions for additional information.
Those who participate in the full programme receive certificates of completion, and are presented with a take-home publication, such as "Rice or mango primers", featuring more detailed information to reinforce the audio-tower broadcasts.
The enthusiasm and commitment generated by the SoAs has been highly encouraging.
In Barangay Concordia in Region 6, for example, out of 88 enrollees for a 16 lesson SoA on mango production, 81, or 92 percent, graduated; in Tulungatung, Region 9, the four-month SoA on rice production run from January to May 1994 with an initial enrollment of 101 farmers saw 98 of them complete the course, marking an impressive 97 percent, retention rate.
In Barangay Naghakel in Region 2, three SoAs were conducted:
* The first ten-lesson SoA on rice-folder had 30 enrollees with complete graduation;
* the second, again a ten-lesson package on sex reversal of Tilapia had 48 enrollees with 43, or 90 percent, graduating;
* and the final seven lesson SoA on Rapid Composting Technology had 48 enrollees with 100 percent graduation.
Only one pilot site, Tunlugatung, was in a position to collect data on the immediate effects of the SoA (as a major component in the campaign strategy) on production increases, but at face value the evidence is highly encouraging (see Box 4 on page 42).
EVALUATION PROCEDURES
Several evaluation methods were used throughout the project to fully examine the strengths and weaknesses of the approaches used so as to maximize the transferability of the process to other sites in the Philippines and perhaps internationally as well.
From a qualitative aspect, a process documentation specialist was hired by the project, who, together with the national consultant and management staff from the ACD, undertook quarterly visits to each project site for monitoring progress in line withannual work-plans.
This included making on-site recommendations with regard to solving technical problems arising, and backstopping media planning, production and distribution term evaluation workshop, the findings of the process documentation specialist were presented along with suggestions to address prior weaknesses flagged for the remaining year of the project.
As well, case studies were presented by the five RACOs around the topics of strengthened linkages between members of NARDNN, feasibility and effectiveness of the CATSas the lead medium, analysis of the complete multi-channel strategy being implemented, and an assessment of the utility of the workshops conducted along with skills training still requiring attention.
The quantitative aspects of the evaluation mainly involved pre-post-project AKAP comparisons along with, wherever possible, increased productivity and income levels directly related to the technologies being transferred.
In all regions, project site data were compared with non-project barangays to allow for more rigorous analyses of the effects of the multi-faceted campaigns.
A summative evaluation workshop during the closing month of the project detailed the findings and recommendations of each RACO's qualitative and quantitative case studies, and steps were taken to build-in sustainability of the CATS and provision for continued communication support.
Direct audio tower messages, field recorded audio-cassettes, video and pamphlets formed the mainstay of campaign materials
back contents next
<section>3</section>
back contents next
SNAPSHOTS OF COMMUNITY SUCCESS
In presenting the results of the campaigns in the four advanced regions (one region, which is highlighted later in the section on "Factors for failure", could not be included because of a change in the pilot site during mid-stream which precluded completion of the steps in the DSC process during the life of the project), it should be noted that each followed a rather standard format.
All were launched during the autumn of 1992, and had an effective running-time of about 18 to 20 months to around April 1994; all also used a relatively uniform channel strategy with a common media-mix made up of CATS, print materials (pamphlets and leaflets), posters, SoAs and video to some degree.
Variations in media-mix were in the number of SoAs conducted, and the production of wall-posters, flip-charts and instructional videos. All pilot-sites also had the benefit of extension agent support and subject matter specialist input for hands-on demonstrations, under the label of "farmers' classes", immediately following the SoAs.
Both bench-mark and post-campaign surveys were essentially conducted by RACO members under the guidance of each pilot-site manager.
On average, each exercise was completed over a two- to three-week period with teams ranging from five to ten interviewers. All regions used an outside group with which to compare results of the media strategies in the pilot sites.
In virtually all cases, however, the outside group could not be considered a "control sample" in the sense of its being isolated from any contact with materials or personnel involved in the campaigns. It would be fairer to say that each outside community had the opportunity for some contact with the campaign whether it were in the form of access to regional radio broadcasts produced by the RACOs or contact with the same extension worker serving the project community.
With this caveat in view, the beneficial effects accrued to the complete multimedia campaign communities, along with the constraints experienced, are discussed below.
COMMUNITY LEVEL RESULTS
Region 2 (Rice and Tilapia)
The pilot site for Region 2 was Barangay Nagbukel, one of 13 barangays in San Isidro Municipality in the northern province of Isabela. It consists of a land area of 404 hectares, 94 percent of which is suitable for agriculture and tilled by about 120 farming families.
Rice farming has been the traditional major livelihood. A handful of farmers had added on Tilapia and duck raising, along with some vegetable production.
Generally, the barangay could be described as being poor, relatively non-cohesive, but with good potential for development, characteristics which closely matched the criteria for site selection.
Prior to the project, for example, a multi-purpose cooperative had started up, but with limited membership.
This was greatly expanded during the project and considerably aided with the construction of a building for rice storage and the donation of a rice drying machine by the governor of the province.
An additional positive factor throughout every phase of the project was the strong support given by the municipal mayor.
Problem tree analysis for barangay Nagbukel
Following the needs assessment, six major focal points for technology concentration were identified, namely, basal fertiliser application for rice, integrated pest management (IPM) to control infestations of golden apple snails and rice leaf-folder, rapid composting technique (RCT), sex fishpond management.
A baseline sample of 130 farmers was interviewed in the target barangay; an additional 30 farmers in a "control" community were included for comparative analysis. A complete resampling of these groups was undertaken in the post-campaign survey.
The campaign launch took place on 30 October 1992 and effectively ran until June 1994. The channel strategy included between one and two hours daily of CATS broadcasts, radio plugs from the regional radio station in addition to regular half-hour Sunday hook-ups with the CATS, pamphlets, and "wall news" on the specific technologies.
Three ten-lesson SoAs were conducted, one each on rice leaf-folder, sex-reversed Tilapia, and rapid composting technology. As well, two instructional videos were produced on SRT and RCT.
Major constraints experienced were in periodic non-functioning of the CATS speakers, partly as a result of original equipment failure but exacerbated by natural factors since this area lies in a major typhoon belt, and the reassignment of the extension worker mid-way through the project as part of an LGU directive.
Even though a replacement extension agent was quickly assigned to the site, some momentum was lost as a result of the extensive training given to the original officer.
Rapid composting demonstration was an integral part of the campaign in Region 2.
Figure 1 Pre- and post- campaign awareness of key rice and fish-pond technologies -full multimedia campaign group (Region 2)
Note: In this table and those which follow, gains between pre- and post-campaign scores for the full campaign group, and gain comparisons between full and partial campaign groups, are significant unless otherwise noted.
In spite of the hindrances, the major findings of the summative evaluation were highly positive.
Figure 1 shows the differences in awareness of the major technologies promoted (defined as a good understanding of the general aspects of a given technology) before and after the campaign.
Figure 2 Comparison of pre- and post-campaign scores and relative gains in awareness levels of key rice and fish-pond technologies by groups sampled (Region 2)
And even though what we term the "partial campaign" group had potential access to regional radio broadcasts produced by the RACO, and the same extension worker(s), and possibly some of the print materials, as the full campaign group, the cumulative effects of these potential sources appear marginal when compared to the solid awareness achievements of the full campaign group (Figure 2).
Finally, the effects on technology adoption, while showing in general a healthy gain between pre- and post-campaign levels in light of the time for such adoption to take place, also produced some unanticipated results (Figure 3).
These occurred in the sex reversal technology portion of the campaign wherein, as farmers learned more about fingerlings and the healthy market currently available in the municipality, they quickly switched from raising Tilapia (which required technology) to fingerling production.
Altogether an original group of six farmers raising Tilapia to grow-out prior to the project rose to 16 during the campaign with a spontaneous switch en masse to fingerling raising after learning about the advantages of doing so. Thus even though the awareness of sex-reversed Tilapia was high (Figure 1), a serendipitous effect took place as a result of learning about a new method for income generation, one with a fast turn-around time of 45 days and immediate market potential.
Anecdotal evidence gathered during the post-campaign survey indicated that the problems with rice-pest management were well on the way to being solved. Partly as a result of this success, coupled with the conversion to fingerling production, the Nagbukel Broadcasters Association - through strong support from the Region 2 RACO - has gained the enthusiastic respect of the community, and in effect become the major gate-keeper to further NGO and government agency involvement in the barangay. As well, NBA members have become a resource base for emerging applications of CATS in other northern municipalities.
Region 6 (rice and mangos)
Iloilo City is the headquarters for Region 6 and has the distinction of having the largest RACO in the country with representatives from 27 different government agencies, universities, colleges and NGOs.
In national terms, most of the island of Iloilo per se is relatively well off agriculturally and in casting about for a suitable barangay for the project the search led to the Island of Gulmaras, which lies about a half-hour bypower-launch west of Iloilo.
Once on Guimaras, the quest for a barangay meeting the criteria for site selection led to the north-eastern part of the island and the municipality of Nueva Valencia. After investigation of three communities falling with in the selection criteria, Barangay Concordia was chosen as the project site.
Figure 3 Comparison of pre and post-campaign adoption levels of multimedia campaign (Region 2)
Concordia is one of 22 communities in Nueva Valencia and has been designated as a depressed community by the government since 1982. Out of a total population of about 2 000 in 1994, the agricultural sector is composed of 168 farmers and 76 farm labourers.
The total land area of the barangay is 1 060 hectares, less than 10 percent of which is suitable for rice cropping. Mango production, which is the pride of the island but mostly carried out on large plantations, is second to rice in importance in the community, followed by coconut, cashew and bamboo.
The barangay is electrified and has a multi-purpose cooperative developed through Save the Children (Australia) some years earlier. Immediately prior to the project, however, it was characterised as relatively inactive but at the same time wishing to increase its membership and role as a community marketing agent. Public transportation to the community is poor, mostly by private motorcycles.
Following the RRA and KIP, rice and mango production were identified as the key priorities for technology concentration.
A base-line sample of 216 "farm cooperators" was interviewed in Concordia with an additional 60 rice and mango farmers sampled in a control barangay ten kilometres down the road. in the post-campaign survey the interviews were restricted to 137 farmer cooperators who produced either rice alone or rice along with mangos (81 out of the 137).
The 60 control respondents, which were later designated as a "partial campaign" sample, remained intact for the summative evaluation comparison.
In addition to awareness, general knowledge and adoption measures, 31 respondents were chosen randomly from the pilot-site sample and administered a 15 item key knowledge test separately for each of the rice and mango technologies promoted, before and after the campaign. The same test was administered for comparison with the partial campaign group.
For the purposes of brevity, only the results accrued to the mango portion of the campaign are presented in this monograph.
Audio-tower, Concordia
The campaign-launch took place on 15 August 1992 and effectively ran until the latter part of April 1994. In this community the regular CATS operations were from 5 to 6 a.m. on Monday, Wednesday and Friday along with a hook-up with the regional agricultural broadcasts producedby the RACO.
A half-hour slot was given to religious programming in the evenings (7.30-8.00 p.m.). As well, the audio-tower was used for unscheduled announcements such as vaccinations for people and animals, visiting speakers coming to the community, and special events.
Since Concordia is a large barangay, outlying areas beyond the reach of the tower were serviced through audio-cassette listening groups.
Other support media included flip-charts, pamphlets, wall news, posters, radio plugs and a seven module video on mango production.
Two SoAs averaging four to five weeks were conducted, one each for rice and mango production, using the CATS and audio-cassette listening groups and specially prepared "primers" accompanying each lesson. Each SoA was followed by four week-long farmers' classes consisting of hands-on field demonstrations provided by subject matter specialists and extension workers.
Mango grafting demonstration by specialists followed SoA.
While only the results referring to the mango technology portion of the campaign are presented here they closely parallel those realized for the rice topics. Altogether twelve technologies covering all phases of mango production were covered with the overall objective being to promote the growing of three trees per backyard. As far as awareness was concerned, the full campaign group nearly reached the maximum ceiling (Figure 4) and scored impressive relative gains between pre and post campaign scores in comparison to the partial campaign groups (65 percent versus 7 percent).
Figure 4 comparison of pre- and post-campaign scores and relative gains in awareness levels of mango technologies by groups sampled (Region 6)
The strong awareness levels generated by the full campaign group, in turn, translated into solid gains in adoption / adaptation rates (Figure 5).
Figure 5 Comparison of pre- and post-campaign levels in actual adoption or adaptation of mango technologies by groups sampled (Region 6)
Region 11 (Coconut, banana)
The Island of Mindanao has been a major growth area in recent years and Davao City has become a beehive of development activities. It also houses the Department of Agriculture (DA)
Regional Headquarters for Region 11 and its RACO.
After a lengthy search for appropriate project sites in the region, including several on-site inspections, the barangay of Tacunan in the district of Tugbok, Davao City was selected.
Rush-hour traffic in barangay Tacunan
In many ways, Tacunan started out as the most depressed of all pilot sites included in the project. Most of its farmers are tenants with only about 10 percent land-ownership.
And although Tacunan is a large barangay with about 2 000 inhabitants spread over eight poroks or sub-divisions, prior to the project it was non-electrified, lacked piped water distribution and had access to only two passenger deepness plying the dirt road leading to the community.
The lack of transport meant that at any rush-hour period upwards of 35 people might be stacked onto one jeepney andjostling for space with everything from pigs and goats to sacks of rice going to market.
Tacunan is essentially a coconut-based farming community with bananas, rice, corn and assorted fruits (such as pomelo, mango and rambutan) comprising the other major commodities.
Not surprisingly, the needs assessment pointed to coconut and banana as the two priority areas for technology concentration, and notably symptoms, prevention and control of diseases in bananas, and pests in coconuts.
A total of 160 farmers, men and women, were interviewed during the base-line survey from all eight poroks.
During the post-campaign survey a sampling of 40 farmers was included from the full campaign area and 40 respondents from the peripheral poroks outside the range of the audio-tower. This latter sample was again termed a "partial campaign" group since they had access to regional radio broadcasts produced by Region 11 RACO, and were serviced by the same extension worker as the full campaign group. Since they were neighbours, they were also no doubt privy to secondary information from the full campaign group.
Figure 6 Awareness of major banana disease symptoms, prevention and control: full campaign group (Region 11)
The Tacunan pilot project was launched with much fanfare on 16 August 1992 and effectively ran until the latter part of May,1994. As part of the opening ceremonies, the "problem tree" was graphically displayed on a billboard as a focus for community development.
Local government dignitaries, led by the mayor of Davao City as well as invited NGOs were then asked to pledge their support to problems in their sectoral area (such as agriculture, health, sanitation, education). Thus, as the project evolved, a holistic community development approach was followed wherein as one set of objectives was solved, the problem tree provided an agenda for the next round.
Within agriculture per se, the communication strategy followed a series of single technology-focused campaigns to address the priorities previously identified. Major problems extant in the community consisted of two banana diseases, bugtok or tibagnol, and bunchy top, both transmitted by insect pests, and one major coconut pest, rhinoceros beetle.
Tibagnol causes hardening of the fruit pulp, while bunchy top stunts growth and eventually kills the banana plant; rhinoceros beetles destroy both coconut fruits and trees if left unchecked.
Led by the CATS, two campaigns were conducted involving a series of broadcasts, information pamphlets, posters, extension-worker support and invited subject matter experts for special on-site training. The pre- and post-campaign results on awareness of symptoms, prevention and control of key banana diseases are shown in Figure 6. The adoption of recommended technologies shown in Figure 7 is also impressive, particularly when noting the low pre-campaign levels.
Figure 7 Comparison of pre- and post-campaign adoption levels of recommended banana technologies by groups sampled (Region 11)
Further to these encouraging quantitative findings, a host of other developments have transformed the community. In addition to a plant nursery and community fish pond, three demonstration plots have been established for research purposes, namely sericulture, bananas, and coconut varieties. The research in this sense is initiated by the farmers themselves and subject matter specialists are only invited for methodology and technology input advice.
Field workers discussed community action planning with the aid of problem tree in Tacunan
Three cooperatives were operational by 1994, a water system was installed, electricity was on the way to the village, and a new cement road was under construction. From hesitant beginnings, the 20-member strong Radyo Tacunan Community Broadcasters Association (RTCBA) had developed a new image, complete with a standard uniform for all members. It had also become established as a legal association capable of undertaking revenue-generating activities.
During the latter part of the project the RTCBA had become the catalyst around which five year community development planning was taking place and, in effect, the entry point for NGO and government agency involvement in the village. Perhaps as a direct result of this involvement, Tacunan residents were unanimous in their post-campaign rating of the CATS as the most important source of agricultural information and their wish to see it remaining in operation.
Radio Tacunan weekly broadcast schedule
Region 9 (Rice)
Lying in the south-east portion across the Island of Mindanao from Davao City, is the headquarters for Region 9, Zamboanga City and the last of the pilot sites, barangay Tulungatung. In this instance only one commodity, rice, was chosen for technology transfer concentration, but each phase of the production cycle was done thoroughly.
Tulungatung lies about 17 kilometres west of Zamboanga in Ayala, one of the city's six districts. Comprised of seven poroks, it has a total land area of 227 hectares, the cultivated portion of which is mainly devoted, in order of priority, to rice, coconut and vegetable crops.
As of 1991 it had a population of 1890, 52 percent of whom were rice-based farming families, 23 percent coconut-based, and 25 percent in other employment. It has adequate access to transportation with a passable dirt and gravel road giving easy access about a kilo metre away to the main highway leading to Zamboanga. During the life of the project a common irrigation system for rice was revitalised and two rice-drying mills were actively functioning.
The barangay qualified as a depressed agricultural area mainly because of a gold mining operation in the foothills immediately above Tulungatung which deposited its tailings in a stream the barangay used for irrigating its rice paddies.
Over a period of three decades, the once fertile soils of the barangay were gradually rendered less productive. This degradation of the agricultural base, coupled with low knowledge of rice technologies and exacerbated by outbreaks of pests and diseases, naturally resulted in a lowering of annual yields. In the year leading up to the launching of the pilot-site campaigns, for example, average rice yields in the barangay were 46 cavans (44 kilograms of rice per cavan) per hectare as opposed to 77 cavans for the whole of Zamboanga City.
Billboard of revenue-generating activities Tacunan
The Tulungatung campaign was similar in many respects to those noted earlier. Following the installation of the CATS and a brief try-out period, it was launched during October 1992 and ran until May 1994. The variety of media used included the CATS, pamphlets, instructional video models projected from a mobile van, a three-month-long SoA, hosted by the extension workers assigned to the area, supported by primers, and evaluated throughout with written tests after each lesson.
Farmer training sessions with hands-on field demonstrations by subject matter specialists complemented the media-based learning modules.
The Tulungatung campaign varied somewhat from the other pilot sites in that its CATS put out a full two hours of scheduled broad casts daily, seven days a week with a dedicated half-hour of agricultural broadcasts (5.30 to 6.00 a.m.) Monday through Friday. In addition, a Saturday morning hook-up with the regional half-hour agri-business radio programme produced by Region 9 RACO was aired.
A further variation occurred when the audio-tower was moved from its original location beside the Barclay office and re-established some two kilometres away in the middle of, and surrounded by, the community's rice fields. Timely technology announcements could hence be directly targeted to farmers as they were working.
Figure 8 Pre- and post campaign awareness levels - full multimedia campaign group (Region 9)
Region 9 targeted a "total family approach" in its campaign. Accordingly, the baseline survey in the pilot community covered 150 respondents composed of 50 heads of household, male farmers, 50 housewives and 50 adolescents; an equal number were sampled in an adjacent community.
Only the male heads of household were reinterviewed for the summative evaluation of campaign effects on technology transfer since they perform the major part of rice farming operations and take the lead in decisions on inputs and methods.
Figure 8 shows the full range of topics covered and the shifts between pre- and post-campaign awareness levels. Figure 9 puts these gains into relief when compared with those generated by the partial campaign group, the latter of whom, like those in other regions, had access to the same extension worker(s), regional radio broadcasts, and possibly some secondary information from pilot-site farmers as well.
Figure 9 Comparison of pre- and post-campaign scores and relative gains in awareness levels of rice technologies by groups sampled (Region 9)
When the high awareness scores were translated into concrete action, the results were also encouraging for both individual practice changes and in comparing the relative gains made by the pilot-site group in comparison with the financially better-off partial campaign sample (Figure 10).
Figure 10 Comparison of pre- and post-campaign adoption levels of rice technologies and relative gains by group sampled (Region 9)
In acknowledging with some pride the considerable changes which had tively short span of time, Region 9 project implementers were quick to point out that the growth in the rates of adoption were mostly due to low-cost practice changes.
For example, one of their first challenges was to control a severe infestation of black bug which had been a major rice pest in the area during the previous six years. A cheap but effective repellent in the form of neem-leaf abstract was recommended and a vigorous effort was made to increase the local supply of neem plants. By the end of the campaign the outbreak of the pest was brought well under control, largely through the efforts of the CATS.
A further variation in the Region 9 evaluation involved the monitoring of rice production levels in the pilot site which, from a meagre beginning of 43 cavans per hectare during the wet season in 1992, had more than doubled to 90 cavans per hectare after the campaign (see Box 3).
One immediately tangible benefit of this increase in income was manifested by the full attendance of children at the primary school, proudly dressed in fresh uniforms and equipped with new books and supplies. Additional production increases, however, may be dependent upon more costlier technologies and a variety of capital-generating projects, such as sericulture, are being considered by the community to support higher level inputs.
Other benefits accrued to the community during the project cycle included a new paved road connecting to the main highway; and with materials and labour contributed by the community, the barangay hall was rebuilt, along with a farmer training centre incorporating a new CATS studio. Parallel to its CATS-led, techno-transfer success has come notoriety and since 1993 Tulungatung has been listed as one of the agri-tourist locations for Zamboanga City.
A CATS-created celebrity in Tulugatung interviews a fellow farmer
Box 3 Production increases recorded
A detailed tallying of ace production levels in the pilot-site for Region 9 was undertaken before, during, and after the campaign for comparison with those generated in the larger Ayala District.
In this case, the campaign was introduced during the dry season in 1993 and its first impact was reflected in the figures for the 1993 wet season harvest (the dry season runs from about December to May, and the wet season from June to November).
During the most intense portion of the campaign, a four month SoA with three CATS broadcasts per week plus print support and field demonstrations by specialists covering all facets of rice farming, including integrated pest management, was run from mid-January to mid-May 1994 or immediately prior to the wet season rice production cycle for that year.
As can be noted in the table below, from a meagre beginning of 43 cavans per hectare during the wet season in 1992, immediately after the campaign in 1994 the wet season harvest yield had more than doubled to 90 cavans per hectare, only six short of that produced in the district at large. Translated into monetary terms, at the going 1994 selling rate of 3.5 pesos per kilo, the wet season harvest increase per hectare in 1994 over 1992 levels amounted to Ps7 238, or about US$290.
One immediately tangible benefit of the increase in income was manifested by the full attendance of children at the barangay primary school, proudly dressed in fresh unifoms and equipped with new books and supplies. Additional production increases, however, may be dependent upon more costlier technologies and a variety of capital generating projects, such as sericulture, are being considered by the community to support higher level inputs.
RICE PRODUCTION LEVELS
(Source: Zamboanga City Agricultural Office, Ayala District, December 1994)
Year
Dry season
Average / hectare
(in cavans)
Wet season
Average / hectare
(in cavans)
1992 Barangay full campaign area*
1992 District level non-campaign area
1993 Barangay full campaign area*
1993 District level non-campaign area
1994 Barangay full campaign area*
1994 District level non-campaign area
* The full campaign area contained 94 hectares of rice land. One cavan of unmilled rice or palay in this region of the Philippines is equal to 44 kilograms.
back contents next
<section>4</section>
back contents
SUMMARY OF ACHIEVEMENTS
Apart from the quantitative indicators, the most obvious benefit at the community level was the cohesiveness resulting from farming families working toward common purposes.
The three pronged process of involving them in the identification and prioritizing of problems from the outset, encouraging their participation in seeking appropriate technological solutions, and creating the conditions for home-grown generation of communication messages to inform fellow residents about, and motivate them toward, practice changes, appears to have struck a responsive chord.
Building upon the linkages with government agencies and NGOs established during the campaign launches provided the technical resource base to tackle each set of problem areas in logical progression.
Particularly noteworthy were the early contributions made by each community toward erecting the audio-towers and production studios, and the later dedication and enthusiasm shown by the "radyo associations" toward maintaining regular broadcast schedules.
As a result, the expertise gained by the pilot-sites is being called upon to assist other communities in mounting CATS operations. Certainly, in terms of day-to-day equipment operation, script preparation and programme production, they have much to offer. Ultimately, over time, the greatest contribution they might make is to provide guidelines on CATS's operational sustainability and its role in meeting the changing information needs of each community in line with its socio-economic progress.
From an LGU point of view, the CATS provided an excellent forum for extension-worker involvement in the community. Indeed, in most instances the SoAs were hosted by the extension staff and in effect their status was considerably enhanced as a result. In Tulungatung extension workers were given a regular weekly broadcast slot.
From a process stance, the project provided an excellent opportunity for further refining the DSC model. In particular, the pioneering of direct beneficiary involvement in RRAs and KIPs as a backdrop to undertaking the detailed AKAPs as tools for accurate diagnoses of farmer problems was successfully realised.
As well, the project introduced a previously untried, but potentially powerful delivery medium, the audio-tower system, as a stimulus for local development. Thus, as a learning experience for both the RACOs and ACD, there seems little doubt that considerable capacity-building toward mounting community development projects has been realised. As one national expression of this confidence, during November 1994 the project received the "Oscar Florendo Award", conferred by the President of the Republic, as the most outstanding regional / local communication project of the year.
SOME REASONS FOR FAILURE
Even though the project proceeded relatively smoothly, it did experience several constraints, some due to natural factors, others to changes in government policy, and some to equipment failures. A number of these have been eluded to earlier in the individual sections and are summarised here.
The Philippines lies in a major typhoon belt and hence any free-standing facility such as an audio tower is susceptible to the effects of typhoons. Normally, the country experiences about 20 or so typhoons per year, but during 1993 the number increased to 37. The island of Mindanao is typhoon free. However, all other regions, and particularly Region 2, were affected both in terms of equipment malfunctioning and damage to crops.
As far as the audio-tower equipment per se was concerned, what was originally perceived as a relatively simple technology turned out to be somewhat more complex. As a result, an audio engineer was engaged to provide technical back-stopping to the pilot-sites. Subsequent to his recommendations, some of the components had to be upgraded, namely, speakers and amplifiers.
As well, audio-towers were moved from their original to new locations to provide more effective coverage in Concordia and Tulungatung. Although these factors did not pose a severe financial setback, they did delay the flow of campaign materials while the replacement equipment was purchased and installed and the towers moved. On the positive side, the configuration now in place can easily stand the test of replication to other sites.
The implementation of the Local Government Code and the devolvement of DA extension responsibility to LGUs, essentially to the municipal mayor level, meant a reassignment of original extension staff in two cases (Regions 2 and 4).
The replacement staff were quickly contacted by the RACOs concerned and oriented to the goals of the pilot projects.
Nevertheless, a great deal of investment in time and development was lost since the original extension workers were participants in some of the training courses (for example, Community organization; Community broadcasting) and were part of RAC O project planning from the start.
Additional factors contributing to keeping the project partially behind schedule occurred in Region 4 wherein the pilot site was relocated twice before it was determined that an appropriate community had been selected.
A further detrimental factor in Region 4 was the departure of the original RACO coordinator and project staff following two years of implementation, including the fuller benefits of training workshops, study tour (for the RACO coordinator), and frequent contact with the other participating regions.
With the appointment of a replacement RACO coordinator, manager and clerk / typist, a new pilot project was launched during mid-April 1994. The team is moving quickly to make up lost ground and it is anticipated that they will have completed the full DSC process by June 1995. As a result of the multitude of setbacks experienced, however, Region 4 was not sufficiently advanced to be included in the impact assessment.
A final factor which evolved from practice and which should influence the setting of criteria for new sites was the sprawl of two of the barangays chosen, Concordia and Tacunan. Only about half the area was reached by the audio-towers in these pilot barangays; to compensate the outlying areas, audio-cassettes were bicycled around to organised listening groups.
Much of the audio-cassette material was specific to technology recommendations and hence this portion of the audience was not privy to the full range of broadcast material nor the spontaneous news and information features. In hind-sight, it is now recommended that a clustered village of two to three kilometres in diameter be included in the rationale for site selection.
LESSONS LEARNED
Based upon this experience acquired over three years, a number of useful suggestions have emerged with regard to advising future applications of the DSC model for community development.
Foremost among these, perhaps, concerns the choice of project site and its meeting of the criteria initially elaborated. Our observations indicate that the commitment of the barangay administration is vital to successfully getting the project off the ground, along with the presence of an active farmers' organisation to keep it moving.
In the communities where these ingredients were not in place, we were forced to change the project site. As well, in addition to meeting the pre-set criteria for pilot-site selection, more research may be needed on the level of social preparation for a given community to successfully undertake a project.
As a starting point, the difficulties in building a consensus involving a critical mass of participants toward objectives to be pursued, and the balance between outside generated RRAs and inside PRAs to realistically set them (Chambers, 1992), will vary widely from community to community and provide a daunting challenge in a three year project of this nature.
Secondly, future projects of this nature should carefully track communication networks at regional, municipal and particularly the community level during the needs assessment phase (FAO, 1994), to more accurately set new communication strategies and enhance those which exist. The extension worker as facilitator / enabler (Bonafacio, 1994) can do much to support this indigenous network.
Thirdly, the visibly presence of the RACO within the community should be actively pursued. In most cases this has meant that the RAC O project managers have been spending two to three days per week mixing with farmers, sometimes moving to live in their area for extended periods, working with various groups in preparing community announcements and audio-tower programmes, and orchestrating the distribution of technology transfer materials.
Box 4 Multiple Uses of CATS
While the FAO project has concentrated on agricultural technology transfer, many other activities, such as better health and nutrition programmes, additional income generating opportunities, water distribution systems and electrification, have proceeded apace.
After a shake down period of six months, each CATS elaborated a weekly broadcast schedule which typically would include one early morning agriculture broadcast, with home economics, youth, cooperatives, health, and religious programmes aired at suitable times throughout the seven-day frame.
Many barangay councils included a weekly programme to inform the community about items such as planning underway and decisions taken. Important announcements such as special events in the community and market prices for agricultural products were broadcast as required.
By the end of the project a litany of positive examples could be cited for each pilot site.
In one site, for instance, a veterinarian unexpectedly arrived during the mid-morning to vaccinate the water buffalo (called carabao in the Philippines) in the area. Given that majority of farmers and their animals were busy in the fields, normally this would have meant that many would have missed the vaccination opportunity. After a series of broadcast tower announcements, virtually all the carabao in the community were brought to the veterinarian.
Similar stories have been forthcoming with regard to the 100 percent vaccination rates among children during the annual campaigns. In another barangay, timely announcements prevented the infestation of rhinoceros beetles.
The list of positive applications goes on. Some barangays have reported using the system for cheerful wakeup calls for farmers in the early morning and to frighten away predatory birds from ricefields at intervals during the day.
No doubt a host of other applications will be recorded as the systems become more fully utilized as an integral part of community life.
Other beneficial effects occurred when previously shy or relatively passive members of the farming community suddenly acquired "celebrity" status as a result of their regular hosting of CATS programmes. This same effect extended to extension staff who hosted either SoAs or regular weekly broadcasts.
In pilot sites where evaluations were taken of presenters popularity, extension workers were among those receiving the highest ratings. A spill-over effect was also evident in the popularity of community administrators whereby in at least three cases barangay captains in pilot sites were chosen as outstanding in their respective municipalities.
Fourthly, the elaboration of the "problem tree" billboard visibly prominent in each barangay provided a framework for a comprehensive approach to community development and an immediately accessible focus for NGO and government agencies planning projects in the area. The recommended holistic approach to improving socio-economic progress covering areas such as health, sanitation, nutrition and literacy in addition to agriculture (Balit, 1988, p. 12) can thus be considerably accelerated through such ground-validated tools.
Fifthly, a common theme referred to during the summative evaluation workshop was the need for additional project time to further capacity building in the pilot areas, while at the same time spreading the audio-tower methodology to new sites.
More time is needed to evaluate how CATS will be adapted over time to new community uses or perhaps develop into more sophisticated community AM or FM broadcast radio stations.
More time is needed to test the longer-term durability of CATS equipment, and the capability of broadcast associations to undertake repairs and up-grade components as required - in short, their ability to be self-reliant (Ramirez and Stuart, 1994).
More time would be useful to build up pilot community multimedia production capacities (posters, flip charts, and simple video in addition to CATS), similar to those being developed in a long term FAO project in Mexico (Fraser, 1990).
Such centres would complement and further localize materials produced by the RACOs and serve as a resource base for regional and municipal LGUs. This suggestion fits well with FAO's experience wherein a project duration of four to five years is considered a normal minimum (Balit, 1987); most successful DSC projects have had a running-time of seven to ten years.
Thus, although the final evaluation of this short-term project should be recast three years or so down the road (to have a five-year time-frame for analysis of campaign and follow-up effects), on the whole the summative evaluation was interpreted as positive in terms of both achievements and in flagging those areas requiring further attention.
Certainly, the DSC process model has provided a solid framework which is flexible enough to allow for farmers' elaboration of location-specific needs, the fitting of existing mature technologies available to address their requirements, and the production, pretesting and packaging of user-friendly multimedia materials to meet information, motivation and training gaps. All of this has required, however, two years to get up to speed.
If, as already noted in one region, the DSC approach proves more broadly successful down the line in significantly raising farm productivity and household incomes, future applications of this nature might be directed more toward reducing the front-end analysis stages through rapid-appraisal-type, baseline AKAP surveys using smaller samples.
This "fast-prototyping", according to the jargon of technology-based learning, would accelerate the evaluation of communication strategies used and the rejecting of those which don't work - and the fine-tuning of those that do.
REFERENCES
Balit, S.
1988. Rethinking development support communication. Development Communication Report, No. 62.
Balit, S.
1993. Development support communication and agriculture: The road ahead. Development Communication Report, No. 80.
Bonafacio, M. F.
1994. Images of agriculture: Problems, issues and trends in technology transfer. Los Banos, Philippines. PCARRD.
Chambers, R.
1992. Rural appraisal: Rapid, relaxed and participatory. Sussex University, Brighton, UK. Institute of Development Studies.
Gary Coldevin
1986. Evaluation in rural development communication: A case study from West Africa. Media in Education and Development, Vol. 19.
FAO.
1985. Masagana programme: Rice technology transfer in the Philippines, by 0. Sison. Rome.
FAO.
1990. Communication strategies for rural development: A case study on the use of campaigns in Lesotho, by G. Coldevin. Rome.
FAO.
1995. Participatory rapid rural appraisal of farmers' agricultural knowledge and communication systems, by R. Ramirez. Rome.
Lightfoot, C., N. Quinn, P. Singh, A. Bottrall & G. Conway.
1989. Training resource book for agri-ecosystem mapping. Los Banos, Philippines. International Rice Research Institute.
Librero, F.
1990. Development communication strategies: Some experiences in the Philippines. Journal of Development Communication, Vol. 1, No. 1.
Ramirez, R. and T. Stuart
1994. Farmers' control communication campaigns. ILEIA Newsletter, Vol. 10, no. 1.
Stuart, T. H.
1993. Constraints in technology transfer: A users' perspective with a focus on IPM, Philippines. In F.W.T. Penning de Vries et al (Eds.), Systems approaches for agricultural development. Amsterdam. Kluwer Academic Publishers.
back contents
