<title>Harvesting of textile animal fibres</title>
<section>1</section>
INTRODUCTION
The animal fibres covered in this bulletin are of considerable importance to the world's textile industry. As a natural renewable resource they have been a vital factor in the development of mankind. Thier products have provided protection from the elements and processing of them was one man's first rudimentary industries.
Today, millions of people still depend on them for their livelihood.
Being products of nature, each of the animal fibre types covered in this bulletin has unique properties, including variability in fibre diameter, colour and length. They are also exposed to the climatic variations of the seasons which result in dirt, seeds and other extraneous matter finding its way into fleeces.
To realise their potential value as textile fibres it is essential that basic rules be followed when harvesting and preparing animal fibres for sale to the world's textile industry. Preparation must focus on meeting customer requirements and expectations to ensure that the confidence of the textile industry is maintained or enhanced.
The world textile industry is highly competitive and animal fibres, although important, fill a relatively small proportion of the total fibre requirement.
Cotton and synthetic fibres dominate textile production, and the synthetic fibre makers continually attempt to duplicate the unique properties that animal fibres possess. Their aim is to penetrate the luxury segment of the consumer market where the majority of products made from animal fibres command premium prices because of their natural properties and perceived value.
This bulletin provides general background information on the main textile producing animals and detailed guidance on the harvesting techniques, including preparation for sale. By following these guidelines growers will maximise the monetary value of the fibre and its value to the textile industry.
A wide range of sources have provided information on the techniques and practices, skills and tasks that must be performed with different fibres to provide the quality assurance approach essential to successful marketing.
I hope all readers will find some beneficial information in the text and that the techniques recommended will lead to improved fibre presentation and increasing demand from manufacturers and consumers alike.
<section>2</section>
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
Wools of New Zealand (formerly called the New Zealand Wool Board) has kindly made available a considerable amount of the material on shearing and gear maintenance, which has been republished in this bulletin. I am extremely grateful for this information and I express my thanks accordingly to Wools of New Zealand - my former employer.
Wools of New Zealand is a wool grower funded body which works to promote New Zealand wool internationally. It also provides wool growers with a range of services to ensure the quality and efficiency of wool production is enhanced.
Wools of New Zealand offers training and instruction services covering:
- Shearing (at junior, intermediate and senior levels)
- Wool handling instruction courses (at junior, intermediate and advanced levels).
- Wool classing instruction and refresher courses.
- Advice to wool growers on farm management, sheep selection, clip preparation and market information.
For your information Wools of New Zealand can be contacted through:
Group Manager Grower Services
Wools of New Zealand
P O Box 3225
Wellington
New Zealand
Phone (04) 472 6888
Fax (04) 473 7872
In conclusion, a special acknowledgment to Liz Kahn, Secretary Grower Services Group for her valued assistance, forbearance and co-operation with the preparation of this bulletin.
<section>3</section>
CHAPTER 1
TEXTILE FIBRE PRODUCING ANIMALS
1.1 Sheep
1.1.1 Introduction to Sheep & Wool
One of the first animals to be domesticated were sheep, some ten to twelve thousand years ago. This very early domestication was due to a number of important factors. Sheep provided prehistoric man with two sources of food - meat and milk as well as producing a very useful fibre plus a pelt. Sheep therefore provided the two essentials for life - food and protection. In addition sheep also helped fertilise the fields of early man. In its primitive state, the sheep moults it's fleece in spring and early summer. Women picked up the shed wool, admired it, spun and wove it. The textile industry was thus born - almost certainly between 10,000 and 8,000 BC. and somewhere in the country bounded by the Black Sea, the Persian Gulf, the Caucasus and the Himalayas.
Sheep are a ruminant mammal of the genus Ovis whose likely ancestor has been traced to the Moufloniforuve Ovis Blyth. However, owing to the wide genetic variety of sheep, there is a range of opinion as to their exact origin. There are now about 200 different breeds and crosses producing a great variety of grades and types of wool. They range from the merino producing the finest apparel wool through to both developed and primitive carpet wool sheep and hair sheep.
Sheep are farmed in most countries around the world. From the hot desert regions of Australia, Asia and the Middle East through to cold, bleak conditions in Northern Europe, Russia, Iceland and Southern South America. They graze pastures in the high altitudes of central Asia and the Himalayas through to the low coastal regions of New Zealand and the United Kingdom. This adaptability has necessitated a variety of pasture types being utilised in these environments. Sheep are even farmed successfully indoors.
Today, the best wool comes from the International Wool Secretariat (IWS) member countries, ie. Australia, New Zealand, South Africa and Uruguay. These countries have practised advanced selective breeding programmes for many years and consequently their wool is of very good quality, with excellent colour and the incidence of melanin pigmentation is rare.
Wool now constitutes 5% of the world's textile fibre and the finished products made from wool are positioned in the top end of the market, whether they are apparel, machine or hand-knotted carpets or bedding.
Sheep are usually shorn annually in the spring/summer months, however in some countries such as New Zealand, shearing more than once per year is practiced. This may be twice per year or three times in two years. The time and frequency of shearing has a great affect on the quality of wool harvested as it can have a major influence on important fibre characteristics, and in particular the degree of fault(s) present. High preparation standards are also maintained in the IWS member countries. These standards focus on preparing wool to meet customer/producer requirements. As a result, the consistency of grower lots put up for sale is very good. The pre-sale testing to objectively determine a number of important fibre properties serves to compliment the quality of wool available. The advanced nature of the sheep and wool production systems in these countries ensures wool's position as a premier textile fibre is maintained.
As this bulletin deals with the harvesting of animal fibres the detailed differences between the principle sheep breeds of the world has not been covered. If this information is required, there are many excellent reference publications available.
In shearing wool from sheep one of two basic techniques or patterns is used:
r One is for Merino sheep, which constitute close to 50% of the world's sheep population.
r The other has been developed for breeds other than Merino.
It is this second shearing pattern that has also been modified to accommodate the shearing of the fat tailed sheep which are found primarily throughout the Middle East.
1.1.2 Sheep and Wool Production
The total world wool production in 1992/93 was 1.664 million tonnes on a clean basis. Production in Australia, the world's largest producer was 561 thousand tonnes clean in 1992/93. New Zealand's production of wool was the lowest level for 30 years at 193 thousand tonnes clean. Estimated production in the Commonwealth of Independent States (C.I.S), the third largest producer in the world, was 170 thousand tonnes clean, while the production estimated for China, the fourth largest producer, was 124 thousand tonnes clean. Production in Argentina was 68 thousand tonnes, while Uruguay's production was 55 thousand tonnes. Production in the United Kingdom was 47 thousand tonnes clean while production in South Africa was 44 thousand tonnes clean.
Table 1.1 World wool production
(thousand tonnes clean)
Country or Region
Country
Australia
New Zealand
Soviet Union/CIS
China
Argentina
Uruguay
United Kingdom
South Africa
Turkey
Pakistan
India
United States of America
Spain
Brazil
Morocco
Iran
Romania
France
Mongolia
Chile
Bulgaria
Region
Other Western Europe
Other Eastern Europe
Other Asia
Other Africa
Other America
World Total
of which:
Merino
Halfbred
Crossbred
Source: International Wool Textile Organisation (IWTO)
p - figures are provisional for the latest season.
Table 1.1 shows world wool production by major wool producing countries and regions for the period 1987/88 to 1992/93 season. World wool production is broken up into three breed groups: Merino, Halfbred and Crossbred.
Table 1.2 shows world woolled sheep populations by major producing countries and regions for the period 1986/87 to 1991/92 according to three breed groups. Australian wool is predominantly Merino and Halfbred while New Zealand is the world's largest producer of Crossbred wools. Graph 1.3 illustrates shares of world wool production in 1992/93 by the major producer countries.
Note: In table 1.1 and 1.2:
Other Africa includes Algeria,, Botswana, Egypt, Ethiopia, Kenya, Libya, Mali, Mozambique, Sudan, Swaziland, Tanzania, Tunisia, Zambia, Zimbabwe. Other America includes Bolivia, Colombia, Ecuador, Greenland, Mexico, Paraguay, Venezuela. Other Asia includes Afghanistan, Bangladesh, Bhutan, Cyprus, Gaza, Indonesia, Israel, Jordan, Kuwait, Lebanon, Macau, Malaysia, Myanmar, Nepal, Saudi Arabia, Syria, Thailand, Yemen. Other Western Europe includes Austria, Belgium, Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Luxembourg, Malta, Netherlands, Norway, Sweden, Switzerland.
Graph 1.1 World wool production
Graph 1.1 World wool production
Graph 1.2 World wool production by category
Graph 1.2 World wool production by category
Table 1.2 World woolled sheep population (millions)
Year ending Sept. of second
year shown
Census Month
Average
Albania
Dec
Argentina
June
Australia a
Mar
Brazil
Dec
Bulgaria
Jan
Canada
June
Chile
June
China
Dec
Czechoslovakia
Jan
Falkland Is.
May
France
Dec
E. Germany
Dec
W. Germany
Dec
Greece
Dec
Hungary
Dec
India
May
Iran
Oct
Iraq
Mar
Irish Republic
June
Italy
Dec
Lesotho
Aug
Mongolia
Dec
Morocco
Mar
Namibia
Aug
New Zealand
June
Pakistan
May
Peru
Dec
Poland
June
Portugal
Dec
Romania
Jan
South Africa b
Aug
Former Soviet Union c
Jan
Spain
Dec
Turkey
Dec
U.K.
June
U.S.A.
Jan
Uruguay
June
Yugoslavia
Jan
Other Africa c
Other America c
Other Asia c
Other Western Europe c
World Total of which:
Soviet Union, China, Eastern Europe
Source: International Wool Textile Organisation (IWTO)
a Covers all farms.
b Official series plus fixed estimate for woolled sheep in Bantu areas.
c See note below for country coverage.
1.1.3 Fibre Characteristics of Wool
Wool is a protein fibre chiefly composed of keratin. The fibre is made up of overlapping cuticle scales and an inner cortex. Both the cortex and the cuticle influence the fibre properties of the wool and the fibre is slightly elliptical, unlike other animal fibres. With the wide range of sheep breeds, the fibre properties of the wool produced are equally wide ranging. The particular fibre characteristic of specific breeds can be exploited by processing the fibre into appropriate end products. In a general sense, wool varies from the super fine Merino producing a fibre similar to cashmere, very high lustre English breeds producing mohair-like fibre, and coarse hairy wools similar to the guard coat of some goats.
The range of fleece weights produced annually by sheep in the IWS member countries is from 2-5 kg clean depending on the breed of sheep and the farming environment. In the countries where sheep owners income from wool is less important, the annual fleece weights are lower, ie. from 1-3 kg clean.
The first shearing of the sheep as a lamb occurs from 3-11 months of age and produces lambs wool which is the finest diameter wool the sheep produces. The diameter is from 2-6 microns finer than the second time the sheep is shorn usually at 9-18 months. The amount of change that occurs is influenced by the interval between shearing, feeding levels and animal health and possible breed effects. The third time shorn, the wool maybe from 1-3 microns coarser that the previous shearing . From then the change in diameter is small. The range of fibre diameters between the different breeds of the sheep varies from 15 microns grown by superfine Merinos through to 45 microns produced by the carpet wool sheep.
The length of wool produced is influenced by breed and fibre diameter. Merinos range from 60-110 mm if shorn annually through to the coarse carpet wools ranging from 100-200 mm annually.
Scientific breeding programmes in the major producing countries have almost eliminated melanin pigmentation and consequently the wool is of very white colour. However, this is not the case with wools grown in many of the other producing countries.
<section>4</section>
1.1.4 End Uses of Wool
Wool constitutes 5% of the world textile fibre production. Wool's limited supply coupled with its excellent textile performance properties has resulted in wool products being positioned in the luxury end of most markets. The promotional activities of IWS have focused on the "woolmark" and have assisted greatly with enhancing this position in the market place. The "woolmark" is an internationally recognised registered trade mark denoting products made from pure new wool, which also meets strict performance criteria.
Owing to the range of sheep breeds and wool types produced wool is processed into an equally wide range of end products. End uses of wool is determined by the main fibre characteristics. These include fibre diameter, fibre length/strength, colour and handle, plus others such as lustre, bulk, presence of faults like vegetable matter and the level of felting.
The two major end uses for wool are apparel products and carpets (both machine made and hand-knotted).
The three systems for making wool yarns are:
r Woollen (condenser spun)
r Semi-worsted, or
r Worsted.
The following table provides a general indication of the end uses of wool based on fibre diameter.
Diagram 1.1 End use of wool
Diagram 1.1 End use of wool
The consumption of wool by end use in the six main markets (France, Germany, Italy, Japan, UK and USA) for 1992:
Million kg
Menswear 101.1
Womenswear 150.1
Knitwear 89.7
Other Apparel 73.7
Carpets 165.9
Other Interior Textiles 70.6
Total 651.1
There are however, a vast number of other products made from wool and a few of the more interesting ones include:
r Mattress and furniture stuffings
r Tennis ball covers
r Piano hammers
r Insulation
r Felt hats and toys
1.2 Goats
1.2.1 Mohair
1.2.1.1 Introduction to Mohair
Somewhat confusingly, mohair comes from the angora goat, a species indigenous to Turkey but said to have originated in the mountains of Tibet - although its true origins are subject to speculation. The evidence, however, suggests that angora goats arrived in Turkey by way of Palestine and the desert regions further north. The breed is thought to be at least 3,000 years old, and there is little doubt that for many centuries these unusually frail and beautiful creatures have been highly prized.
The breed takes its name from Angora in Turkey, better known today as Ankara. The hair of the goat - which is white, long and very fine and silky - is called "mohair" which is a corruption of the ancient Arabic word "mukhyar" meaning the "best of selected fleece". It was noted for its softness, brightness and receptiveness to rich dyes.
Today, the best raw material comes from South Africa where there are strict guidelines and standards, and the industry is well organised. The focus in breeding programmes is to obtain goats that produce less kemp fibre.
Despite its historic connections with mohair, Turkish mohair production lags behind the industries in South Africa and Texas. Turkish quality control leaves much to be desired by modern standards and Turkish fleeces are considered too kempy. The amount of mohair obtained per goat is much lower than South African and Texan goats, as animals raised in Turkey are shorn only once a year.
Australia currently contributes 4 per cent and New Zealand only 2 per cent of world mohair production, although the fibre produced is more lustrous than that obtained in more arid climates. It is also reported that genetic breeding programmes in Australasia are resulting in a dramatic reduction in the level of kemp.
Angora goats are not a sturdy breed and thrive best under certain conditions. The angora goat's demands are exact: they thrive at altitude in a warm, dry climate. If exposed to cold or wet, they may die of pneumonia, and this provides a sharp contrast to the much hardier cashmere goat.
The best fleece is produced in high altitude where the animals can forage for a variety of shrubs and aromatic plants. It is important for the goats to lead an active life, constantly on the move.
More attention must be paid to the fragile angora goat than to any other livestock. The amount of mohair that the angora goat produces (unlike the cashmere goat) is mainly dependent on the nutritive value of its feed, rather than upon seasonal or climatic effects, although mohair production obviously falls during drought periods.
1.2.1.2 Production of Mohair
Mohair accounts for only 0.1 per cent of world natural fibre production. Annual world mohair production amounts to 15 thousand tonnes compared with 15 thousand tonnes of cotton and 1.7 million tonnes of wool. The major producers are Southern Africa (South Africa and Lesotho), followed by the USA (Texas), Turkey, Argentina, Australia and New Zealand. Australian and New Zealand production is still very small as breeders in both countries are trying to develop a breed of angora goat suitable for their particular environment, but it is hoped that production will expand. Small amounts of mohair are also produced in Zimbabwe; by the Navajo Indians in Arizona, USA and Mexico; and on many small angora goat farm operations in the UK, Spain and France. However, the quantities from these sources are negligible compared with the major producing countries.
The latest figures suggest that the total production of mohair in 1993 was 14.95 thousand tonnes.
Table 1.3 World mohair production by main producing countries
(thousand tonnes)
YEAR
SOUTH
AFRICA
F
USA
F
TURKEY
F
ARGENTINA
F
LESOTHO
F
AUSTRALIA
NEW
ZEALAND
MISC
PRODUCTION
F
TOTAL
Source: International Mohair Association
1.2.1.3 Fibre Characteristics of Mohair
The Mohair fleece of the angora goat is white, smooth and lustrous and has a high tensile strength. The smooth lustrous appearance is caused by the flat, overlapping scales covering the fibre. Although mohair - like wool - consists of the protein keratin, it nevertheless differs from wool in certain respects. The cross-section of wool is slightly elliptical, whereas the very fine mohair fibre is round. The scales are larger than wool and lie flatter, making a smoother fibre surface. The resultant greater reflection of light gives mohair its characteristic lustre.
The value of a fleece is determined by fibre diameter, lustre, softness, freedom or near freedom from kemps, and clean yield. Kemps are short, heavily medullated, coarse fibres. Kemp fibres contain air spaces (medulla) which reduce the effectiveness of dye and in a finished cloth show up as being much lighter in colour than the other fibres. Although in certain end uses kemp can be used to create a special effect, in mohair kemp is undesirable - too much kemp will cause serious problems in spinning and dyeing. The presence of any foreign material in the fleece will affect the quality of the final product and will have to be removed prior to processing, adding to the cost of manufacture. Kemp can be controlled or reduced by genetic selection.
Grading is primarily related to fibre diameter. The age of the goat is probably the most important determinant in the quality and quantity of mohair produced. Fleece production increases from birth and peaks at approximately three or four years of age. The average peak production in South Africa is about 4-5 kg a year for females and 5-6 kg for males. Over the goat's lifespan, the fibre diameter increases from an average of 24 microns for kids up to 46 microns for strong adults. Kids normally produce fibre with a diameter of 24-28 microns at their first shearing, approximately 29-30 at one year, 31-34 at 18 months, and from 36 to 46 microns as adults. Staple length shows little change with age and grows at an average rate of 20-25 mm/month.
The first three shearings produce the most sought-after fibre and subsequently the fibre becomes coarser. Kid mohair fetches the highest price but only represents 16 per cent of the clip.
1.2.1.4 End Uses of Mohair
Mohair is a lustrous fibre with a silky, luxurious appearance but it is also very hard wearing. One of the advantages of this fibre is its tremendous versatility. It can be used both for clothing and furnishing and, within these, its end uses are wide ranging. Individual fibres are strong and make a finished fabric that is non-crushable, soil resistant and does not pill. Mohair has an affinity for dyes and is able to absorb them completely and indelibly. It provides warmth during the winter months but also makes a cool suiting fabric for the humidity of summer, hence its popularity in the Far East, particularly Japan.
Mohair is used to manufacture many products - including knitting yarn for hand or machine knitwear, lightweight suitings, fabric for stoles, scarves and warm blankets and durable upholstery velours. It is often blended with wool for top quality blankets where the mohair content makes the fabric warmer, and at the same time lighter.
About 12 per cent of total mohair production goes into furnishing fabrics, such as upholstery velours and moquettes. Such fabrics are often used for upholstery, particularly in prestige locations - including the first class areas of ships such as the QE2. Mohair upholstery velours are chosen because, although expensive, the fabric is extremely hard wearing and easy to clean while creating a feeling of quality.
One of the challenges facing the mohair industry - particularly the knitting sector - is that the fibre has been imitated by much cheaper acrylic yarns, developed to have similar properties and described as "mohair-like". These products are seen to have done genuine mohair a disservice, adulterating its high quality image.
1.2.2 Cashmere
1.2.2.1 Introduction to Cashmere
The appeal of cashmere and its unrivalled status as a luxury fibre hinges on three key factors:
r its visual appeal and its extreme softness;
r its scarcity, and
r its image or mystique.
As a luxury fibre, Cashmere commands some of the highest prices in the world of textiles. Only vicuna and musk ox - neither of which is available in anything approaching commercial quantities - achieve higher prices than cashmere. Another key feature of its attraction is its scarcity in comparison with other well known fibres, both natural and man-made. The uncertainty and speculation which surround the production and availability of cashmere have increased its appeal, sometimes sending prices soaring upwards. Also, the geographical remoteness of cashmere production, the dependence on manual skills in the early stages of processing and the fibre's association with exotic peoples following a traditional rural way of life add to the attraction of cashmere fibre in highly industrialised western urban markets.
Cashmere is one of the alternative - and lesser used - spellings of Kashmir, a region, partly in India and partly in Pakistan, in the western Himalayas. This wild and mountainous area gave its name to the fine soft goat's wool, or down, which first came to the West in the form of intricately woven cashmere shawls. In fact the fibre came not from Kashmir but from Tibet where it was gathered by herdsmen from their goats during the animals' spring moult. Cashmere fibre took its name from Kashmir as it was there that it was spun, woven and sold as a finished item. Today in Kashmir and Tibet - where the fibre is still produced and processed by hand - it is known locally as pashmina.
1.2.2.2 Production of Cashmere
Detailed information on cashmere production, particularly that in China, is not easy to obtain. Accurate figures on national cashmere production are difficult - if not impossible - to acquire. One source of information is the IWS China Branch which estimates that in 1988 there were 67 million goats in China, of which 40 million were producing cashmere.
However, in 1988, world production of cashmere was estimated at about 5,000 tonnes. This compares with an annual availability of wool in the same year of 1.8 million tonnes. World cashmere production is thought to have declined since then.
Estimates of the volume of cashmere produced in China, Mongolia, Iran and Afghanistan vary considerably. An estimate of current world production of cashmere raw material is 4,500 tonnes, which represents a 10 per cent decline from a figure quoted in 1987 of 5,000 tonnes.
China itself produces roughly 60 per cent of the total volume of raw cashmere, with Inner Mongolia contributing up to 70 per cent of this amount. The remainder is thought to be split roughly equally between Mongolia (20-25 per cent) and Iran and Afghanistan (20-25 per cent). Iranian and Afghan cashmere is of a lower quality to the cashmere from China and is spun into yarn principally for woven cloth.
As well as being by far the world's largest supplier, China produces the best quality cashmere. The Chinese claim that the very finest cashmere is produced north of the 40th parallel in Inner Mongolia (north of the Yangtse River).
1.2.2.3 Fibre Characteristics of Cashmere
Chinese cashmere has a fibre diameter of between 12.5 and 16.0 microns. A diameter of 15.5 microns is considered a standard for cashmere. The longer the fibre the better the quality. The Chinese Commodity Inspection Bureau (CCIB) specifies that the hair should be longer than 32 mm. A fibre length of 46 mm is considered long.
White breeds are most desirable, as white down commands the best prices. White fibre is preferred since it is easiest to dye, producing the purest colours. This is particularly important for cashmere knitwear where soft pastel shades are perennial favourites. Cross-breeding can result in undesirable coloured fibre.
Cashmere produced in Mongolia is generally slightly coarser, between 16.0 and 17.5 microns, but longer. It is used in knitwear and weaving. Cashmere produced in Iran and Afghanistan has a diameter of 17-21 microns and is chiefly used for weaving.
1.2.2.4 End Uses of Cashmere
The knitwear industry is the largest consumer of cashmere. Traditionally, Scotland has been the home of the cashmere knitwear industry, producing collections known to prestigious markets all over the world. Many knitwear producers use cashmere from time to time, often using blended yarns. Few specialise in 100 per cent cashmere knitwear, however. The Scottish knitters still constitute one of the biggest markets for cashmere fibre outside China.
The weaving sector is a smaller consumer of cashmere than is the knitwear industry. Nevertheless, significant amounts of cashmere go into accessories (scarves, shawls, stoles), rugs (especially travel rugs and "throws") and cloth for luxury coats, jackets and suits for the menswear trade.
The hair which is removed from the down in the debarring process is used in carpets, underfelts, and interlinings for men's suits and jackets.
1.3 Camel
1.3.1 Introduction to Camel Hair
The Camelus is part of the Camelidae Gray family, as is the South American Auckenidi (which includes Llama, alpaca, vicuna and guanaco). The Camelus is made up of two sub-species: the one humped and the two humped.
The one humped dromedary or Arabian camel is found throughout Africa, Arabia, the Near East and, to a lesser extent, in other areas of Asia. It was imported into the Canary Islands, Spain, the former USSR, and to various Central and South American countries and Australia, where it adapted to local conditions.
The two humped species, known as the Bactrian camel, is bred in Eastern and Central Asia. Surviving in extremely cold climates, the Bactrian camel has been used throughout history by the Tartars, the Mongols and the Chinese. It is not a particularly intelligent animal, having a difficult and capricious character. Both species are used as pack animals, for riding, and sometimes for sport. Camel hair raw material is largely obtained from the double humped Bactrian camel.
The double humped camel is bred mainly in the northern areas of China and Mongolia. In Inner Mongolia (China) breeding areas are concentrated in Alxa Megn prefecture, bordering on the Gobi Desert and in Mongolia. This is an area where the predominantly desert conditions yield only shrubs, on which camels alone can survive. In Mongolia most camels are raised in the Gobi Desert which makes up the southern third of the country. Over half the camel hair produced by China comes from Inner Mongolia, with the remainder from Xinjiang, Gansu, Qinghai and Ningxia. Some camel hair also comes from Afghanistan and Iran, but this is generally of an inferior quality.
1.3.2 Production of Camel Hair
Details on the production of camel hair are very limited.
In 1987, China recorded national production of 1800 tonnes of camel hair, of which 56% came from Inner Mongolia. In this same period, China exported 546 tonnes.
<section>5</section>
1.3.3 Fibre Characteristics of Camel Hair
Camel hair, like cashmere, comprises two qualities: relatively coarse outer hair and inner down fibre. The underdown produced by animals living in the hottest desert climates tends to be coarser and sparser than from those living in a more temperate climate. The best fibre is found in Inner Mongolia and Mongolia. The fine down fibre varies from 19-24 microns - about 2 microns coarser than Iranian cashmere - and varies between 2.5 and 12.5 cm in length. This fibre is the result of many years of selective breeding.
The outer hair of the camel is coarse and can be up to 37.5 cm in length with a diameter of 20-120 microns. The average weight of the adult female under hair is 3.5 kg while that of the male is double this amount. The fibres are obtained by shearing and also by collecting the hair during the moulting season.
Like cashmere, only the soft underwool or down hair is used in the production of yarn. When the camel moults it does not lose its hair all at once: first the neck hair falls off, then the mane and finally the body hair. This process takes place over a six to eight week period starting in late spring. The hair covering the humps is not shorn since, without it, the animals would be more susceptible to disease in the summer months. The hair is obtained by a number of methods: by combing, by shearing and simply by collecting the clumps of hair shed naturally during the moulting season.
Varying from reddish to light brown, the hair is sorted according to shade and age of the animal. Baby camel hair, which has an average diameter of about 19 microns and a length of 2.5-12.5 cm, is the finest and softest. It holds greater cachet but it is not currently in greater demand than adult hair as its high premium is beyond its economic value.
During the winter the Bactrian camel produces long, thick hair. A type of mane grows around the neck and a long tuft extends from the muzzle. Long hair is also found on the joints of the elbows, knees and on the limbs. The most common colour is reddish brown, with variants from brown to grey. The white fleece is the most valued but is very rare.
1.3.4 End Uses of Camel Hair
Fabrics containing camel's hair are left in the natural state or dyed to a darker shade of brown. The fine fur fibres are woven or blended with fine wool for overcoating, top coating, sportswear and sports hosiery.
The long hair removed by the dehairing process is used to make felt for the Mongolian yurts or tents and for the herdsmen's winter coats, which are very warm and completely waterproof. It is also used for carpet backing. The strong, springy hair of the camel mane is used for interlinings and the outer hair is traditionally used in bedding as it is said to have properties beneficial to rheumatism and arthritis.
1.4 Llama
1.4.1 Introduction to the Llama
The South American camelids are in four existing forms: all of which live in the high altitudes of the Andes: the Llama (Lama glama), the alpaca (Lama pacos), the vicuna (Vicugna vicugna), the guanaco or huanaco (Lama hunchus or Lama guanicoe). These animals can endure the climate of the highest Andean altitudes - from 2,500m up to 5,500m - from tropical areas to sub-polar regions, adapting to the rarefied atmosphere and are able to survive on the tough natural vegetation of the steppes. Like the Afro-Asian camel, they are pseudo-ruminants; unlike true ruminants they have three stomachs rather than four. The Llamas' tendency to kick and spit saliva and the remains of undigested food has been exaggerated; they will only do so if badly irritated.
The Llama and alpaca are domestic animals and have lived with man since time immemorial. Llama males in particular, are used as a beast of burden and have been since the times of the ancient Incas. The alpaca is the species most famous for its fibre production. The vicuna and guanaco, however, are wild animals and have a more aggressive nature. As a result, the fibre from these is seldom harvested.
Today, although less significant than in its heyday, alpaca production remains one of Peru's staple industries. In areas where little or no crops can be cultivated for subsistence, the breeding of animals is the peasants' only means of livelihood. Alpaca is also still in a small way connected to traditional ceremonies of the peasant Indian population. Weaving, although modified following the introduction of the European treadle loom in the early years of the Colombian period, is still carried out in some parts of the Andes in much the same way as it always has been.
Much of Peru's population lives in the Altiplano grasslands of the Andes at altitudes where the perpetual cold inhibits growth of trees and crops. The local Indians' livelihood depends predominantly on animals. The camelids, in contrast, are adapted to the high altitudes where they are able to convert the poor highland forage and bear young. Their soft padded feet, unlike sheep's cloven hooves, do not break the ground.
1.4.2 Production of Alpaca Fibre
It is estimated that there are some four million alpaca in South America, three million Lama glama (or domestic Llama) and 125,000 vicuna. The wildest of the Llama group, the guanaco, is in a state of great danger; the entire South American herd is thought to number fewer than 50,000.
During the early 1970's stocks of alpaca and llama were significantly reduced, seriously affecting the livelihoods of the local population. Subsequently efforts have been made, through education and research, to restore the level of the camelid population. But the fibre industry is erratic and highly dependent on world demand. It is also subject to the political and economic events that characterise life in Peru, which has also variously affected the level of the population of these animals.
A further factor affecting the breeding of the animals is the physiognomy of the land itself. The central Andean region - and particularly the vulnerable highlands - have been overgrazed in recent years by sheep and cattle forcing the alpaca back into the more remote and impoverished areas of the Altiplano.
Fibre production has been low in the last two years, dropping by as much as 40 per cent. This has been partly a result of drought.
Alpaca raw material is not exported. All raw material is processed in Peru into products for export, in the form of tops, yarns and knitwear - although some is still used for domestic consumption, for knitwear and woven fabrics, and also for the craft industry for products sold in the tourist trade.
There are about three million alpacas worldwide. Roughly 80 per cent are found in Peru, chiefly in the southern regions of Puno, Arequipa and Cuzco, where the animals have been domesticated since the ninth century. The most important areas in Bolivia are Pacejes, Carangas and Omasuyos.
1.4.3 Fibre Characteristics of Alpaca
There are two types of alpaca; the huacaya, which accounts for 80 per cent of the total, and the suri which makes up the remaining 20 per cent. The fibre obtained from the suri is the longest and most highly prized.
The hair of the alpaca is fine and silky, between 20 and 34 microns in diameter and 8-12 cm in length. The fleece comes in a wide variety of shades, which is a special characteristic of the alpaca. Colours range from pure white and various shades of white - which represent about 80-85 per cent of the clip and have the highest value - to warm fawns, reddish browns and a variety of greys and black.
The animals are shorn. With the encouragement of the research stations and major merchants, shearing is carried out with modern equipment, an advance on the pieces of glass or rusty knives used in the past.
1.4.4 End Uses of Alpaca
The fleece from the alpaca is now the only fibre from the South American camelid used in any quantity for spinning yarns for fashion applications. The primary end use for alpaca is knitwear but it also goes into woven cloth for clothing, accessories - such as shawls and stoles - and rugs.
More recently there have been attempts to promote in Europe blends of alpaca with wool, cotton and silk for both knitwear and woven cloth as a means of widening its use.
Llama hair is used for ropes or sacking and other tough applications, sometimes for export when the price is depressed. The hair from the vicuna and guanaco are almost completely unavailable.
1.5 Angora Rabbit Hair
1.5.1 Introduction to the Angora Rabbit
The origin of the angora breed is not known. It is believed to be a mutation which developed among wild rabbits in France in the late 18th century.
Angora rabbit hair is very fine, soft hair used principally in the production of high quality knitwear, although currently there is a trend towards incorporating small quantities of angora in woven cloth. It is also used in blends with other natural fibres for the production of yarns for both knitwear and woven cloth for apparel.
Rabbits are farmed on a highly intensive "factory farm" system or by individual farmers producing on a smaller scale. China has a large number of individual farmers and farming of rabbits is highly labour intensive. Rabbits are bred in hutches with a grid floor, constructed so as to avoid the animals damaging their coats. Because angora rabbits are albino, the hutches have to be kept in semi-darkness. The angora rabbit is generally shorn every three months. The fibre on the French type is sometimes pulled. This method offers the advantage that new hair grows after each harvest, but it is not generally favoured as the animal can suffer from shock. The hair from the female is considered to be better than that of the uncastrated male.
1.5.2 Production of Angora Fibre
China is by far the world's leading producer of angora rabbit hair, contributing about 90 per cent of global production. Chile is the world's second biggest, followed by Argentina. Small amounts of angora are produced in East European countries, including Czechoslovakia and Hungary, and very small amounts in France.
World production figures for angora rabbit hair are difficult to obtain as there is no group or association specific to the fibre. In 1986 world production of angora rabbit hair raw material was estimated at 7,000 - 8,000 tonnes. Chinese production peaked in 1984, reaching 5,000 - 7,000 tonnes. Production has since declined considerably worldwide. One trade estimate puts current annual Chinese production at only 2,000 -3,000 tonnes and Chilean production at 150 - 200 tonnes.
1.5.3 Fibre Characteristics of Angora
The weight of the rabbit is between 2 and 4 kg and its body is covered with an abundance of white silky hairs. The average growth of hair is 0.7 mm per day; the coat grows more rapidly in winter than summer.
Maximum production is obtained with the third and fourth shearing. Some rabbits yield a satisfactory amount until they are eight or even ten years old. Individual yields are in the range of 200 - 500 gm and average about 300 gm. Average length of hair is approximately 36 mm and diameters are between 11 and 13 microns. But there is a large differential between short and long hair. Super grade angora can be as much as 70 mm in length. China specifies that the length of super grade should be a minimum of 38 mm.
1.5.4 End Uses of Angora
The angora fibre has a smooth, silky texture which makes it difficult to spin, and the fibres tend to slip out of the yarn and shed from the fabric; nevertheless, the fibre is desired for its texture, warmth, light weight and pure white colour, although it is sometimes dyed in pastel shades. Angora rabbit hair is used primarily for items such as sweaters, mittens, baby clothes, and millinery.
There are basically two types of hair. The first, known as the "French type", is longer and spikier and contains guard hair which is hollow and does not take dye. Used in garments, this type of hair shows up as contrasting pale fibre and is often used to create a fine, brushed appearance. The second type of hair is finer and is produced by an angora rabbit with German origins. It is less spiky in character, and can be used to make a softer yarn which is sometimes viewed as an alternative to cashmere. It is used in very fine yarns for high fashion knitwear and thermal underwear. A typical angora blend yarn is a 70/20/10 woollen spun blend of lambs wool/angora/nylon. This would use a shorter fibre from the middle of the range. A high fashion garment, on the other hand, would have a larger percentage of angora made from longer fibre.
1.6 Yak
1.6.1 Introduction to the Yak
Yak hair is regarded by some as being an acceptable alternative to cashmere, although it is not produced in commercial quantities.
Although a member of the hoofed bovidae family, the yak is actually a unique species in itself, weighing 700-800 lb (315-360 kg). It differs from other bovines in several of its characteristics - for instance, its tail is similar to that of the horse but is less mobile, having long, thick/wavy hair.
1.6.2 Production of Yak Hair
Each yak only produces an average of 100 gm of hair a year, which is pulled or combed in the spring moult. The outer hair needs to be separated from the down hair. One estimate reported in Wool Record in 1989 put the numbers of domestic yaks on the plateau flanking the Himalayas at 13 million with the majority in China: in Qinghai province, which borders on Tibet; in the adjoining provinces of Sichuan and Gansu; and in the autonomous region of Tibet itself. The output from Qinghai province was estimated in 1989 at a steady 500 tonnes a year.
Note: The Wool Record is a journal published monthly in the UK and covers a wide range of topics of interest to the world's textile industry.
1.6.3 Fibre Characteristics of Yak Hair
Yak are widely used in the mountainous regions of the Qinghai-Tibet Plateau as beasts of burden and for subsistence through its milk and meat. The hides are used by the local people and in more recent years herdsmen have earned money from selling the hair. The animal, which lives above the snowline, has developed a thick coat of long hair reaching almost to the ground.
Wild yaks tend to have black hair, but domestic yaks have hair which is often piebald, predominantly black and brown with white markings. White hair is inevitably the most precious, as it can be dyed. However, only about 10 per cent of yaks grow white hair. The underhair of the one year old calf has a diameter of 15-17 microns and is 4-5 cm in length. Adult underhair is 18-20 microns in diameter and 3.0-3.5 cm long.
1.6.4 End Use of Yak Hair
The hair is used locally for weaving coverings for huts, blankets, mats and sacks. Strong ropes are made from the tail hair, and felted fabrics from the down hair. Once dehaired, the fine down hair can be made into yarn comparable to cashmere.
1.7 Beaver
The largest amphibious member of the rodent family, it is found in Europe and America. Beaver fur, like muskrat, is considered the best for felt hat manufacture. Coming from an animal which weights about 20 kgs, the fur has an average fibre diameter of 15.8 microns. It is soft and silky and lends itself to textile use, but the hair is used only when certain shiny effects are desired in blends. Considerable demand exists for beaver pelts in the fur industry. They are plucked and shorn and because of the light belly portion, they appear to be striped. Canadian beaver has a blue-brown fur fibre while other animals vary in shading from light brown to pale tawny. Today, the pelt is used in fur coats and in trimming fur and fabric garments.
1.8 Weasel
There are about 175 species in existence. They have a long cylindrical body and walk on their toes, not on the soles of their feet. Some species are well known, the mink and the ermine for example are ferocious and bloodthirsty animals. Larger than these two is the wolverine which is found in Europe, Asia and America. Other members with valuable fur are the marten and the sable. Still another group includes the badger. The fur industry uses nearly all the species of the weasel family in making coats, trimmings, capes, etc. The textile industry uses large amounts of their fine fibres, but only those with names that will add to the dignity and glamour of the fabrics. The accent is on luxury.
<section>6</section>
CHAPTER 2
PREPARING ANIMALS FOR SHEARING
2.1 Preparing Sheep for Shearing
It is very important that wool looks its best when displayed for sale. To ensure this occurs, the following preparation measures should be practised.
- Shearing is stressful for sheep. To reduce this, move sheep from the grazing area to the shearing shed quietly and always handle sheep with care.
- Dag the sheep at least seven days before shearing.
- In between dagging and shearing, keep sheep on a maintenance ration - unless the ewes have lambs at foot.
- Avoid penstain. Penstain is caused by sheep defecating on each other through being penned too closely. Penstain will affect the way the wool takes up dye. To avoid this fault, hold the sheep in a bare paddock for at least six hours and preferably 12 hours before penning up for shearing. The shearing yards should be well drained. If a mob is pen stained, don't mix it with a clean mob. Never tightly pen sheep with full stomachs into yards.
- If there are sheep with different lengths of wool, breeds or sex, draft them into separate mobs.
- If possible, keep sheep out of undeveloped and/or seedy areas in the weeks before shearing.
- Never shear wet sheep, as wool which is shorn wet will discolour very quickly.
Once the sheep are shorn it is important to provide plenty of feed and shelter, particularly if shearing is close to lambing. Shorn sheep feel the cold and shelter from wind and rain is essential for the first week after shearing.
2.2 Preparing Angora Goats for Shearing
The preparation of the mohair clip for sale is the culmination of the year's work. The fibre shorn reflects the "total environment" experienced throughout the growing period. The total environment includes the physical environment and the husbandry practices of the grower.
As shearing approaches every effort should be made to protect the long mohair from the possibility of contamination from vegetable matter, dust and pigmented fibres. Such contamination will depreciate the value of the mohair. It is advisable to keep the goats in clean, well grassed, open paddocks to avoid contamination from dust and vegetable matter. Avoid crowding or yarding the mohair producing goats with coloured grade animals. The pigmented fibre from such animals often contaminates otherwise clean mohair.
Some animals particularly crossbreds, shed hair in the spring. It is good management to shear before this occurs. As the fleece sheds it also mats and these fleeces must be kept separate to prevent their discounted price affecting other fleeces.
Fineness of fibre to a large extent is determined by the age of the animals, and therefore it is advisable to draft the herd into age groups, eg. kids - 2-4 tooths and mature aged goats, prior to shearing. The various age groups should then be shorn separately.
2.3 Preparing Alpaca for Shearing
Alpacas should be grouped separately before shearing for sex, age (ie. adult, Tui and Cria) and coat colour, each grouped being shorn separately. The recommended shearing sequence is from white, grey, brown, black and lastly, mixed colours to minimise colour contamination. Likewise, the Cria should be shorn first, then the Tui and followed by the adult.
Apart from this separation prior to shearing, Alpacas do not require any other pre-shearing preparation.
2.4 Preparing Cashmere, Camels and Yaks for Shearing
There appears to be no special pre-shearing treatment required for these animals prior to harvesting the fibre owing to the manner in which the fibre is harvested.
2.5 Preparing Angora Rabbits for Shearing
Provided the angora rabbits have been kept in clean cages and on proper rations, there should be no special pre-shearing treatment of the rabbit. However, if some animals are dirty or their fur is contaminated with vegetable matter, these should be kept separate to prevent cross contamination of the faulty fibre with clean fault free fibre.
<section>7</section>
CHAPTER 3
FIBRE HARVESTING EQUIPMENT
3.1 Machine Shearing
3.1.1 The Shearing Stand
There is a vast array of shearing equipment available and information on the correct settings and adjustments on these should be sought from the manufacturers or their representatives.
Wool shed layouts vary tremendously but set out below are some standard measurements providing the relationship of the shearing plant to the catching pen and porthold. Detailed woolshed designs are available from the Wools of New Zealand.
Figure 3.1 The shearing stand
Correct chute construction - Cut-away shows 150 mm indent into shearing board and 150 mm immediate drop.
Figure 3.1 The shearing stand
3.1.2 The Dropper
The dropper contains the gut which provides the driving power for the handpiece. Important features of the dropper are:
The Spring - It provides an automatic return after each blow.
The Elbow - It is important to keep this oiled daily.
The Short Tube - The tube should be set so the gut is just inside the tube. If the handpiece won't stay engaged, slide the tube up a little.
The Long Tube - When assembling the dropper, always lift the long tube approximately 20 mm from where it rests inside the ferrule, otherwise the gut is put under stress while shearing. A well oiled and well maintained down tube is essential for easy shearing.
All parts of the dropper should be checked for excessive wear before shearing ie. cogs, guts, etc.
Always keep spare guts handy at shearing time and hang them to keep them straight. It is crucial that the down tube be at the correct height for easy shearing. The length of the long gut and the mounting of the machine determines this, but as a rule of thumb the bottom of the short tube should be just touching the floor. The dropper should hang 40 cm out from the wall.
Flexible Tubes (Not illustrated) Set the machine up so the bottom of the flexible tube is just clear of the floor. If rigidly mounted the machine should sit out from the wall so the down tube is 40 cm away from the wall.
In some situations, people have to sling the machine on a rope from a rafter. If this is the case, ensure:
1. That the machine is tied to prevent rotation when shearing and;
2. That the electrical connection is sound and secured in such a way that if the machine locks up, the motor cannot tear the electrical cable. If the earth wire in the electrical cable is disconnected and there is an electrical short in the motor, the shearer becomes the earth, with possible fatal consequences!
Figure 3.2 The dropper
Figure 3.2 The dropper
3.1.3 The Handpiece
The handpiece has been evolved over the last 85 years as an efficient tool for removing wool from the sheep. A good shearer working with clean sheep can shear for half an hour without the comb getting hot enough to burn the hand when touched.
The handpiece is designed to convert the rotary motion of the driving spindle into a reciprocating (back and forth) action of the cutter. The drive from the gut of the down-tube enters at the back spindle and is transmitted through the two cogs of the back joint to the crane spindle. On the front end of this spindle there is a pin mounted eccentrically. A steel ball fits onto this pin and engages in a race in the back end of the fork. The fork is pivoted on the centre post, and so the rotation of the crank spindle causes the fork to move from side to side.
On the front end of this fork are two fork yokes or "chicken feet" which hold the cutter in contact with the comb. The pressure needed to keep the fork yokes and cutter in close contact with the comb comes from a tension pin. The lower end of this pin presses on the front half of the fork. Its upper end fits into the tension sleeve. Screwing down the tension nuts thus forces the pin down and increases the pressure on the cutter. Since both ends of the tension pin are spherical, equal pressure is exerted in all directions by the cups at each end while the fork moves from side to side.
Similarly, the top of the centre post, on which the fork pivots, is spherical and fits into the fulcrum cup of the fork to take the forward and downward pressure exerted by the tension pin.
Figure 3.3 The handpiece
Figure 3.3 The handpiece
3.1.4 Combs and Cutters
When purchasing shearing combs, it is important to buy a type of comb that is best suited to the sheep you will be shearing. The important things to consider are the bevel and the consistency of the teeth in length, shape and thickness.
The major shearing equipment manufacturers produce a variety of combs but mostly combs can be put in three categories based on their bevels or tips:
Short Bevel Comb
The short bevel comb is principally used when the shearing is at its best and the stock are in top condition. The bevel is also appropriate on thinner combs when the scallop is ground out.
Medium Bevel Comb
The medium bevel comb is the most widely used comb and is used for the majority of crossbred shearing. Suitable for all types of wool.
Long Bevel Comb
These combs are particularly suited to fine woolled sheep and are used when the wool is sticky or for early shearing.
When using new combs, use them as they come out of the packet to determine how they perform. If they run through the wool easily and don't dig in or cut the sheep then no further work or dressing may need to be done.
However, if the comb does dig in and cut the sheep or if it is hard to push and keeps riding up off the skin, further dressing will be required.
"Experting" is the term used to describe the dressing of combs and grinding of combs and cutters. It is important that every shearer master the basics of experting, for without properly ground and dressed gear, good quality work cannot be achieved.
Figure 3.4 Types of bevel
Figure 3.4 Types of bevel
3.2 Hand Shears (Blades)
Hand Shears (or blades) have never been entirely displaced by machine shearing in many countries around the world. Blades are used extensively where electricity is limited or not available. Blades are also used for dagging and eye wigging.
Blade shears must always be treated with care and should never be dropped on the floor or jammed into a cleft in a post.
Compared to machine shorn sheep the length of wool left on blade shorn sheep after shearing is longer, providing greater protection against sudden adverse weather occurring soon after shearing. A set of blades with the various parts named is given below.
Figure 3.5 Hand shears
Figure 3.5 Hand shears
3.3 Combs
3.3.1 Combs - Cashmere
The combs used for harvesting fibre from cashmere goats are made of 16 metal rods, which are curved round at the end and sharpened (see below). Two sizes of combs are used, the first one coarser than the second. Further adjustments are made by means of a metal slide which moves the teeth either closer together or further apart. This slide also assists in removing the hair from the comb.
Figure 3.6 Cashmere comb
Figure 3.6 Cashmere comb
3.3.2 The Mongolian Yak Comb
The comb used in Mongolia to harvest down fibre from the yaks is made of steel. The comb fingers are spring steel 1.5 mm in diameter and approximately 100 mm in length. The end of the fingers are curled around and have a radius of 13 mm with the tips being rounded to form a blunt point. The handle is 125 mm in length and 25 mm in diameter. The tube the comb fingers are brazed into is 100 mm long and 15 mm in diameter (see below).
Figure 3.7 Yak comb
Figure 3.7 Yak comb
Source: R Johnston, Kingston Morrison
<section>8</section>
CHAPTER 4
FIBRE HARVESTING TECHNIQUES
4.1 The New Zeland Wool Board Shearing Pattern
The New Zealand Wool Board's shearing pattern has evolved over the past 40 years and was originally developed by Godfrey Bowen who established the first shearer training schemes.
The pattern still adheres to the basic principles but refinements have steadily been made to take advantage of developments in equipment and technique which have followed from the growth of shearing as an international sport.
It is a style now used by the world's leading shearers. For individuals, efficiencies and improvements will be obtained by careful discipline, precise coordination and minimising stress to both the shearer and the sheep.
One of the secrets of successful shearing is being able to hold and move the sheep in such a way that it remains relaxed. This requires the shearer to be comfortable and balanced. Correct location and movement of the feet are vital. Where possible the illustrations indicate the appropriate positions.
Instructions from a shearing school or an expert shearer will help in perfecting this aspect of shearing technique.
The shearing patterns shown cover Merino, Crossbred including modifications for fat tailed sheep.
Also included in the Crossbred sheep shearing (4.1.2) section are recommended modifications for lamb shearing. The asterisk (*) identifies recommended lamb shearing variations. This should provide savings of approximately 10 blows per animal with practice and concentration.
4.1.1 Machine Shearing Merino Sheep
Merino wool is relatively highly priced when compared with crossbred wools. It is finer in diameter and shorter in the staple length so avoiding second cuts is essential. Merino sheep are soft-skinned and boney, and shearing varies from sheep to sheep.
Setting up of the gear is important because the skin of the merino cuts easily. Shear with as much lead on the comb as possible; that way the comb flattens the skin out of the way of the cutter. Also shear with a flat hand so that the teeth are tipped up a little.
It may be necessary to thin the tips if the entry of the comb is not easy.
Figure 4.1 Merino shearing pattern
Figure 4.1 Merino shearing pattern
A. Belly - all blows must start high on the brisket to remove all discoloured fribs. Use left hand (on blow 2 particularly) to smooth out wrinkles. Shear across more to avoid prominent veins on belly.
Figure 4.1 Merino shearing pattern
B. Use left hand to tighten skin and to protect teats.
Figure 4.1 Merino shearing pattern
C. First hind leg 1 - Stretch skin with left hand. Blow 1 runs down, then 2 back up to flank.
Figure 4.1 Merino shearing pattern
D. Topnot - Blow 3 must go in under horn.
Figure 4.1 Merino shearing pattern
E. First shoulder (Option 1) - Sheep must be sitting up. Bring left foot in. Blow 3 starts under shoulder.
Figure 4.1 Merino shearing pattern
F. First hind leg - Press left hand into flank.
Figure 4.1 Merino shearing pattern
G. Face - Lift sheep up and clear side of face. Figure 4.1 Merino shearing pattern
H. First shoulder (Option 2) - On some sheep, blows run down the leg. Figure 4.1 Merino shearing pattern
I. Note: Denotes backbone. Third blow must be a full comb under backbone.
Figure 4.1 Merino shearing pattern
J. Neck - Left foot must be well forward. A clearing blow to the bottom of the first fold, then in a circular motion run blows up neck to top of main neck fold. It is important to start as deep as possible on neck and not to break fleece open until it is completed. Blow 5 clears side of face. Insert: Blow 7 runs across wrinkle.
Figure 4.1 Merino shearing pattern
K. Long blow - keep handpiece flat.
Figure 4.1 Merino shearing pattern
L. Long blow - Bow sheep around leg and push head firmly down. Blow 6 leads into full comb around shoulder.
Figure 4.1 Merino shearing pattern
M. Face - Blow 1 runs under horn. Blow 4 runs to first fold.
Figure 4.1 Merino shearing pattern
N. Neck - Lift head onto knee and shear down to first fold. Tuck head between knees, then run blows around folds to complete neck. Step forward on right foot to pick up leg as Blow 6 finishes.
Figure 4.1 Merino shearing pattern
O. Shoulder - First blow clears inside of leg. Second blow slides at bottom of leg to flatten wrinkle.
Figure 4.1 Merino shearing pattern
P. Last side - Keep handpiece flat. Second blow to hock.
Figure 4.1 Merino shearing pattern
Q. Last side - Pick up head and step back. Use the left hand to keep leg straight and stretch skin.
Source: Wools of New Zealand
Important Points
1. Select a medium to long bevel.
2. Use only factory bottom bends.
3. Use new combs wherever possible.
4. Use maximum lead to minimise skin cuts.
5. Remember points may need to be bright but not scratchy or prickly.
6. Merinos need a flatter hand. Keep the heel of the handpiece down to ride the wrinkles.
Only the bottom tooth here is suitable for merinos.
Only the bottom tooth here is suitable for merinos.
Thin the tooth only to the left of the line.
Thin the tooth only to the left of the line.
4.1.2 Machine Shearing Crossbred Sheep
Crossbred sheep are different in body shape to Merinos, particularly around the neck area as they do not have the neck wrinkles and the skin is not as soft. Shearing Crossbreds requires to comb to run flat on the skin.
Shearing Fat-Tailed Sheep (Awassi)
In general, the Crossbred shearing pattern can also be adapted to shear fat tailed sheep with two modifications to the pattern.
1. The Fat Tail
The fat tail is shorn in conjunction with the "first hind leg". This will result in the tail staying under the sheep as the last leg is completed.
The shearing of the fat tail is detailed in figure 4.2.E. It is important to note when shearing the fat tail that the small "pig-like" tail protruding from the centre of the fat tail is not use to lift or move the fat tail as it easily breaks off causing profuse bleeding.
2. The Toggles
When shearing the Awassi type sheep there are two small (60-70 mm long) pendulum type glands situated either side of the throat, immediately below the jawbone. To accommodate these glands when shearing, note the modified shearing technique described in figure 4.2.G.
Figure 4.2 Machine shearing crossbred sheep
Figure 4.2 Machine shearing crossbred sheep
A. Belly - Delete blows 1a and 4. All blows must start high on the brisket. Remove all fribs and ensure easy entry for neck blows.
Figure 4.2 Machine shearing crossbred sheep
B. Crutch - *Blows 3 and 4 may be combined. protect teats on blow 2. Repeat if necessary to ensure a clean crutch.
C. First Le Figure 4.2 Machine shearing crossbred sheep
g - *Blows 1 and 2 may be combined. Gently push the wool upwards to remove skin wrinkles for blows 1 and 2.
Figure 4.2 Machine shearing crossbred sheep
D. Undermine - *Blow 1 may be deleted. Blows must run parallel to the back bone. One each side.
Figure 4.2 Machine shearing crossbred sheep
E. Shearing the Fat Tail. (Alternative to D.)
Figure 4.2 Machine shearing crossbred sheep
F. Top Knot. Place blows carefully. Blow 1 must clear top of eye and front of ear.
G. Neck - *Blow 2 may be deleted.
On blow 1 keep the top of the comb on the skin and finish square under the jaw.
With some sheep blow 2 may be deleted. If so, blow 4 would finish under the ear and another blow could run from the shoulder up and around the ear.
Awassi Modification. Make the first blow up the neck ensuring the nose of the sheep is turned down. Locate the toggles with the fingers of left hand and bring the bottom tooth of the comb above the top of the toggles and complete the blow under the jaw. Withdraw comb past toggles and with left fingers fold toggles up and take second blow under toggles and out the cheek.
Figure 4.2 Machine shearing crossbred sheep
H. First Shoulder - Roll wrist on back of neck to keep bottom teeth on the skin.
Blow 2 and 3 may be combined.
Turn sheep into long blow position while shearing blow 4.
Figure 4.2 Machine shearing crossbred sheep
I. Long Blow - Delete blow 2 on small lambs.
Keep sheep's head down and step over while shearing blow 3.
Blow 4 must not cross the backbone before the shoulder. It finishes square under the bottom ear.
Between blow 4 and 5 roll sheep over onto left foot to shear deep on shoulder and neck.
Figure 4.2 Machine shearing crossbred sheep
J. Cheek - *Delete blow 2 where possible.
Shearer's knees to support sheep's head.
Figure 4.2 Machine shearing crossbred sheep
K. Last Shoulder - Sheep's head turned nose up and placed high in between shearer's legs.
Blow 4 cleans fribs under leg.
Figure 4.2 Machine shearing crossbred sheep
L. Last Side - Shearer's legs must straighten before blow 2. Do not pressure sheep with legs or left hand.
Keep legs straight and relaxed.
Figure 4.2 Machine shearing crossbred sheep
Source: Wools of New Zealand
Note: There are no shortcuts to shearing successfully. It is critical that the blows in each section are completed. A learner or novice shearer may require more blows, initially, to make a good job.
4.1.3 Shearing Angora Rabbits
Shearing requires just as much mental effort as physical effort. Young rabbits should be ready for their first shearing at eight to nine weeks, but do not leave them any longer. Thereafter shear every 3 months.
4.1.3.1 Method
1. Use good quality electric clippers designed for the job.
2. Tie the rabbit on a flip-over shearing board. Alternatively, sit the rabbit.
3. Comb the animal to eliminate knots (mats) and any contamination with dirt or hay.
4. Remove the fibre in the order shown below. Take particular care around the doe's teats.
5. Avoid "second cuts" ie. cutting the fibre high up off the skin, then cutting a second time close to the skin.
To prevent second cuts, ensure the handpiece is angled so the comb runs on the skin. Pulling the skin back with the free hand will prevent the comb digging in and cutting the skin.
Second cuts happen easily because angora fibre is so light it doesn't fall away from the cutter. Working with an assistant who lifts the fibre away as it is cut is the most efficient way. The assistant must not pull the fibre or the shearer will cut the skin. One animal should take about 15-20 minutes to complete.
Figure 4.3 Shearing angora rabbits
Figure 4.3 Shearing angora rabbits
A. Make first blow up back legs to centre of the back above the tail.
Figure 4.3 Shearing angora rabbits
B. Clear the tail. Avoid nicking it.
Figure 4.3 Shearing angora rabbits
C. Make a blow along the centre of the back, then continue with a series of blows starting from the back leg.
Figure 4.3 Shearing angora rabbits
D. Make a blow down the side of the face.
Figure 4.3 Shearing angora rabbits
E. Turn the animal and repeat the same series of blows as on the previous side.
F. Stand facing the front of the rabbit and take blows from under the chin,
steadying the rabbit by holding the scruff of the neck. Figure 4.3 Shearing angora rabbits
Figure 4.3 Shearing angora rabbits
G. Turn the rabbit over. Check the number of teats. Note that the teats do not always line up as neatly as shown here.
Figure 4.3 Shearing angora rabbits
H. Clear groin, back and front legs. On does, raise the handpiece over the nipples. Leave fibre 10mm long on the belly of does.
Figure 4.3 Shearing angora rabbits
I. On bucks, the blows can run straight along the belly.
Figure 4.3 Shearing angora rabbits
J. Press on the nerve at the thigh joint to straighten the back legs. Trim the feet.
Figure 4.3 Shearing angora rabbits
K. Hold the rabbit vertical to trim the front feet.
Figure 4.3 Shearing angora rabbits
L. Finally trim any stray fibres. Then cut the nails and dose.
Source: Angora Rabbits by N. Rennie, T. Reece, D. Kearvell
4.1.4 Machine Shearing Llamas
Wool fibre covers the sides and the loin of the animal while hair fibre covers the chest, belly, head and legs. A machine shearing technique has been developed for alpacas in Peru by R. Dunick, a New Zealand Wool Board shearing instructor. The animals are shorn lying on their side with the two hind legs tied to a wall. Electric clippers with sheep shearing comb and cutters are used. An assistant holds the alpaca by both front legs, stretching and rolling the alpaca to expose the unshorn parts for the shearer. Shearing is initiated on the right side by first running a blow from the belly line, vertically to the shoulder area towards the withers. A second blow is made along the hairy belly line towards the rump, and then repeated blows run lengthwise until the backline is reached. The fleece is collected and the alpaca rolled over to repeat the procedure on the other side in the opposite direction. The fleece from the back and side is collected separately as "premier fleece"
and the rest as "oddments" including neck (fine, short), chest (or apron) (coarse, long), belly (hairy) legs and pieces (head, shanks and tail). The shearing is carried out in this sequence: body, belly, hind legs, tail, front legs, neck and head as detailed below.
Figure 4.4 Shearing Llamas
Figure 4.4 Shearing Llamas
A. Shearing is initiated on the right side by first running a blow from the belly line
vertically up the shoulder and towards the withers.
Figure 4.4 Shearing Llamas
B. A second blow is made along the hairy belly line running towards the rump,
and thus a separation line is formed between fleece and oddments.
Figure 4.4 Shearing Llamas
C. The shearing blows are repeated lengthwise until the backline is reached and them completed
by running an extra blow over the backbone into the other side.
Figure 4.4 Shearing Llamas
D. The alpaca is rolled on to the right side to initiate a blow from the lower rump
separating the hairy britch towards the back line (lumbar vertebra).
Figure 4.4 Shearing Llamas
E. A second blow is made along the hairy belly line towards the front shoulder point.
Figure 4.4 Shearing Llamas
F. The blows are repeated to complete the fleece shearing.
Figure 4.4 Shearing Llamas
G. The alpaca is rolled onto its back and the belly shorn from the lower abdomen towards the chest.
Figure 4.4 Shearing Llamas
H. The alpaca is swayed slightly to the left and the right hind leg is shorn from the upper to
lower parts and the shank cleared.
Figure 4.4 Shearing Llamas
I. The alpaca is swayed slightly to the right and left hind leg shorn as in H.
Figure 4.4 Shearing Llamas
J. The body is stretched and the right front leg exposed to shear from the upper to lower part
and the shank cleared. A blow is run from the shank to the lower neck.
Figure 4.4 Shearing Llamas
K. Similarly, shearing is carried out on the left front leg and continued onto the neck,
both underneath and along the side.
Figure 4.4 Shearing Llamas
L. The back and right side of the neck and head are shorn while rolling and holding the alpaca by the head.
Source: NZ Society of Animal Production
4.1.5 Blade Shearing Sheep
An expert blade shearer must master the following six important points.
1. Control of the sheep - get right down over the sheep and become part of it.
2. A positive hand - the shearing hand must be positive in its action, with control and finish.
3. A good wrist - the wrist of the shearing arm must be supple and flexible, able to work both ways, turning to keep the bottom blade on the sheep and bending forwards to finish every blow.
4. Return action - fast back and near the sheep but watch that the blade comes back only to the start of the blow.
5. Use the left hand to prepare the wool just in front of the blade. Try to control the sheep as much as possible with the legs.
6. Rhythm and timing are important keys. Actions should be smooth and the shearing of each section is run into the next so the sheep is shorn in an even flow.
The technique of a good blade shearer is to shear the sheep once only, and to leave the same wool length all over the body of the sheep.
Figure 4.5 Blade shearing
Figure 4.5 Blade shearing
A. Hold both front legs up under the left arm.
The shearer pull his legs back tight against the
sheep the stretch the belly.
Figure 4.5 Blade shearing
B. Right knee in front of the brisket.
Figure 4.5 Blade shearing
C. Right foot moves back when clearing over the tail.
Note: (Full blow over the backbone).
Figure 4.5 Blade shearing
D. Remove all the trimmings inside the leg.
Figure 4.5 Blade shearing
E. Blow 15 roll the head starting on the top side of the brisket. Finishing square under the jaw.
Figure 4.5 Blade shearing
F. Clear up behind the ears and top knot with
the sheep's head below the shearer's knee.
Figure 4.5 Blade shearing
G. Shear into the first shoulder, keeping points of shears down onto the skin.
Figure 4.5 Blade shearing
H. Shear around the first side moving left foot away from
the sheep to let the sheep lie down.
For blow 26 to commence the long blow.
Figure 4.5 Blade shearing
I. Put blow 27 in as the sheep drops down. Step over with the right foot, as blow 28 finishes.
Figure 4.5 Blade shearing
J. Complete a full blow over the back bone, as blow 29 finishes step forward with the right foot turning toe in.
( Denotes backbone).
Figure 4.5 Blade shearing
K. The last cheek is cleared before releasing sheep's right front leg.
Figure 4.5 Blade shearing
L. Step out with the left foot when blow
37 is completed.
Figure 4.5 Blade shearing
M. The sheep's head is bought forward of shearer's legs.
Figure 4.5 Blade shearing
N. Grip the loose skin in the flank, and roll the fist on
the firm part of the leg to keep it straight.
O. A Guide to Pattern Shearing
Figure 4.5 Blade shearing
Source: Wools of New Zealand
<section>9</section>
4.1.6 Crutching Sheep
Crutching is the removal of wool from around the tail and udder of the sheep to prevent flystrike, to make it easier for newborn lambs to feed and to prevent dags forming.
Figure 4.6 Crutching
Pre-Lamb - Remove a full or half belly then proceed to the full crutch.
Half belly
Option 1 - With any belly crutch the teats must be properly cleared so lambs can feed easily.
Figure 4.6 Crutching
Figure 4.6 Crutching
Option 2
Full Belly - The full belly is recommended with long woolled sheep. This helps the fleece dry quickly keeping the wool a better colour. It also gives the option of leaving very short belly wool on in the case of early mainshear.
Note: Keep the comb on the skin up to the base of the teats. Don't flick the comb off the skin.
It is important that the whole crutch is properly cleaned.
Note: Remember to protect the teats.
Figure 4.6 Crutching Figure 4.6 Crutching
The back end can be done in two ways.
Figure 4.6 Crutching
E. Fan Crutch - Special care must be taken to avoid cutting hamstrings.
Use left hand to maintain pressure in the flank to keep the sheep's legs
straight until both hamstrings have been cleared.
Figure 4.6 Crutching F. Back Slam.
Figure 4.6 Crutching
Figure 4.6 Crutching G. The back end must be even on both sides without an overhand of wool over the tail. Excess fleece wool should not be removed. A tidy finish is essential. Some trimming blows may be needed to ensure no tassles of wool hanging from the sheep.
Figure 4.6 Crutching
I. Wethers - When clearing the pizzle, always approach from the side.
H. Top Knot (where necessary)
Source: Wools of New Zealand
4.2 Combing
4.2.1 Combing Cashmere Goats
Cashmere fibre is combed from the animal during the spring moult. The cashmere goat is tethered in a standing position and the longer outer hair is first clipped to remove matted hair to make it easier to comb. It is then tethered lying down for combing which is done in short, pulling strokes. Finally, the animal is clipped once more to remove the remaining hair which also has export value (for use in suit interlinings and carpet underlay).
Combing is a more efficient way of harvesting the fibre than shearing, which is the method favoured in the West. Shearing not only means that all the coarse fibre is collected together with the down, but it may fail to harvest all the underwool, leaving some of the precious fibre on the animal. The comb has been copied in the West but has proved difficult to use.
Traditionally, farmers collected and packed the fibre into jute sacks; today polypropylene sacks are more common. Unfortunately, this presents the possibility of contamination of the cashmere with stray fibre from the sacks. Each sack should be new to reduce this chance and it is vital to maintain cleanliness in the packing of the fibre. A small strand of synthetic fibre which escapes notice before processing can be very costly to remove.
Polypropylene cannot be dyed and if fibre contaminates cashmere yarn, it will ruin the processing lot. One large supplier of dehaired cashmere is initiating a programme of exchanging polypropylene bags for polyethylene bags, to reduce contamination.
The sacks of cashmere are delivered to local collecting stations which exist throughout the cashmere producing regions of China. (There are 60 collecting stations in Gansu province alone). From these initial collection points, the sacks of fibre are distributed to sorting factories or warehouses.
4.2.2 Combing Yaks
Yaks are combed soon after the spring moult has occurred. The lower sides and belly are combed to remove the soft fine under coat. The neck, back and hind quarters are not combed.
4.3 Plucking Angora Rabbits
Plucking is an alternative to shearing. It's not really feasible in a commercial rabbitry as it is time consuming - one rabbit taking about an hour to pluck. For a small scale venture seeking top quality fibre, plucking is suitable.
Plucking must be done during the rabbit's natural shedding period. Young rabbits are first plucked at about 12-14 weeks. Thereafter every three months.
Judging when a rabbit is ready to pluck is developed through experience. With a coloured rabbit, colour is usually the best indicator. Part the fibres, and if new darker growth can be seen at the base, it is ready for plucking.
When the fibre is ready for harvesting the old coat lightens in colour, and the new fibre is about 33-50 mm long. The fibre to be plucked will be about 100 mm long.
White fibre is more difficult to judge. To test whether a rabbit is ready gently pluck a sample out. Once plucked, the rabbit will look quite naked.
Pluck the long fibres by gripping the tips of the fleece between finger and thumb. Use the fingertips of the other hand to hold the rabbit's skin tight. Only take the long fibres, and remove small amounts of fibre at a time. Don't attempt to pluck them unless the fibres are loose, as this will cause the rabbit discomfort.
The plucked fibre should be packed in a non-contaminating packaging material and suitably identified. Plucking often needs to be done over a period of days as the fibre may not all be ready for plucking at the same time. Generally, the back is ready first, then the sides and later the extremities.
4.4 Slipe Wool Production
There are many millions of sheep slaughtered throughout the world for their meat. The process obviously requires each carcass to have the skin removed. This skin offers two valuable bye products for the sheep meat industry - the pelt for leather and the wool. For the full potential value of both the pelt and the wool to be realised requires the woolly skin to be processed correctly. This section deals with both the process of removing and processing the wool (known as slipe wool) and first stage treatment of the pelt once the wool has been removed.
Slipe wool, which constitutes approximately 5% of world wool production, has particular characteristics that arise from the sliping process and which make it somewhat different from greasy wool. The three most notable of these are that:
1. Because the skins receive a thorough washing immediately after removal from the animal, much of the suint is washed from the wool and the yield on drying raised, on average, about ten percent.
2. Fibre length is more even because without shearing, there are no second cuts.
3. Residues of the depilatory mix may be found as a contaminate in the wool. Colloquially known as "lime", this is a dried compound of the lime-sodium sulphide depilatory and some dissolved wool fibre that it contacted. This is fairly readily broken up and removed in scouring.
4.4.1 The Production System
The text will name the steps in the production line and give a brief explanation of the method and purpose of each. It is important to bear in mind that the system outlined is aimed at having two valuable products both emerging in the best possible condition: the pelt and the wool.
Some side processes will be described separately. When introduced in the text, these will be names between square brackets thus: [Slipemaster process].
4.4.2 Sheep Wash
It is recommended that incoming sheep are washed in a spray, swim-through or submerging floor wash to free them of any dirt and particularly fouling that occurs during trucking. This is done the day before slaughter.
4.4.3 Skin Wash
As skins arrive at the fellmongery (often within seconds of leaving the animal), they are thoroughly washed in cold water to:
(a) quickly lower the temperature by removing the body heat and,
(b) to remove grime and particularly blood from the wool.
If skins are left uncooled and in bulk, decay will set in quickly and spoil the leather-making qualities. In plants without their own fellmongery, the skins are washed before dispatch to the company's central fellmongery. Washing is usually by being propelled through a soak tank and then tumbled in a rotary screen in a spray of water. This device is colloquially known as a "rumbler".
4.4.4 Wringing
Subsequent procedures need the skins wet but not as wet as they emerge from the skin wash so excess water must be removed. This may be done by spinning in a hydro-extractor (commonly called a "hydro") like a giant spin dryer, or by passing through a pair of squeeze rollers.
4.4.5 Trimming and Spreading
These operations are carried out to even up the shape of the skin, remove portions with very different wool types, and to ensure that the skin is well spread to receive the depilatory spray that follows. Trimming is carried out on the moving table that will take the skins under the depilatory spray. The pieces removed are head pieces, brisket pieces, cod-lock pieces and in some plants, shank pieces off the lower leg. In some plants, the head pieces and/or the brisket pieces will have already been removed on the skinning chain or earlier in the fellmongery.
Wool from the trimmings is reclaimed through the ["slipemaster" process].
The skins move from the trimmers through under a [Paint] canopy to receive a spray of the chemical depilatory. Thickened to the consistency of thick porridge and a blue/green colour from the sodium sulphide base, this will work through the skin in the next few hours and dissolve the fibre root allowing easy removal of the wool.
4.4.7 Pairing
As the painted skins come to the end of the moving table (in essence a conveyer belt), a worker lifts them off one by one and in most plants, stacks them on crates (or pallets) alternately paint to paint, wool to wool, to:
(a) prevent the paint from drying out and,
(b) protect the wool as much as possible from paint contamination. In some plants the pairs of skins may be hung over wooden poles or on metal hangers with big sheep skins folded along the back and hung singly.
4.4.8 Storing
Painted skins are held overnight in a cool, damp area known as the "skin cellar" or the "potting shed". They are usually ready for pulling (wool removal) in a few hours but to fit a normal work schedule are held over for pulling the next day.
A skin cellar is desirably cool and draught-free so the skins will not start to dry out and reduce the efficiency of the chemical process.
This is the operation of removing the wool from the skins and grading it at the same time. It may be a hand or machine operation, but machines are gradually taking over from hand pulling. In each case the wool off each skin is identified for grade and thrown into a container for that grade. Wool from the edges is graded off as "seconds", while wool that falls on the floor around hand pullers becomes "thirds". As the containers fill, the wool, which is still quite wet, is taken from the pulling area either to the drier, or if it is very short, or contaminated with paint as may be the case with seconds and thirds, to the [Fehrer Wash].
4.4.10 Drying
For this purpose, standard driers as used in wool scours are used. The containers of wool are marshalled according to grade and dried batch at a time. The wool is commonly put through rollers to squeeze out as much water as possible and monitored into the drier through a feed hopper. Wool that has been through the Fehrer wash is treated similarly to wool from the slipe mastered skin pieces.
Drying slipe wool is a complex operation because many of the grades have very different drying characteristics; some dry very quickly and easily while others slowly. An added complication is that there are many small runs and frequent changes with the end of one run and the start of another in the drier at the same time.
From the drier (or driers), the wool is transported to the bins or, in some cases, directly to the press. There are three common means of transport; barrows, conveyor belts or forced air ducts.
4.4.11 Binning
Most plants bin their wool, at least overnight. In order to be sure that all the wool is adequately dried with no wet patches, slipe wool is commonly over-dried to make sure. It is therefore desirable that it be given time to regain atmospheric moisture before pressing so that it can be weighed out and invoiced at a normal regain figure. From the drier, the wool is normally weighed in tared barrows before being taken to the bins.
4.4.12 Pressing
Any of the usual wool presses may be used to produce bales. Only new wool packs are used and bale weights are lower than with greasy wool because, with the higher yield, the same volume of wool weighs less.
4.4.13 Elaboration of Specified [ ] Process
These are covered in the order in which they appear in the earlier text.
4.4.14 Slipemaster Process (for skin pieces)
This is a process which uses the action of scalding temperature water to loosen the wool fibre from the trimmed skin pieces. The operation is as follows:
(i) The pieces are batched according to type, headpieces, briskets etc. and loaded into the feed hopper of the machine. Large ones such as head pieces may be cut into two or three smaller pieces by the operator in order to get a more effective pull.
(ii) A spiked brattice carries the pieces up and into the hot water tank. Here they progress slowly through the scalding water, temperature approaching 100C.
(iii) On emerging from the water the pieces fall over a lip and into the nip of two fast rollers, one metal and one covered with rubber. Being slippery from the hot water, the skin does not get gripped by the rollers but dances round on top while the wool is pinched and pulled through into the delivery chute. The skin piece meanwhile works along the rollers and drops off the end onto a conveyor which delivers it to the rendering department for boiling down.
(iv) The wool will have picked up some contamination of animal fat in the hot water and for this reason is usually given a cold water rinse and spun in a hydro before being taken to the drier.
Slipemaster wool has a distinctive smell picked up in the hot water treatment because of the fat released from the skin. With good processing control this is no problem.
Another feature is the contamination by small or tiny fragments of skin. It is accepted that slipemaster wools will contain these but if the machine settings and temperature are not right they can be quite big (say thumbnail size) and when dried, are very hard.
All head piece wool is kempy and that of black faced breeds will have black kemp necessitating a specific sub grade for black fibre head pieces. Slipemaster shank wool will be loaded with coarse, short hair fibre while brisket wool is usually the poorest colour of all the grades.
4.4.15 The "Paint"
The active agent of the paint is sodium sulphide. This is dissolved in water to make a solution of the required strength and then thickened with hydrated lime to a slurry, thick enough to stay on the skin instead of running off. The lime also helps maintain the alkalinity of the mix as the chemical is taken up by the skin. For the chemically minded, the components are:
1. Sodium sulphide - Na2S
2. Water - H2O
3. Hydrated lime - Ca(OH)2 - and the mixing is in two steps:
Step 1 2Na2S + 2H2O = 2Na SH + 2NaOH
In this step we have the sodium sulphide combining with the water to form sodium hydrosulphide and caustic soda.
Step 2 2NaSH + Ca(OH)2 = Ca(SH)2 + 2NaOH
This step forms calcium hydrosulphide and more caustic soda and constitutes the paint ready for use.
In practice, the sodium sulphide comes as a hard, crystaline substance in metal drums which are opened as required and hoisted upside-down over a tank of water. A pump circulates the water and plays a jet onto the sulphide, slowly dissolving it. The operator knows fairly closely how much chemical to use but having made up the base solution, tests it with an hydrometer, an instrument which measures the relative density of the solution. The particular instrument used here is the "Twaddel" hydrometer and the measurements are in "degrees Twaddel". The principle of the hydrometer is that the lead shot in the bottom causes it to float upright in whatever fluid is being measured. It will float higher or lower according to the density of the fluid and the reading is taken from the graduated scale. Pure water gives a reading of zero and as sulphide is dissolved into it, the hydrometer floats higher and the reading rises. Paint strengths may be varied according to the age of the
animals and the wool length.
Older animals and those with short wool have thicker skins and require stronger paint. The strength ranges from 14 to 25 degrees Twaddel.
Once the solution is at the correct strength, the next stage is the addition of the hydrated lime to give the final chemical composition and to thicken the paint so it will stay on the skins. Lime starts as limestone, calcium carbonate - CaCo3 and is first burnt forming calcium carbide - CaCo. This is allowed to take up atmospheric moisture and becomes calcium hydroxide - CaOH2. In this form it is bagged as a ground powder and distributed to users. In the making up of depilatory paint, it is tipped down a chute into the mixing tank where the solution is stirred with a power stirrer. Based on experience an initial amount is put in, and then the final fine-tuning of the thickness done with the aid of another hydrometer more suited to the heavy suspension we now have. This is the Baume hydrometer.
The final product is kept in circular holding tanks with periodic stirring until required at which time it is pumped to the tank at the paint table.
4.4.16 Painting
From a tank by the paint table, the paint is jetted onto the flesh side of the skins as they pass underneath. In most cases, the jet is designed to give a heavier application to the centre of the skins than to the flanks as the skin is thicker along the back. The jet covers the full width of the table which is in fact, an endless conveyor so all skins get a plastering as also does any wool protruding from under the skins. When the painted skins have emerged, they are taken off the belt have surplus paint recovered from them and are washed ready to receive more fresh skins. The paint is highly caustic and for this reason the workers must wear rubber gloves and protective clothing. Also, an emergency water spray is always adjacent to the paint table.
When paint falls on wool, it dissolves the fibre until it dries or exhausts its chemical action. This results in chunks of material colloquially called "lime" but which in fact are an insoluble compound formed when the chemicals of the paint and the dissolved fibre dry out. One way to remedy this is to wash the wool while still wet as is commonly done with the "seconds", the wool from the edges of the skin which received some spray of paint. However, it is not practicable to wash all types before drying so scourers provide a second option; the use of a "cyclic" opener in the pre-scour treatment. This machine holds the wool in and beats it for a predetermined time to pulverise the contaminate and allow it to fall or wash out as dust.
4.4.17 Alternative Paint Mixtures
There has long been concern to develop alternatives, especially to the use of lime, as the presence of residues in the wool creates sales resistance and makes it difficult to open up new markets. Various other thickeners have been experimented with, flour, potato starch and some based on the cellulosic wall-paper pastes, the latter seeming to have the best potential and some are in commercial use in some fellmongeries. These still require some lime (15-20 % of the normal quantity) to achieve the right chemical makeup and to help maintain a sufficiently alkaline state right through the process.
Another alternative uses caustic soda (Na(OH)2), as the active ingredient, and a propriety cellulosic thickener as a "quick-pull" paint allowing pulling on the same day. This can be used as a strategic option eg. to finish everything on a Friday and give a clear weekend.
4.4.18 A Non-Paint Alternative
Band-knife shearing is being developed as an alternative to the whole existing process. This would entail the skin lying flat and even on a conveyor or drum that would take it under a self-sharpening band-knife operating one to two millimetres above the skin surface. This has advantages and difficulties.
Advantages:
- No mess, no contamination, easier sales promotion.
- Straight through, same day processing.
- Less danger to less people.
Problems:
- Loss of one to two millimetres of fibre.
- Band knife shearing would present a need to pre-flesh the skins ie. remove any flesh or fat left on by the butchers, in order that
the skin will lie flat for shearing and that the valuable grain surface would not be ruined.
- It would not obviate the use of sodium sulphide and lime; these would still be needed to completely de-wool the pelts in pelt
processing.
4.4.19 Pulling and Grading
"Pulling" is the term given the operation of removing the wool from the painted skin. The pullers grade the wool at the same time. There are two methods in current use, hand pulling and the more recently developed machine pulling.
The hand puller has the painted skins brought up to him on their crates, poles or hangers, and one by one throws them over his "puller's beam" to work on them. The beam is a steeply sloping bench waist high and sloping down and away from him and flanked to each side and in front with small bins or other containers for the wool.
The puller does half the skin at a time starting with the rear end. The puller will remove the britch wool first, throwing it into its container and then run his gloved hands down the sides of the skin, taking off the seconds and depositing them in the appropriate container for their grade. Next is the main body wool which may take two sweeps of the hands to clear. Most of the body wool goes to one of three basic fineness grades with possible three length grades within each. Sometimes the wool must go into a fault grade for vegetable fault, dusty or stain.
Once the butt end is completed, the skin is lifted off and redeposited to work on the front end. The seconds are taken off first and then body wool. Should there be any brands or raddle marks, the affected wool is removed as a "brand" grade.
Frequently there is difficulty with the neck area; folds or bits of fat adhering to skin have stopped the penetration of the paint and the wool will not full freely. A common option here is to take up a pair of hand shears and shear the offending portion. This falls on the floor and along with any other wool off the floor round the puller, is periodically gathered up as "thirds".
The skin, now cleared of most or almost all its wool, becomes known as a "slat" and is dispatched to the [pelt-house] for processing to the pickled pelt stage while the wool is moved on to the Fehrer wash and/or the drier.
4.4.20 Machine Pulling
This is very different. This skins are hung over flat boards, wool side out and are carried up between a pair of beaters which beat the wool off. If fed properly and adjusted properly, these machines are very effective. If not, they can be wasteful of wool and damaging to the skin. Where the skin folds over the top edge of the board the wool needs to be pulled off by hand as the beaters don't have access to it, while if placing is careless with folds in the skin, wool can be left on and/or strips torn off the flanks of skins.
The pulled wool falls onto a moving conveyor which serves as a grading table. It moves up, then flattens out at waist height. A worker each side takes off the seconds while another stationed at the end grades the body wool to the skips (movable bins on wheels) which surround the end of the conveyor.
With machine pulling it is unusual for a britch grade to be considered and commonly the seconds are left ungraded for fineness.
Compared to hand pulling, the machine has its advantages and disadvantages.
Advantages:
- It does not tire; it pulls as effectively at the end of the day as it did at the beginning.
- If properly adjusted and fed, it recovers more wool than hand pulling.
- In the event of a walk-out or strike, management can clear a backlog of painted skins, albeit without grading the wool.
- It does not require the extreme physical effort and skill.
Disadvantages:
- It does not lend itself to as thorough grading as hand pulling does.
- There tends to be more paint contamination in the body grades.
- Damage can be done to the skin, and skin pieces contaminate the wool.
- It presents a temptation to shortcut methods with even more contamination with paint and skin pieces.
4.4.21 Pie Wool (Sweating)
Prior to the development of the slipemaster machine, wool from skin trimmings was reclaimed by "pieing". In this process, the wet skin pieces were stacked in a neat heap, the "pie", and left to heat and ferment for several days. The wool was then pulled off by hand, the task known as "pie-picking". It was an unsavoury task, the strong smell of fermenting skin permeating the pickers' skin.
During the process, fat is released from the skin pieces and permeates the wool. Beyond a certain percentage, it allows the wool to sustain fire should it heat and ignite spontaneously, hence the fat content and heat testing provisions prior to shipping. Pieing is rare or non-existent today. It would be done only to special request or if the slipemaster machines were broken down and the company didn't wish to dump its trimmings. A very similar process for de-woolling skins, is however, big business in Mazemet, France, the worlds major centre for sweated wools. The woolly pelts from slaughtered sheep are piled up and allowed to sweat for several days after which the wool is pulled off the pelt, sorted, pressed and marketed as Mazemet wool. This method of recovering wool is mainly used when the skin has little or no leather making potential.
4.4.22 Grading
Slipe wools are divided into five basic sections with the necessary range of grades in each.
These sections are:
(1) Woolly Lambs
This is for wool from lambs that have never been shorn. This wool is regarded as the elite of slipe wool and consequently has
greatest range of grades in the system. Grading is to fineness length and fault only.
(2) Shorn Lambs
Body wool from lambs that have been previously shorn. Because of the varying times between shearing and slaughter, length
becomes a factor so a series of length grades are superimposed over the fineness grades. Oddments and fault grades are often
combined with adult "sheep" grades to create more marketable quantities.
(3) Sheep
This category follows the same pattern as the shorn lamb grades except for the addition of a cott grade and a grade for extra long
wool.
(4) Sheep and Shorn Lamb Combined
A category designed to take many of the oddment and faulty wools from categories 2 and 3. In this section of grades, fineness is
not considered; length becomes the deciding factor where two grades of a type are provided, eg. the "stained" grades. However,
many producers and traders prefer sheep and shorn lamb wools separated.
(5) Sundry Grades
Grades for wools where no breakdown on age, fineness or, in most cases, length is warranted. These grades include black, dags,
seedy slipemasters, slipemaster shank wool, sweepings.
Some preliminary sorting of skins is usual so that a group of handpullers or a machine are pulling only one category of skins at a time. Grading for fineness is achieved by recognition of a limited range of fineness-cum-breed types nominated in fellmongery terms as:
"Quarterbred" - 58 and finer,
"Halfbred" - 56/58,
"Threequarterbred" - 50/56 and
"Crossbred" - 46/50 and coarser.
It is only with woolly lambs that a grade for Quarterbred is provided and likewise, only with woolly lambs is there a grade for particularly coarse wool, this described as "Crossbred - coarse - 44/48 and coarser". Whether or not a plant can make either or both of these grades depends very much on the breeds used in the regions they service.
The maintenance of grading standards is the responsibility of the fellmonger and his supervisors.
4.4.23 Fehrer Wash
This is an enclosed machine which the wool is propelled through by heavy, high speed beaters in the presence of a large volume of cold water delivered through outlets above the beaters. This effectively breaks up the staples of the wool and disperses any clumpiness and paint residues. It is used mainly for contaminated grades such as seconds and thirds and for very short grades which are very difficult to dry otherwise
All grades under 25mm are washed but opinions vary on the wisdom of washing the next length grade up, 25-50mm, some washing the coarser of these and others firmly against it.
4.4.24 Pelt House Procedure
Pulled skins, now knows as "slats" are moved from the fellmongery to the pelt house to be cleaned up and pickled for sale. There are several stages in this process:
1. Liming
This process is aimed at ridding the slats of the very last vestige of wool which it dissolves away with sodium sulphide and lime. The paint on the slats supplies most of the chemical requirement which is re-activated when the slats are loaded into a container with water.
The container may be a large half cylinder vat or steel, fibreglass lined vessel which have wooden paddles to circulate the contents.
With this system, the slats must be physically lifted from vat to vat for each ensuing process.
The slats are paddled round for about half an hour to completely mix the chemical and water which is then tested for strength. Normally, more sodium sulphide will be required to bring it up to strength. The required amount is added and the mix paddled again. After thorough mixing it is let stand with periodic paddling over several hours by which time the wool residues are gone.
2. Deliming
Once the wool is dissolved, the slats are then delimed to remove all traces of the lime and sulphide. This is simply a thorough wash and rinse with clean, cold water. Neutralising follows, using one of a choice of acids to offset the alkaline build-up during the earlier processes. This is important because the later pickling depends on achieving a controlled acidic state.
3. Bating
This is a process which affects the fibre structure of the slat and helps avoid a grain surface defect known as "Mottle", and also cleanses the grain of detritus loosened in the previous processes so as to produce a smooth, silky surface.
Bating is an enzyme process with enzymes obtained from pancreas glands as the active agent.
The slats now are clean, white and silky to touch.
4. Pickling
This involves a soak in a pickle solution of common salt and sulphuric acid. The acid at 1.5% content is the main pickling (preserving) agent while the salt helps and also inhibits undue swelling of the skin. Also added to the pickle will be one of a choice of fungicides to prevent mould developing as the acid and salt alone will not prevent this.
5. Draining
From the pickle bath the now "pickled pelts" are lifted and allowed to drain of surplus pickle, often on barrows from which they will be graded.
6. Grading
Pelts are graded to size and degree of fault. Faults may be inherent in the breed type, be acquired on the farm or caused in the plant.
Inherent:
- Pinhole - a fault of many fine wool skins whereby whole follicle groups are taken out by the depilations process and leave tiny but
visible "pinholes".
- Ribby and Merino grades, the pelts having a wrinkly or ribbed grain surface.
Farm Faults:
- Scars - Barbed wire, dog-bite, shearing cuts.
- Inoculation cysts, open or closed.
- Cattle tick and/or flystrike damage.
- Sunburn, rape scald or facial eczema damage.
- Dermatitis - skin lesions.
- Cockle, pimple-like raised spots.
- Seed, penetration by barley grass, storks bill or similar.
Plant Faults:
- Knife score or hole.
- Strain.
- Broken grain.
- Stunner burn.
- Torn or misshapen pelt.
7. Packing
The graded pelts are folded in sixes and placed in bins where they continue draining. When ready for pressing, they are counted onto a pallet and the whole package put under a slow acting, hydraulic press which presses them down to the required dimensions and presses more surplus pickle liquor out. Removed from the press the package is strapped and shrink-wrapped on the pallet, branded with company name, grade and number and is ready for dispatch. In this form the pelts may be reasonably held for up to two years if need be, before tanning.
<title>Harvesting of textile animal fibres</title>
CHAPTER 5
FIBRE PREPARATION FOR SALE OR PROCESSING
5.1 Objectives
To provide both the buyer and manufacturer with parcels of fibre they can handle confidently, knowing they are uniform and meet the standards required for processing into quality yarns and textiles
To maximise the net returns of the grower.
This can best be achieved by paying careful attention to: producing as few lines as possible from the clip, while maintaining an appropriate degree of uniformity within each line;
eliminating contamination of the clip by removing stained and pigmented fibres and by keeping out all foreign material.
5.2 General Requirements
All textile animal fibres are natural raw materials and as such possess, to some degree, inherent variability. This variability will be present with all the important fibre characteristics that affect processing potential and may, if not properly separated, limit end use and/or grower income. The important variable fibre properties are:
- fineness (fibre diameter)
- hairiness (medullation)
- fibre length
- fibre strength
- colour
- fault(s)
Within a group of animals with a common genetic history and run in the same environment, the fibre harvested from each animal will have similarities, the bell-shaped distribution graph below indicates that the bulk of the fibre within a clip will be similar and the quantity that differs significantly from this and requires separation, will be small.
Figure 5.1 Within clip distribution
Figure 5.1 Within clip distribution
Fine
Fineness
Coarse
Shorter
Length
Longer
Best
Colour
Poorest
Least
Fault
Most
The aim of preparing animal fibres for processing is therefore to present lines that have acceptable uniformity of fineness (fibre diameter), colour, length, hairiness and fault.
The degree to which each of the fibre types must be separated depends on:
- the quantity of fibre to be prepared;
- the variability of the lot to be prepared;
- the requirements of the buyer and textile processor.
To ensure the requirements are consistently met, fibre preparation should concentrate on the identification and separation of important fibre characteristics that may, if not adequately separated, limit the textile processing potential, such as:
- mixed fineness
- mixed length
- mixed hair content
- urine stain
- felting
- clumps of vegetable matter (v.m)
- non-scourable acquired stains
- mixed natural colours (pigmentation)
- faeces (dags or dung)
- mineral content (dust/dirt)
- skin pieces
- contamination
Contamination consists of man made articles, packaging materials and other items which may find their way into the fibre before or during harvesting. Contamination is a very serious issue facing all animal fibre industries. It is essential that all stages of fibre harvesting, preparation and packaging contamination by foreign articles does not occur.
The specific preparation requirements for each fibre type will be discussed separately.
Preparation of some fibres such as wool begins well before shearing with dagging, drafting etc.
No animal fibre should be shorn and pressed wet. This will cause the fibre to rapidly deteriorate in quality.
However, for many of the animal fibres harvested by shearing the preparation begins at the time the animals are shorn. During this operation it is essential that adequate, trained labour is on hand to:
- keep the shearing area clear of second cuts and other short staple fibre;
- the shearing area must be swept clear in between each animal shorn;
- dags and stains kept separate;
- belly fibre kept separate;
- carry each fleece to an area for further preparation. It is usual that each fleece is thrown or laid on a slotted preparation table.
5.3 Preparation of fibres
5.3.1 Preparing Wool
The level of fleece preparation required to remove processing faults will depend on the type of wool and extent of fault. Lambs, hoggets and mature sheep should always be separated before shearing and shorn as separate mobs and likewise with ewes, wethers and rams. Each clip will tend to fall into one of the categories below, depending on the fineness, length, overall colour and/or fault presence in the clip.
The descriptions suggested are for guidance purposes as the names applied to each line made vary considerably from country to country. However, the principle requirements for separation and/or combining of wools remain.
5.3.1.1 On the Shearing Board
It is essential that as each sheep is shorn the woolhandlers follow these steps:
- after the shearer has shorn the belly wool off and thrown it aside, the woolhandler must pick this up and place it in the receptacle for
belly wool.
- sweep the short and/or discoloured crutch wool away, and if present, remove dags and urine stain from the crutch wool;
- carry the shorn fleece away and throw it onto the skirting table for skirting;
- sweep the shearing board clear between each sheep. The bulk of this short wool separated on the board will be combined with the
short second cut wool which falls through the slotted skirting table and forms the wool type known as locks;
5.3.1.2 Skirting Annually Shorn Fleeces
The following guidelines show what should be removed from each fleece, according to the colour of the clip.
GOOD
COLOUR
AVERAGE
COLOUR
POOR
COLOUR
PIGMENTED
COLOUR
Remove
Remove
Remove
Remove
- Neck collars with
VM
- Neck collars with
VM
- Bellies
- Locks
- Stains
- Permanently
discoloured pieces
- Heavily discoloured
pieces
- Locks, short
pieces
- Dags
- Clumps of V.M.
- Bellies
- Bellies
- Stains
- Contamination
- Backs with VM
- Clumps of VM
- Dags
- Pieces with VM
- Urine stain
- Contamination
- Urine stain
- Dung stain
- Dung stain
- Locks & short
pieces
- Locks & short
pieces
- Dags
- Dags
- Contamination
- Contamination
Figure 5.2 Board work
5.3.1.3 Classing Apparel Wool (Merino/Corriedale < 30 microns)
These fleeces should be classed for fineness - ie. fine, medium and strong. Secondary lines of off-type fleeces will cater for those of very different length (ie. shorter and/or longer), colour or with significant faults. Remember the bell shaped distribution and place the bulk of the wool in the medium line and keep separate those fleeces which are very different.
Fine Line Separate fleeces 3 microns finer than medium line.
Medium Line Bulk of clip.
Strong Line Separate fleeces 3 microns stronger than medium line.
In addition, the following wools, if present, must be kept separated from the main fineness lines and placed in secondary lines depending on the overall colour of the clip.
GOOD COLOUR & BETTER
AVERAGE COLOUR
Separate fleeces from the main lines which obviously do not match the bulk, such as:
Separate fleeces which obviously do not match the bulk, such as:
- Cotted
- Cotts
- Yellow or discoloured
- Very discoloured
- Obviously short or very long
- Very tender
- Containing VM
- Very heavy v.m
- Tender
- Pigmented wool
- Pigmented wool
- Contamination
- Contamination
Figure 5.3
5.3.1.4 Grading Annually Shorn Coarse Wool (> 30 microns)
Well bred Crossbred farm clips usually do not need to be subdivided into fineness brackets, but this will depend upon the age of the sheep, the fineness range present and price differentials. It is important that off-type fleeces be removed from the main line.
5.3.1.5 Wools Shorn at 3-9 Month Intervals
This caters for coarser wools which have less than one year's growth, often 5-8 months. The fleeces do not hold together and are best handled on the shearing board, then taken to a stack on the wool room floor for blending and checking before pressing. Shorter and/or discoloured wool, urine stains and dags, should be removed from the main body wool as it comes off the sheep and each type placed in a separate line. Lambs and other short wools can generally be divided into two lines:
- The body wool.
- The shorter and discoloured wools from the belly, legs and crutch and is known as the Bellies and Pieces.
GOOD COLOUR & BETTER
AVERAGE COLOUR
PIGMENTED
Separate off-type fleeces which obviously do not match the bulk, such as:
- Cotted
- Yellow or discoloured
- 33 microns and finer
- Very hairy
- Very strong and
lustrous
- Obviously short or very
long
- Heavy V.M.
- Contamination
Separate off-type fleeces which obviously do not match the bulk, such as:
- Cotted
- Very discoloured
- 3.3 microns and finer
- Very short or long fleeces
- Very heavy V.M.
- Contamination
Separate off-type fleeces which do not match the bulk, such as:
- Very fine or strong
- Very short or long
- Heavy clumps of V.M.
- Sort as required for
colour
- Contamination
Figure 5.4
GOOD COLOUR
AVERAGE COLOUR
PIGMENTED COLOUR
Separate:
- Permanently discoloured
wool
- Very short wool
- Pen stain
- Hairy britch in fine
crossbred lambs
- Seed or vegetable matter
- Dags
- Contamination
Separate:
- Heavily discoloured wool
- Very short wool
- Pen stain
- Hairy britch in fine
crossbred lambs
- Seed or vegetable matter
- Dags
- Contamination
Separate:
- Dags
- Clumps of V.M.
- Sort as required for
colour
- Contamination
Figure 5.5
5.3.1.6 Merchant/Factory Sorting & Grading
In many wool producing countries, particularly in Asia and the Middle East, sheep are owned in relatively small numbers and flocks over 50 sheep are rare. In these circumstances, the sheep are shorn, often in the field and each fleece is rolled up into a bundle, packed in sacks and sold to local merchants. The merchant combines small lots into larger, more marketable parcels of wool.
It is desirable that these merchants sort the wool prior to on-selling to processors. This sorting should follow this sequence.
- Unroll each fleece on a slotted table to allow dirt and dust to fall free.
- Remove the dags.
- Remove unscourable brands.
- Separate the pigmented wool which may be sorted to colour, fineness, length etc.
- Separate felted fleeces or portions of fleeces.
- Separate clumps of vegetable matter.
- Remove contamination.
Once the fleeces have been sorted as above, it may be necessary to grade the remaining fleece wool into broad fineness categories such as:
< 25 microns
< 30 microns
< 40 microns
> 40 microns
However, if sorting to fineness is to be carried out, specific customer requirements/specifications may determine the level of sub-division.
The fleeces may also be graded for length, such as:
> 100 mm
< 100 mm.
The length brackets made may, as with fineness, be determined by customer requirements/specifications. When sorting is completed the lines made must be pack in sound new packs to prevent contamination and clearly identified with sellers worked, bale number and description of contents.
5.3.2.1 Preparing Mohair
Shearing: The shearing board should be kept free of locks and must be swept after each animal is shorn. Bellies should be picked up from the shearing board, and after removing stained fibre (if applicable) placed in a suitable line.
Skirting the fleece: The following procedure should be consistently adopted:
Remove if present
1. All stained pieces - keep separate.
2. Fleece portions with kemp and keep separate.
3. Heavy grass seeds or burr.
4. Any areas significantly different to the bulk, eg. coarse hairy britches or stronger neck hair.
In most cases, mohair produced on clean pastures will require only careful light skirting.
Classing guidelines: Because of the range of Mohair produced, the following should be regarded as a guideline only.
Classing is the grading of mohair according to fineness, length and type. Uniformity of all the mohair within one line has an important bearing upon its value and processing performance. The classer's aim should always be to accumulate large even lines, but pigmented, kempy, stained or short mohair must always be kept separate from the main lines.
The classer should consider making the following distinctions:
Superfine kid > 90 mm < 26 micron < 2% kemp
Fine kid > 90 mm < 30 micron < 2% kemp
Fine kid > 90 mm < 30 micron 2-4% kemp
Young goat > 90 mm < 34 micron < 2% kemp
Young goat < 90 mm > 34 micron < 2% kemp
Young goat > 90 mm < 34 micron 2-4% kemp
Young goat < 90 mm < 34 micron 2-4% kemp
Crossbred < 34 micron 4-7% kemp
Adult > 90 mm > 34 micron < 2% kemp
Adult > 90 mm > 34 micron > 2% kemp
Length: Evenness of length is extremely important when marketing mohair, the ideal length being between 90mm and 150mm. In large lots of mohair it may be possible to grade the hair into separate lengths, ie. 150mm, 125mm, 90mm. However, if the quantity of mohair does not allow for 3 lengths, the 90mm to 150mm hair may need to be blended. It is suggested therefore that provided the quantity allows three lengths brackets be made:
A: 125 mm - 150 mm
B: 90 mm - 125 mm
C: Under 90 mm
Style and Character: Evaluations of sale lots over ten years in South Africa have shown that whilst style and character does not affect price to the same extent that fineness does, it nevertheless is significant. Therefore, fleeces lacking style and character should not be included in the top fleece lines.
Procedure: After the fleece has been skirted and the stained and kempy portions removed, the fleece should be carefully appraised as outlined for fineness, length, style and character.
The fleece may have to be subdivided into two or more lines. Usually the longest and coarsest mohair occurs on the neck and the britch may often be shorter and contain more kemp whilst the shoulders and flank form the average. Well bred goats should have even fibre throughout the fleece.
Classing from the table into containers and then checking the contents into bins is a useful practice that is often adopted.
Packaging: Most angora flocks are relatively small, so that most classed lines will not be sufficient to make individual bale lots. Therefore, mixed or part bales are pressed. Note: Do not press wet mohair - stains must be dried before pressing.
A Specification sheet detailing the clip should be completed and forwarded to the selling agent.
It is interesting to note that in South Africa the classing of mohair is governed by Government Notice which requires that certain parts of the fleece such as "breech hair, wasty backs, urine stained hair, locks, shall be packed separately".
5.3.2.2 Preparing Cashmere
Cashmere fibre quality is defined by:
- colour (higher price for white);
- average fibre diameter (finer is preferred in the range);
- range of fibre diameters (narrow range preferred);
- length of down fibre (longer preferred up to a limit);
- impurities (the lower the better);
- grease content.
White is quoted at about twice the price of brown, with light grey midway between.
Better cashmere fibre is produced from a dense-fleeced animal, which also produces more cashmere weight.
As a rule, the finer the fibre the lower the production, and the stronger the fibre the greater the weight. The coarser the fibre the lower the price, and the finer the fibre the higher the price (but generally only down to fibre diameter of 15.5 microns).
Colour: White cashmere fetches a premium. It can be found on animals with black or brown guard hair and skin pigment but is usually from white animals. Other colours are cream, grey and brown. Unfortunately, it is difficult to determine cashmere colour, especially when it is mixed with guard hair.
Usual colour grades are:
- white: pure white;
- grey: although there is some true light grey, most is basically white, with "grey" resulting from small numbers of dark pigmented fibres;
- brown: all pigmented fibres. (Even silver-grey down mixed with black guard hair turns out brownish once dehaired).
Fleece should be classed for colour as:
- white: white down with white guard hair only;
- white and coloured guard hair: no pigmented down fibres;
- light grey:
(a) white down with small number of pigmented down fibres;
(b) intermediate down colours of tan, fawn, blond;
- brown: all pigmented down fibres.
The differentiation between light grey (a) and light grey (b) is made because some processors have been paying more for light grey (b) than brown.
Fleece from feral animals should be sorted into two grades of high and low yield of down weight to total fibre, then into colour groups, and packaged separately.
Fibre length: Minimum average cashmere length of 40 mm is desired. Maximum length is not really determined, but a range of 20-65 mm is suggested, and 50-55 mm is ideal.
Fibre diameter: Cashmere fibre diameter is difficult to assess accurately with the naked eye, and objective testing must be used. Fibre yield is affected by nutrition, season and animal health, but in general the greater stress on the animal does not usually affect fibre diameter.
In China, the raw cashmere is sorted by hand in factories. Sorting is carried out by girls who, with a trained eye, are able to sort the fibre roughly into grades and colours. In the more up to date factories, rows of girls sit at tables fitted with grills through which the dirt, grit and sand falls out. In less well equipped factories, the workers sit on the floor. The sorting is done at great speed and requires a high degree of expertise.
Sorting reduces the guard hair in the underdown and the raw material is sorted into three natural colours - white, grey and brown. The different piles of graded fibre are then "willowed". This process entails putting the fibre through a simple revolving machine which shakes out much of the dust and grit. After sorting the material is scoured before being dehaired.
5.3.2.3 Preparing Camel Hair
Camel hair is obtained by a number of methods: by combing, by shearing and simply by collecting the clumps of hair shed naturally during the moulting season.
The fibre is collected from the herdsmen's cooperatives and transported to local collecting stations. In China it is sold principally through the same channels as cashmere, chiefly the China National Native Produce & Animal By-Products Import & Export Corporation.
The colour varies from reddish to light brown and the camel hair is sorted according to shade and age of the animal. Baby camelhair, which has an average diameter of about 19 microns and a length of 2.5-12.5 cm, is the finest and softest. Baby camel holds greater appeal but it is not currently available in commercial quantities.
5.3.2.4 Preparing Alpaca
Shorn fleeces are classed into ten colour categories: white, grey, fawn, light brown, dark brown, black, roan, brown and white, black and white and spotted (or mixed colours).
Fleeces are separated into those less than 1 year-old cria (baby), tui (1-2 year old) and adult, and sorted into (a) premier fleece (back, side, part of shoulder and rump), (b) neck, (c) oddments (apron, belly, legs) or (d) pieces (head, shankings, tail and other extreme hairy pieces) within each colour and age category. Premier fleeces are graded according to fineness into baby (<22 micron), extra fine (22.0-24.9 micron), medium fine (25.0-29.9 micron) and coarse (>30.0 micron) categories. Extremely coarse guard hair and kempy fleeces are also separated from the main lots. Fleeces from tuis unshorn as cria were long, while late born crias had shorter fleeces when shorn with the older crias. Fleeces were therefore also sorted for length into short (<60 mm), medium (60-120 mm) and long (>120 mm) grades.
5.3.2.5 Preparing Angora
Angora is a delicate fibre and great care must be taken when handling and preparing it for sale. Fleeces or part fleeces with lower quality fibre must be kept separate and not allowed to contaminate good quality lines. The common grades the fibre should be sorted into are:
Grade 1: clean, free of felting, over 60 mm long.
Grade 2: clean, free of felting, under 60 mm but over 30 mm long.
Grade 3: clean, felted, second cut.
Grade 4: all dirty, discoloured fibre.
5.3.2.6 Preparing Yak Hair
There appears to be no sorting of yak fibre carried out at the time of harvesting the fibre from the yaks. After combing the fibre from the yaks it is packed into large sacks and sent off to warehouses/sorting factories. Here the fibre is hand sorted to separate, or more correctly, reduce the quantity of guard hair present in the underdown, also to separate the natural colours. This is a slow process and the sorters handle only about 10kgs per day.
- white, about 10%
- fawn, 20%
- dark grey (blue), 10%
- dark brown, 60%
As the quantities of sorted yak fibre build up it is pressed in bales and sent off for yarn making either for hand spinnng or machine spinning.
<title>Harvesting of textile animal fibres</title>
<section>1</section>
CHAPTER 6
HARVESTING EQUIPMENT, PREPARATION AND MAINTENANCE
6.1 Machine Shearing
6.1.1 Harvesting Equipment
Although the modern handpiece appears to be a solid piece of machinery, it is a delicate precision tool.
The outer casing is a steel casting carefully machined to very fine tolerances, while moving parts are formed from specially hardened steel.
6.1.1.1 Setting Up The Handpiece
Select the most suitable comb for the job. Ensure that the comb and cutters to be used are properly ground.
Make sure the comb bed of the handpiece is properly cleaned. Place the comb on the handpiece and set it with the ground fact against the comb bed using one of the comb screws to secure it for the moment.
Turn the handpiece right side up and slip the cutter under the forked yokes, ensuring the pins sit in the holes in the cutter. Apply just enough tension to stop the cutter falling out.
Figure 6.1
Figure 6.1
Now adjust the position of the comb to get the correct lead and throw. The cutter should extend far enough each side to just cover the outside teeth on the comb. Secure the comb again so it will not slip.
Check again that the cutter is not placing any pressure on the comb before finally tightening the comb screws.
Recheck the lead and throw, then apply shearing tension to the cutter. The tension can be "fine tuned" when the handpiece is fitted to the dropper and the machine started. The handpiece should just turn in your hand when you relax your grip.
The distance between the base of the scallop and the tip of the cutter.
Note: Lead should never be less than 2 mm.
Insufficient lead is the main cause of skin cuts. Always use more lead in full wool, fine wool or when using thinner combs.
Figure 6.2 Lead
Figure 6.2 Lead
Note: If the tension is too loose it might be dangerous as the cutter may fly off or lock up the handpiece. It may also allow the wool get between the cutter and comb and will not then cut effectively, even if subsequently tightened. If the tension is too tight the handpiece will overheat and cause excessive comb and cutter wear.
6.1.1.2 Lubrication
The body or barrel of the handpiece contains one small oil reservoir which may need filling with clean grade 30 oil every two hours. At the same time, put a few drops of oil on the comb surface, the fork yoke sleeves, the tension pin cup, the crank roller and a squirt of oil down the ferrule on the back joint.
Periodically putting grease in the tension sleeve should complete an adequate lubrication job.Note: Do not put grease inside the tension nut.
Any sign of overheating around the tension nut will signal a lack of lubrication. Similarly, overheating around the post can generally be fixed by placing a drop of oil on the centre post.
6.1.1.3 Fault Finding
It is rare that a handpiece malfunctions except as the result of an accident which has damaged it. But there is a gradual deterioration in performance over time as the working parts wear.
Ninety percent of supposed handpiece malfunctions are due to poorly ground gear. First ensure that your combs are evenly ground over the whole surface with no white hairlines visible on the cutting edges. Cutters must be evenly ground over the whole surface with no dull tips.
These partially ground edges show up as dull tips or white hair lines on the edges of the teeth.
Figure 6.3 Cutter
Figure 6.3 Cutter
Check the performance of the handpiece with properly sharpened gear before taking any other corrective measures.Next remove the comb screws, clean the comb bed and visually check that the comb bed is perfectly flat. Also check there is no wool caught in the cups. Ensure the fork yokes swivel freely in the fork.
If none of the above faults are evident it may be time to replace any worn parts.
Figure 6.4 Comb
Look for white lines on the cutting edges. These are actually rounded edges not quite ground out.
Also check that there are no score marks on the combs. If faults are apparent repeat procedure.
Figure 6.4 Comb
Look for white lines on the cutting edges. These are actually rounded edges not quite ground out. Also check that there are no score marks on the combs. If faults are apparent repeat procedure.
6.1.1.4 Replacing Parts
Figure 6.5 Parts requiring regular replacement
Figure 6.5 Parts requiring regular replacement
There are some parts of the handpiece that require regular replacement. After wearing out a string of 50 cutters, which is the normal number a professional shearer would carry per handpiece, you should replace the tension sleeve, the tension pin and top cup. The centre post and bottom cup should also be replaced.
Fork yokes, back cogs, joint guard and drive pin will require periodic replacement.
There are three essential safety parts on any handpiece. NEVER operate a handpiece without them. They are there for the shearer's protection. They are the tension spring, the fork yoke retaining bar and the tension pin retaining spring.
Tension Spring
The tension spring should be working properly, stopping the tension gradually coming off. Without the spring unnecessary tension is often used and accelerates the speed at which gear wears, requiring a major gear grinding job.
If a new spring is too tight, remove it and squeeze it up before refitting. This will allow it to retain tension without making it so tight that it makes changing cutters difficult.
Figure 6.6 Parts requiring periodic replacement
Figure 6.6 Parts requiring periodic replacement
Fork Yoke Retaining Bar
This bar is designed to secure the fork yokes to the fork.
Tension Pin Retaining Spring
This simply holds the tension pin in place. The handpiece is unsafe to use without it in place as the pin could slip while changing cutters. Note: Absence of an effective tension spring will contribute to lockups.
Figure 6.7 Essential parts
Figure 6.7 Essential parts
It is dangerous to operate any handpiece without them.
Centre Post and Cup
With normal use the back of the post wears against the back of the bottom cup to form a smooth complementary pivot surface. Once this surface is created, it is most important that the post is not moved from its original working position.
The only time the post should be adjusted is when you are installing a new post and bottom cup. You would normally replace the centre post and bottom cup when you are setting up a new supply of cutters.
With the handpiece set up with a comb and half worn cutter the correct setting is when one third of the crank roller is visible above the fork body when you look down the barrel from the cutter end. On a new handpiece the centre post is normally correctly set but should be checked.
Once it is bedded into the cup the centre post SHOULD NOT be adjusted.
Figure 6.8 New post and cup
Worn post and cup Figure 6.8 New post and cup
Do not adjust post once it is worn
Figure 6.8 New post and cup
The Comb Bed or Baseplate
The handpiece is a piece of precision machinery which can be easily distorted by rough treatment. Constant dropping on the floor, being kicked from the shearer's hand to smash against the wall or other maltreatment can bend the comb bed. This is a serious fault and is best fixed by sending the body of the handpiece to a suitably equipped engineer or agent who specialises in handpiece repairs.
A correctly aligned bed will be parallel to the screw bushing and at 90 degrees to the tension bushing.
Comb bed and tension bushing should be at right angles. Comb bed and screw bushing should be parallel.
Figure 6.9 Comb bed and tension bushing should be at right angles. Comb bed and screw bushing should be parallel.
Figure 6.9
If the comb bed is damaged, it must be repaired by a qualified shearing engineer.
6.1.1.5 Safety Tips
Do not operate the handpiece with badly worn fork yoke pins or when the fork yokes are sloppy inside the fork sleeves.
Do not start the handpiece without checking that:
- The comb screws are firmly tightened (note: excessive tightening will eventually strip threads in the handpiece body).
- The fork yoke pins are securely located in the cutter holes.
- The correct starting tension is applied. Using the thumb on the back cogs, move the cutter across the surface of the comb. A safe
starting tension will leave a good impression of the cogs on your thumb.
6.1.1.6 The Spline Drive/Pin Option
The traditional connection of the handpiece onto the down tube has been a pin drive. Another option which is becoming popular with some shearers is a spline drive.
This has an important safety benefit if the shearer hits an ear tag, piece of wire or the handpiece locks up for some other reason.
When operating with a spline drive, the handpiece usually unlocks from the gut before any serious damage occurs. With a pin drive, a lock-up will normally result in expensive breakages and possible loss of work through injury.
Many machines are not fitted with spline drives. Safety conscious shearers can overcome this by carrying their own appropriate short gut and fitting it into the machine before they start. Don't forget to retrieve it at the end of the job though!
6.1.1.7 Dressing a New Comb
Dressing a comb should always be done in good light and involves shaping the teeth to the ideal profile. This should be done before the comb is ground and requires three stages.
1. Shape the bevel to the desired profile using a piece of fine emery working from the back of the comb over to the cutting face aiming at a high rounded point. There are three common faults which should be avoided:
(A) Too round: will not enter the wool properly and tends to ride out of the wool.
(B) Dropped point: with a tooth of this shape skin cuts will occur.
(C) Squared off points: will not enter the wool easily and skin cuts will occur.
(D) The correct shape: the most important part of dressing a comb is the finish. All teeth must be dressed to the same shape and
must also follow an even concave.
2. When the bevels are finished, the next step is to fine the bottom edge of the bevel (the edge that runs along the skin) down to approximately the thickness of the edge of a postcard.
Good fine teeth mean better combing. Using a fine wedged slip stone, emery or a tapered spinning disc grinder called a bright boy, start from the back of the tooth and work around to the point, taking care not to alter the point which has just been formed nor to go too far and damage the cutting edge of the comb. DO NOT OVERTHIN.
As illustrated, if the teeth have not been thinned, they will ride off the skin causing second cuts (A);
The comb best suited to quality work is where the tips have a fine white line around the end of the tooth (B);
Over thinning will cause skin cuts (C).
3. To get a smooth finish, use 1200 grade wet and dry sandpaper then check bevel fineness to make sure all the teeth are of the same thickness.
Polish the teeth by rubbing on a leather strap, an old rubber tyre or a machine buffer. Use polishing compound for a good shiny finish. Polishing combs helps to stop the greasy building up and allows for smoother entry and running.
When you've completed dressing and polishing combs grind them ready for shearing.
Figure 6.10 Common Faults
Figure 6.10 Common Faults
Figure 6.11 Thinning the teeth
Figure 6.11 Thinning the teeth
Figure 6.12 Comb Tip
Figure 6.12 Comb Tip
Dressing a Worn Comb
When combs are ground down so that the scallop grinds out and they become too sharp to use, repeat the process for dressing a new comb.
Each time the comb grinds out to a sharp tip, redressing is required. The teeth get shorter and slightly rounder each time. Note: Be careful not to sand along cutting edges.
6.1.1.8 Grinding
Grinding is an extremely important part of shearing. It requires a high degree of precision and care. Shearers often blame their handpieces, the sheep or themselves for their difficulties. Often poor grinding technique or faulty machinery can be the cause.
Safety
- The grinder should be placed away from doorways and steps.
- It should be in a well-lit area with easy access for grinding.
- Never leave the grinder running unattended.
- Check the pins on the pendulum for length.
- Guards must be fitted to the grinder.
- The use of safety glasses is essential. (Carry a pair in your tool kit).
- Always check nuts are tight before turning grinder on.
Note: A grinder can be lethal. Do not rush when grinding, use common sense and safety equipment - for your own sake and the sake of others in the shed.
Top magnetic bar is slightly shorter than lower pressure bar so that the heel of the comb or cutter always touches the disc first.
Figure 6.13 The Pendulum
Figure 6.13 The Pendulum
Bottom view of the pendulum bar showing corners ground off. This will prevent an accurate grind.
Figure 6.14 A damaged holder will not grind properly
Figure 6.14 A damaged holder will not grind properly
The Pendulum
The exclusive use of a good pendulum on a correctly set grinder will ensure reliable and efficient grinding at all times.
Pendulum Maintenance
The bottom bar of the pendulum applies pressure to the comb or cutter during grinding and it is essential that it is true. If the bar has the corners ground off, it will not give an accurate grind.
The recommended setting between the pressure bar and pins is 4 mm; a closer setting will heel grind; a wider pin setting will tip grind.
Make sure that the pins are long enough so that they maintain a hold on the comb or cutter.
- When not in use store so that the pendulum rod does not bend.
- Use a metal strip on the magnetic bar to retain magnetism.
Heel Grinding
Heel grinding results from use of pendulums where the pin settings are closer than the recommended 4 mm. To avoid tip grinding a small bevel may be removed from the heel of the comb.
Excessive heel grinding is not recommended because it:
- Prevents sufficient grinding pressure being applied to the tips of the comb to sharpen cutting surfaces properly.
- Creates excessive flexibility in the heel of the comb.
- Affects the contact of the comb screws on the comb.
The Hollow Grind
The face of the grinder disc is shaped to give a very slight hollow grind between heel and tip of combs and cutters. This is essential to bring the cutting edges of the comb and cutter together properly under pressure.
Grinder Setting
The height setting of the pendulum is very important to produce the hollow grind on the face of the comb or cutter. When the pendulum rod is handing straight, a vertical flow of sparks from the tips will indicate the correct settings.
Using the hook to suspend the pendulum, the heel of the comb or cutter should touch the disc just before the tips. With the pendulum hanging straight, the magnetic bar should hand 25 mm from the outer edge of the disc.
Figure 6.15 Grinding disc
The Disc has a half degree fall from centre to edge.
This produces a hollow grind in the gear from heel to toe.
Figure 6.15 Grinding disc
6.1.1.9 Grinding Procedure
Combs:
Combs should be ground on the coarse paper (40 grade) with the bottom tooth of the comb towards the outside of the disc. After ensuring the pins of the pendulum are in the holes of the comb, put the comb to the disc. Using a firm even pressure move the comb five or six times (six to eight seconds) across the paper, making sure it does not run off the edge or into the centre of the disc. Before removing the comb, hold it still with an even pressure for 2-3 seconds with the pendulum rod straight.
- Ensure that the sparks are even right across the comb.
- Remember too much pressure overheats and distorts the comb.
After grinding, check combs by looking across the teeth from side to side in good light.
The HEIGHT SETTING of the pendulum is therefore MOST IMPORTANT.
A vertical glow of sparks indicates the ideal setting.
Figure 6.16
Pendulum rod must hand parallel to disc with the heel of the comb or cutter touching first.
Edge of magnetic head should hang 25 mm from edge of disc.
Pins must swing just under the centre of the shaft for cutters and to the bottom of the shaft for combs.
Figure 6.16
Combs: Cross section of one tooth, shows original sharp edge rounded with use.
Figure 6.17 Checking combs &amp; cutters
Partially ground edges show up as white hairlines on the edges of the teeth.
Figure 6.18 Worn combs
Figure 6.17 Checking combs & cutters
Figure 6.18 Worn combs
Cutters:
Follow the same procedure as with combs using an even lighter pressure and reduce to two to four passes (3-4 seconds) across fine paper (80 grade).
Cutters should be ground evenly over the whole surface with no dull tips. If there are any faults repeat procedure.
Should be ground evenly over the whole surface with no dull tips or white hair lines on the edges of the teeth.
Figure 6.19 Cutters
Figure 6.19 Cutters
Check that cutters are grinding down evenly on both sides. Also ensure that each cutter is wearing at the same rate. Rotating on a wire or cutter holder will help. The handpiece will work better and last longer if the cutters wear down at an even rate. For a full time professional shearer a string of 50 cutters is recommended.
If there are any faults after the check repeat the grinding procedure and recheck.
6.1.1.10 Grinding Equipment
Setting Papers:
Always store papers in dry conditions. Ensure that the disc is clean, free from old glue and dry. Place new paper on clamp. Spread glue onto the disc evenly and sparingly, then clamp the paper firmly but without excessive pressure. A thin flat sheet of cardboard between the emery and the clamp will reduce the crushing of the emery grit.
Care of Papers:
Do not grind first thing in the morning or when the atmosphere is damp. When the papers are partly worn they can be revived by using a rubber cleaning stick and a light stroke with a carborundum stone or wire brush. Light, even grinding will also make papers last longer.
Grinder Maintenance:
Although discs are made of cast steel, they can be distorted by rough treatment or wear and tear.
- When not in use for long periods store discs on the clamps.
- Check that the back of the disc and the area where it connects to the grinder are clean when mounting discs.
- The centre of the paper should be cut out and any excessive glue cleaned away.
- Always use washers when setting paper and mounting discs on grinder.
- These machines are for sharpening shearing gear and should not be used as bench grinders.
- Discs in need of repair can be refaced and rebalanced by engineers specialising in shearing equipment.
Note: For best results, use your own grinder all the time or carry your own discs from shed to shed. Always use your own pendulum.
6.2 Hand Shears (Blades)
A new set of blades may appear sharp enough for general purposes, but a good deal of attention is required before they can be used.
The sharp edges necessary for successful shearing, will be maintained for a longer period if the blades are properly set. If any alterations made, it is always necessary to maintain as far as possible the makers' "set".
6.2.1 Pulling Back (for separating the blades)
Pulling back is carried out so that the shears will take more wool in each cut. The amount of opening up will vary according to the individual shearers and the type of fleece being shorn. In hard-cutting wools with little or no rise of the yolk, less wool should be taken than in open fleeces or those with a good rise.
If the shears are to be used for dagging only, it may not be necessary to pull them back at all. They are then less dangerous, especially to those not accustomed to using them.
There are several methods of pulling shears back. In all methods care must be taken to prevent twisting and warping, especially when using a vice. The pull must be even on each blade, so that the makers' set is maintained and no bend is put on the blade. In one method, each handle in turn is gripped in the vice, and the pull is straight back toward the operator. Another methods uses a small block of wool nailed onto a wall stud, above a dwang (Fig. 6.20).
Correctly pulled back blades should be about 30 mm apart at the tips, when fully closed.
Figure 6.20 Pulling
Figure 6.21 Adjustment
Figure 6.20 Pulling
Figure 6.21 Adjustment
6.2.2 Adjustment
To adjust the shears, one of the blades is cut out with a hacksaw and filed so that a spike is shaped to impale a piece of 6 mm leather (knocker, see Fig. 6.21). The knocker prevents jarring, and eliminates the metallic noise when the blades come together.
When the knocker is pressed into place, the blades will not close fully at the points. This is corrected by cutting or filing the shoulder of the opposite blade until the points almost meet. Do not overdo this as the points must not overlap.
6.2.3 Setting
This is done in a vice. Secure the back of one blade horizontally in the vice, with its cutting edge upward. The blade is then bent one way or the other from the bow end so that, when closed, the rear cutting edge of the lower blade is 1.5 mm away from the top inside edge of the upper blade. The other blade is then set in the same way.
Figure 6.22 Setting Figure 6.23 Grindingt
Figure 6.22 Setting
Figure 6.23 Grindingt
6.2.4 The Grindstone
A sand grindstone is used initially, to bring up an edge on each blade. This can then be finished easily and quickly with an oilstone.
The grindstone surface should be level. If there are bumps or hollows in the middle, they must be taken off by grinding against a heavy, sharp-edged piece of metal. Sometimes a small, hard flint or stone appears in the he surface. This can be carefully chipped out to prevent denting (gapping) the edge of the blade.
Water only is used to lubricate a sandstone. Any oil or grease contamination on stone or shears must be removed before grinding. Grease will fill up the pores of the stone, preventing good abrasion and making the stone slippery and dangerous.
The amount of water should be just enough to keep the stone nicely wet. Too much water will wash off all the surface grit that helps grinding, and a dry stone will burn the metal in the shears or take the temper out of it, leaving a soft spot that will not hold an edge.
6.2.5 Grinding The Blades
The blade is held at about a 10 degree angle to vertical. The marker's edge (the edge left by the manufacturer on a new blade) should be almost ground off. DO NOT OVERGRIND. The finished bevel should be as flat and level as possible and approximately 4 mm wide. After grinding, wash and dry blades thoroughly. Care must be taken not to hollow the grindstone out. When the stone gets a hollow in it, use an old file held across the stone to level it out again.
6.2.6 Grinding with a Bat
The ideal grinding technique is with the use of a bat. The blade is held in the bat and moved across the stone giving a hollow grind. Care must be taken not to grind the blade too thin. A white line should be clearly visible along the length of the blade. Remember, on a smaller grindstone you will get more of a hollow grind. Grinding with the bat is safer, gives a better grind and keeps the grindstone much flatter.
Traditional sandstone grindstones are not as common today as a few years ago, largely replaced by electric bench grinders.
You can use a 150 mm bench grinder using a white stone to grind your shears. However, care must be taken not to overheat the blades.
Figure 6.24 Grinding with a bat
Figure 6.25 Sharpening
Figure 6.24 Grinding with a bat
Figure 6.25 Sharpening
6.2.7 The Oilstone
A number of different types and grades of oilstone are available. The oilstone must be looked after. Some hints on the care of an oilstone are:
r It is very brittle and should never be dropped.
r It must be kept clean of dirt and congealed oil. A dirty stone should be boiled with washing soda and a little soap powder. (Some
makes carry directions to clean them with kerosene).
r The cutting face must be kept flat. If it has a hollow (which it will slowly get), it can be levelled again by being ground on the sand
grindstone or by being rubbed with coarse emery paper on a flat surface.
It should be oiled regularly with a thin, clear oil. An oiled rag can be placed under the stone. When the stone is picked up it will have a film of oil adhering to it, and when it is put down, the oil rag will take off any particles of dirt, dust and fine metal.
An oilstone should not be used on wet shears, because there is a danger of the stone slipping off the blade.
6.2.8 Sharpening
Using a fine carborundum or soft Arkansas oilstone hold the blade open at chest height on a 60 degree angle in the end slot of a sharpening peg. Using the slot, keep the blade steady and the angle constant. The stone is applied at a 45 degree angle to the blade and lightly rubbed with a smooth circular motion toward the operator. When there is a thin even line along the cutting edge, stoning is complete except for removing any feather edge which may be on the inside of the cutting edge.
Lay the stone flat across the inside of the blade and stroke gently from the back to the tip of the blade once or twice. To test if blades are sharp, place a staple of wool between them and cut. If the wool runs towards the tips, the blades are still blunt and more stoning is required.
6.2.9 Spring Tension
If the shears spring open too far, the spring can be weakened by placing the bows of the fully closed shears on the floor at a 45 degree angle, inserting a file in the bows and pressing down. Turn the shears over and repeat.
The blades should spring open so that the heels just meet. Make sure the bows are always centred in the middle of the handles when closed.
Figure 6.26 Spring Tension
Figure 6.27 The driver
Figure 6.26 Spring Tension
Figure 6.27 The driver
6.2.10 The Driver
Shears should be equipped with a driver, otherwise there is a great risk of permanently injuring a hand, especially if the shears are pulled back.
A driver may be made of strip of leather which is soft and pliable, but which will not stretch. The uses of the driver are:
r To push the blade into the wool.
r To prevent the hand slipping up over the blades.
r To give assistance in guiding the shears while the hand is opening and closing.
r To prevent the shears being knocked or kicked out of the hand.
The driver can be bound to the forward end of the top handle, turned over the back of the hand, and tied back to the centre of the bows. Alternatively, it can be brought to the junction of the handle and bow of the bottom blade and half-hitched there with the free end tied securely on the outside of the bows.
<section>2</section>
CHAPTER 7
PACKAGING OF ANIMAL FIBRES
7.1 Introduction
Following fibre harvesting and preparation the packaging of the textile fibre into bales for transport to the processors is the next important task and one that must be done properly.
Packaging standards are a fundamental part of marketing and high standards must always be maintained when baling animal fibres for presentation to world markets. The packaging material (pack) used to form bales of animal fibre is unfortunately prone to damage because of the bales size, weight, coupled with the handling systems and transportation methods used. The pack material used must therefore be strong enough to withstand the handling methods used through the transport route.
7.2 Essential Requirements
The packaging of animal fibres has three essential requirements.
* The packs used must completely contain the contents and prevent the contents of the bale from being contaminated and must not in itself contribute to the contamination of the contents.
* The identification marks applied to each bale must be unique and be clearly and easily read.
* Pack into each bale only one category, grade or type of fibre.
To achieve the first of these requires
- the use of packs that completely contain the fibre, ie. no exposed fibre.
- the use of a pack material that is strong enough and is constructed in a manner that will withstand damage from the bale handling, transport and storage systems. This requires the setting of a detailed pack specification which specify minimum requirements of the fabric tensile strength, resistant fibrillation, selvage strength, construction, composition etc. The specifications must be set at levels of proven acceptable pack performance and only such packs should thereafter be used. Such specifications have been set in Australia, New Zealand and South Africa for use in the wool industry.
To achieve the second packaging objective, each bale should have the following clearly and easily readable marks applied, preferably using a stencil with a minimum letter, size of 50mm.
- Owner/seller identification mark(s)
- Lot number
- Individual bale number
- Description of the bale content
- Bale weight
The bale branding substance used should be scourable, as this will not contaminate the contents should some of the branding substance soak through the pack material onto the valuable fibre contained inside the bale.
7.3 Packaging Materials
Historically, jute sacks were the most widely used packaging material. Over more recent years, High Density Polyethylene (HDPE) has taken over as the packaging material in many fibre producing countries.
However, the world textile industry has repeatedly expressed serious concern at the levels of contamination from both jute and HDPE packs. They feel that this contamination issue is one of the biggest threats facing the animal fibre industry. This situation has focused attention on alternative packaging materials in recent years, and as a result, other materials have been identified. However, for a different pack material to gain widespread use requires the material to have equal or better performance properties, be non-contaminating and be comparatively priced. Multifilament nylon packs have been used to pack the very fine Merino wools with some success. These nylon packs meet the performance and non-contamination requirements, but they are considerably more expensive than HDPE. It is for this reason the use of nylon packs is limited to the finest and most expensive Merino wools.
Some use is now made of polyethylene film for use as an alternative to woven HDPE for the wrapping material which is placed around the bale and under the bands which hold the bale together. This type of package requires a high dense press with a minimum 200 tonne pressure. Polyethylene film used as a pack material has not proved successful to date in farm type wool presses as used in Australia, New Zealand and South Africa.
Because of the pack contamination concerns expressed by the textile industry, it is difficult to make clear recommendations as to what pack material animal fibre producers should use. Two things are clear however - previously used packs should not be used because of the increase in pack contamination that may occur and customer preference in packaging materials should be obtained. If possible, the fibre they purchase should be packed in their preferred material. It is also preferable that twine should not be used to sew up the top of the bale because the twine is a source of contamination. Processors have a clear preference for clips to be used instead of twines.
<section>3</section>
CHAPTER 8
GLOSSARY OF TERMS
Apparel Wool Wool suitable for manufacture into clothing products.
Belly Fibre shorn from the belly of the animal, usually heavy in condition and often containing vegetation. In the case of male animals the portion around the pizzle is stained with urine.
Blow Each sweep of the hand piece or shears in the shearing process.
Board That part of the shearing shed where the sheep and goats are shorn.
Brand
* A temporary colouring agent applied to a small area of an animal for identification purposes.
* The identifying marks on a bale of fibre.
Bulk Line The sale lot from a clip into which the majority of fibre has been placed.
Burr Particular varieties of seed heads found in wool and other fibres such as clover burr.
Catching Pen The pen from which the shearer catches an animal for shearing.
Classing The grading of wool or other animal fibres into similar categories, taking into consideration such factors as type, fineness, length, style and fault.
Clip Quantity of shorn wool from a defined area (farm or locality) or group of sheep.
Coloured Wool A term used to describe wool with melanin pigmentation.
Comb
* Stationary unit of shearing handpiece which enters and holds the fibre as it is cut.
* A machine which removes short fibre (noils), neps and vegetable matter and further aligns the fibres.
Condition Refers to the amount of non-wool constituents, such as yolk, sand, earth etc. present in greasy wool.
Cortex Dense fibrous central region of a fibre.
Cotts Matted fleeces which require an additional opening operation prior to the normal opening at the start of the scouring chain.
Cotted Portions Matted parts of a fleece, usually around the points, which require an additional opening process.
Crutchings Wool removed from around the tail end of sheep usually in the autumn/winter to prevent flystrike and to also make it easier for lambs to feed from the udder.
Cuticle Surface layer of wool and hair fibres consisting of overlapping scales.
Cutter Reciprocating unit of shearing handpiece which cuts the fibre against the stationary comb.
Dags Animal fibre contaminated with hard clumps of dried faeces, which is either adhering to, or has been clipped from, the anal area.
Down Tube Jointed tube containing a flexible drive shaft connecting a shearing handpiece to an individual electric motor or overhead gear.
Ewe Female sheep.
Expert Australian term for the person who grinds the shearing gear and keeps the handpieces and plant in order.
Eye Clip or Wiggings Wool shorn from the face and head of sheep to prevent wool blindness and which contains a high proportion of kemps.
Fault Any factor which limits a fibres end use or incurs extra processing cost.
Fellmonger Person who removes the wool from sheep skins, and treats pelts.
Fellmongery The premises where wool is removed from sheep-skins to produce slipe wool and treated pelts.
Fibre Diameter (Mean) The average thickness of fibres in any parcel expressed in micrometers (or microns).
Fine Fibre assessed to be the thinner diameter within a breed, flock or clip.
Fleece The coat of an animal.
Follicle Tubular depression in the skin from which a hair or wool fibre grows.
Free
* Fibre free from vegetable matter.
* Sometimes used to mean that the fleece is free grown i.e., not cotted.
Free or nearly free (FNF) Free or nearly free of vegetable matter (VM). A term used to describe wool containing 1% or less V.M.
Full wool Wool shorn annually.
Greasy Wool Wool in its natural state as shorn off the sheep.
Hair Fibre similar in chemical composition to wool but containing a medulla.
Halfbred Wool Broadly used to describe wools of half Merino and half long wool breeding.
Hand-knotted carpet A carpet made by knotting tufts of pile yarn onto the warp threads as the fabric is woven by hand.
Hogget
* A sheep from 7 to 18 months of age.
* The fleece of a hogget which was shorn as a lamb.
IWS The International Wool Secretariat. A partnership body funded by woolgrowers from Australia, South Africa, New Zealand, and Uruguay, for wool promotion and research world-wide.
IWTO The International Wool Textile Organisation - a body representing the interest of the world's wool-textile trade and industry with membership on a national basis. IWTO covers standards for wool testing, terms of contract and arbitration and is a forum for the international wool-textile trade and industry.
Kemps Short, straight, brittle, hairy fibres that are shed and remain in the fleece.
Keratin Chemical substance of which animal fibre is composed.
Lambs Wool Wool shorn from lambs. It is characterised by a curly tip and soft handle and is generally finer and higher yielding than full length fleece wool from mature sheep of the same breed.
Lanolin A product from the refining of wool grease (wax) recovered during scouring and which is used in cosmetics, ointments and a range of other products.
Liming The use of lime and sodium sulphide solution to dissolve all remaining wool from pulled sheep skins or to remove hair from cattle skins.
Line Several bales of fibre of a similar type.
Locks Very short staples of fibre and second cuts, which fall from the fleece during shearing and skirting.
Lot One or more bales of similar dimensions and weight within commercial limits and of similar fibre type, individually identified by number and marks of origin and put together for the purpose of sale.
Lustre The manner in which fibres reflects light. A characteristic of most strong wools and mohair.
Medium The middle fibre diameter range within a clip.
Medulla Core of large air-filled pockets between collapsed cells which occur in the centre of hair fibres. Fibres containing a medulla are called medullated and have a different appearance to unmedullated fibres. In kemp, the medulla forms the greatest portion of the fibre and is surrounded by a comparatively thin layer of cortex.
Medullated Fibres Fibres containing a medulla, or hollow core, which makes it stiff and hairy. Meduallated fibres appear chalky because light is reflected from the inner wall.
Merino Wool Fine apparel wool grown by sheep with more than three-quarters Merino blood.
Micron The standard unit of fibre diameter measurement being one millionth of a metre.
Neck The collar of fibre from under the animal's neck which is often matted and contains vegetable matter.
New Wool Wool which has not previously been manufactured.
Oddments Lines of fibre other than the main body section, eg. necks, pieces, bellies, crutchings, locks and eyeclips.
Off-Type Fleeces which do not match the main lines of a clip and which should be kept separate. These could include fleeces with different breeding to the bulk of the clip, very fine or very strong and badly faulted wools.
Painting The application of a chemical depilatory to facilitate the removal of the wool from sheep skins, with the wool remaining in good order.
Pen Stain Green excreta contamination on wool caused by close contact with daggy or defecating sheep. Causes shading problems in dyed product.
Pendulum A magnetic holder used to hold shearing combs and cutters for sharpening.
Permanently Discoloured Wool which shows yellow discolouration which cannot be removed during the scouring process. Such fibre should not be used for a pastel shade product and a dark shade is advisable.
Pie wool Wool traditionally recovered from the head and shanks of skin pieces of slaughtered sheep after decomposition of the skin tissue. Process now replaced with slipemaster process using hot water.
Pieces Poorer coloured, shorter heavy conditioned portions, skirted from the perimeter of the fleece.
Pigmentation Black or coloured fibres formed by malanocyte cells producing minute pigment granules, which evolve in the follicle.
Pizzle Stain Urine stained fibres from the bellies of male animals or crutch of female animals.
Porthole Opening or doorway through which sheep leave the shearing board after shearing.
Pressing Compressing loose fibre into bales in either a shearing shed or store.
Processing Faults Faults which when present in animal fibres are of a permanent nature eg. canary yellow, or which will need addtional work by the processor in order to rectify or remove eg. cotts, vegetable matter.
Quality Number System A subjective system of assessing the fineness of wool using an arbitrary number. Originally the number indicated potential spinning ability. With this system, the finer the wool the higher the quality number
Raw Wool Greasy wool; wool which has been scoured, carbonised, washed or solvent degreased; scoured skin wools; washed skin wools; and slipe wools. It consists of wool fibre together with variable amounts of vegetable matter and extraneous alkali insoluble impurities, mineral matter, wool waxes, suint and moisture. Raw wool has not entered yarn or felt making process.
Scoured Wool Greasy or slipe wools that have been commercially scoured, carbonised, or solvent degreased, excluding washed and partly washed wools.
Scouring Washing wool to remove the natural impurities of wax, suint, and dirt.
Sebaceous glands Glands attached to all primary and some secondary follicles and which secretes wool wax. Merinos with a higher ratio of secondary follicles produce greater quantities of wax than coarse-woolled sheep.
Second cut A staple of animal fibre which has been cut twice.
Second shear wool Wool from sheep shorn more frequently than once every eight months.
Seed Ovules from plants (other than burr producers) which adhere to the wool and other animal fibres to cause vegetable contamination i.e. bidi-bidi, grass seeds, etc.
Semi-Worsted Processing A comparatively modern system developed to provide an alternative route to produce yarns with similar characteristics to worsted spun yarn but in a shorter, more economic way. Because there is no combing step, the wool used in this process must be of good uniform length and free from vegetable matter.
Shearing The operation of removing the fleece from animals by machine or blades. Frequency of shearing may be once a year, twice a year, or three times over two years.
Shearing board Area in shearing shed where animals are shorn.
Shearing shed Synonymous with woolshed. Building in which sheep and goats are shorn. Commonly abbreviated to shed.
Shed Hand Synonymous with woolhandler. Persons, other than shearers, employed to handle and usually prepare the shorn fibre in the shearing shed.
Shive Vegetable matter, usually that contained in the back wool, such as leaves, grass etc . Does not refer to burrs or seed.
Shorn Hogget Fleece off a hogget shorn as a lamb.
Skin Pieces Clumps of wool attached to pieces of skin removed inadvertently during shearing and which, if not removed prior to manufacture, will cause problems in processing.
Slipe Wool Wool removed from the skins of slaughtered animals, by a chemical depilatory which loosens the wool fibres.
Slipemaster Machine used to remove wool from pelt trimmings and head pieces in a fellmongery, and with the aid of scalding water.
Sound Evenly grown fibre, of good tensile strength throughout the staple length.
Stand Area immediately surrounding an individual shearing machine.
Staples A mass of fibres growing in bunches, or clusters and also known as locks, each of which is held to the adjoining locks by binders or fibres running obliquely from one staple to another.
Strong Wool with a large fibre diameter for its type.
Style The degree of excellence or fault in a line. A subjective term broadly used to embrace character, colour, condition, soundness, freedom from seed and other faults.
Suint Natural water soluble impurity present in wool and some other animal fibres, secreted from the sudoriferous or sweat gland attached to the follicle.
Sweating Method of dewoolling skins dependent on induced bacterial degradation to loosen the wool within the skin.
Tare The weight of packaging material enclosing the fibre in the bale.
Tender Fibre with a tensile weakness along a portion of the staple length.
Unsound Fibres which are weak or tender in tensile strength.
Wool grease Natural impurities of wool (wax and suint) secreted by glands attached to the wool follicle. Also called yolk.
Woollen Processing The yarn produced by woollen carding and spinning (condenser spun), and which is bulkier and fuzzy compared to other yarns. These characteristics carry through to the texture of the fabrics and knitted wares.
Woolmark Registered IWS trade mark denoting products made from pure new wool, which also meet strict performance criteria.
Wool table Slatted table on which fleeces are skirted and may be classed.
Worsted Processing The branch of the textile trade which uses mainly the longer stapled fibres which are gilled to align the fibres and combed to remove the noils and vegetable matter and gilled to straighten the fibres. The yarn produced is very smooth and level and the fabric clear and smooth handling.
Yield The amount of clean fibre, at a standard regain expressed as a percentage of the weight of greasy fibre.
BIBLIOGRAPHY/ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Wools of New Zealand (formerly the New Zealand Wool Board) for the information on shearing from "The Shearing Handbook".
Mr A Marshall, Wools of New Zealand, for background information on the Llama.
Mr B Morrison, R D 3, Eketahuna, for assistance with shearing.
Mr R Dunick, Christchurch, for assistance with shearing the Alpaca.
Mr J Woodward, Mohair Fibres Ltd, for assistance with Mohair and Cashmere fibres.
Mr W R Regnault, Director of Wool Diploma Studies, Massey University, Palmerston North, for assistance with slipe wool production.
Mrs T Reeve, Box 32, Horitu, Waikato, for assistance with Angora Rabbits.
Mrs G Absolon, Box 1681, Palmerston North, for assistance with Angora Rabbits.
Mr R Johnson of Kingston Morrison, Wellington, for assistance with the Yak.
International Mohair Association for assistance with Mohair Production.
MAF (Ministry of Agriculture & Fisheries) for assistance with Angora Goats and Cashmere Goats.
NZ Society of Animal Production, 1992, Vol. 52, for assistance with Shearing the Alpaca.
The Economist Intelligence Unit Report, "Luxury Fibres" for assistance with background information on the Angora Goat, Cashmere Goat, Camel, Angora Rabbit, Llama and the Yak.
